Mr King gives a speech on reforming the
international financial system: the middle way
Speech delivered by Mr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to a session of the
Money Marketeers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on 9 September 1999.
 Introduction
1.
One of the roles which international financial officials are sometimes required to play is to describe
disasters  as  triumphs  and  to  make  the  dramatic  seem  bland.  So,  on  16  September  1992,  following
massive speculation against sterling and its withdrawal from the Exchange Rate Mechanism, the then
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, opened his statement with the words: “Today has been
an extremely difficult and turbulent day”. In the seven years since, several finance ministers have had
cause to echo those words. Officials have spoken of the risks associated with capital flows. Well they
might. Sharp reversals of capital flows to emerging markets have caused crises with a frequency and
on a scale that threaten support for an open, market-led international economy.
These  crises  have  created  millions  of  victims,  whose  circumstances  and  aspirations  were  totally
unrelated to financial markets. In Korea unemployment tripled, in Indonesia several years of economic
growth  were  wiped out leading  to political instability  and  similar  results  have  been  visible  in  other
parts of Asia as well as Latin America. Over the past century, governments in the industrialised world
have,  in  the  wake  of  domestic  financial  crises,  taken  steps  to  regulate  and  strengthen  the  financial
system. Is there a similar need to change the rules of the game for the international financial system?
Capital  markets  do  not  operate  on  their  own.  They  need  an  adequate  legal  and  supporting
infrastructure for participants to engage with each other. There is no magic wand that can be waved to
create such an infrastructure internationally. Short of a world authority, what is required is a patient
process of building such an infrastructure. Some have described this as a need for new architecture,
others  as  a  need  for  plumbing.  I  prefer  to  speak  of  bricklaying.  But  after  innumerable  meetings  of
ministers  and  governors,  deputies,  deputies’  deputies  and  so  on,  we  still  do  not  have  an  adequate
building. Recent crises have shown that the need is not for a lavish palace, but simply a roof over our
heads. We need to get to the point where less time is spent on the role of the IMF in handling crises
and more on the role of the World Bank in promoting development. So where should we start?
In  order  to  answer  that  question  it  is  necessary  to  understand  the  causes  of  recent  financial  crises.
Without pretending to be comprehensive, I shall focus attention on the importance of balance sheets
– national balance sheets – as the trigger for financial crises. I shall discuss four issues. First, I shall try
to identify the problems underlying recent financial crises. Second, I shall discuss two fundamental or
purist solutions which, although infeasible in the short run, do provide us with some ideas about how
we might deal with these problems in our imperfect world. Third, I shall describe some practical steps
– a “middle way” to improve the international financial system. These are the bricks which are slowly
being  laid  in  place.  Fourth,  in  the  context  of  the  middle  way,  I  shall  argue  that  transparency  is  of
crucial  importance.  Notwithstanding  the  weaknesses  in  domestic  policies  pursued  by  a  number  of
emerging  market  economies,  there  is  a  structural  fault  in  the  nature  of  international  capital  flows.
Short-term debt flows, especially bank finance, are highly volatile. Unless that problem is tackled the
potential for future crises will remain.
1
BIS Review 95/1999
What is the source of the problems?
2.
“Small open economies are like rowing boats on an  open  sea.  One cannot  predict  when they  might
capsize.”1  So  wrote  Joseph  Stiglitz,  Chief  Economist  at  the  World  Bank.  He  also  likened  the
international financial system to a road which, after too many accidents, raises more doubts about the
design  of  the  road  than  the  drivers  involved.  The  analogy  with  travel  has  been  taken  up  by
Larry Summers, who compared global financial markets with jet aeroplanes. Travel is faster and, on
the whole, safer. But crashes, when they do occur, are more spectacular. Whichever form of travel you
prefer, one thing is clear. In recent years, the passengers have suffered from severe travel sickness. So
much so, that their journey towards an open capital market has seemed, at times, a nightmare.
The  core  of  the  problems  faced  by  a  number  of  emerging  markets  has  been  the  sharp  reversal  of
capital  flows.  Between  1996  and  1998,  the  reversal  of  capital  flows  to  the  five  Asian  countries
primarily  affected  (Korea,  Thailand,  Indonesia,  Malaysia  and  the  Philippines)  was  of  the  order  of
$125 billion,  equivalent  to  12%  of  the  pre-crisis  level  of  GDP.  These  reversals  imply  equal  and
opposite swings in the current account. To turn a large current account deficit into a substantial surplus
within two years almost certainly requires a recession. In 1998 real GDP fell by 6% in Korea, by 9%
in Thailand, by 14% in Indonesia, by 7% in Malaysia and by 1% in the Philippines.
Moreover,  the  reversal  of capital flows  to emerging  markets  means  that  the  industrialised  countries
must in aggregate run a larger trade deficit. The distribution of that increase in the collective deficit
has  already  led  to  a  debate  about  domestic  policy,  making  it  harder  to  resist  the  ever  present
protectionist  pressures,  especially  in  election  years.  So  rapid  reversals  of  capital  flows  bring
substantial economic costs.
Capital flows also bring real economic benefits. They enable savings in one country to finance more
profitable  investment  in  another.  That  was  a  key  feature  of  the  world  economy  in  the  nineteenth
century. Such flows also facilitate the transfer of knowledge and expertise. And by investing overseas,
domestic residents are able to pool risks of various kinds with residents of other countries. To date,
international diversification of portfolios has been remarkably limited. In particular, equity portfolios
of  investors  in  the  industrialised  world  are  heavily  biased  towards  domestic  equities.  In  part,  this
reflects the difficulty of obtaining adequate information about the legal, accounting and other aspects
of  the  infrastructure  of  economies  overseas.  But  the  failure  to  exploit  the  full  benefits  of  an  open
capital market reflects also the instabilities resulting from the volatility of short-term capital flows.
The  volatility  of  capital  flows  has  affected  not  only  Asia  but  also  Latin  America,  and  almost  all
emerging markets have suffered directly or indirectly as spreads on their debt have risen to levels that
in some cases have come close to  cutting  them  off  from  the  international capital  market  altogether.
Indeed, Eisuke Sakakibara, formerly of MOF in Japan, has insisted that the past five years have been a
“crisis  of  global  capitalism”.2  Over  that  period,  financial  crises  have  been  too  frequent  to  be
acceptable. The so-called “Washington consensus” that sound macroeconomic and financial policies
should embrace the free movement of capital has come under fire. Both Mexico and Korea, regarded
as  models  of  development  to  such  an  extent  that  they  were  admitted  to  the  OECD,  experienced
damaging crises shortly after their elevation to the premier league of advanced economies. Contrast
their fate with that of India. Capital controls insulated India to a large extent from the recent crisis. If
we cannot find a way to reconcile free movement of capital with prevention of financial crises, then
many countries may draw the lesson that they are better off with capital controls – either explicit or
implicit – than without. Over the past decade, the two-year swing in the current account among G7
countries has been of the order of 1-2% of GDP. The largest swing was less than 4% (3.7% for Italy
over the period 1992-94). These are small compared with the swing of 17% for Korea, in 1996-98.
1 Stiglitz, J E, Financial Times, 25 March 1998.
2 Sakakibara,  E  (1999),  “Reform  of  the  International  Financial  System”,  speech  to  the  Manila  Framework
Meeting in Melbourne on 26 March 1999.
BIS Review 95/1999
2
Two dimensions of the reversal of capital flows have  been  evident in recent experience.  First,  their
intensity  and  scale.  Second,  the  rapid  contagion  from  one  emerging  market  to  other  previously
unaffected countries. Both phenomena are a product of the nature of the capital flows concerned. The
problems arise from short-term flows of debt finance, not long-term equity flows or direct investment.
Equity investment has a self-stabilising mechanism. When an investor wishes to  withdraw from  the
equity market he or she has to find a buyer before they can head for the exit. The market price adjusts
in  order  to  attract  a  buyer  to  replace  the  seller.  The  physical  investments  financed  by  equity  flows
remain in place, even if their value on the market has  fallen. The  need  to  find  a buyer  to  replace  a
seller can be expressed in the equivalent statement that the maturity of the liability is extremely long,
in this case indefinite. The real problems stem from liabilities with very short maturities. These occur
with debt finance, whether in terms of bank deposits payable on demand or longer-term debt finance
which has almost run to maturity. In these cases, depositors who wish to withdraw their funds do not
have to find replacement depositors. They simply take their funds out. The result is that, if this rush to
the exit is on a sufficiently large scale, banks find themselves on the receiving end of a liquidity run.
Such  runs  can  occur  even  if  the  fundamentals  are  sound,  although  they  are  more  likely  when  the
fundamentals are weak. And the banking systems of some emerging markets compounded the problem
by borrowing in foreign currency at short maturities and investing the proceeds in domestic currency
assets at longer maturities. This was indeed a recipe for instability.
The  importance  of  short-term  debt  finance  in  the  reversal  of  capital  flows  in  recent  years  is  clear.
Virtually  the  whole  of  the  $125  billion  reversal  of  flows  to  the  five  Asian  crisis  countries  was
accounted for by swings in short-term debt finance. And 80% of this swing resulted from changes in
the  net  flow  of  finance  from  commercial  banks.  Figures  from  the  Institute  of  International  Finance
suggest that the same picture is true for a larger group of emerging markets, with 81% of the decline in
private net capital flows to the 29 most important emerging market economies accounted for by bank
lending.
Liquidity runs, although not the sole cause of problems, did play a major part in recent financial crises.
Such runs reflect mismatches in the national balance sheet. Such mismatches can occur in either the
public or private sectors. Examples of the former are Mexico and Argentina in 1994, where short-term
official  dollar  denominated  debt  exceeded  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Examples  of  the  latter  are
Thailand, Korea and Indonesia in 1997, where the private sector had borrowed short in order to lend
long. Either maturity or currency mismatches create the potential for sudden reversals of capital flows
on a huge scale. In the technical jargon, such markets are subject to multiple equilibria where a small
event can cause a shift from one benign equilibrium state to another which is accompanied by rapid
capital outflows. The possibility of a rapid shift from one equilibrium to another explains, in the words
of Maurice Obstfeld, “why capital markets can appear to impose too little discipline before the crises
arise, and too harsh a discipline afterwards”.3
If this diagnosis is correct, two observations follow. First, capital flows in the form of foreign direct
investment and portfolio equity investment should be encouraged. Emerging  markets can do a great
deal to increase these by adopting modern accounting standards, a transparent legal framework, and a
stable market-friendly environment to which foreign investors will be prepared to commit long-term
investments. Second, ways must be found to reduce the volatility of short-term flows of bank finance.
The key is to avoid maturity and currency mismatches on the national balance sheet. That is easier said
than done, and similar mismatches on the balance sheets of domestic financial institutions have caused
financial collapses on a regular basis in the industrialised world.
Before  turning  to  the  question  of  how  such  mismatches  might  be  limited  if  not  prevented,  let  me
mention two other contributory factors to recent crises. The first was overvalued real exchange rates,
reflecting  attempts  to  maintain  fixed  nominal  exchange  rates  beyond  their  economic  shelf  life.  Not
3 Obstfeld,  M  (1998),  “The  Global  Capital  Market:  Benefactor  or  Menace?”,  NBER  Working  Paper  6559,
mimeo.
3
BIS Review 95/1999
only did such attempts contribute to a crisis when the nominal peg could no longer be sustained, but
they  also  contributed  to  the  illusion  that  it  might  be  profitable  to  borrow  at  lower  interest  rates  in
foreign  currency  and  invest  at  higher  rates  domestically,  thus  exacerbating  the  balance  sheet
mismatches.  The  second  is  that  capital  outflows  do  not  result  solely  from  the  actions  of  overseas
residents.  Capital  flight  by  domestic  residents  has  been  a  factor  in  increasing  the  scale  of  outflows
from a number of emerging markets.  It is important to focus on the nature of capital flows  not  the
nationality  of  investors  concerned.  Hence  the  resolution  of  crises  involves  more  than  simply
restructuring liabilities to foreign banks or overseas investors. The problems created by the volatility
of short-term debt flows require a structural solution.
Purist solutions
3.
How can we design an appropriate infrastructure for the international capital market to prevent, or at least
limit the frequency of, crises? To return to our transport analogy, there is clearly a case for eliminating
blind spots on the road or lengthening the runway. But this is not enough. We also need to think about
how the emergency services should respond to a crash.
The purist is led naturally to consider solutions of two opposite kinds. One, which maintains open and free
capital movements, is to create an international lender of last resort (ILOLR). The second, at the opposite
end of the spectrum, is to reinstate permanent capital controls.
Consider first the merits of an ILOLR. The obvious institution to play that role would be the IMF, and its
First Deputy Managing Director, Stanley Fischer, provided a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis of an
ILOLR  earlier  this  year.4  Although  not  new,  the  concept  of  an  ILOLR  has,  in  polite  official  circles,
become the facility that dare not speak its name.
The principle of a lender of last resort was described by Thornton and Bagehot in the nineteenth century
as a willingness to lend freely against good collateral at a penal rate. All three aspects of this principle
– “lending  freely”,  “good  collateral”  and  a  “penal  rate”,  are  problematic  at  the  international  level.  An
effective LOLR must be willing to lend whatever it takes to prevent a liquidity run. The more credible is
the LOLR, the less the resources that are required to be lent in practice. Domestic LOLRs have credibility.
But for a prospective ILOLR the decision for a group of countries, either jointly or via the IMF, to lend
large sums to another country will always be difficult. In a world of nation states, it is unreasonable to
suppose that political considerations will not enter the choice of recipient of such largesse. And the greater
the political uncertainty about the willingness to act as an ILOLR, the larger the amount of funding that
will be required. In turn, the operation will appear less credible, and the authorities are caught in a vicious
circle. The current resources of the IMF – between $125 billion and $150 billion depending on how they
are measured – are wholly inadequate for an ILOLR. Nor are resources on the appropriate scale likely to
be forthcoming.
Moreover, serious moral hazard arises when the private sector ignores the risks of lending to a country
because it believes that the country would be bailed out by the international community in the event of a
liquidity crisis. And investors are encouraged to lend to emerging markets in forms – short-term debt –
which  are  more  likely  to  be  bailed  out.  In  the  domestic  context,  the  LOLR  ensures  that  neither  the
managers nor the equity holders of the institution receiving support are allowed to benefit. Internationally,
it is not easy for the IMF to penalise those responsible for management of the economy, nor to distinguish
between  those  citizens  that  have  been  responsible  for  excessive  risk-taking  and  those  who  will  be  the
innocent victims of the consequences of a financial crisis. It is the ordinary taxpayers in emerging market
countries who will have to bear the burden of servicing loans from the IMF.5
4  Fischer, S (1999), “On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort”, IMF.
5  A point stressed by Calomiris (“The IMF’s Imprudent Role as Lender of Last Resort”, Cato Journal, Vol. 17
No. 3 1998) although he underestimates, in my view, the possibility of liquidity runs as seen, for example, in
Korea in 1997.
BIS Review 95/1999
4
Absent  a  world  government,  it  is  difficult  to  see  a  credible  ILOLR  on  the  horizon.  The  reason  is  the
simple maxim: “it’s the politics, stupid”.
The second purist solution, at the opposite end of the spectrum, is the imposition of permanent capital
controls. In other words, a return to the world in which the Bretton Woods institutions were created
half a century ago. The advantage of capital controls is that they prevent the liquidity runs that result
from  currency  and  maturity  mismatch  of  the  financial  sector.  India  did  not  experience  a  financial
crisis, Korea did. They also enable countries to maintain a fixed exchange rate while retaining some
flexibility  in  domestic  interest  rates.  And  they  might  limit  the  movement  of  capital  to  lower  taxed
jurisdictions,  thus  slowing  the  inexorable  decline  of  capital  income  taxation  resulting  from  the
development of a world capital market. But  it is  difficult  to  distinguish  between  controls  on  capital
flows  and  flows  related  to  trade.  The  growth  of  trade  in  services  has  highlighted  the  difficulty  of
separating  currency  trade-related  flows  from  those  representing  investment.  Thus,  to  be  effective,
capital controls are likely to impede trade flows. This would be a heavy price to pay and few countries
have chosen to pay it.
Permanent capital controls have other disadvantages. They forsake all the economic benefits of a free
capital market. And controls are never implemented by wise, or even merely clever, economists. They
attract rent-seeking and corrupt behaviour in both official and private sectors. And they undermine the
cause of market liberalisation. There is no shortage of protectionist tendencies that seek to limit trade
and investment. We should not add to them.
So neither purist solution is likely to appeal – the one because there is insufficient political and financial
support for an ILOLR, and the other because permanent controls go against the grain of promoting market
reforms and good governance.
But the present system is not sustainable. The danger is that we have the worst of both worlds. The IMF
may lend large amounts, create moral hazard in doing so, and still not be able to ward off the threat of
financial crises. And faced with a run on their currency or banking system, countries may be forced to
take unilateral action to suspend payments. So what to do?
The middle way
4.
Given that neither purist approach is on the agenda, the international community has been trying to take
some practical steps forward. The aim is to reduce the frequency and severity of financial crises. Some
might describe this as muddling through. I prefer to call it the “middle way”. The difference is that the
middle way is based on the principle that if the emergency services will be slow to arrive then whichever
form of transport you care to think of, borrowing countries should drive slowly.
How to encourage and enforce careful driving has been the subject of innumerable international meetings.
Initially, the discussion took place in the G10, which, as you know, comprises eleven countries. Then last
year the discussion was taken up by the G22. By the spring of this year that group had become the G33.
Can  you  complete  the  sequence  by  guessing  which  international  forum  will  take  the  lead  next  year?
Suffice it to say that at the original Bretton Woods conference there were forty-four countries and it took
place fifty-five years ago.
In terms of practical steps forward, it is useful to distinguish between the prevention and resolution of
crises. On the former, recent experience suggests five lessons for emerging markets:
(1)
Create a do-it-yourself (DIY) LOLR, with the aim of providing self-insurance against a liquidity
crisis.  There  are  several  ways  of  providing  such  insurance.  One  is  to  build  up  large  foreign
currency  reserves.  This  has  already  been  taken  to  heart  by  emerging  markets.  China  has
substantial foreign exchange reserves ($147 billion at the end of June). And Korea, perhaps the
best example of a country suffering a liquidity run on its banking system in terms of foreign
currency, has raised its reserves from a low point of $7.3 billion in November 1997 to a current
high of $64.8 billion in August. It is unfortunate that the absence of more efficient solutions to
the risk of crises means that scarce capital might be deployed in this inefficient way. Building
up net reserves – via current account surpluses – will reduce world demand at a time when the
5
BIS Review 95/1999
US economy is unlikely to provide as large a stimulus as over the past five years. An alternative
is  to  create  gross  reserves  by  borrowing  from  abroad  and  investing  the  proceeds  in  liquid
international securities. Both methods involve costs. A second approach to DIY LOLR is for
emerging markets to create contingent credit facilities with international banks, as Argentina has
done with its contingent repo facility, or try to set up collateralised loan facilities along the lines
suggested  by  Martin  Feldstein.6  A  final  approach  to  the  DIY  LOLR,  in  the  absence  of  an
effective  multilateral  ILOLR,  is  the  creation  of  regional  self-insurance  funds.  All  of  these
approaches are likely to be pursued, to a greater or lesser extent, in the wake of recent financial
crises.
Manage  the  national  balance  sheet  and,  as  far  as  possible,  avoid  maturity  and  currency
mismatches. For a country without a track record of international borrowing, it is important to
manage  its  external  liquidity  position,  especially  in  foreign  currency.  The  lack  of  foreign
exchange controls means that it will be difficult to observe, let alone manage, the balance sheet
of the entire private sector. But the key elements are those relating to the public and banking
sectors. Governments already have information on these sectors. As important as anything is the
need for self-awareness by the countries concerned of the state of their national balance sheet
and the approach of impending liquidity difficulties. When governments and markets alike are
informed  of  the  potential  for  future  financing  difficulties,  both  sides  have  time  to  take
preventive action. Of course, the use of derivative instruments and hedging techniques makes
the assessment of risk exposure more difficult. But the effort must be made. Alan Greenspan has
suggested that consideration be given to simple rules of thumb such as that countries without a
track  record  of  international  borrowing  should  maintain  unencumbered  foreign  exchange
reserves sufficient to meet all foreign currency liabilities over the following year, and that the
average  maturity  of  external  liabilities  should  exceed  three  years.  Rudiger Dornbusch  has
proposed the use of value at risk assessments of  country  balance  sheets.  Ideas such as  these,
precisely because they focus on the national balance sheet, are sure to be centre stage.
Encourage inflows of equity rather than debt finance. This is an extension of the need to manage
the national balance sheet. The imperative is the old adage: borrow long not short. A credible
legal  and  institutional  infrastructure  for  private  investors  would  go  a  long  way  to  encourage
equity  inflows.  Reserve  requirements  on  short-term  debt  inflows,  as  adopted  in  Chile,  might
help to modify the pace of vulnerable capital inflows, but will in themselves do little to help in
times  of  rapid  capital  outflow.  It  is  also  time  to  reconsider  the  incentive  to  the  provision  of
short-term finance provided by the Basel Accord risk weights.
Promote the better design of debt contracts which provide a framework for negotiation between
creditors  and  debtors  when  financing  difficulties  arise.  The  particular  proposal  –  advanced
initially by a G10 Deputies’ report in 1996 and subsequently endorsed by the G7 – for the use of
collective action clauses  in sovereign debt  contracts  has stalled.  How far  such clauses  would
help is unclear. Bonds issued under UK, but not US, law – currently these account for just under
50% of the stock of emerging market eurobonds – generally include such clauses already. But
their  widespread  adoption  looks  unlikely,  not  least  because  of  the  reluctance  of  the  G7  to
incorporate such clauses into their own debt contracts. More productive in the short run is likely
to  be the  promotion  of  regular  contacts  between  debtor  countries  and  their  creditors  in  good
times, well before any crisis occurs. State-contingent debt where returns are related to the price
of major exports is another possibility.
Avoid,  at all  costs, the defence  of fixed but adjustable exchange  rate  pegs  when  they  are  no
longer consistent with internal and external equilibrium. Thailand shows the cost of a prolonged
and ultimately unsuccessful attempt to defend its exchange rate. Brazil shows that there is life
after a fixed exchange rate. It is much too early to conclude that emerging markets have little
option but to adopt the dollar as their currency.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
6  Feldstein, M (1999), “A self-help guide for emerging markets”, Foreign Affairs, March/April, 93-109.
BIS Review 95/1999
6
To  these  five  imperatives,  I  have  refrained  from  adding  the  mantra  of  better  banking
supervision. Of course, banking supervision should always strive to be better. But is it not time
to  ask  the  question  of  whether  the  implicit  government  guarantee  afforded  to  the  banking
systems of the major industrialised countries is itself not part of the problem. One of the factors
contributing  to  the  scale  of  short-term  debt  flows  to  emerging  markets  is  the  moral  hazard
implied by the financing of banks in the developed world. It is certainly crucial that international
rescue packages do not lead to moral hazard in the provision of finance to emerging markets.
But an important lesson for the G7 is that moral hazard starts at home.
In  the  resolution  of  crises  less  progress  has  been  made.  The  IMF  can,  and  has,  provided
financial assistance without which the cost of recent crises to the affected countries would have
been  even  greater.  But  the  stumbling  block  has  been  how  “to  involve  the  private  sector”.
Although the statement by G7 finance ministers to the Cologne Summit in June set  out both
“principles”  and  “tools”  for  involving  the  private  sector  in  crisis  resolution,  much  remains
obscure. Unilateral debt moratoria can be damaging in terms of future access to capital flows.
But there will be circumstances in which a debtor country and its creditors could benefit from a
joint resolution of temporary payments difficulties, and procedures are needed to prevent some
creditors from free-riding on others. The following four elements in crisis resolution merit some
consideration. They have no particular status, but are issues that need to be faced. The four are:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
the  provision  of  official  finance  should  be  linked  to  the  involvement  of  other
creditors,  including  the  private  sector,  in  the  resolution  of  crises.  This  can  be
achieved  by  the  IMF  setting  a  floor  for  the  minimum  level  of  foreign  exchange
reserves a country is required to maintain;
the aim of resolution is to find a cooperative solution negotiated between a debtor
and its creditors. No particular class of creditor should be in a privileged position,
unless the instrument in question explicitly gives it preferred creditor status;
the  use  of  temporary  standstills  –  possibly  sanctioned  by  the  international
community – would allow time for a country to negotiate with its creditors. In the
absence  of  a  formal  mechanism  to  achieve  this,  the  IMF  can  indicate  its
endorsement of a standstill by being prepared to provide new money to a country
which  has  temporarily  suspended  payments  to  its  creditors  (often  referred  to  as
IMF lending into arrears). By making standstills part of the furniture – or one of the
bricks  –  they  would  be  seen  not  as  an  ad  hoc  response,  which  might  lead  to
contagion in other emerging markets, but part of an approved process;
measures, including perhaps strictly temporary capital controls, to prevent capital
flight  by  domestic  residents  in  exceptional  circumstances.  It  would  be  odd  to
sanction  a  standstill  of  payments  to  foreign  creditors  while  allowing  domestic
residents to move assets overseas without restriction.
The essence of the  middle  way is to find  practical  steps forward to enable emerging  markets to  better
manage the liquidity positions of their external liabilities, and to reduce their dependence on debt finance.
Crises  will  still  occur.  But  the  aim  is  to  reduce  their  frequency  and  severity.  To  that  end  there  is  one
further policy which is fundamental to the success of the middle way – transparency.
Transparency
5.
Transparency is one of the most popular words in economic policy today. And for good reason. Much has
been said about transparency, and, interestingly, much has been done. Why is transparency so important?
In itself, transparency will neither prevent nor resolve financial crises. But transparency can help reduce
the frequency of crises – by alerting not only markets but also policymakers to problems on the horizon –
and their severity – by minimising the surprises about the scale of any liquidity problems. In Korea, the
foreign  currency  exposure  of  its  banking  system  was  not  known  until  after  the  crisis  had  hit.  And  in
Thailand, the true state of the foreign exchange reserves was unknown even to its own finance ministry,
7
BIS Review 95/1999
let alone financial markets. So transparency can be seen as a “second best” policy when purist solutions to
financial crises are unavailable. It is in the context of the middle way that transparency comes into its own.
The  aims  of  transparency  are  to  allow  better  informed  decisions  in  both  public  and  private  sectors,  to
reduce  the  risk  of  contagion  by  allowing  markets  to  differentiate  among  borrowers  and  to  encourage
macroeconomic  policy  to  become  more  predictable.  Transparency  is  not  simply  a  question  of  making
available certain data. It is an approach to economic policy, almost a way of life. The G22 Report of the
Working  Group  on  Transparency  and  Accountability  (which  I  was  privileged  to  co-chair  with
Andrew Sheng  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority)  was  published  in  October 1998.  Its
recommendations  were  endorsed  in  full  by  the  G7.  It  stressed  the  importance  of  transparency  in  three
different sectors: national governments, the private sector and the international financial institutions. Good
progress has been made in implementing many of its recommendations.
Rather than give an exhaustive account of progress in transparency, let me give a few examples. In March
of  this  year,  the  IMF’s  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard  was  strengthened  by  the  inclusion  of  a
template  covering  the  disclosure  of  net  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  short-term  foreign  currency
liabilities of central government. These data are required to be published monthly with a lag of no more
than one  month,  and  the  transitional  period for observing  the standard runs  to  the end  of March 2000.
Agreement is very close on a Code of Monetary Policy Transparency to match the earlier Code on Fiscal
Policy Transparency.
BIS data on international banking statistics will  be produced  quarterly from  next  spring  and the lag  in
publication  shortened.  One  of  the  three  Financial  Stability  Forum  Working  Groups  is  considering  the
quality and timeliness of disclosure of exposures to and of  highly  leveraged institutions. This category
includes hedge funds. Proposals for direct regulation of internationally mobile funds are unlikely to be
workable. But many commentators remain suspicious, regarding such funds as like children playing just
out of sight who are told – “I don’t know what you’re doing, but, whatever it is, stop it”.
The  IMF  itself  has  become  more  open  about  the  release  of  information.  During  an  eighteen-month
experiment countries will be able to publish their Article IV reports. And more background information,
including  policy  papers  and  programme  reviews,  is  now  available.  All  this  should  improve  the
transparency and accountability of national governments, the private sector and the IMF.
But  there  is  one  further  step  on  which  progress  is  urgently  required.  In  a  world  of  sovereign  states,
countries cannot, and should not, be compelled to disclose information if they do not wish to do so. But
countries should not be able to claim to be transparent when in fact they are not. A crucial substitute for
the inability to  make  transparency  mandatory is  that  we need transparency  about  transparency. That is
why the G22 Report recommended that the IMF – in the context of its Article IV consultations – prepare a
Transparency  Report  for  each  country  summarising  the  degree  to  which  that  economy  complied  with
disclosure standards and codes of conduct. The case for “transparency about transparency” is the case for
honesty in economic policy.
Some progress has been made. Pilot transparency reports on the UK and Argentina have been produced
by  IMF  staff.  Other  pilot  reports  are  to  come.  Australia  has  published  a  self-assessment  transparency
report. The need now is to make the production of Transparency Reports an integral part of the Article IV
process. There is no reason for further delay. Transparency Reports should always be published. I very
much  hope  that  the  IMF  will  make  rapid  progress  towards  the  regular  production  and  publication  of
Transparency  Reports  on  each  country.  This  practical  measure  could  do  a  great  deal  to  enhance  the
performance of all economic actors involved in the international capital market.
Conclusions
6.
Unrestricted  capital  mobility  and  the  absence  of  an  ILOLR  are  not  a  recipe  for  a  stable  international
financial system. Short-term interbank flows are the Achilles heel of present arrangements, leading to both
currency  and  maturity  mismatches. Throw  in a  predilection  of emerging  markets  for  pegged  exchange
rates and you have a dangerous cocktail. Purist solutions – whether of an ILOLR or a return to permanent
capital controls – are, for good reasons, unlikely to be pursued. What is needed now are some practical
steps forward. Central to any such programme is the need to monitor and manage the national balance
BIS Review 95/1999
8
sheet. The objective cannot be to eliminate the risk of financial crises. The middle way will not do that.
But it can reduce the frequency and severity of crises. In this context transparency is important. There will
still be crises in the future, but transparency will reduce their costs and help to keep governments closer to
the straight and narrow. All central bankers will surely welcome that.
Of  course,  the  immediate  crisis  has  receded,  and  some  of  the  Asian  countries,  in  particular,  have
recovered sharply over the past year. But we should not be misled by the calm after the storm. There will
be  future  storms,  and  now  is  the  time  to  prepare  for  them.  There  is  no  need  for  another  international
conference of the kind which led to the creation of the Bretton Woods institutions. But there remains a
need for thinking as original and imaginative as that which inspired the Bretton Woods conference. The
middle way is a start, but no more.
David Ignatius has written about the “founding generation”, people  such  as  Dean Acheson  and  George
C. Marshall, who created the great post-war institutions. All of those institutions have now passed their
fiftieth  birthday.  It  is  time  to  appraise  carefully  the  architecture,  foundations,  plumbing  and  even
bricklaying of that inheritance. Ignatius described the qualities of the founding generation as “resolve and
clarity”. Those qualities are still required. Dean Acheson entitled his memoirs, “Present at the Creation”.
Let us hope that, similarly, a new generation of officials will be able, at some future date, to look back at
the creation of an open world economy in which financial crises were successfully contained. That would
be an achievement of which all economic bricklayers could be proud.
9
BIS Review 95/1999
