Mr Roth discusses demonitisation of gold in Switzerland
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Vice–Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank,
at the 22nd Annual FT World Gold Conference in London on 14 June 1999.
I would like to thank you for inviting me to participate in this gold conference and for the opportunity
to  give  you  some  insight  into  the  present  state  of  the  discussions  on  the  demonetisation  of  gold  in
Switzerland. I must admit that I have accepted your invitation with mixed feelings: why play the role
of trouble shooter here among people worried about the activity of central banks on the gold market?
How to communicate the SNB’s intentions when its room for manoeuvre depends on a complicated
political process? All this makes me dream of the comfortable situation of my colleagues in Belgium
and  Holland  who  were  able  to  implement  their  strategy  without  outside  interference  and  could
communicate their sales as a fait accompli. I also look with envy at the Bank of England which will be
able to proceed with sales shortly after the Treasury has made its intentions public.
Let me address the following issues:
•  Firstly, I will show you the importance of gold in the National Bank’s monetary reserves;
•  Then I will outline why the revaluation of our gold holdings will necessarily lead to disposals:
• 
In  a  third  part,  I  will  describe  the  different  political  stages  down  the  road,  the  uncertainties
surrounding this process, and the timetable we can expect to adhere to.
•  Finally, I will conclude by indicating in what spirit we plan to tackle the delicate task of disposing
of an important part of our gold holdings.
1.  Switzerland’s gold reserves
The  situation  in  Switzerland  is  completely  transparent.  With  2590  tonnes  of  gold  in  its  reserves,
Switzerland is one of the major holders of the yellow metal. Its holdings are comparable to those of
Italy,  slightly  lower  than  those  of  France,  and  significantly  higher  than  those  of  Great  Britain  (see
graph 1).
Graph 1
Gold Reserves of the G10 Countries
as of December 1998 in Tonnes
3700
3184
2593
2590
United States
Germany
France
I taly
Switzerland
Netherlands
Japan
United Kingdom
1052
754
715
Belgium
296
Sweden
147
Canada
77
8137
source: I WF
In  relative  terms,  however,  Switzerland  is  the  largest  holder  of  gold  reserves:  per  capita,  per  GDP
unit, in proportion to imports or relative to currency in circulation (see graph 2).
1
BIS Review  73/1999
Graph 2
Gold Reserves in Relative Terms
Gold / Imports
United States
Germany
France
Italy
Switzerland
Netherlands
6.5%
6.3%
9.0%
8.9%
5.2%
9.0%
Japan
1.8%
United Kingdom
Belgium
Sweden
1.6%
1.7%
1.6%
Canada
0.3%
Gold per GDP Unit
United States
0.9%
Germany
1.6%
France
Italy
Switzerland
Netherlands
2.0%
2.0%
2.6%
Japan
0.2%
United Kingdom
0.5%
Belgium
1.1%
Sweden
0.6%
Canada
0.1%
Grams of Gold per Capita
Gold / Currency in Circulation
United States
30.5
United States
15.8%
25.4%
Germany
France
Italy
Switzerland
Netherlands
45.1
54.3
45.0
68.9
Japan
6.0
United Kingdom
12.3
Belgium
29.1
Sweden
16.6
Canada
2.6
Source : IWF, OECD
Germany
France
Italy
Switzerland
Netherlands
365.5
22.0%
33.0%
59.9%
46.8%
97.1%
Japan
1.7%
United Kingdom
Belgium
Sweden
16.0%
19.5%
14.3%
Canada
3.3%
As you can see, Switzerland probably represents an extreme case with regard to gold holdings. The
fact that the question of possible gold sales by the SNB in the market has not arisen until recently is
due to several technical and psychological factors:
•  Gold is still valued at its last official price of 1971 in the SNB’s balance sheet, only one-third of
 its market value is shown;
In the past, the SNB was required to back 40 per cent of the banknotes in circulation with gold,
which did not leave any room for action;
•  The sale of gold requires a fundamental reform of the Swiss monetary system, which, because of
our direct democracy, is a long and complex process;
•  Finally,  in  the  public’s  mind,  the  Swiss  franc  and  gold  were  so  closely  linked  that  the  idea  of
selling gold seemed to be rather unrealistic.
Things started to move in February 1997. At that time, a first decision regarding demonetisation of
gold was taken by the Economic Committee of the National Council, one of our two houses of our
parliament. Two months later, in May 1997, the market became fully aware of the gold issue, when
the President of the Confederation proposed to parliament to allocate a part of the revaluation gain on
gold to fund a Swiss Foundation for Solidarity which would provide assistance to persons in need in
Switzerland  and  abroad.  It  was  established  from  the  outset  that  the  initial  contribution  to  the
foundation would be in the form of a 500 tonnes gold donation by the SNB. It thus became fully clear
BIS Review   73/1999
2
that Switzerland was going to demonetise gold and to progressively transform a part of its stock into
interest bearing assets.
But  why  did  we  decide  to  fund  the  Foundation  with  gold  and  not  with  other  assets?  In  order  to
understand this, one must take a closer look at the structure of the SNB’s balance sheet.
2. From revaluation of the gold stock to gold sales
2.1. The SNB’s balance sheet
If, in relative terms, Switzerland is leading among all industrialised countries as far as gold holdings
are  concerned,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  is  also  a  special  case  with  respect  to  the  structure  of  its
balance  sheet.  The  bulk  of  the  SNB’s  assets  consist  of  foreign  exchange  and  gold.  Swiss  franc
denominated  assets  constitute  a  mere  20%  of  the  total.  Compared  to  the  balance  sheets  of  the
Bundesbank  prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  exhibits  only  a  small
proportion of domestic assets (see graph 3).
Graph 3
 Assets Structure of the Bundesbank and
the Swiss National Bank
54%
30%
14%
BUBA
20%
50%
30%
SNB
 Gold Foreign Claims Domestic Claims Other Assets
On the liabilities side, the most striking feature are the bank’s own capital and reserves to which will
be added the revaluation gain on the gold stock (see graph 4).
Simplified Balance Sheet of SNB as of 31th December 1998 in Billion Dollars
with Gold at Market Price
Graph 4
Assets
Liabilities
Gold Holdings & Claims on Gold
Claims in Foreign Currencies
Claims in Swiss Francs
24 Monetary Base
41
17
Liabilities towards the Confederation
Gold Provision
Capital, Reserve & Provisions
Total
82
Total
Two arguments justify a transfer of gold reserves:
29
11
15
27
82
3
BIS Review   73/1999
Firstly, the existence of considerable capital resources within the SNB balance sheet shows that we
are  endowed  with  more  reserve  assets  than  necessary  from  a  monetary  point  of  view.  There  is  no
example of a central bank of a G10 country with such a proportion of capital and undistributed profits
in its balance sheet (see graph 5).
Estimate of G10 Central Banks’ Net Wealth in Proportion of GDP
Graph 5
United States
Germany
France
I taly
Switzerland
Netherlands
Japan
United Kingdom
Belgium
Sweden
Canada
The  question  therefore  naturally  arises  whether  the  moment  has  not  come  to  allocate  a  part  of  the
Bank’s own wealth to other purposes than monetary policy.
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Secondly,  our  balance  sheet  shows  clearly  that  any  transfer  of  the  revaluation  gain  or  part  thereof
cannot  take  place  in  Swiss  francs  or  in  foreign  exchange.  Our  domestic  assets  are  too  low  and  a
transfer of foreign reserves would have a negative impact on the Bank’s operations:
  the SNB would be impeded in conducting its monetary operations (interventions, money market
operations)
the bank’s profitability and liquidity would diminish drastically.
Consequently, a transfer in gold of a part of the valuation gain is the obvious solution. A group of
experts has been asked to make an estimate of the excess reserve of the bank.
2.2 The proposals
The group of experts has come to the conclusion that a capital corresponding to 1300 tonnes of gold
could be withdrawn from the SNB’s balance sheet to be used for other purposes than monetary policy.
Of these 1300 tonnes, 500 tonnes are to be set aside for financing the Swiss Foundation for Solidarity
previously announced.
What to do with the remaining 800 tonnes?
A first idea would consist in transferring the remaining excess reserves to a public investment fund
having more extensive investment possibilities than the SNB. Currently, our asset management policy
is basically limited to fixed-income investments. The fund’s regulations should provide for investment
in shares in order to achieve a higher long-term yield.
But there is usually no limit to the imagination of politicians when money is to be distributed! Other
concrete proposals exist. Some would like the excess gold reserves to be earmarked for specific goals
such as improving the capitalisation of our social security schemes or for educational purposes.
But regardless of the projects, the aim is always to transfer our excess reserves outside the SNB in
order  to  manage  them  more  effectively  than  within  the  central  bank  and  its  relatively  restrictive
framework. On our side, we are not keen about the idea of being in charge of managing a large reserve
BIS Review   73/1999
4
portfolio. We do not wish to wear two hats, one as central bank in charge of monetary policy and that
of asset manager for the country. We could run the risk of being caught in the crossfire of criticism
when it comes to executing a mandate which is not a part of our basic responsibility.
One way or another, the transfer of excess reserves by the SNB to one or several outside entities is not
just a simple accounting problem. Even though the National Bank is independent it does not have the
legal  power  to  dispose  of  a  part  of  its  own  resources  for  other  purpose  than  monetary  policy.
Legislative and constitutional steps are necessary and they are currently under way. It is important to
have them in mind because they may hold a few surprises.
3. The political process
3.1 First stage: demonetisation of gold
The first stage, which aims at demonetising gold, is already well under way. The demonetisation of
gold required two legal adjustments:
 a revision of the Swiss Constitution
a revision of the current Coinage Act.
On 18 April 1999, the Swiss voters approved a total revision of the Constitution. In this revision, the
requirement that a certain percentage of banknotes be backed by gold was removed. The abolition of
this  requirement  constitutes  the  first  step  in  the  dismantling  of  the  old  order  based  on  the  gold
standard. The new Constitution will enter into effect on 1 January 2000.
In the course of the next few months the Swiss Parliament will debate on the revision of the Federal
Coinage  Act,  which  will  henceforth  be  known  as  the  Federal  Law  on  Currency  and  Payment
Instruments. The Coinage Act vested the right to fix the gold parity of the Swiss franc in the Federal
Council. In future, no reference will be made to a gold parity. In this respect, too, one of the chief
characteristics of the gold standard will disappear.
Parliament is expected to pass the new Federal Law on Currency and Payment Instruments before the
end of this year. The Law will enter into force in spring 2000 unless, in the meantime, 50,000 citizens
would request for a referendum on the subject. If a referendum is to be held, it would probably take
place in autumn 2000. To my mind, however, the probability that signatures will be collected for a
referendum is slight indeed. I am fairly confident that the new law will enter into effect in spring 2000
without delay.
By  the  time  the  law  on  payment  instruments  will  be  in  place  in  early  2000,  gold  will  have  been
demonetised.  The  SNB  will  be  allowed  to  evaluate  its  gold  holdings  at  their  market  price,  and  a
revaluation surplus will appear on our balance sheet. Technically, the SNB will also be able to buy or
sell gold on the market.
3.2 Second stage: transfer of excess reserves
The recently revised Constitution and the new Federal Law on Currency and Payment Instruments are
not sufficient as a legal basis for allowing the National Bank to transfer excess reserves for external
use. A special constitutional basis must be created for this purpose and then specific legislation will
have  to  allow  the  realisation  of  concrete  projects  (law  on  the  Swiss  Foundation  for  Solidarity,  for
example).
5
BIS Review   73/1999
Consequently,  a  second  revision  of  the  constitutional  article  concerning  the  SNB  is  now  being
drafted. Among other things, this new article provides for the possibility to transfer, outside the SNB,
excess reserves deriving from the revaluation of the gold stock.
Deliberations on this article have just begun in Parliament. If everything goes well, the article could
be approved by both houses before this summer. Afterwards, in compliance with Swiss regulations,
the  draft  of  the  new  article  of  the  Constitution  will  be  submitted  to  the  voters  and  the  cantons  for
approval.  In  Switzerland,  every  amendment  to  the  Constitution  must  reach  two  majority  votes:  a
majority of the citizens’ vote and a majority of the cantons approving the revision. This vote could
take  place  in  spring  2000,  i.e.  at  the  time  the  Federal  Law  on  Currency  and  Payment  Instruments
enters into force. If the revision of the Constitution is approved, it will become effective immediately,
which means that the SNB will be able to transfer its  excess  reserves  as  soon  as  the  implementing
bills will be ready.
Should the revision of the Constitution fail to pass, the excess reserves would remain on the SNB’s
books,  and  the  Bank  would  then  have  the  responsibility  of  managing  them  with  the  objective  of
generating more profit for the government. Nothing fundamental would change as far as the possible
selling of gold is concerned : gold sales would remain on the agenda.
With regard to the sale of gold, the essential element is thus that the Federal Law on Currency and
Payment Instruments be passed. The amendment to the Constitution is only important to the extent
that it determines where the excess reserves will be administered.
4. Perspectives for the SNB’s gold policy
Ladies and gentlemen, I have been talking to you for twenty minutes now without actually giving you
an idea what the SNB will concretely do. Given the political uncertainty which still exists regarding
the process of demonetisation of gold and the transfer of excess reserves, you will understand that this
is neither the time nor the place to set out a sales programme.
Listening to my presentation, you will no doubt have concluded that the process of demonetisation of
gold is well under way and that one can reasonably expect that the gold parity of the Swiss franc will
be abandoned in the spring of next year.
Formally,  the  demonetisation  of  gold  will  give  the  SNB  sufficient  room  for  manoeuvre  to  become
active  on  the  market.  Gold  transactions  could  thus  be  scheduled  to  begin  next  year  when  the  legal
framework  will  be  in  place.  Greater  uncertainty  surrounds  the  question  of  the  allocation  of  excess
reserves, but this will have no impact on our sales intentions. As no precise date for the beginning of
our  sales  activities  could  be  set,  I  will  limit  myself  to  indicate  to  you  in  what  spirit  we  plan  to
approach this question. In my opinion, two observations seem essential:
First, as a major holder of gold, the Swiss National Bank has no interest in adopting a strategy which
would push the price down. We know that 1300 tonnes of gold cannot be absorbed by the market in a
short period of time. We therefore are considering distributing the sales over a period of several years.
Second, we intend to keep important gold holdings. Once the sales programme has come to an end,
gold  will  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  our  monetary  reserves.  The  recent  revision  of  the
Constitution has led to the stipulation that we should maintain “sufficient” gold reserves. The fact that
this precision was introduced at the initiative of our parliament indicates that the Swiss people wish to
keep  ample  gold  reserves.  Consequently,  we  do  not  envisage  going  beyond  the  announced  plan  of
selling 1300 tonnes.
BIS Review   73/1999
6
