Mr Noyer evaluates the role of the euro as a new stable currency for Europe
Speech  delivered  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
“Seminar  on  the  euro”  organised  by  the  European  Union  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  Korea  and  the
Federation of Korean Industries in Seoul and Pusan, Korea on 7 and 8 July 1999.
I should like to start by thanking you for your kind invitation to speak  here  on  the  occasion  of  the
seminar  on  the  euro.  The  first  half  year  since  the  launch  of  the  euro  has  been  successful  in  both
political and operational terms. With the introduction of the single currency, European integration has
taken a large step forward as the new millennium approaches. Monetary Union is creating a zone of
price  stability  among  11  participating  European  countries  that  fulfilled  the  convergence  criteria  set
out  in  the  Treaty  on  European  Union,  often  referred  to  as  the  “Maastricht  Treaty”.  Intense
preparations by national authorities, a substantial process of disinflation and a high degree of nominal
convergence among these countries have contributed to making the euro a reality.
Since the start of Monetary Union, the Governing Council of the ECB, as the central decision-making
body, has been in charge of monetary policy for the euro area. The task of implementing monetary
policy decisions taken centrally by the Governing Council lies with the Eurosystem, comprising the
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  national  central  banks  (NCBs)  of  the  Member  States  which
have  adopted  the  euro.  The  respective  operational  tasks  are  to  a  large  extent  carried  out  in  a
decentralised manner by the NCBs.
As my presence here in Korea shows, the euro also plays an important role outside the euro area. Just
after  its  launch  in  January,  the  euro  featured  on  all  major  financial  markets  around  the  globe.
Currency trading is regularly carried out in euro, most European stocks are denominated in euro, and
it  has  attracted  new  international  bond  issues  that  have  frequently  made  use  of  the  euro  as  the
currency of denomination. As a means of payment the euro will significantly reduce transaction costs.
For  citizens  living  in  the  euro  area  and  for  international  trading  partners,  transparency  has  been
increased across euro area countries, as price comparisons between goods sold in different countries
have  been  made  easier.  In  some  ways,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  may  justify  expectations  that
competition will be tighter in the euro area and that consumers are the likely beneficiaries of these
developments.
For the euro to become a success story as the single currency for nearly 300 million people and as an
international  currency,  the  confidence  of  European  citizens  and  of  international  investors  in  the
stability of the new currency and in the Eurosystem are crucial. In its early days the Eurosystem has
already made a start on building up credibility and gaining a sound reputation in financial markets for
its monetary policy.
Monetary policy and other policy areas
Let me point out that the Eurosystem’s stability-oriented monetary policy strategy is geared towards
the maintenance of price stability for the euro area as a whole. Before the establishment of Monetary
Union,  monetary  policies  in  the  countries  that  now  form  part  of  the  euro  area  could,  at  least  in
principle,  react  to  country-specific  developments.  However,  within  the  new  monetary  policy
framework  of  the  Eurosystem  this  possibility  is  ruled  out.  Clearly,  to  the  extent  that  national
developments  have  an  impact  on  area-wide  developments,  the  single  monetary  policy  takes  these
factors into account.
While  a  substantial  process  of  disinflation  and  nominal  convergence  preceded  the  establishment  of
Monetary Union, cross-country differences, particularly in real developments, have recently attracted
attention. Some observers have suggested that differences in national developments might turn out to
be  a  complicating  factor  in  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  It  is  true  that  the  cyclical
1
BIS Review   82/1999
positions of the participating countries have not completely converged in real terms. Such differences
may  exist  for  a  number  of  reasons,  reflecting  country-specific  institutional  features,  catching-up
processes or economic structures that have evolved over time, all of which will still be present in the
future. In our view, such differences in real economic developments across euro area countries do not
pose a threat to the single monetary policy. After all, the same phenomenon can be observed between
different parts of any given country.
Regarding  price  developments,  some  cross-country  differences  are  difficult  to  avoid,  for  instance,
those  which  relate  to  catching-up  processes  or  to  indirect  tax  changes.  However,  differences  in
inflation rates related to unsustainable wage developments or the lack of structural reforms in some
countries are highly undesirable and urgently need to be tackled by appropriate policy adjustments at
the  national  level.  The  Eurosystem  can  only  focus  on  area-wide  price  stability.  With  the  single
currency in place and the successful implementation of structural reforms and sound fiscal policies,
we would expect some of the remaining national differences to disappear over time.
The  Maastricht  Treaty  provides  a  fundamentally  sound  allocation  of  objectives  and  instruments
between  the  single  monetary  policy  and  national  fiscal  policies  in  Europe.  The  Eurosystem  is
responsible for maintaining price stability. The Maastricht Treaty also states that the Eurosystem shall
support the general economic policies in the Community without prejudice to the objective of price
stability. There is a widely held view that maintaining price stability is the best contribution monetary
policy can make to a high level of output and employment in the medium term.
With  regard  to  fiscal  policy,  in  1997  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was  agreed  among  the
governments  of  the  EU.  This  Pact  requires  fiscal  authorities  to  meet  the  medium-term  budgetary
objective of positions close to balance or in surplus. It thereby provides the right incentives for the
conduct of sound and disciplined fiscal policies across all participating Member States. Safeguarding
sound  government  finances  is  a  means  of  strengthening  the  conditions  for  price  stability  and
achieving  strong  sustainable  growth,  which  is  conducive  to  employment  creation.  In  addition,
structural reforms in labour and goods markets are the best way to address the underlying causes of
the currently high level of unemployment in Europe, in particular the structural rigidities in the labour
market.  This  clear  division  of  responsibilities  enhances  the  credibility  of  monetary  and  economic
policies in Europe, increases transparency and facilitates accountability. At the same time, it requires
national  policies  and  labour  and  goods  markets  to  be  increasingly  flexible  in  order  to  be  able  to
respond effectively to economic shocks. Well-functioning labour and product markets are needed to
enable adjustments to be made to wages and prices if local or global economic conditions change.
Against this background, an open exchange of information among policy-makers is most helpful for a
proper assessment of the impact that fiscal policies have on developments in the euro area as a whole.
This  assessment  will  form  one  input  –  among  others  –  into  monetary  policy  decisions  aimed  at
maintaining price stability over the medium term.
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy
Given  the  well  known  lags  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  it  is  important  that
monetary policy is conducted in a forward-looking manner with a clear focus on the medium term.
Transitory factors that are not under the control of a central bank, such as sudden oil price shocks or
changes  in  indirect  taxes,  may  influence  prices  in  the  short  term.  To  the  extent  that  such  factors
represent one-off changes in the price level, these effects cancel out if a longer time horizon for the
stabilisation of prices is chosen.
The  Eurosystem,  like  any  other  central  bank,  influences  future  inflation  by  adjusting  short-term
interest rates. In the transmission of monetary impulses to the real sector, the behaviour of financial
institutions,  corporations  and  households  is  crucial.  It  is  widely  acknowledged  that  private
expectations  can  facilitate  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  if  the  strategy  and  the  objective  of  the
BIS Review   82/1999
2
central bank are well understood and credible. In order to stabilise public expectations of future price
developments,  monetary  policy  has  to  be  transparent.  Against  this  background  the  Eurosystem
clarified in autumn last year how the mandate conferred on the ECB by the Treaty to maintain price
stability is defined in quantitative terms.
Price  stability  has  been  defined  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer
Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. This has to be maintained over the medium term. The
coverage of the HICP is quite close to that of the consumer price indices (CPIs) normally used. One
advantage of its use is that the underlying statistical framework has undergone a process of intensive
harmonisation within the EU.
As the wording “increase”  in  the  Eurosystem’s  definition  of  price  stability  makes  clear,  deflation  -
that is, a persistent fall in the price level - would not be consistent with price stability. Beyond that, it
was  not  regarded  as  possible  for  us  to  announce  where  exactly  we  would  draw  the  dividing  line
between  price  stability  and  deflation.  This  is  partly  for  reasons  that  have  been  described  as  the
measurement  bias  in  consumer  price  indices.  For  the  United  States  it  was  estimated  that  measured
consumer prices tend to slightly overestimate actual inflation. A bias may also exist for the euro area
HICP, although its exact magnitude is as yet unknown and needs to be explored further.
In order to maintain price stability, the Governing Council of the ECB has chosen a stability-oriented
monetary  policy  strategy.  The  chosen  strategy  is  forward-looking  in  nature  and  also  ensures
continuity  with  the  former  strategies  of  the  NCBs.  Moreover,  it  takes  into  account  the  fact  that
monetary policy decisions must be based on area-wide rather than national indicators.
The Eurosystem’s stability-oriented monetary policy strategy rests on two “pillars”, which  are  both
important when the Governing Council discusses monetary, financial and economic developments at
its bi-weekly meetings. The first pillar, which is a prominent role for money, takes into account the
essentially monetary origins of inflation over the medium to long term. It recognises that  empirical
studies show a stable long-term relationship between money and prices in the euro area. Therefore, in
the  euro  area  monetary  developments  constitute  an  important  guide  for  the  conduct  of  monetary
policy and it is essential to analyse and monitor the development of monetary aggregates closely.
The ECB has announced a quantitative reference  value  for  broad  monetary  growth  as  measured  by
M3, the first reference value for M3 growth being set at an annual rate of 4½%. This reference value
is  consistent  with  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  while  allowing  for
sustainable output growth and assuming a trend decline in the velocity of circulation of M3. In setting
the  reference  value  for  monetary  growth,  the  Governing  Council  emphasised  its  medium-term
orientation. Substantial or prolonged deviations of current monetary growth from the reference value
will normally signal risks to price stability in the medium term. The choice of M3 was guided by its
performance in terms of stability and leading indicator properties for future inflation. Let me mention
that  monetary  policy  in  Korea  also  gives  prominence  to  a  broad  monetary  aggregate.  Narrow
aggregates were chosen as an intermediate target for monetary policy in Korea until the late 1970s,
but  then  there  was  a  gradual  shift  towards  broader  aggregates.  More  recently,  in  1998,  M3  was
chosen.
The  ECB  does  not  intend  to  react  to  deviations  of  monetary  growth  from  the  reference  value  in  a
mechanistic  way.  In  the  first  instance,  such  deviations  are  analysed  thoroughly  to  infer  any  signals
which they may give about the prospects for price developments. If a deviation points to a threat to
price stability, monetary policy has to react in a manner appropriate to counter this threat.
Although monetary data contain information which is important for monetary policy decision-making,
monetary  developments  alone  clearly  do  not  constitute  a  complete  summary  of  all  the  economic
information  necessary  for  appropriate  policy  decisions  to  be  taken.  Thus  the  Governing  Council
emphasises that it is important, in parallel with the assessment of monetary growth, to look at a wide
3
BIS Review   82/1999
range of financial and other economic indicators, including economic forecasts. The second pillar of
the Eurosystem’s strategy therefore consists in a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price
developments  and  the  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  This  broadly  based
assessment takes into account, inter alia, the information provided by wage developments, exchange
rates, fiscal indicators, real economic activity, and asset and commodity prices. Forecasts of economic
activity  and  prices  in  the  euro  area  can  certainly  also  contribute  to  the  success  of  an  appropriately
forward-looking  monetary  policy.  Thus  we  take  into  account  forecasts  available  from  international
organisations  such  as  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  or  the  Organization  for  Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) as well as internal forecasts.
Monetary policy decisions and the outlook for price stability
In December 1998 the Governing Council of the ECB announced that the level of interest on the main
refinancing operation at the beginning of Monetary Union in January 1999 would be 3%. In the first
quarter of 1999 the Governing Council kept this  rate  unchanged.  In  April,  however,  the  Governing
Council  became  concerned  about  downside  risks  to  price  stability,  mainly  stemming  from  the
weakening of (domestic) economic activity. Consequently, the Governing Council decided to lower
the interest rate on the ECB’s main refinancing operations by 50 basis points to 2.50%. In parallel, the
interest rate on the marginal lending facility was lowered to 3.50% and the interest rate on the deposit
facility to 1.50%.
The Governing Council has kept the interest rates on its monetary policy instruments unchanged since
April. It considered that at the current levels of ECB interest rates, price increases as measured by the
HICP  would  continue  to  remain  compatible  with  the  Eurosystem’s  announced  definition  of  price
stability over the medium term. Let me explain the current assessment in the context of the stability-
oriented monetary policy strategy.
M3  expansion  has  been  close  to  the  reference  value  of  4½%  since  the  beginning  of  this  year.  The
latest  three-month  moving  average  of  M3  growth  (covering  the  period  from  March  to  May  1999)
increased  somewhat  to  5.2%,  compared  with  5.1%  in  the  previous  three-month  period,  mainly
reflecting  expanding  overnight  deposits.  Given  that  this  is  close  to  the  reference  value,  this  is  not
regarded as constituting a signal of future inflationary pressures.
With regard to the broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the risks to
price stability, various indicators of future price developments and economic activity in the euro area
signal a favourable outlook for price stability in the euro area. In recent months long-term rates have
increased, mainly in response to the strong increase in long-term interest rates in the United States.
Nevertheless, the still low level of long-term interest rates signals market expectations of consumer
price inflation consistent with the definition of price stability.
The risks for the external economy appear to have become more balanced. In particular, the danger of
contagion effects from the emerging market economies seems to be reduced. In a number of countries
in South-East Asia the economic and financial conditions have improved. Let me also mention that
exchange rate developments are taken into account in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy via
their effect  on  the  outlook  for  prices  and  the  risks  to  price  stability.  Since  the  start  of  the  year  the
external  value  of  the  euro  has  declined,  bringing  the  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  back  to
around the level observed for its constituent currencies in mid-1997. This development was strongly
influenced by the cyclical divergence that strengthened the US dollar over the past few months. But
we expect this divergence to diminish over the course of this year and next year.
Therefore  with  the  strong  commitment  of  the  Eurosystem  to  internal  price  stability,  there  is  clear
potential for a stronger external value of the euro.
BIS Review   82/1999
4
Recent price changes in the euro area have been affected by higher oil prices, which have fed through
quickly to the energy component of the HICP. Nevertheless, inflation for the euro area as measured by
the HICP has remained close to 1% since the fourth quarter of 1998 and hence has been consistent
with price stability. In May 1999 annual consumer price increases were reported to be 1.0% for the
euro area. Moreover, recent surveys and forecasts of inflation in the euro area covering the next one to
two years indicate that consumer price increases are expected to remain below 2%.
Regarding economic activity in the euro area, little new information has become available in recent
months. The assessment is currently somewhat complicated by the time-consuming introduction of a
new methodology, namely the European System of Accounts (ESA 95). But according to the  latest
estimates  (released  by  EUROSTAT  mid-June),  the  weakening  of  output  growth  which  was  spread
over 1998 came to a halt in the first quarter of  1999.  Data  on  industrial  production  for  April  1999
confirm this picture and the recent increase in business confidence, together with a maintained high
level of consumer confidence are encouraging. All this tends to indicate that the European economy is
picking up during the course of this year. The European Employment Pact, adopted at the summit of
the European Council in Cologne this year, recognises the need to pursue comprehensive structural
reforms and thereby sends the right signals. Starting to implement such reforms would also have an
important confidence-building effect for the euro area and would support the conduct of a stability-
oriented monetary policy.
With  regard  to  public  finances,  it  is  crucial  that  structural  reforms  are  accompanied  by  strict
adherence to the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact in order for the euro area to be better
able to exploit its growth and employment potential.
The international role of the euro
Let me now briefly address the international role of the euro. Clearly, the introduction of the euro has
had important implications for international capital markets. This has been the case not only because a
number of the currencies which have now been replaced by the euro played an important international
role  in  the  past,  but  also  because  the  euro  has  become  the  currency  of  an  economic  area  which
roughly  equals  the  United  States  in  terms  of  economic  size  and  external  trade,  and  which  has  the
world’s second largest capital markets.
The international role comprises a number of functions, which can be distinguished according to the
official use of the euro and its use for private transactions. Concerning the former, the euro might be
considered for official interventions in the foreign exchange market and similarly as a currency for
official  reserve  holdings.  Moreover,  in  the  context  of  formal  exchange  rate  arrangements,  those
countries that previously pegged their currency to one of the participating euro area currencies might,
in  future,  peg  their  national  currency  to  the  euro.  Private  investors  will  use  the  euro  for  the
international exchange of goods and services and for all kinds of portfolio investment. With regard to
portfolio investment, the private use of the euro spans a broad spectrum from currency trading, bond
and securities issues to investment in stocks.
One of the key elements encouraging international portfolio diversification in favour of the euro is the
creation of a large, liquid and integrated capital market in Europe that began with the launch of the
euro. For short-term instruments, we are now dealing with a broad and liquid European money market
that  ensures  very  similar  short-term  interest  rates  for  comparable  instruments  and  credit  risks.  The
development  of  this  market  has  been  strengthened  by  the  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  of
open market operations, which is mainly based on reverse transactions, and the implementation of the
new TARGET real-time gross settlement payment system in participating countries. At the longer end
of the maturity spectrum, market integration was jump-started by the re-denomination of outstanding
government debt in euro and by the convergence of interest rates to narrower spreads following the
elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk.  The  elimination  of  this  risk  will  also  foster  the  development  of
uniform  market  standards  so  that  government  bonds  in  the  euro  area  will  become  relatively  close
5
BIS Review   82/1999
substitutes, creating a large and liquid bond market. Obviously, this requires sound  and  sustainable
budgetary policies that ensure that credit risk spreads remain small.
Among the important determinants of the international role of the euro two factors stand out, namely
the size of the financial market and confidence in the currency. It is widely recognised that a large
degree  of  openness  of  domestic  financial  markets  normally  also  leads  to  a  substantial  use  of  the
currency by foreign investors. At the same time country-specific risk features such as political risks
can  reduce  the  international  use  of  the  currency.  Let  me  emphasise  that  the  euro  is  backed  by  an
environment  of  monetary  stability  with  a  medium-term  orientation  and  which  may  be  seen  as
providing sound conditions for the further enhancement of the international role of the euro.
Clearly,  the  disappearance  of  11  national  currencies  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro  as  a  major
international currency had an immediate impact on the turnover and focus of attention in the global
foreign  exchange  markets.  This  has  been  reflected,  for  example,  in  relatively  active  and  liquid
euro/dollar trading in the foreign exchange market since the launch of the new currency.
The euro can also be expected to become an attractive currency for the investment of official reserves.
Moreover, available information concerning the private use of the euro as a currency of denomination
for debt securities indicates a significant increase in the share of international debt markets in the first
quarter of 1999. This supports the view that in the medium term financial markets see the euro as a
stable  currency.  Moreover,  it  is  widely  recognised  that  in  the  medium  to  long  term  exchange  rates
follow  a  path  determined  by  fundamental  factors  such  as  price  and  economic  developments.  Thus,
internal price stability should serve as an anchor for the development of the euro’s external value in
the medium term. Indeed, a stability-oriented monetary policy protecting the purchasing power of the
euro is the basis of a solid and stable currency over the medium term.
As  yet  it  is  too  early  to  predict  how  long  it  will  take  for  the  euro  to  be  considered  as  a  truly
international  currency  similar  to  the  US  dollar.  The  Eurosystem  neither  promotes  nor  hinders  the
development of the euro as an international currency. We consider that the international role of the
euro should develop through the interaction of market forces.
Concluding remarks
To conclude, the success enjoyed by the euro in its first half year can without doubt be attributed to a
number of factors. Above all, the Member States were successful in their efforts to achieve a smooth
changeover  to  the  euro.  The  independence  of  the  ECB  and  the  clear  mandate  to  maintain  price
stability  are  crucial  to  ensuring  a  high  degree  of  credibility  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy.
Without  the  confidence  of  international  financial  markets  and  the  permanent  support  of  banks  and
financial  institutions  in  the  euro  area  and  beyond,  the  single  currency  in  Europe  could  not  have
become a reality. I am confident that we can expect also a continued support to making the euro  a
truly international currency.
BIS Review   82/1999
6
