Mr Hayami discusses the Bank of Japan’s thinking behind the current zero interest rate
policy
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Mr Masaru Hayami, at the Japan National Press
Club in Tokyo on 22 June 1999.
I.
Introduction
Four months have passed since February when the Bank of Japan launched its so-called zero
interest  rate  policy,  and  my  speech  today  explains  our  thinking  behind  this  historically
unprecedented policy.
At  the  outset,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  all  decisions  regarding  the  Bank’s  policies,
including  the  present  zero  interest  rate  policy,  are  made  after  deep  and  wide-ranging
discussions  by  the  Policy  Board.  For  example,  as  can  be  seen  in  the  recent  minutes  of
Monetary Policy Meetings, when the Policy Board decided upon a zero interest rate policy, it
gave  serious  consideration  to  such  policy  alternatives  as  quantitative  monetary  easing  and
inflation targeting. For details of these discussions, the minutes of Monetary Policy Meetings
are available.
II.
A.
Zero Interest Rate Policy
Elements of the Zero Interest Rate Policy
The  so-called  zero  interest  rate  policy  comprises  three  elements.  First,  to  encourage  the
unsecured overnight call rate to move as low as possible by providing ample funds. Second, to
pay  due  consideration  to  maintaining  the  proper  functioning  of  the  market  so  as  to  avoid
disturbance  in  the  short-term  money  market.  And  third,  to  continue  with  the  current  policy
until deflationary concerns subside.
Of these three, the first element is a specific directive to guide the interest rate down to around
zero.  Like  the  central  bank  in  the  US  and  elsewhere,  daily  monetary  control  in  Japan  is
conducted through guiding the shortest inter-bank rate, namely the unsecured overnight call
rate. Up to last February when the Bank decided on the zero interest rate policy, the target for
guiding the unsecured overnight call rate had already been as low as 0.25 percent, which had
left hardly any room for further reduction. Under such circumstances, a view was expressed at
the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  on  February  12  that  for  further  monetary  easing  quantitative
targeting  might  be  more  effective.  The  majority  view,  however,  was  that  the  demand  for
monetary  base  fluctuated  widely  depending  on  money  market  developments  and  that  its
relationship with the real economy was not stable. After thorough discussion, it was decided
to make the maximum use of the remaining room for the further reduction of interest rates by
eliminating the de facto floor for the call rate. Interest rates and the quantity of money are two
sides  of  the  same  coin.  A  reduction  of  interest  rates  to  zero  accompanies  simultaneous
quantitative  easing  on  a  massive  scale,  which  expressed  by  the  phrase  “provide  ample
liquidity.”
The second policy element is to pay due consideration to maintaining the proper functioning
of the market. This means the careful and cautious guidance of interest rates while keeping a
close watch on the behavior of market participants and the functioning of the market after the
lower limit for the call rate has been removed. Since the call market is an important market
1
BIS Review   80/1999
where all transactions in Japan are finally settled, the central bank should at all cost avoid any
disruption. In guiding interest rates down to zero the Bank was navigating uncharted waters
and hence in the process had to pay  particular  attention  to  the  effects  of  the  policy  change.
Since the decision on February 12, the Bank gradually and cautiously encouraged the fall in
the  call  rate  while  carefully  monitoring  market  developments.  By  April  the  unsecured
overnight call rate had declined to 0.03 percent and has remained stable since then. This call
rate of 0.03 percent can be regarded as the de facto zero interest rate taking into consideration
transaction fees.
A conspicuous change in the market structure during this period was the downsizing of the
call market from 35 trillion yen to 20 trillion yen, or a decline of approximately 40 percent.
The downsizing itself is a result of the large decline in the need for fund-raising in the call
market and, in a sense, is a natural reaction of the market mechanism to the ample provision
of funds. The question is whether such downsizing has made transactions in the market less
smooth. So far we have not observed any problems, but we will maintain a close watch on the
impact of our zero interest rate policy on the market function.
With respect to the third policy element that the Bank will continue with the current policy
until  deflationary  concerns  subside,  this  is  not  in  the  February  12  decision,  but  is  an
expression of the current stance of the Bank’s monetary policy based on the majority opinion
of the Policy Board. Needless to say, the objective of monetary policy is to contribute to the
sound  development  of  the  national  economy  through  the  pursuit  of  price  stability.  In  other
words, the Bank aims at achieving a situation which is neither deflationary nor inflationary.
Therefore, as long as deflationary concerns linger, the Bank should continue with its current
monetary easing to achieve price stability and economic recovery. In making clear its stance,
the Bank sought to explain to the market, as well as to the public, the objective of its monetary
policy  in  the  context  of  current  economic  conditions  so  as  to  maintain  the  credibility  of
monetary policy. Particularly in view  of  the  instability  in  the  financial  market  that  we  have
experienced from time to time since last year, we thought it necessary to restate the objective
of monetary policy to secure market stability. In fact, since I referred to this objective in April,
the downward trend has permeated from shorter to longer term interest rates.
B.
Effects of the Zero Interest Rate Policy
Since April, the unsecured overnight call rate, the direct target of the Bank’s monetary policy
operations, has  remained  stable  at  around  0.03  percent,  or  virtually  at  zero  percent.  Interest
rates on longer terms have also declined sharply in the short-term money market. As a result, a
sense  of  relief  regarding  fund  availability  has  spread  among  financial  institutions.  Also,
concern overseas about the availability of funds to Japanese banks has receded significantly,
the effect of which has manifested itself in the almost complete disappearance of the Japan
premium since March. The permeation of monetary easing seems to have induced liquidity to
flow into longer term debt and equities, having a favorable effect on long-term interest rates
and stock prices.
Against this background, tightness in corporate funding has eased considerably. Last year, the
turmoil  in  international  financial  markets  and  the  failure  of  several  Japanese  financial
institutions impaired the proper functioning of domestic financial markets, making it difficult
for even blue-chip companies to raise funds in the market. Financial institutions were obliged
to assume a strict attitude toward lending because of not only the constraint on their capital
position  but  also  difficulties  in  their  fund  raising.  All  this  has  changed  considerably  since
BIS Review   80/1999
2
early  spring,  and  we  can  now  safely  say  that  the  financial  environment  as  a  whole  has
improved significantly.
It  appears  that  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  has  begun  to  exert  a  beneficial  influence  on
strengthening the forces for economic recovery from the monetary side. What are the reasons
for this?  Simply stated, the monetary easing in February was to reduce the targeted call rate
by some 0.25 percent, which was the same as the policy change on September 9 last year in
terms of the size of reduction in the call rate. Nevertheless, the effects seem to have perhaps
been much larger than generally expected.
One  of  the  reasons  for  the  larger  than  expected  effects  is  that  the  zero  interest  rate  policy
benefited from the synergy of such favorable factors as an improvement in the international
environment surrounding Japan. Last summer, the economic crisis in Russia and the collapse
of  a  major  hedge  fund  in  the  US  triggered  considerable  tension  in  international  capital
markets. The increase in the Japan premium was caused not only by domestic factors but also
by such international factors. Fortunately, the tension in international financial markets began
to lessen from around the end of last year. On the domestic front, measures to restore Japan’s
financial system, such as the injection of capital using public funds and the introduction of a
special credit guarantee system for small and medium-sized firms substantially contributed to
easing  tightness  in  the  financial  market  and  corporate  funding.  In  addition  to  the  favorable
turn of events, a strong resolve expressed by the Bank to avoid deflation by implementing the
zero interest rate policy was a significant contributing factor.
The zero interest rate policy not only had such an effect but also helped to  revive,  to  some
extent, the weakened financial intermediation function in Japan as observed last year.
To elucidate the point, let me first describe a ‘liquidity effect’ of the zero interest rate policy.
Whatever the level may be, a reduction in interest rates requires a corresponding increase in
liquidity.  Reducing  the  interest  rate  down  to  zero  means  that  the  central  bank  will  provide
enough liquidity so that all the demand for short-term funds will be met in the market. Under
such circumstances, the market will reach a stage where there is hardly any liquidity risk for
market  participants.  As  was  mentioned  previously,  concern  about  liquidity  increased
substantially  in  Japan’s  financial  markets  last  year.  The  zero  interest  rate  policy  played  a
significant role in completely turning around the situation which could be labeled  ‘liquidity
evaporation.’
The  zero  interest  rate  policy  also  had  the  effect  of  encouraging  risk  taking  by  market
participants. Whether indirect financing like bank lending or direct financing, the essence of
financial  intermediation  lies  in  taking  future  risks.  When  financial  institutions  become
excessively cautious, as was the case last year, they will not take even normal risks and the
financial  intermediation  function  to  support  economic  activity  weakens  considerably.  As  a
consequence  of  the  latest  decline  in  interest  rates,  institutional  investors  have  gradually
become more active in investing in securities with longer maturities or those carrying some
credit  risk  such  as  CP  and  corporate  bonds.  Of  course,  excesses  must  be  avoided  and  we
intend  to  carefully  monitor  market  developments.  In  contrast,  as  regards  bank  lending,  we
cannot  yet  say  that  a  recovery  has  been  seen.  Needless  to  say,  we  also  intend  to  closely
monitor  any  changes  in  the  attitude  of  banks  toward  lending  and  how  such  changes  might
affect corporate funding and investment behavior.
3
BIS Review   80/1999
III.
Discussions on Zero Interest Rate Policy
A.
Zero Interest Rate Policy and Quantitative Easing
We recognize there are opinions that it is not enough just to continue the current policy and
that the Bank of Japan should pursue quantitative easing or inflation targeting, or increase the
purchase of government bonds to prevent a rise in long-term interest rates.
Regarding  quantitative  easing,  it  should  be  noted  that  both  a  reduction  in  interest  rates  and
quantitative easing are expressions of monetary easing, only from a different point of view.
One cannot increase quantity while keeping interest rates constant, and conversely, one cannot
reduce interest rates while keeping quantity constant. Interest rates and the quantity of money
should be treated as inseparable.
The zero interest rate policy is to encourage the unsecured overnight call rate to move as low
as possible by providing ample funds. In this sense, the Bank has already effected sufficient
quantitative easing because interest rates have declined to virtually zero.
For  example,  at  present  the  required  reserves  for  financial  institutions  amount  to  some  4
trillion yen per day, but the Bank has been providing more liquidity than the required amount.
Recently, we offered to supply funds to the market through our daily operations, but there was
not enough demand. The Bank tried to provide additional liquidity, but the market responded
“enough.” This evidences, in our view, the abundance of liquidity in the market.
Another  example.  For  the  past  three  years,  money  supply  has  increased  by  60  trillion  yen,
which is more than ten times the 5 trillion yen increase in nominal GDP. As a result, the ratio
of  money  supply  to  nominal  GDP,  Marshallian  k,  which  shows  how  much  money  is
circulating compared with economic activity, has rapidly risen. The pace of rise matches or
exceeds that experienced in the high inflation period of excess liquidity in the 1970s and the
bubble period of the 1980s.
As  such,  current  monetary  policy  has  already  had  a  significant  easing  effect  from  the
quantitative aspect. When quantitative easing is discussed, it sometimes specifically refers to
measures which set some numerical targets for quantitative indicators such as money supply.
Since interest rates and the quantity of money are two sides of the same coin, the argument
can  be  rephrased  as  the  following  technical  question:  “For  monetary  easing,  is  it  better  to
focus mainly on the quantity of money or interest rates as an operational target?”
For  example,  in  an  economy  where  inflationary  expectations  fluctuate  significantly  due  to
such external shocks as an oil crisis, nominal and real interest rates diverge. Thus, focusing
only  on  interest  rates  runs  the  risk  of  making  a  mistake  regarding  the  degree  of  monetary
easing and tightening. Under such circumstances, it is better to conduct monetary operations
guided by quantitative targets such as money supply.
Conversely, in an economy where demand for money greatly fluctuates, setting a quantitative
target becomes rather dangerous. Until the latter half of last year, the monetary base, which is
the sum of currency in circulation and reserve deposits, had exhibited a high growth rate of
about 10 percent on a year-on-year basis. This was because, against the background of anxiety
regarding financial  system  instability,  the  financial,  household,  and  corporate  sectors  held  a
huge amount of liquidity either in the form of cash or deposits with the Bank of Japan. If the
BIS Review   80/1999
4
Bank  had  adopted  quantitative  targeting  under  such  a  situation,  it  would  have  meant  a
tightening of monetary policy which would have been contrary to its policy stance.
There  are  many  other  issues  to  be  examined  such  as  the  relationship  between  quantitative
indicators and the real economy, the Bank’s controllability of such indicators, and the effect of
targeting on financial system stability. These issues have been taken up for active discussion
by  the  Policy  Board.  One  Board  member  even  made  a  specific  proposal  for  quantitative
targeting.  However,  the  majority  opinion  of  the  Policy  Board  to  date  is  that  it  is  more
appropriate  to  effect  monetary  easing  by  using  interest  rates  as  an  operational  target  rather
than setting quantitative targets.
B.
Zero Interest Rate Policy and Inflation Targeting
The  Bank  of  Japan  Law  explicitly  stipulates  that  monetary  policy  aims  at  price  stability.
Hence from the viewpoint of pursuing price stability, there would be no conflict between our
current  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  inflation  targeting.  The  difference  boils  down  to
whether or not to set a specific numerical target such as a 1 percent increase in CPI.
Since the central bank aims at price stability over the medium to long term, it needs to make a
manifold analysis of various factors affecting price developments, such as the risk of future
price changes, to come to a judgment. It is dangerous to stick to a specific figure for a specific
price  indicator  as  a  target.  For  example,  even  if  a  specific  target  were  set,  it  does  not
necessarily follow  that  a  policy  response  would  not  be  required  until  the  actual  price  index
exceeded  the  target.  Depending  on  the  speed  of  price  changes  and  tightness  of  supply  and
demand conditions, there might be a situation where an appropriate policy response would be
called for before the price index reached the target.
The  currently  prevailing  argument  for  inflation  targeting  includes  dissipating  the  current
excessive  deflationary  expectations  of  the  public  by  raising  their  inflationary  expectations.
Can we really raise inflationary expectations just by announcing an inflation target? Even if
we can, there is the danger that long-term interest rates may rise to the point where they have
an adverse impact on the economy.
What  is  the  significance  of  setting  numerical  targets,  be  it  money  supply  or  inflation,  for
monetary policy? The answer is to prevent market participants from engaging in unnecessary
speculation by clearly showing the Bank’s commitment to its policy objective.
If so, without entering the  tricky  area  of  setting  specific  and  concrete  targets,  the  Bank  can
incorporate the usefulness embodied in inflation targeting by making explicit the key elements
of monetary policy conduct. It was this line of thinking that was behind the Bank’s explicit
announcement  that  it  would  “continue  with  the  current  policy  until  deflationary  concerns
subside.”
C.
Underwriting and the Outright Purchase of Government Bonds by the Bank
Behind  the  request  that  the  Bank  underwrites  government  bonds,  there  seems  to  be  the
intention  that  the  Bank,  through  underwriting,  should  ensure  the  smooth  issuance  of
government bonds, thereby containing a rise in long-term interest rates. If this is the case, then
the Bank holds firm against complying with such a request.
5
BIS Review   80/1999
Once a central bank engages in the automatic financing of a fiscal deficit, sooner or later the
time  will  come  when  it  cannot  put  a  brake  on  money  expansion,  thereby  inducing  vicious
inflation.  This  is  one  valuable  lesson  that  we  have  learned  from  history  and  constitutes  the
main reason why the underwriting of long-term government bonds is prohibited not only in
Japan but also in other industrialized countries.
An increase in the outright purchase of long-term government bonds eventually leads to the
same  situation  as  in  underwriting.  Over  time,  long-term  interest  rates  are  determined
reflecting the views of market participants on the future state of the economy and prices. If the
Bank were to prevent long-term interest rates from rising despite market pressures, it would
have  no  choice  but  to  increase  the  purchase  of  government  bonds.  Then,  inflationary
expectations  would  intensify,  putting  further  pressures  on  long-term  interest  rates.  Such  a
vicious  circle  would  repeat  itself  and  the  amount  of  government  bonds  that  had  to  be
purchased would increase infinitely. This would eventually be the same as the underwriting of
government bonds.
If a limit on either the amount or the period is set for the underwriting or the outright purchase
of government bonds, can we obtain favorable results while avoiding the vicious circle?
The answer is  “no” if we consider the  mechanism  of  financial  markets  and  the  behavior  of
market  participants.  Even  if  the  amount  or  the  period  is  limited,  market  participants  will
always  think  about  what  is  ahead  when  they  act.  It  is  natural  for  investors  who  want  to
purchase ten-year government bonds to think about ten years ahead. Therefore, once market
participants anticipate a rise in long-term interest rates after the pre-determined underwriting
or outright purchase is completed, long-term interest rates will in fact rise immediately, not in
the distant future. Furthermore, if market participants perceive that a brake has been released
in seeing the central bank begin monetizing the fiscal deficit by even a limited amount, there
is  a  risk  that  the  market  would  become  concerned  with  vicious  inflation  and  loss  of  fiscal
discipline. Given that globalization will continue and that investors worldwide are interested
in Japanese government bonds for portfolio management purposes, we should be very careful
about our policy operations, while keeping in mind such a market response.
The  issue  will  come  to  be  a  matter  of  confidence  in  the  yen  and  the  Bank’s  conduct  of
monetary policy, and eventually confidence in the Japanese economy itself. Confidence would
most likely be eroded if the Bank succumbed to the request for the underwriting or increase in
the  outright  purchase  of  government  bonds,  with  or  without  a  limit  on  the  amount  or  the
period.
Let me turn to the difference between the outright purchase of long-term government bonds
currently conducted by the Bank and the recent request to underwrite or increase the outright
purchase of government bonds. Our current long-term government bond purchase operations
are  a  way  to  smoothly  provide  the  long-term  funds  necessary  for  sustainable  growth  of  the
economy.  They  are  neither  aimed  at  the  smooth  issuance  of  government  bonds  nor  for
supporting their prices. The Bank makes it a rule to purchase long-term government bonds in
the  amount  roughly  consistent  with  the  trend  growth  rate  of  banknote  issuance  over  the
medium term. By adopting such a rule, the Bank tries not to directly affect long-term interest
rates. The Bank will continue to hold firm to the posture that it will not purchase long-term
government bonds for smooth issuance or price maintenance purposes.
BIS Review   80/1999
6
Relating  to  this  discussion,  there  are  suggestions  that  the  Bank  should  effect  quantitative
easing through the purchase of government bonds. In response to these suggestions, monetary
easing has already permeated the market and the Bank has sufficient operational tools to effect
monetary  easing.  The  Bank  does  not  have  to  resort  to  an  increase  in  the  purchase  of
government bonds in the conduct of its current monetary policy.
Since  the  Bank  is  providing  ample  liquidity  to  the  market,  related  anxiety  has  almost
disappeared in financial markets. However, many investors and financial institutions seem to
be experiencing a hard time finding good borrowers and profitable investments. For the whole
economy the savings and investment balance is tilted toward huge net savings.
Under such circumstances, if the yield on government bonds records a large increase over a
sustained  period,  it  will  most  likely  signal  either  that  views  on  the  economy  are  turning
favorable or that the market is warning against an increase in the budget deficit. In the case of
the former, it indicates economic recovery and we welcome this development while staying
alert to whether there is any overreaction in the market. In the case of the latter, we should use
it  as  an  opportunity  to  review  the  costs  and  benefits  regarding  the  widening  of  the  budget
deficit in the context of future economic developments.
D.
Reforming the Government Bond Market
Even if the Bank does not underwrite or increase the purchase of government bonds, it does
not  mean  that  the  government  bond  market  is  not  important.  In  fact,  the  government  bond
market has become increasingly important. The Bank has long been working actively on the
issue  of  reforming  the  Japanese  government  bond  market,  and  it  will  continue  to  make  the
utmost efforts toward that end.
For  the  Bank,  the  government  bond  market  is  an  important  market  in  which  its  operations,
such  as  repos  and  short-term  government  bond  operations,  are  conducted.  In  addition,  the
Bank conducts various businesses from the issuance to the redemption of government bonds
on behalf of the government, not to mention running the government bond settlement system.
From such a standpoint, we have taken a great interest and devoted much effort in improving
the functions of the government bond market. In preparation for the introduction of real time
gross settlement by the end of 2000, the Bank has been working hard on upgrading computer
systems,  and,  at  the  same  time,  formulating  new  market  practices  together  with  market
participants.
In general, financial assets with low liquidity which are traded by a small number of investors
in  the  market  tend  to  show  excess  price  volatility.  Therefore,  making  the  government  bond
market  more  liquid  and  convenient  for  many  diversified  investors  is  essential  to  improve
functions  of  both  the  primary  and  secondary  markets.  The  importance  of  reforming  the
government  bond  market  does  not  stop  here.  A  highly  liquid  government  bond  market  in
which the market mechanism functions efficiently forms a basis for developing other financial
markets. In this regard, we should not underwrite government bonds and contain their prices
against market pressures. Rather, we think it important, through improving the functioning of
the  government  bond  market,  to  strengthen  financial  markets  which  are  the  basic
infrastructure of our national economy.
7
BIS Review   80/1999
We expect that the issues regarding fiscal management and the government bond market will
continue to be discussed in various fora, including the Diet. The Bank stands ready to make a
contribution by, for example, stating its views.
IV.
A.
Current Situation and Prospects for the Japanese Economy
Current Situation
While  the  Japanese  economy  has  stopped  deteriorating,  there  are  not  yet  clear  signs  of  a
recovery.  There  are  four  reasons  behind  the  halt  in  deterioration  and  which  can  be
summarized as follows:
First, an increase in policy-driven demand such as public investment and housing investment
has been observed.
Second,  under  the  continued  expansion  of  the  US  economy,  the  economic  environment
overseas  has  been  improving  as  a  whole  as  illustrated  by  the  gradual  recovery  of  Asian
economies and the rebound of international commodity prices.
Third, as a result of such developments in final demand together with the cautious attitude of
firms  toward  production,  inventory  adjustment  has  progressed.  Judging  from  current
inventories,  it  appears  that  conditions  are  being  laid  for  production  to  increase  once  final
demand picks up.
Fourth, against the background of our zero interest rate policy and the injection of capital into
major banks using public funds, the financial environment has turned favorable.
B.
Prospects
Though  the  Japanese  economy  has  stopped  deteriorating,  we  cannot  yet  foresee  an
autonomous recovery. There are three reasons for this.
The first is that the present halt in the deterioration of the economy is basically supported by
policy-driven demand like public investment, and private demand, which is the engine for an
autonomous  recovery,  still  remains  weak.  Considering  that  future  demand  prospects  are
uncertain and that balance sheet adjustment is needed to improve soundness and efficiency,
particularly among large firms, business  fixed  investment  will  very  likely  further  decline  in
fiscal  1999.  In  view  of  the  increasing  severity  of  the  employment  and  income  environment
reflecting aggressive corporate restructuring, it seems difficult to expect any rapid recovery of
private consumption from the current situation.
The second reason is that we still need time to carefully monitor how an improvement in the
financial  environment  affects  the  real  economy.  It  is  true  that  the  attitude  of  financial
institutions  toward  lending  has  become  less  strict  compared  with  a  while  ago,  but  their
balance sheet adjustments and strengthening of risk management systems have not yet reached
a stage where they will actively seek loans that carry larger credit risk. Stock prices have been
partly supported by such  outside  factors  as  rising  US  stock  prices.  To  ensure  the  continued
improvement of the financial environment and subsequently of the real economy which leads
to a virtuous circle between finance and the economy, it is necessary for firms to restructure
themselves in a forward-looking manner and to consolidate their business in such a way that
will gain the confidence of the market.
BIS Review   80/1999
8
The third reason, which relates to the weakness of private demand pointed out earlier, is the
persisting  pressure  of  structural  adjustment.  Needless  to  say,  changes  in  industrial  structure
are  inevitable  for  the  Japanese  economy  to  become  more  efficient.  Among  these  changes,
employment is one of the most serious problems during the transitional period. In this regard,
we welcome the government’s initiative to create an employment policy framework which is
consistent with the direction of structural reform. Nevertheless, it should be noted that, at least
for a short period, there is a possibility of increased downward pressure on the economy from
the employment side.
Bearing these reasons in mind, the present situation does not warrant an autonomous recovery
of  the  economy  led  by  private  demand  in  the  latter  half  of  this  fiscal  year  when  public
investment is expected to taper off. Thus, potential downward pressure on prices appears to
remain,  and  it  is  our  judgment  that  the  economy  has  not  yet  reached  the  stage  where
deflationary concerns have been dispelled.
V.
Conclusion
At  the  present  moment,  with  prolonged  worries  regarding  financial  system  stability  at  last
subsiding, the Japanese economy stands at an important crossroads. If it can overcome such
problems  as  the  changes  in  industrial  structure  and  unemployment,  then  an  autonomous
recovery  can  be  realized.  In  this  regard,  we  are  well  aware  that  monetary  policy  plays  an
important role. Based on such recognition, the Bank has committed itself to maintaining its
monetary easing policy until deflationary worries subside.
Needless  to  say,  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  solve  all  problems.  We  should  thoroughly
recognize that the current zero interest rate policy is an unusual and emergency measure for a
central  bank  and  also  that  we  should  not  indefinitely  pursue  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy
centering on public investment. To truly revitalize the Japanese economy we must forcefully
promote structural reform to strengthen the supply side, while sustaining the economy through
an aggregate demand policy.
There  are  various  aspects  to  structural  reform,  the  main  purpose  of  which  is  to  garner  the
intrinsic potential power of the economy and to raise the medium-term expected growth rate.
To these ends, competitive dynamism should be fully utilized. It is thus necessary to create a
competitive  market  environment  which  encourages  firms  to  boldly  pursue  technological
innovation and explore new business areas. In addition, to take advantage of new investment
opportunities,  it  is  essential  to  have  efficient  and  well-functioning  financial  markets  which
enable savings to be smoothly channeled to investment through various financial instruments.
If the changes in industrial structure and reform of the financial system progress and public
expectations  for  growth  become  more  optimistic,  our  monetary  easing  policy  to  date  will
become even more effective.
9
BIS Review   80/1999
