Mr Duisenberg’s speech at the 11th Frankfurt International Banking Evening
Speech  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr  W  F  Duisenberg  at  the  11th
Frankfurt International Banking Evening in Frankfurt on 20 May 1999.
It is indeed an honour for me to have been invited to say a few words here this evening at the
Frankfurt International Banking Evening. At the same time, it is more than a challenge and a
rather daunting task. Speaking after Hans Tietmeyer is almost like preaching after the pope.
Moreover, I believe it is well known by now that the members of the Governing Council of
the ECB speak with one voice. So, what does that leave me to say?
Some have taken this principle of “speaking with one voice” to mean that there would only be
one  spokesperson  for  the  ECB.  That  is  a  misunderstanding.  Each  of  the  members  of  the
Governing Council of the ECB has a voice and makes use of it. It is essential for the decisions
and  views  of  the  Governing  Council  to  be  explained  comprehensively  throughout  the  euro
area as well as outside it and multiple expression is one way to do it. This is particularly so in
these early years following the introduction of the euro. After I had given a speech in German,
Theo Waigel once observed, “The euro speaks German.” He was right, of course, but the euro
actually speaks the languages of all the other countries in the Eurosystem. We speak with one
voice  but,  if  need  be,  in  eleven  languages.  This  evening  we  are  speaking  English,  although
Hans  quoted  an  advertisement  in  Dutch  in  which  I  appear.  I  shall  presently  also  speak  two
sentences in German. Incidentally, Hans could also have referred to another advertisement in
which a puppet - according to some people, a President of the ECB look-alike - is doing some
basic  arithmetic.  He  calculates  that  if  1  euro  is  2  guilders  and  20  cents  then  2  euro  are  4
guilders and 40 cents. At the ECB our sums are rather more complicated than that, but Hans
rightly  argued  that  central  bankers  cannot  be  replaced  by  computers.  Neither  should  the
second  advertisement  be  taken  as  an  argument  for  replacing  central  bankers  by  puppets,
especially not with their strings being pulled by Ministers of Finance.
We,  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  speak  with  one  voice,  but  not  all
voices are identical. How can they be, since they belong to different individuals? We are not
in the business of producing clones. Earlier this evening we once again had the privilege of
listening to a convincing  and  clearly  audible  voice.  There  is  nothing  in  what  was  said  with
which I disagree, and I intend to add very little to it. In fact, on some matters I can only repeat
what  was  said  in  my  own  words.  Don’t  worry,  I  shall  not  do  this  extensively.  However,
repetition is the mother of all genuine knowledge. I cannot therefore resist the temptation to
focus  briefly  on  two  points  that  Hans  made.  The  principle  of  conducting  monetary  policy
within  a  longer-term  framework  and  from  a  longer-term  perspective  is  the  first  issue  that  I
should like to address. This principle sounds simple and its logic is indeed not complicated. It
is, however, as difficult to adhere to it in practice as its logic is simple. It seems to me that it
has even become more difficult to apply in recent decades as a result of the rapid development
in information and communication technology. Tonight is not the occasion to elaborate on this
at length, but perhaps you will allow me to share the following reflections with you.
Developments  in  these  areas  have  brought  great  benefits  and  have  the  potential  to  lead  to
significant additional welfare gains in the years ahead, not least in Europe. At the same time
they  present  challenges  to  economic  policy-makers,  since  they  have  already  fundamentally
changed  the  character  of  society  and  its  economies.  These  changes  are  ongoing  and  we  are
only beginning to come to terms with them. The  word  which  characterises  much  of  today's
1
BIS Review   57/1999
lifestyle is “zapping”. The equivalent of “zapping” in  monetary  policy  terms  is  adopting  an
activist policy, with over-eager responses to all the items of daily information in the financial
markets.  I  sometimes  have  the  impression  that  activism  is  experiencing  a  revival  in  some
circles,  although  the  past  has  demonstrated  clearly  how  ill-advised  we  would  be  to  follow
such policies. Hans Tietmeyer has time and again stressed the importance of taking a longer-
term view. He has also pointed out - although this is perhaps less known - that economies do
not  operate  in  isolation.  Historical  developments  and  the  wider  social  and  cultural
environment should be taken into account. Short-termism is also the name of the game being
played by some commentators who, barely five months after the introduction of the euro, are
drawing  far-reaching  conclusions  about  the  success  of  the  euro  or,  more  spectacular,  its
failure.  From  a  longer-term  perspective,  one  can  appreciate,  for  example,  that  the  current
situation of price stability is a great improvement on the situation in many countries in recent
decades. Making the euro a lasting success is of course an ongoing process and indeed, in line
with the title of Hans’ speech, “a permanent challenge and task”. This task requires the input
of many persons, firms and institutions. Of course, the Eurosystem is not the least important
in this respect.
This brings me to the second point made by Hans on which I should like to focus. That is that,
in the end, even the most independent central bank cannot guarantee the maintenance of price
stability  if  no  real  support  for  this  objective  is  given  by  fiscal  policies,  politicians,  social
partners, good  academic  analysis,  the  financial  community  as  present  here  this  evening  and
the  public  at  large.  Although,  technically  speaking,  an  independent  central  bank  is  able  to
maintain price stability in the medium term, in the longer term the actual outcome would be
radically  different  without  the  existence  of  what  Hans  would  call  an  entrenched  stability
culture.  The  importance  of  this  cannot  be  overstated  here  in  Europe,  where  we  have  just
introduced  a  new  currency  in  eleven  countries  with  different  histories,  cultures  and
backgrounds.  Establishing  and  maintaining  a  European  culture  of  stability  is  of  the  utmost
importance.  This  also  explains  why  central  bankers  regularly  express  their  views  on  other
policies, be it fiscal policies or structural reforms. I have done so in the past and shall continue
to do so in the future - as always, on a constructive basis and in recognition of the fact that the
central  bank  does  not  decide  on  these  policies,  but  only  gives  its  advice.  The  German
authorities  have  received  a  great  deal  of  advice  from  Hans  over  the  past  six  years.  Perhaps
they did not always like his advice - for instance when they wanted to  revalue  the  stock  of
gold - but I am sure that they were not surprised that he gave it. They would have been really
surprised, however, if the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank had not expressed his views.
To help to establish and maintain a culture of stability is also one of the reasons why a central
bank  needs  to  be  open  and  communicative.  We  at  the  ECB  attach  great  importance  to  this
principle and are making every effort to practise it. We are prepared to learn from experience
and to adjust our line of thinking wherever and whenever it proves necessary.
Only  the  pope  is  infallible  -  central  bankers  are  not.  Communication  should  not  be
unidirectional. We are willing to listen to others and to exchange information and views with
them, while at the same time bearing in mind our own spheres of responsibility and those of
others.  Finally,  I  should  like  to  mention  the  importance  of  a  serious,  well-informed  and
constructively critical press in this communication process. For the communication process to
function well we need to provide the press with sufficient information, clearly conveying our
views to its representatives. It also calls for journalists who are prepared to really digest this
information, not just to “zap” through it in search of an eye-catching headline; they also need
to  study  the  sometimes  technical  background  of  central  banking.  A  particular  group  of
BIS Review   57/1999
2
journalists  awards  the  prize  of  European  central  banker  of  the  year.  Perhaps  it  would  be  a
good idea to award a prize to the best European financial journalist of the year. Let me make
myself clear, I should not want to be involved in the organisation of such a competition, nor
even to have a vote in selecting the winner. I have to admit, though, that I would be interested
in the outcome.
Tonight  Hans  Tietmeyer  has  addressed  the  Frankfurt  International  Banking  Evening  for  the
last time in his capacity as President of the Deutsche Bundesbank. Hans, I know that it is not
over yet. However, August is drawing closer and closer. You have now entered the phase in
which you are doing things for the last time in your present capacity. Recently, you visited De
Nederlandsche Bank. It was probably your last visit, but, surprisingly, it was also your first. I
say  surprisingly,  because  as  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  you  represented  the
Deutsche Mark, which, as we in the Netherlands used to say, was for fifteen years pegged so
successfully to the guilder.
Tonight is not the occasion to say farewell to you. Nor am I the person to make the farewell
speech that you deserve. In this group of financial experts there is no need to go  over  your
impressive  career  with  all  its  highlights;  they  are  well  known.  Let  me  just  simply  mention
some of the facts: almost six years as President of the Bundesbank, your unique role in the
German  unification  process,  your  key  role  in  the  establishment  of  EMU  from  the  very
beginning  (in  fact,  you  were  a  member  of  the  Werner  group  in  the  early  days  of  planning
economic and monetary union) and your role on the international scene, not least but certainly
not only in the central banking community. Germany, Europe and the world know you as a
determined, uncompromising and convincing teacher of the necessity and merits of stability-
oriented policies. What you had and have to say was perhaps often predictable, but more often
than not your saying it lent it weight and inspired confidence. Moreover, what you once aptly
said is absolutely true: “Man kann schöne Sonntagsreden halten. Die Entscheidungen fallen
an Werktagen.” You are known to be a hard worker - some would even say a workaholic -
and you have tremendous “Ausdauer”.
You  never  get  tired  of  putting  your  analysis  and  convictions  across,  as  has  again  been
demonstrated tonight. We owe you a great deal of gratitude. After August we central bankers
will miss you  as  a  colleague,  although  I  believe  we  have  internalised  your  basic  principles.
They will therefore still be around as if you are still present yourself. And should we tend to
forget them, I am sure that Ernst Welteke will help me to remind other colleagues of them.
Sometimes, I wish that we could do the same as they do in the world of sport in the United
States. There, when an outstanding player retires, in order to honour him the number he wears
on the back of his shirt is never again used by another player. Central bankers do not wear
shirts  with  numbers  on  the  back,  but  if  we  did,  I  am  sure  that  we  would  withdraw  your
number. Retirement is the  natural  end  of  one’s  career,  but  it  should  not  be  overdramatised.
People do matter - and you have certainly shown that - but institutions generally outlast them.
In fact, that is what many people work for. Luckily, I am convinced  that  this  is  the  case  in
central banking. So, the institutions that you have worked to build will go on. Meanwhile, as I
look  ahead  to  August,  I  know  that  while  I  will  lose  a  colleague,  I  will  still  have  the  same
friend. I know that is true for many of us here this evening. I should therefore like to close by
simply expressing my thanks for your support over the years both as a colleague and a friend.
3
BIS Review   57/1999
