Mr Noyer reviews first experiences with the euro
Speech delivered by the Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Mr Christian Noyer, at
the conference organised by Swedback in Stockholm on 26 May 1999.
I should like to start by thanking you for your kind invitation to speak here on the occasion of
this  conference  organised  by  Swedbank.  It  is  some  five  months  now  since  the  euro  was
launched. The introduction of the euro has been accomplished successfully and the enormous
technical and logistical challenges arising during the early days of monetary union have been
overcome. The first months of the euro have been successful in both political and operational
terms. With the introduction of the euro, European integration has taken a large step forward
as the new millennium approaches.
The euro plays an important role in the euro area and beyond. Just after its launch in January,
the euro already featured on all major financial markets around the globe. Currency trading is
regularly  carried  out  in  euro  and  shares  are  denominated  in  euro  on  most  European  stock
exchanges. Moreover, the euro has attracted new international bond issues as the currency of
denomination.  In  some  ways,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  may  justify  expectations  of  large
overall  efficiency  gains.  For  citizens  living  in  the  euro  area,  two  obvious  gains  will  be  the
reduction  of  transaction  costs  and  increased  transparency  across  countries,  as  price
comparisons between goods sold in different countries are made easier.
The Governing Council of the ECB is the central decision-making body in charge of monetary
policy for the euro area. The Treaty on European Union – the Maastricht Treaty – assigns the
ESCB  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  The
implementation of monetary policy decisions taken centrally by the Governing Council rests
with  the  Eurosystem,  comprising  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  (NCBs)  of  the
member states which have adopted the euro in stage three of economic and monetary union.
The respective operational tasks are to a large extent carried out in a decentralised manner by
the NCBs.
For the euro to become a success story as the single currency for around 300 million people,
the confidence of European citizens in the stability of the new currency and in the Eurosystem
is crucial. You would probably agree that the Eurosystem has already achieved a lot in terms
of building up credibility and gaining a sound reputation in financial markets for its monetary
policy  in  its  early  days.  This  will  certainly  facilitate  the  establishment  of  a  stability  culture
throughout  Europe.  The  foundation  of  this  stability  culture  is  a  broad  consensus  among
Europeans that the maintenance of price stability is of the utmost importance and is conducive
to the achievement of other objectives such as high employment.
Monetary policy and other policy areas
By maintaining price stability in the euro area, we will ensure that the single monetary policy
contributes as much as possible to economic growth and high employment. At the same time,
national  fiscal  authorities  and  general  economic  policies  also  have  to  demonstrate  their
commitment to the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. In this context, the Stability
and Growth Pact adopted in 1997 is a crucial element. Its aim is to encourage the pursuit of
disciplined and sustainable fiscal policies for the participating member states and prospective
members.  In  so  doing,  it  can  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the  establishment  of
favourable  conditions  for  sustained  economic  growth  and  high  employment  in  the  medium
1
BIS Review   60/1999
term. Moreover, sound fiscal policies facilitate the task of monetary policy to maintain price
stability. It would be counterproductive if national fiscal policymakers were not to continue to
work towards a budgetary situation which is close to balance or in surplus in the light of the
achievement of monetary union and the positive price outlook for the euro area.
In this connection please allow me to briefly address the matter of calls for closer coordination
between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policies.  Any  form  of  ex  ante  coordination  that,  for
example, would commit the monetary policy of the ECB to move its interest rates in a certain
way in response to specific action or plans of other policymakers  would  provide  the  wrong
impetus  for  the  conduct  of  sound  macroeconomic  policies  and  would  not  be  efficient.  This
does not, however, exclude a constructive dialogue between the Eurosystem and government
authorities which clearly respects the independence of the ECB.
In line with its clear mandate, enshrined in the Treaty establishing the European Communities,
and for sound economic reasons, the ECB has to decide which monetary policy best serves the
maintenance of price stability over the medium term  and  then  act  accordingly.  At  the  same
time, the Treaty also emphasises the need for sound fiscal policies. This clear separation of
responsibilities  is  both  efficient  and  transparent.  Obviously,  monetary  policy  alone  cannot
solve  Europe’s  economic  problems  such  as 
level  of
unemployment. Appropriate structural reforms implemented by national  governments  are  of
the  utmost  importance  and  much  progress  is  required  in  this  broad  area.  Moderate  wage
settlements in both the public and private sectors would, of course, contribute to reducing the
high level of unemployment in many parts of the euro area. In this context, let me remark that
recent wage agreements in some parts of the euro area do not appear to be in line  with  the
need to encourage higher employment.
intolerably  high 
the  present 
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy
With regard to the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy, I should like to emphasise that the
euro area monetary policy is a single one and therefore indivisible – by definition. Monetary
policy decisions must be based on area-wide rather than national considerations and hence on
area-wide  indicators.  Monetary  policy  has  to  be  transparent  so  as  to  stabilise  public
expectations of future price developments. In order to clarify how we interpret the mandate
conferred  on  the  ECB  by  the  Treaty,  the  Governing  Council  has  announced  a  quantitative
definition of its primary objective.
Price  stability  has  been  defined  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  harmonised  index  of
consumer prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. This has to be maintained over the
medium term. As the wording ‘increase’ makes clear, deflation – that is, a persistent fall in the
price level – would not be consistent with price stability. It would not be possible for us to
announce  where  exactly  we  would  draw  the  dividing  line  between  price  stability  and
deflation.  This  is  partly  for  reasons  that  have  been  described  as  the  measurement  bias  in
consumer price indices. For the United States it was estimated that measured consumer prices
tend to slightly overestimate actual inflation. A bias may also exist for the euro area HICP,
although its exact magnitude is as yet unknown and needs to be explored further.
To maintain price stability, the Governing Council has  chosen  a  stability-oriented  monetary
policy  strategy.  The  chosen  strategy  is  forward-looking  in  nature  and  also  ensures  as  much
continuity as possible with the former strategies of the NCBs. In this respect and with regard
to the overriding objective to maintain price stability in an environment of flexible exchange
BIS Review   60/1999
2
rates, our strategy is broadly similar to that of Sveriges Riksbank, although there are important
differences. In particular, the Riksbank follows a direct inflation targeting strategy in which
monetary policy is almost exclusively guided by inflation forecasts of about two years ahead.
In contrast, the Eurosystem relies on two pillars, thereby focusing on the medium term, and
does not give such a predominant role to inflation forecasts as the Riksbank.
In  our  view,  the  Riksbank  has  achieved  high  standards  with  regard  to  transparency  and
accountability, as is for example evidenced by its comprehensive quarterly inflation report. In
more recent years, the Riksbank has enjoyed a fair measure of success in gaining control over
domestic price developments, as supported by its strong performance in fighting inflation, and
in  overcoming  a  deep  recession  in  the  early  1990s.  Its  track  record  also  demonstrates  that
price stability in Sweden was given a high priority long before this was formally recognised
by an amendment to the Riksbank Act at the start of 1999.
The Eurosystem’s stability-oriented monetary policy strategy rests on two pillars, which are
both  important  when  the  Governing  Council  discusses  monetary,  financial  and  economic
developments at its biweekly meetings. The first pillar, which is a prominent role for money,
takes into account the essentially monetary origins of inflation over the medium to long term.
It recognises that empirical studies show a stable long-term relationship between money and
prices  in  the  euro  area.  Therefore,  in  the  euro  area,  monetary  developments  constitute  an
important guide for the conduct of monetary policy and it is essential to analyse and monitor
the  development  of  monetary  aggregates  closely.  The  ECB  has  announced  a  quantitative
reference value for broad monetary growth as measured by M3, the first reference value for
M3  growth  being  set  at  an  annual  rate  of  4.5%.  This  reference  value  is  consistent  with  the
maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  while  allowing  for  sustainable  output
growth  and  assuming  a  trend  decline  in  the  velocity  of  circulation  of  M3.  In  setting  the
reference  value  for  monetary  growth,  the  Governing  Council  emphasised  its  medium-term
orientation.  Substantial  or  prolonged  deviations  of  current  monetary  growth  from  the
reference value will normally signal risks to price stability in the medium term.
The ECB does not intend to react to deviations of monetary growth from the reference value
in a mechanistic way. In the  first  instance,  such  deviations  are  analysed  thoroughly  to  infer
any signals which they may give about the prospects for price developments. If the deviation
points to a threat to price stability, monetary policy  has  to  react  in  a  manner  appropriate  to
counter this threat.
Although monetary data contain information which is important for monetary policy decision-
making, monetary developments alone clearly do not constitute a complete summary of all the
economic  information  necessary  for  appropriate  policy  decisions  to  be  taken.  Thus  the
Governing  Council  emphasises  that  it  is  important,  in  parallel  with  the  assessment  of
monetary  growth,  to  look  at  a  wide  range  of  financial  and  other  economic  indicators,
including  economic  forecasts.  The  second  pillar  of  the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  therefore
consists of a broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the risks to
price stability in the euro area as a whole. This broadly based assessment takes into account,
inter alia, the information provided by wage developments, exchange rates, fiscal indicators,
real economic activity, and asset and commodity prices. Forecasts of economic activity  and
prices in the euro area can certainly also contribute to the success of an appropriately forward-
looking  monetary  policy.  Thus  we  take  into  account  forecasts  available  from  international
organisations such as the IMF and the OECD as well as internal forecasts.
3
BIS Review   60/1999
We  are  aware  that  forecasts  have  to  be  interpreted  with  great  caution.  Given  behavioural,
institutional and structural uncertainties, forecasting price and other developments in the euro
area is inevitably difficult. Moreover, a forecast cannot encompass all the indicator variables
that are important for monetary policy. Nor can it  always  incorporate  indicators  in  a  timely
manner.  Furthermore,  by  the  time  the  forecast  has  been  finalised,  the  original  assumptions
may have become less realistic, requiring a careful interpretation of the results. Therefore, a
thorough  analysis  of  individual  indicator  variables  plays  an  important  role  in  our  monetary
policy strategy, in addition to any role that these variables may have in the forecast.
Within the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy, the Eurosystem also takes into account
the external value of the euro as an important determinant of the outlook for price stability. If
exchange  rate  developments  pose  a  significant  threat  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  all
other things  being  equal,  monetary  policy  will  have  to  respond.  Of  course,  all  other  factors
that  impart  information  on  price  developments  will  also  be  taken  into  account  before  an
interest rate decision is taken.
Monetary policy decisions and the outlook for price stability
In  December  1998  the  Governing  Council  announced  that  the  interest  rate  on  the  main
refinancing operation would be 3%. In the first quarter of 1999 the Governing Council kept
this  rate  unchanged.  After  an  in-depth  review  of  recent  monetary,  financial  and  economic
developments, the Governing Council decided at its meeting on 8 April to set the interest rate
for  the  ECB’s  main  refinancing  operations  at  2.5%.  In  addition,  the  interest  rate  on  the
marginal lending facility was lowered to 3.5% and the interest rate on the deposit facility to
1.5%.  These  rates  were  left  unchanged  at  the  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  last  week.
The decision to lower interest rates taken at the first meeting in April has to be seen in the
context  of  the  stability-oriented  strategy.  The  decision  has  thus  been  taken  from  a  forward-
looking perspective, focusing on the medium-term trends in inflation and the compatibility of
these trends with the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability. By adhering to this strategy,
the Eurosystem’s monetary policy contributes to creating the economic conditions which are
essential  to  exploiting  the  considerable  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  and  to  reducing
uncertainty about future economic developments.
I should like to take this opportunity to explain the current assessment, which is in line with
the Governing Council’s expectations at the beginning of April. With regard to the first pillar
of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy, monetary growth cannot be seen as signalling
upcoming inflationary pressures at this stage. Since the beginning of this year, the three-month
moving average of M3 growth has been close to the reference value of 4.5%. For the period
from  January  to  March  1999  the  average  growth  rate  increased  somewhat  to  5.2%.  This
observation may, however, have been affected by special factors prevailing at the start of stage
three.  Therefore,  in  its  current  assessment  the  Governing  Council  does  not  regard  current
monetary trends as constituting a signal of future inflationary pressures.
With  regard  to  the  second  pillar  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  broadly
based  outlook  for  price  developments  and  risks  to  price  stability  and  various  indicators  of
future  price  developments  and  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  indicate  a  favourable
outlook for price stability. Financial indicators such as the very low level of long-term interest
rates point to low inflation expectations and the credibility of monetary policy. Following the
cut in short-term interest rates, long-term rates decreased somewhat initially, which confirms
that  the  market  considered  the  cut  in  interest  rates  by  the  ECB  to  be  appropriate.  More
BIS Review   60/1999
4
recently  these  rates  have  risen  somewhat,  mainly  as  a  reflex  to  the  strong  increase  in  long-
term interest rates in the United States.
Regarding economic activity in the euro area, data available for the first two months of 1999
do not yet reveal evidence of a rebound in economic growth. Labour market indicators show
signs  of  a  somewhat  decelerating  level  of  employment  growth  towards  the  end  of  1998.
Meanwhile,  preliminary  April  figures  from  the  European  Commission  on  confidence
indicators point towards some first signs of an improvement in industrial confidence.
Recent  price  trends  have  been  consistent  with  price  stability.  Inflation  for  the  euro  area  as
measured by the harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) has been close to 1% since the
fourth  quarter  of  1998.  As  has  been  emphasised  on  previous  occasions,  the  current  low
inflation rates are to some extent the reflection of the large fall in energy prices during 1998.
HICP  data  for  March  1999  show  an  annual  increase  of  1%.  The  slight  increase  relative  to
January and February reflects the fact that goods prices are subject to some upward movement
in  the  short  term  owing  to  the  reversal  in  energy  price  trends  expected  by  the  Governing
Council at the beginning of April. However, the effects of changes in energy prices on rates of
HICP increase may only be of a temporary nature. More lasting effects  on  future  consumer
prices normally come from changes in the overall monetary and economic situation.
To sum up, weighing all the relevant indicators and adopting a forward-looking and medium-
term  perspective,  the  Governing  Council  regards  the  current  level  of  ECB  interest  rates  as
appropriate with a view to maintaining the outlook for continued price stability.
Aspects of the Eurosystem’s communication policy
The Treaty acknowledges that it is important in a democratic constitution for an independent
central  bank  to  be  open,  transparent  and  clear  about  the  reasoning  underlying  its  actions.
Therefore, a number of reporting obligations exist for the ECB which aim at making the ECB
accountable  for  its  performance.  Moreover,  by  communicating  clearly  with  the  public,  the
Eurosystem  reinforces  its  credibility.  In  this  regard,  the  Eurosystem’s  approach  bears
comparison with the best practices of any other central bank.
In practice the ECB has committed itself to exceeding the stringent requirements of the Treaty
concerning  transparency  and  accountability.  For  example,  the  ECB  releases  each  month  a
bulletin  providing  detailed  background  information  regarding  the  current  assessment  of  the
economic  outlook.  At  the  same  time,  with  the  more  extended  editions  of  the  bulletin  in
March, June, September and December, we fulfil the Treaty requirement to publish a quarterly
report.  For  the  benefit  of  the  general  public,  the  ECB  issues  regular  press  releases  and  an
introductory  statement  by  the  President,  which  is  released  immediately  after  the  first
Governing Council meeting each month. Furthermore, the ECB submits an annual report on
its activities to the European Community institutions (the Council of the European Union, the
European Commission and the European Parliament).
With  regard  to  the  Eurosystem’s  relationship  with  European  Community  institutions,  the
Treaty  states  that  the  President  of  the  ECOFIN  Council  and  a  member  of  the  European
Commission may participate in the meetings of the Governing Council of the ECB, with the
right  to  express  their  views  but  without  voting  power.  The  President  of  the  ECB  attends
hearings at the European Parliament at least four times a year to discuss the activities of the
Eurosystem and is also invited to attend the informal euro-11 Council meetings. I should like
5
BIS Review   60/1999
to  stress  that  the  participation  of  the  President  in  these  meetings  serves  the  purpose  of
exchanging  information  and  views,  while  fully  respecting  the  independence  of  the
Eurosystem.
In  the  field  of  the  international  representation  of  the  ECB,  formal  and  informal  agreements
have been reached with the IMF and the OECD and in the context of the G7 and the G10. At
the end of last year the IMF granted the ECB observer status, full membership being restricted
to individual nations. Nevertheless, this observer status will allow the ECB to participate in
the  relevant  work  and  assessments  by  the  IMF  of  economic  policies  in  the  euro  area  and
beyond.
The international role of the euro
Clearly, the introduction of the euro has had important implications for international capital
markets. This has been the case not just because a number of currencies replaced by the euro
played an important international role in the past but also because the euro  has  become  the
currency of an economic area which roughly equals the United States in terms of economic
size and external trade, and which has the world’s second largest capital markets.
Let me emphasise at this juncture that the Eurosystem has no exchange rate target vis-à-vis
other major currencies. We are also not participating in a formal exchange rate arrangement
with third countries outside the EU, for instance with the United States, and we believe that
this situation will continue in the future. It is important to mention that according to the Treaty
the single exchange rate policy has to respect the primary objective of price stability.
As the representative of a large economic area, the Eurosystem can best meet its overriding
objective to maintain price stability in the euro area if it is not constrained by an exchange rate
target. However, for smaller, very open economies, setting an exchange rate target may be a
very reasonable decision. Against this background the ERM II exchange rate mechanism was
created for those member states which have not yet joined monetary union but are willing to
do  so  in  the  near  future.  Experience  with  the  European  Monetary  System  (EMS),  the
predecessor of ERM II, has shown that participation in a system of this kind may facilitate the
fulfilment  of  other  convergence  criteria.  The  new  exchange  rate  mechanism  may  play  a
similar  role.  In  this  context,  we  should  certainly  wish  to  acknowledge  the  efforts  which
Sweden is making to achieve sustainable convergence with the euro area. We hope that the
success of the euro in its early months will help to convince the Swedish population of the
benefits of early participation in monetary union. Clearly, a decision to join ERM II would be
important for fulfilling the convergence criterion of exchange rate stability and would help to
smooth the transition to participation in the euro area.
In recent months the external value of the euro has been influenced by the market view of the
economic  developments  in  the  euro  area  relative  to  the  United  States.  More  recently  other
factors had an impact on the exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the dollar, in particular the
conflict in Kosovo. From the beginning of the year to mid-May, the euro weakened against the
dollar  by  about  10%.  In  nominal  terms,  measured  against  a  trade-weighted  basket  of  the
currencies of the 15 most important trading partners of the euro area, the euro has weakened
significantly  less,  i.e.  by  about  6%  since  its  launch.  However,  rather  than  focusing  on  very
short-term developments, one should look at long-term evolution. In that respect, it has to be
observed that the current exchange rate of the euro against the dollar is not so very different
from the levels observed in the first three quarters of 1998.
BIS Review   60/1999
6
Clearly,  some  variability  is  typical  for  the  bilateral  exchange  rate  vis-à-vis  the  US  dollar.
Market expectations about future cyclical developments and the course of monetary and fiscal
policy in the United States and Europe play a role in explaining exchange rate volatility. It is
widely recognised that in the medium to long term exchange rates follow a path determined by
fundamental factors such as price and economic developments. In this context, it should be
pointed  out  that  recent  exchange  rate  developments  have  as  yet  not  indicated  any  risk  for
future  price  stability.  Moreover,  internal  price  stability  should  serve  as  an  anchor  for  the
development  of  the  euro’s  external  value  in  the  medium  term.  Indeed,  a  stability-oriented
monetary policy strategy protecting the purchasing power of the euro is the basis of a solid
and stable currency over the medium term.
Maintaining price stability in the euro area also promotes credibility and thereby enhances the
international role of the euro. The Eurosystem neither promotes nor hinders the development
of the euro  as  an  international  currency.  We  consider  that  the  international  role  of  the  euro
should develop through the interaction of market forces. As yet it is too early to predict how
long it will take for the euro to be considered as a truly international currency similar to the
US dollar.
Clearly,  the  disappearance  of  11  national  currencies  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro  as  a
major international currency had an immediate impact on the turnover and focus of attention
in the global foreign exchange markets. This has been reflected, for example, in rather active
and  liquid  euro/dollar  trading  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  since  the  launch  of  the  new
currency.  However,  there  are  also  indications  that  the  euro  has  further  potential  to  grow  in
other markets as the surprisingly slow development of euro/yen trading suggests.
The euro can also be expected to become an attractive currency for the investment of official
reserves.
One of the key elements to further international portfolio diversification in favour of the euro
is the creation of a large, liquid and integrated capital market in Europe that began with the
launch of the euro. For short-term instruments, we are now dealing with a broad and liquid
European  money  market  that  ensures  very  similar  short-term  interest  rates  for  comparable
instruments  and  credit  risks.  The  development  of  this  market  has  been  strengthened  by  the
Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  of  open  market  operations,  which  is  mainly  based  on
reverse transactions, and the implementation of the new TARGET real-time gross settlement
system  in  participating  countries.  At  the  longer  end  of  the  maturity  spectrum,  market
integration  was  jumpstarted  by  the  redenomination  of  outstanding  government  debt  in  euro
and by the convergence of interest rates to narrower spreads following the elimination of the
exchange  rate  risk.  The  elimination  of  this  main  risk  will  also  foster  the  development  of
uniform market standards so that government bonds in the euro area will become rather close
substitutes,  creating  a  large  and  liquid  bond  market.  Obviously,  this  requires  sound  and
sustainable budgetary policies that ensure that credit risk spreads remain small.
Concluding remarks
Following a remarkable period of disinflation in most member states, the Eurosystem has had
the good fortune to commence its operations in an environment of price stability. The success
enjoyed by the euro in its first five months can be certainly attributed to a number of factors.
Above all, the successful efforts of member states made possible a smooth changeover to the
euro.  The  independence  of  the  ECB  and  the  clear  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  were
7
BIS Review   60/1999
crucial  for  ensuring  a  high  degree  of  credibility  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy.  As  a
final observation, I should simply like to mention that without the positive echo of financial
markets  and  the  permanent  support  of  banks  and  financial  institutions,  a  single  currency  in
Europe could not have become a reality.
BIS Review   60/1999
8
