Mr White discusses the Asian crisis and the Bank for International Settlements
A  paper  presented  by  Mr  William  R  White,  Economic  Adviser,  Head  of  the  Monetary  and
Economic Department, Bank for International Settlements, at the conference on “Asia and the
future  of  the  world  economic  systems”,  organised  by  the  Royal  Institute  of  International
Affairs and held in London on 17-18 March 1999.
The  Asian  crisis,  perhaps  even  more  than  the  Mexican  crisis  which  preceded  it,  has  raised
some  fundamental  issues  about  the  workings  of  the  international  financial  system.  In  the
course of the Willard process1 and in many other fora, the behaviour of private sector agents
who are internationally active has been widely analysed with a view to devising prescriptions
and policies that might reduce the incidence of destabilising activity on their part. The role of
the  public  sector  has  also  been  an  object  of  scrutiny,  with  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank
receiving particular attention given the size of the public resources they command and their
influence  over  the  governments  of  emerging  market  economies.  Before  proceeding  to  the
specific subjects on which I have been asked to comment by the organisers of this conference,
it seems to me worth pointing out that the Bank for International Settlements has also been
caught up in these deliberations, although the implications for us may be less significant than
for others.
A.  A new role for the BIS or an old one?
The most recent Communiqué issued by the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors of
the  Group  of  Seven2  announced  the  establishment  of  a  new  Financial  Stability  Forum.  The
Forum  will  bring  together  representatives  from  each  of  the  G7  countries,3  the  principal
international  financial  institutions  and  the  various  international  committees  whose  work
focuses on financial stability. The objective would be to ensure a constant dialogue between
all those in the public sector concerned about international financial stability, with a view to
ensuring closer coordination of the work being undertaken and an enhanced (moral) authority
for any decisions  taken  as  to  best  practices  in  this  area.  The  BIS  will  be  represented  in  the
Forum  along  with  other  international  financial  institutions,  and  many  of  the  international
committees  also  represented  on  the  Forum  meet  regularly  at  the  BIS.  In  addition,  the  BIS
General Manager will serve (in his personal capacity) as the Chairman of the Forum and its
secretariat will be based in Basle.
In some ways, both the process of consultation and the substance of the work being proposed
are rather similar to what has been going on in Basle for many years.4 As to the former, what
is increasingly referred to as the “Basle process” involves groups of national officials coming
together to discuss international issues of common interest with a view to reaching decisions
about  recommended  forms  of  behaviour.  The  Basle  Concordat5  and  the  Basle  Accord6  are
probably the best known examples of the genre. Once a consensus has been reached in such
                                                          
1
In response to a request by President Clinton at the APEC Summit in Vancouver, a meeting of representatives of
22 countries (G7 plus 15 significant emerging markets) was convened at the Willard Hotel in Washington on 17
February  1998.  Subsequently,  three  working  groups  were  set  up  which  reported  in  October  1998  (see
BIS/IMF/OECD/World Bank (1998a), (1998b) and (1998c)).
See Group of Seven (1999).
2
3 Each country would be represented by a senior official from the central bank, Treasury and a regulatory agency.
4
5
6
With time, it is envisaged that representatives from emerging markets will also be included in the Forum.
See White (1998a).
See BIS: BCBS (1975).
See BIS: BCBS (1988).
1
BIS Review   36/1999
fora, national officials must return to their home grounds, where sovereignty still reigns, and
convince  local  lawmakers  and  commercial  interests  of  the  desirability  of  following  the
international norms agreed upon. Central bankers and regulators have followed such processes
for  years  in  Basle,  and  the  new  Forum  will  in  a  sense  extend  this  process  to  include
governments themselves. As to the latter, the work undertaken in Basle under the auspices of
central  bank  Governors  has  a  scope  and  substance  which  should  ensure  it  makes  a  useful
contribution to the deliberations of the Forum.
A useful conceptual framework for describing this work is a four-dimensional matrix, whose
first  two  dimensions  consist  of  a  traditional  flow-of-funds  table  with  columns  (the
institutional  sectors  involved  in  the  international  financial  system)  and  rows  (the  various
markets).  The  third  dimension  is  the  infrastructure  which  supports  the  first  two  dimensions
(payment  and  settlement  systems,  legal  infrastructure,  etc.),  while  the  fourth  dimension
comprises the simultaneous clearing conditions in all the markets subject to sectoral budget
constraints. In this conceptual framework, failures or shortcomings with respect to any of the
first three dimensions will have implications for market clearing conditions which will in turn
feed  back  on  the  real  economy.  It  was  the  recognition  that  financial  instability  has  such
macroeconomic 
the  new  phrase
“macroprudential policies” — namely, policies designed to strengthen each dimension of the
international financial system referred to above (institutions, markets and infrastructure) thus
helping to limit the damage should some shock hit any part of the system.
implications  which 
led  policymakers 
to  coin 
It  is  more  a  product  of  historical  circumstance  than  design  that  the  Basle  community
comprises relevant committees of national experts7 in each of the three defined areas. Within
the first sectoral dimension is the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), whose
work is by now well known. More recently Basle has also become home to the secretariat of
the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). An offer has also recently been
made  by  the  Swiss  Government,  with  support  from  the  BIS,  to  relocate  the  secretariat  of
IOSCO  to  Basle.  But,  in  any  event,  that  group  (representing  the  international  investment
dealing community) interacts regularly with the Basle Committee and the IAIS in the form of
the  Joint  Forum,  the  Secretariat  of  which  is  also  located  at  the  BIS.  As  for  the  second
dimension of the matrix (markets), the Euro-currency Standing Committee (ECSC) has had a
long  record  of  deliberations,  publications  and  data  collection  pertaining  to  the  evolution  of
international  financial  markets  and  possible  systemic  implications.  The  third  dimension  is
infrastructure, and in this domain the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS)
has been  increasingly  active  in  recent  years.8  Finally,  the  way  in  which  the  market  clearing
conditions bring together the dimensions referred to above has recently been reflected in the
renaming  of  the  ECSC.  Reflecting  the  new  mandate  given  to  it  in  February  1999  by  the
Central Bank Governors of the Group of Ten countries, this committee is now to be called the
Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (CGFS).  This  name  is  intended  to  emphasise  a
new  focus  on  how  those  dimensions  of  the  international  financial  system  ultimately  come
                                                          
7
It is important to emphasise the concept of national experts. It is these people who provide the central input to all
the decisions made by the committees and the documents they produce. The staff of the BIS, in particular those
providing  secretariat  support  to  the  committees,  have  as  their  primary  function  to  support  the  cooperation  of
others. This makes the BIS quite a different type of organisation from both the IMF and the World Bank group,
though perhaps less different from the OECD and the WTO.
Issues having to do with the legal infrastructure underpinning the international financial system have also been of
growing interest to the Basle community, although until now ad hoc procedures have been relied upon rather than
a standing committee directed to such issues.
8
BIS Review   36/1999
2
together in a market framework, and how steps might be taken to make that framework more
stable.9
The active prospective involvement of the Basle community in the Financial Stability Forum
is  only  one  aspect  of  its  response  to  the  Mexican  and  Asian  crises.  The  Monetary  and
Economic  Department  of  the  BIS,  which  traditionally  provides  analytical  and  statistical
support to the work of the various Basle-based committees, will also focus more intensively
on  such  issues.  Moreover,  with  the  establishment  last  year  of  the  BIS  Financial  Stability
Institute,  there  is  now  another  vehicle  for  the  practical  dissemination  of  the  best  practices
established  both  by  the  relevant  BIS  committees  and  other  groups  concerned  with
international financial stability. These are admittedly small contributions by a relatively small
international financial institution, but they may go some way to helping avoid a repetition of
the dramatic events we have seen in international financial markets since mid-1997.
The subject matter assigned to me today seems to fall neatly into two categories. The first of
these  (monitoring  capital  flows,  currency  boards  and  foreign  exchange  controls)  has  to  do
with  resolving  the  so-called  “impossible  trinity”  problem.  Since  a  country  cannot
simultaneously  have  free  capital  flows,  a  fixed  exchange  rate  and  an  independent  domestic
monetary  policy,  what  should  be  given  up?  The  second  topic  (reform  of  capital  adequacy
ratios,  regulating  the  regulators)  has  inter  alia  to  do  with  minimising  the  fallout  when
macroeconomic  problems  do  emerge.  How  can  regulation  make  the  system  more  stable  in
principle and how can we assure that those principles are being applied in practice? The rest
of  this  paper  deals  with  these  two  issues.  It  will  come  as  no  surprise  if  I  also  choose  to
highlight the particular contributions which have already been made, or are in the process of
being made, by the Basle-based committees in response to both the Mexican and Asian crises.
B.
Monitoring short-term capital flows and responding to them
A belief that has recently grown in strength is that increased transparency on the part of all
economic  agents  would  sharply  improve  the  functioning  of  markets  and  lead  to  greater
financial  stability.10  It  is  hard  to  object  to  this  at  the  level  of  principle,  though  it  is
disconcerting that much of the impetus for this belief comes from a misapprehension. It has
been frequently asserted that the size of the inflows into the Asian countries later affected by
the  crisis  would  have  been  much  smaller  had  individual  investors  been  made  aware  of  the
aggregate  exposure  of  these  countries.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  the  basic  problem  was  a
shortage of information given that the international financial statistics collected semiannually
by  the  BIS  and  the  OECD  (based  on  banking  statistics  and  trade  credits)  were  widely
available. These data clearly indicated both growing debt levels and a very high proportion of
short-term debt in the case of many countries. Indeed, concerns based on these figures (albeit
sotto voce) were raised as far back as 1995 in the quarterly publications of the BIS as well as
in successive BIS Annual Reports.
Perhaps reflecting the availability of such information, some non-bank financial institutions11
and  equity  investors  seemed  to  begin  moving  out  of  Asian  markets  much  sooner  than
                                                          
9 Generally speaking, measures taken to strengthen individually each dimension of the system might be assumed to
strengthen  the  system  itself.  Nevertheless,  there  might  well  be  instances  where  a  more  comprehensive  (cross-
committee) approach might prove still more beneficial. The design of public sector safety nets is a good case in
point.
10 See BIS/IMF/OECD/World Bank (1998a) and BIS (1997), Chapter IV.
11 See BIS (1998a), Chapter V.
3
BIS Review   36/1999
internationally active banks, whose eventual response was both sharp and highly disruptive.
Informal  enquiries  about  the  banks’  behaviour  would  appear  to  indicate  that  a  shortage  of
information about international exposures was not the basic problem. Indeed, while in some
cases credit officers failed to detect the risk, in other cases the senior management of banks
seems  to  have  overridden  the  specific  recommendations  of  their  credit  officers.  While  this
may  still  have  been  sound  strategic  practice,  given  the  limited  exposure  of  individual  large
banks, the collective impact on the debtor countries was severe. This in itself would indicate
that some form of market failure took place, though not necessarily one based on a shortage of
information.
To  say  that  a  lack  of  information  was  not  the  heart  of  the  problem  is  not  to  say  that  the
available data were ideal. Indeed, after the Mexican crisis, the (then) ECSC made considerable
efforts to improve the semiannual banking statistics collected by the BIS. Steps were taken to
expand the number of reporting countries, and the reporting and publication lags were reduced
from  more  than  six  to  less  than  five  months  and  still  further  reductions  are  planned.  In
addition, steps were taken to reclassify the exposure of national banking systems on the basis
of  “ultimate  risk”  to  deal  with  the  problem  of  loans  booked  by  emerging  countries  in
international  financial  centres.  In  another  development,  the  Inter-Agency  Task  Force  on
Finance Statistics12 has agreed to build on and replace the existing set of BIS/OECD external
debt  statistics  with  a  new  set13  of  debt  statistics  which  is  jointly  issued  by  the  BIS,  IMF,
OECD and World Bank. It brings together for the first time the best international comparative
data currently available on external debt. This data will be published quarterly from 15 March
onwards, on as timely a basis as possible. 14
The monitoring statistics referred to above are drawn in very large part from the on-balance
sheet  positions  of  a  limited  number  of  (albeit  important)  creditor  institutions.  An  obvious
shortcoming is that they do not pick up the off-balance sheet positions of any institutions, nor
the aggregate positions of non-regulated financial institutions.15 The former problem can be
rectified with time, under current legislation. However, the latter problem is thornier and is at
the heart of the debate about the role of hedge funds in the Asian crisis. Many Asian-Pacific
authorities (including representatives from Australia, Hong Kong and Malaysia) feel strongly
that  hedge  funds  set  out  systematically  to  destabilise  their  currencies  and  their  financial
markets.16  However,  other  evidence  is  less  compelling  in  support  of  this  hypothesis17  and,
even  if  accepted,  would  not  necessarily  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  such  funds  should  be
regulated. As the US authorities consistently point out, many other institutions also engage in
highly leveraged position taking, including the proprietary trading desks of both regulated and
unregulated  institutions.  The  implication  of  this  fact  is  that  the  authorities  might  have  to
                                                          
12 This Task Force, which is chaired by the IMF, comprises the BIS, the European Central Bank, Eurostat, the OECD,
the United Nations and the World Bank.
13 The data are not new in the strict sense because all of them have been published elsewhere before. Moreover, as
indicated in the text, by far the largest part of the information is provided by the BIS international locational and
consolidated  banking  statistics.  For  a  description  of  the  exact  relationship  between  the  BIS  locational  and
consolidated banking statistics, see BIS (1998b), pp 32-43.
14 These data can be found at www.bis.org/publ/r_db9901.htm or at www.oecd.org/dac/debt.
15 Being drawn from creditor sources, they also fail to pick up securities issued in domestic markets and purchased by
foreign investors. To date, this does not seem to have been a major drawback to the use of these creditor-based
statistics.
16 A common tactic, seen both in Hong Kong and later in South Africa, was for hedge funds to sell short the currency
as well as a long-duration investment (e.g. shares and bonds) whose value was particularly sensitive to short-term
interest  rates.  If  the  monetary  authority  supported  the  currency  by  raising  interest  rates,  the  speculators  profited
from the domestic play. If the monetary authorities let the currency slide, the profit was on the currency play.
17 See BIS (1998a), Chapter V.
BIS Review   36/1999
4
regulate  this  kind  of  activity  at  all  types  of  institutions,  in  turn  raising  the  issue  of  how  to
prevent it from simply moving offshore.
What  does  seem  to  have  been  agreed  in  the  international  community  is  that  it  would  be
desirable to have more information about the activities of highly leveraged investors who are
internationally active. Not only does this seem prima facie a good thing, but some authorities
also  consider  such  information  a  fair  counterpart  to  the  provision  of  more  information  by
public  sector  authorities  about  their  own  off-balance  sheet  activities.18  Currently,  three
avenues are being actively explored within the Basle community. The Basle Supervisors are
primarily concerned about the health of banks and wish to be assured that the loans made to
highly leveraged institutions are subject to the proper kind of credit analysis. A subgroup of
the  BCBS  (the  Brockmeijer  working  group)  has  already  published  two  documents,  one
outlining deficiencies in past banking practices and the other suggesting guidelines for good
practice in the future.19 The CGFS has two initiatives under way. One is a reprise (under the
same  chairman)  of  the  1994  Fisher  Report20  which  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  enhancements  to
disclosure  practices  by  financial  institutions  in  relation  to  market  and  credit  risk  exposures
arising from their trading activities, including those involving off-balance sheet instruments.
The primary objective of this exercise is to encourage further improvements in disclosure so
as to ensure that market participants have an adequate basis for an appreciation of the risks
they are running in dealing with, investing in or lending to, financial institutions. The second
CGFS initiative is to examine what kind of aggregate information about exposures would help
to improve the functioning of markets, taking as a starting-point the BIS international banking
statistics.
Having  adequate  knowledge  about  short-term  capital  flows  is  one  thing.  Establishing  an
exchange  regime  to  minimise  their  disruptive  effects,  while  maintaining  their  longer-run
efficiency  benefits,  is  quite  another.  As  already  stated,  a  country  cannot  have  completely
liberalised  capital  flows  (assuming  a  high  degree  of  substitutability  between  domestic  and
foreign assets), a fixed exchange rate regime and an independent monetary policy. The events
in Asia and more recently in Latin America have highlighted the need for trade-offs, but have
not  provided  guidance  as  to  optimal  solutions.  Indeed,  what  is  of  particular  interest  is  how
quickly opinions have reversed about the desirability of specific options. This in turn raises
the fundamental issue of how much any of us really understand.
Consider first the issue of capital controls. It was less than two years ago that the IMF was
vigorously pursuing the issue of revising Article VIII of the Fund’s statutes to allow the Fund
to promote actively the liberalisation of the capital account in emerging market economies.21
Today, there is a much greater willingness to recognise that some capital controls may have a
                                                          
18 One  feature  of  the  Asian  crisis  was  that  a  number  of  governments  supported  their  currencies  extensively  using
forwards  and  other  forms  of  off-balance  sheet  intervention.  This  information  was  hidden  from  the  public  and,
when revealed, indicated that the true level of reserves was much less than thought. This contributed to the aura of
panic and the sudden desire on the part of creditors to withdraw. To provide an example of proper behaviour in
this  regard,  the  G10  countries  agreed  to  adhere  to  a  template  on  foreign  exchange  exposure  drawn  up  by  a
subgroup of the ECSC. This template will serve as the basis for the statistics to be submitted to the SDDS database
operated by the IMF.
19 See BIS: BCBS (1999a) and (1999b).
20  See BIS: ECSC (1994).
21  It  is  worth  reminding  ourselves  that  the  postwar  Bretton  Woods  agreements  were  designed  to  discourage  such
flows. Keynes and others were concerned that capital flows would cause problems which would lead countries to
retaliate in the form of trade protectionism. Since, in light of the experience of the 1930s, the fear of protectionism
was of primary concern, it was considered at that time to be an acceptable trade-off to give up the benefits of a
more open capital account.
5
BIS Review   36/1999
useful role to play. References are frequently made to the Chilean experiment and their careful
use of controls over short-term capital inflows. Concerns about a possible prolongation of the
current crisis through a devaluation of the Chinese renmimbi are assuaged through reference
to the fact that China still has capital controls. Even the Malaysian experiment, as flawed and
potentially dangerous as it was,22 does not seem to have had the dire consequences predicted
by many at the time. A consensus also seems to be forming that, if controls are required to
deal with a crisis, they should be directed to incoming capital only, should favour longer-term
over shorter-term inflows, and should  be  accompanied  by  clear  indications  as  to  when  they
might be removed. Note that the new consensus does not  extend  to  questioning  the  longer-
term benefits of international capital flows.
When we turn to the issue of exchange rate regimes, a similarly rapid change of views seems
to  have  occurred.  Prior  to  the  Russian  and  Brazilian  crises,  a  constant  refrain  was  that
countries using a fixed exchange rate regime to stabilise inflationary expectations also needed
an “exit strategy”. This last point was in recognition of the fact that real exchange rates tend to
rise during a disinflationary process, leading to a deteriorating current account which in turn
undermines the credibility of the fixed rate regime. Since the onset of the Brazilian crisis, we
have  been  hearing  an  increasing  number  of  references  to  the  desirability  of  imposing  a
currency board in Brazil. Going even further down this path, the Argentinians, who already
have a currency board, have hinted at dollarising the economy if  the  Argentine  peso  comes
under  further  attack.  Both  suggestions  have  validity  to  the  extent  that  dedication  to  an
“immutable”  fix  reinforces  the  credibility  of  the  regime  and  leads  to  a  stronger  domestic
currency and lower interest rates.23
Yet, such policies are also the very antithesis of the exit policies of such recent fashion. The
question  remains  unanswered  as  to  what  will  happen  if  the  current  account  continues  to
deteriorate  under  such  a  regime  and  the  unemployment  rate  continues  to  rise  because  of
excessively  high  domestic  labour  costs?  Since  domestic  legislatures  are  always  sovereign,
fears would remain that the exchange regime policies could be reversed. At the very least, a
substantial  credit  risk  premium  might  be  expected  to  remain  for  borrowers  from  such
countries, at least until they set their “house” in order. This having been said, it remains within
the realm of the possible that a combination of initial sharp currency depreciation, imposition
of a still more credible exchange rate regime, sticky domestic wages (even as prices rise) and
fiscal probity might be sufficient to deal with the longer-term competitiveness problem.24
What  is  also  surprising  in  light  of  the  Asian  experience  is  that  the  merits  of  voluntarily
adopting a regime of floating, the polar extreme to the immutable fix, has not received more
attention.25 This is particularly surprising given the (albeit questionable) hypothesis that most
                                                          
22  The  greatest  danger  arising  from  the  unilateral  Malaysian  imposition  of  controls  on  outgoing  capital  was  that  it
would increase investors’ fears that the same policies might be followed elsewhere. In practice, it took the Russian
default  and  effective  declaration  of  non-convertibility  to  initiate  a  withdrawal  of  international  investors  from
emerging markets more generally.
23  The gains could be particularly great for Brazil since the government’s internal debt is large and very short-term.
Thus, lower interest rates lower debt service and the deficit and this presumably would make the currency stronger
contributing to a virtuous circle of lower interest rates in turn. The stronger currency would pay a further dividend
in that a significant proportion of the government’s internal debt service is indexed to the US dollar. This highly
interactive and non-linear system could also operate in reverse were confidence not to return.
24  Szapáry (1998) makes similar observations with respect to eastern Europe.
25
In the Financial Times of 22 February 1999, reporting on the G7 meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors  on  the  preceding  weekend,  28  items  were  listed  as  being  on  the  G7  timetable  for  reform  of  the
international  financial  system.  The  only  reference  to  exchange  rates  was  “Considering  necessary  elements  for
BIS Review   36/1999
6
Asian  countries  suffered  enormously  from  pegging  their  currencies  too  tightly  to  the  US
dollar.  In  the  early  1990s,  as  the  dollar  weakened  against  the  yen,  pegged  Asian  currencies
became  over-competitive.  This  led  to  massive  capital  inflows  (especially  from  Japan),
domestic  overheating  and  an  unprecedented  increase  in  production  capacity  in  many  areas.
The  fact  that  the  peg  against  the  dollar  was  considered  inviolate  also  encouraged  domestic
residents (including banks) to borrow abroad in foreign currencies at low interest rates. All of
these  tendencies  were  to  create  major  problems  later,  problems  which  might  have  been
avoided had the domestic currencies been allowed to appreciate in the face of capital inflows.
Later  (from  early  1995),  dollar  strength  against  the  yen  coincided  with  a  period  when  the
prices  of  products  extensively  produced  in  Asia  were  already  under  pressure  globally.  The
combination  proved  unsustainable  and  the  peg  had  to  be  given  up  on  the  downside  in  an
environment  of  full-blown  crisis  with  attendant  (and  domestically  painful)  requirements  for
both fiscal and monetary tightening.26
There is, of course, no single right answer to the choice of an exchange rate regime either for
emerging  or  industrial  economies.27  The  right  answer  for  a  single  country  depends  on  that
country’s particular circumstances. However, clarifying the criteria for making choices would
now  seem  a  particularly  ripe  area  for  fruitful  analysis  in  the  case  of  emerging  market
economies. Clearly, some important mistakes have recently been made in this area. And the
wide variety of recommendations being made to different countries by academics and others
argues for an assessment of the criteria on which those recommendations are being made.
C.
Improving international banking regulation and supervision
Regulation  and  supervision  are  not  the  same.  The  former  has  to  do  with  setting  out  rules,
while the latter has to do with ensuring that the behaviour of financial institutions is overseen
and that the rules are followed. We must distinguish as well between principles and practices
in both areas. For example, it has been relatively easy28 to lay out certain Core Principles of
Banking Supervision, but the next stage of ensuring their global implementation will be much
more difficult and time-consuming. In light of some of the banking problems which emerged
in  Mexico  and  more  recently  in  Asia,  let  us  consider  some  recent  advances  in  the  area  of
international banking regulation and supervision.
Perhaps  the  best-known  of  all  the  international  banking  regulations  are  the  Basle  Capital
Adequacy Ratios. These ratios are now being re-examined by the BCBS with a view to having
a  consultative  document  in  the  public  domain  in  April  1999.  While  developments  (such  as
securitisation and advances in credit risk modelling practices) in industrial countries gave the
main  impetus  for  this  review,  the  re-examination  was  also  motivated  by  the  Mexican  and
Asian  developments.  In  particular,  it  has  been  pointed  out  by  some  analysts  that  the
preferential treatment of bank loans made to counterparties in countries which are members of
                                                                                                                                                                     
maintaining  sustainable  emerging  market  exchange  rate  regimes”.  Martin  Wolf  in  the  Financial  Times  has  also
drawn attention to this puzzle of omission.
26 One reason why countries may currently hesitate to adopt floating is that they confuse what might happen under
such a voluntary regime  with  what  did  happen  (effectively  an  uncontrollable  depreciation)  when  countries  were
forced off their previous peg.
27  These issues bring us back to the literature on optimal currency areas pioneered by Robert Mundell. Many of the
pertinent criteria for joining such an area  (a  truly  immutable  fix)  were  revisited  in  the  period  leading  up  to  the
introduction of the euro.
28  The operative word here is “relatively” since the background documents on which the Core Principles were based
took over 15 years to agree upon and the Core Principles themselves took over a year to draft.
7
BIS Review   36/1999
the  OECD29  may  have  contributed  to  both  Mexico  and  Korea  attracting  more  short-term
capital  than  was  healthy.  Further,  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  low  capital  requirements
imposed on short-term interbank loans also shifted lending into such categories, increasing the
likelihood of a sudden and dangerous reversal.
Without wishing to  deny  these  suggestions,  it  is  important  to  note  that  there  are  alternative
(perhaps even complementary) explanations of the behaviour of internationally active banks
in the Asian crisis. An important consideration, affecting Japanese and continental European
banks in particular, appears to have been the search for return abroad in light of heightened
competition and shrinking margins at home.30 While acceptance of this explanation might also
have  implications  for  a  revision  of  the  Capital  Accord,  the  implications  would  be  of  a
decidedly different nature.31
A second factor which may have influenced bank behaviour was the existence of safety net
provisions provided by public sector entities, both domestic and international. For example,
consider  the  case  of  Korea.  Once  it  became  clear  the  domestic  authorities  would  not  let
Korean banks fail, interbank loans funded from abroad bore Korea’s sovereign credit status.
Moreover, given that the loans were short-term and denominated in dollars or yen, there was
no explicit won currency risk. Finally, in light of the Mexican, Thai and other international
rescue  packages,  there  was  a  perception  that  there  was  no  liquidity  risk  either.  In  such
circumstances, it was perhaps not surprising that internationally active banks were willing to
lend  as  much  as  they  did  at  ever  narrowing  risk  spreads.  This  interpretation  of  events  has
public policy implications with respect to safety nets, as much as they do for the specification
of capital adequacy ratios.
Developments in international banking and capital markets in the years spanning the Mexican
and Asian financial crises contributed to a desire to revisit the credit risk baskets in the Capital
Accord,  and  indeed  the  whole  approach  to  credit  risk  which  underlies  that  Accord.  The
biggest losses in banking traditionally arise from credit risk. The Basle  Supervisors  will,  as
noted, be issuing a consultative document with a view to having a revised Capital Accord as
soon as possible. They will also soon be issuing a paper which investigates the potential use of
in-house credit models to replace or augment more traditional regulatory measures of capital
requirements. While the problems inherent in this approach are even more daunting than in
the use of such models to evaluate exposure to market risk, technology is advancing so rapidly
that it merits keeping an open mind.
Applying capital ratios in practice is also not as simple as one might like, in large part because
there continues to be much uncertainty about the accounting definitions which underlie these
calculations.  This  certainly  applies  in  many  emerging  markets,  and  this  fuzziness  perhaps
explains  why  there  seems  to  be  no  clear  relationship  between  actual  movements  in  capital
                                                          
29  This  so-called  “Club  Rule”  was  originally  adopted  after  lengthy  consideration  failed  to  reveal  an  acceptable
alternative.
30  Similar forms of behaviour, otherwise known as “irrational exuberance” or “excessive optimism” have been seen
in a large number of different markets across the world in recent years. Some discussion of the underlying forces at
work is provided in the BIS 67th Annual Report (see BIS (1997), pp 3-4 and Chapter VIII). See also White (1998b)
and the French and Belgian contributions in BIS (1999).
31  Such global tendencies towards enhanced competition seem likely to be further encouraged by the introduction of
the euro in continental Europe, the prospective demise of Glass-Steagall in the United States and the introduction
of “Big Bang” in Japan. Such trends might imply that capital ratios should on average be higher than they have
been.
BIS Review   36/1999
8
ratios  and  subsequent  crises.32  Yet  it  must  be  said  that  there  remain  problems  in  certain
industrial  countries  as  well,  with  Japan  being  a  particularly  important  example  even  if
progress has been made recently. There continue to be important international differences in
the provisioning for future losses and the definition of non-performing loans. Moreover, what
counts as capital has also been changing as financial institutions have creatively issued new
liabilities which may or may not be a charge on future earnings. Both these issues have been
actively addressed33 by the Basle Committee, though more work  will  be  necessary  to  attain
truly harmonised global standards.
Considering now the principles of banking supervision, the preparation of the Core Principles
of Banking Supervision was an enormous step forward in at least four ways. The Principles
were  comprehensive;  they  addressed  all  banks  and  not  just  those  which  are  internationally
active; they were drawn up in association with representatives of emerging markets; and they
were  designed  to  provide  a  checklist  of  good  practice,  not  only  by  national  supervisors  but
also  other  interested  parties  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors.34  Moreover,  the
dissemination of these Core Principles has already had an influence extending far beyond the
Principles themselves, in that the process is serving as a model for the creation of similar sets
of core principles in a wide range of other areas. The IAIS (insurance) has already laid out a
set  of  core  principles  as  has  IOSCO  (investment  dealers),  and  the  CPSS  (payment  and
settlement  systems)  is  in  the  process  of  doing  the  same.  Finally,  a  perusal  of  the  various
recommendations  of  the  working  groups  associated  with  the  Willard  process  indicates  that
core principles and international standards of best behaviour have become the flavour of the
month.35 Whether all these principles can be effectively transformed into action in all of these
areas having a bearing on financial stability remains to be seen.
Turning principles of good behaviour into good practices in the financial area will certainly
not be an easy task. Principles provide guidelines of behaviour, but what is also required is an
incentive system to ensure that actions follow words. At the present time, four complementary
sets of processes in the supervisory area look promising: a code of transparency for national
supervisors; peer pressure; tightened residency requirements; and market discipline. The first
three of these provide incentives for national supervisors to enforce the Core Principles. The
fourth provides incentives for owners and managers of banks to act in accordance with these
Principles. While the specifics of the processes pertain to implementation of best practice in
the area of banking supervision, similar incentives might be applicable in other areas as well.
The  first  process,  directed,  inter  alia,  to  ensuring  implementation  of  the  Core  Principles  of
Banking Supervision, has been the preparation of another code — namely, a Code of Good
Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies. This Code, which is being put
together  by  the  IMF  in  association  with  the  BIS  and  relevant  international  committees  of
regulators, deals in part with the need for transparency in the formulation and conduct of all
                                                          
32  See Lindgren et al (1996), who conclude that capital ratios had no systematic predictive power in emerging market
banking crises.
33  See BIS: BCBS (1998).
34  It  is  also  worth  noting  that  these  Principles  are  not  cast  in  stone  but  will  have  to  be  constantly  revisited,  and
revised. This implies an ongoing iterative process between the Basle and emerging market Supervisors, who drew
up the Principles, and others (in particular the IMF) who will be seeking to apply these Principles in the field.
35 At the BIS, the CGFS has, as noted, recently proposed a template, agreed with the IMF, for providing information
about  national  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  contingent  assets  and  liabilities  affecting  them.  The  CGFS  is  also
looking into the possibility of preparing a set of good practices for the establishment of well functioning markets;
this would be a follow-up to a “Report by a  Study  Group  on  market  liquidity”  which  is  currently  being  revised
prior to publication.
9
BIS Review   36/1999
policies (deemed Financial Policies) having implications for financial stability. If information
about how the supervisors are behaving is a necessary condition for ensuring that the banks
are  behaving  properly,  this  Code  of  Transparency  seems  a  useful  initiative.  The  Code  of
Transparency is still in the process of being finalised, but in its current form it is based upon a
sensible if (to some)  radical  framework.  Akin  to  what  is  increasingly  being  accepted  in  the
realm of monetary policy, the draft Code suggests there should be transparency with respect to
the  supervisors’  mandate, 
their  democratic
accountability  to  other  bodies.  In  effect,  this  Code  of  Transparency  tries  to  ensure  that  the
supervisors do their job in implementing the Core Principles.
the  effectiveness  of 
their  powers,  and 
As noted above, transparency may be a necessary condition to ensure that supervisors carry
out  effectively  their  task  of  implementing  the  Core  Principles.  But  it  is  hardly  a  sufficient
condition. While the IMF will be monitoring compliance with the Code of Transparency (and
also the implementation of the Core Principles themselves36), the influence the IMF can exert
may  be  relatively  limited  unless  the  country  in  question  has  an  active  programme  with  the
IMF. One complementary suggestion that might be helpful is the exercise of “peer pressure”
on national supervisors. Indeed, given that effective banking supervision is often resisted by
the  political  authorities  (because  of  connected  lending  and  other  reasons),  Central  Bank
Governors and Finance Ministers from developed countries might usefully try to put similar
pressure on their counterparts in emerging markets.37 In a similar if more extreme vein, a third
suggestion  would  be  to  limit  more  aggressively  the  “right  of  establishment”  in  the  world’s
major financial centres. In effect, banks without an adequate supervisory framework in their
own country would not be able to conduct an international banking business. This may seem
radical, but has been a dictum among industrial countries since the 1975 Basle Concordat.38
As well, some still more practical issues having to do with the incentives given to supervisors
cannot  be  overlooked.  Supervisors  must  be  paid  adequately  to  prevent  a  constant
haemorrhaging  of  staff  to  the  private  financial  sector.  Other  working  conditions  must  be
suitably  attractive,  including  personal  legal  protection  from  litigation  arising  from  official
decisions.  And  lastly,  supervisors  must  be  properly  trained  and  their  training  continuously
updated  to  reflect  new  circumstances  created  by  a  changing  financial  world.  The
establishment at the BIS of the Financial Stability Institute will go a small way to helping in
this last regard. However, the personnel challenge is huge and many years of intensive efforts
will be required to respond to it adequately.
The last set of incentives applies to the owners and managers of banks. Aside from effective
supervisory pressure, how can they be induced to behave in ways which are consistent with
appropriate corporate governance and effective risk management? The first and most obvious
point  is  that  they  should  suffer  in  light  of  inappropriate  behaviour.  This  implies  that  the
owners  should  have  their  own  capital  at  stake  and  that  managers  should  be  treated  as  the
stewards of that capital. What is also increasingly needed is for market discipline to be used to
get the attention of owners and managers. Financial institutions which are thought to be badly
                                                          
36
It  is  possible  that  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  will  also  play  a  role  in  implementing  “Codes”  elaborated  by  other
Basle-based committees.
37  Financial  stability  in  emerging  market  economies  by  the  Group  of  Ten  (see  Group  of  Ten  (1997))  contained  a
number of practical recommendations as to how financial stability might be promoted. A meeting of Central Bank
Governors and Finance Ministers from both industrial and emerging markets took place in Hong Kong in October
1997 with a view to exerting pressure of this sort. Sadly, most industrial countries were represented only by lower-
level officials.
38 See BIS: BCBS (1975).
BIS Review   36/1999
10
managed, or willing to take excessive risks, should have to pay a market price for this; funds
should be available only at a premium; collateral requirements should be onerous and share
prices should be marked down. Moreover, a similar price should be exacted from firms which
release too little information to allow judgements to be made in this regard.39 Hence the focus
on public disclosure.
A last word is also warranted on the role of rating agencies. The activities of these firms have
expanded enormously in recent years and their interest in financial institutions has increased
commensurately.  In  light  of  the  recent  experience  with  both  sovereign  and  private  sector
ratings in East Asia, no one would contend that all ratings have been perfect. Yet it is the very
difficulty of the task of assessment that leads one to conclude that professional and specialised
efforts  in  this  area  are  warranted.  Ratings  increasingly  complement,  and  sometimes  even
replace, in-house credit risk assessments, and they clearly have the capacity to affect market
prices  of  debt  and  equity.  Ratings  thus  provide  information  which  helps  markets  to  impose
discipline  on  the  owners  and  managers  of  financial  institutions,  and  this  market  discipline
serves  as  a  useful  complement  to  internal  discipline  and  the  discipline  imposed  by  the
supervisory and regulatory authorities.
While  this  last  statement  might  seem  at  first  glance  to  recommend  a  surfeit  of  disciplinary
sources, the costs of recent financial crises indicate that efforts directed to crisis prevention
have thus far been clearly inadequate. On the presumption that markets are normally efficient,
market  discipline  should  normally  be  relied  upon.  At  the  same  time,  the  supervisory  and
regulatory  authorities  must  recognise  that  market  failures  do  occur  and  should  focus  their
efforts on how such failures might be redressed. The BIS, whether in its old role or some new
one, hopes to continue to make a material contribution to these efforts to encourage financial
stability.
References
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (1999):  “The  monetary  and  regulatory  implications  of
changes in the banking industry”. BIS Conference Papers, Vol 7, March.
Bank for International Settlements (1998a): 68th Annual Report, June.
Bank  for  International  Settlements  (1998b):  International  banking  and  financial  market
developments, August.
Bank for International Settlements (1997): 67th Annual Report, June.
Bank for International Settlements: Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1999a): Banks’
interactions with highly leveraged institutions, January.
Bank for International Settlements: Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1999b): Sound
practices for banks’ interactions with highly leveraged institutions, January.
Bank for International Settlements: Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1998): Sound
practices for loan accounting, credit risk disclosure and related matters, October.
                                                          
39 See  BIS:  ECSC  (1994).  This  is  also  a  rationale  behind,  for  instance,  the  Disclosure  framework  for  securities
settlement systems by the CPSS and IOSCO (see BIS: CPSS (1997)).
11
BIS Review   36/1999
Bank  for  International  Settlements:  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (1988):
International convergence of capital measurement and capital standards, July.
Bank for International Settlements: Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (1975): Report
on the supervision of banks’ foreign establishments.
Bank for International Settlements: Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (1997):
Disclosure framework for securities settlement systems, February.
Bank for International Settlements: Euro-currency Standing Committee (1994): A discussion
paper  on  public  disclosure  of  market  and  credit  risks  by  financial  intermediaries  (Fisher
Report), September.
BIS/IMF/OECD/World  Bank  (1998a):  Report  of  The  Working  Group  on  Transparency  and
Accountability, October.
BIS/IMF/OECD/World  Bank  (1998b):  Report  of  The  Working  Group  on  Strengthening
Financial Systems, October.
BIS/IMF/OECD/World  Bank  (1998c):  Report  of  The  Working  Group  on  International
Financial Crises, October.
Group of Seven (1999): Communiqué of G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors,
20 February, Petersberg, Bonn.
Group  of  Ten  (1997):  Financial  stability  in  emerging  market  economies:  a  strategy  for  the
formulation,  adoption  and  implementation  of  sound  principles  and  practices  to  strengthen
financial systems, April.
Lindgren,  Carl-Johan,  Gillian  Garcia  and  Mathew  I.  Saal  (1996):  Bank  soundness  and
macroeconomic policy. Washington: IMF.
Szapáry, György and Zoltán M Jakab (1998): “Exchange rate policy in transition economies:
the case of Hungary”. Journal of Comparative Economics, 26, pp 691-717.
White, William R (1998a): “Promoting international financial stability: the role of the BIS”,
in  Teunissen  (ed),  Regulatory  and  supervisory  challenges  in  a  new  era  of  global  finance,
Forum on Debt and Development (FONDAD).
White, William R (1998b): “The coming transformation of continental  European  banking?”
BIS Working Papers, No 54.
BIS Review   36/1999
12
