Mr Duisenberg’s opening statement at the European Parliament on 18 January 1999
Introductory statement by the President of the European Central Bank, Dr Willem F. Duisenberg,
before the European Parliament’s Sub-Committee on Monetary Affairs in Brussels on 18/1/99.
On  1  January  1999  a  new  chapter  in  European  economic  history  was  opened.  After  years  of
intense and thorough preparation, the launch of the single currency in Europe was accomplished
successfully.  Today,  just  a  little  more  than  two  weeks  after  this  historic  event,  it  is  a  great
privilege for me to be here at the European Parliament for another exchange of views with your
committee.  I  should  like  to  begin  my  statement  by  reviewing  the  changeover  to  the  euro,
including money market developments during the first two weeks of the single currency. I shall
then go on to summarise the assessment by the Governing Council of the European Central Bank
(ECB) of the economic environment in which the new currency has been launched and which has
shaped our initial decisions about monetary policy. Moreover, I shall comment on some of the
challenges  that  lie  ahead.  Finally,  I  shall  touch  briefly  upon  some  issues  related  to  the
communication policy of the European Central Bank, after which I shall, as usual, stand ready to
answer any questions you might have.
A. Transition to the euro
The transition of the banking and finance community from the national currencies to the euro in
only three and half days after the publication of the conversion rates was, indeed, a success. The
smooth  migration  of  all  electronic  systems  and  procedures  was  a  sign  of  the  quality  of  the
preparatory work carried out over recent months and years. In our view, the workforce that was
directly involved in the changeover in the global financial markets - including all major financial
centres outside the euro area - was probably higher than the 50,000 reported by the media.
Within the Eurosystem, which comprises the ECB and the 11 participating national central banks
(NCBs),  preparations  had  been  ongoing  for  some  time.  The  first  plan  of  action  for  the
changeover weekend had already been approved by the EMI Council in March 1998. After the
establishment of the ECB, the Governing Council examined reports on the changeover at four of
its meetings. During the changeover weekend several thousand staff members were at work or on
call at the ECB and the NCBs.
The major concern of the Governing Council was to avoid a breakdown in the transition to the
euro  -  at  the  ECB,  at  any  NCB  or  within  any  of  the  systems  of  the  “core  infrastructure”  of
financial  markets  in  the  euro  area.  For  this  reason,  the  ECB  made  recommendations  to  credit
institutions  and  securities  settlement  systems  and  set  up  a  procedure  for  monitoring
developments  within  and  outside  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  during  the
weekend.  Moreover,  the  decision-making  bodies  of  the  ECB  stood  ready  to  convene
extraordinary  meetings  via  teleconference  and  to  adopt,  if  needed,  contingency  measures.  The
latter was not necessary. The monitoring of conversion activities conducted by the ESCB during
the  changeover  weekend  revealed  no  incident  that  might  have  impaired  the  smooth  start  of
Monetary Union.
As to the involvement of the Eurosystem in the changeover activities, I should like to mention
that I had the honour of attending the meeting of the ECOFIN Council on 31 December 1998,
during which the conversion rates were irrevocably fixed. I delivered personally to the ECOFIN
Council  the  Opinion  of  the  ECB  on  the  proposed  conversion  rates.  On  the  morning  of  31
December, the Eurosystem had contributed to the computation of the conversion rates. Later on,
the Governing Council had, with the participation of the national central bank governors of the
BIS Review   6/1999
– 2 –
countries  not  adopting  the  euro  at  the  start  of  Stage  Three,  a  meeting  by  means  of  a
teleconference  to  approve  its  legal  Opinion.  The  Eurosystem  also  contributed  to  the
dissemination of the conversion rates in a prompt and secure manner to the banking and finance
community, as requested by market operators in order to  enable  them  to  start  their  conversion
activities as soon as possible in the early afternoon of 31 December.
In  addition,  on  31  December  1998  the  euro  central  rates  for  the  Danish  krone  and  the  Greek
drachma  in  ERM  II  were  agreed  by  written  procedure  between  the  relevant  parties.  The  new
central  rates  are  in  line  with  the  previous  ones,  after  allowing  for  minor  deviations  due  to
rounding. Moreover, the ECB, Danmarks Nationalbank and the Bank of Greece established by
common  accord  and  announced,  on  the  same  day,  the  compulsory  intervention  rates  for  the
Danish  krone  and  the  Greek  drachma.  Fluctuations  of  the  two  currencies  during  the  first  two
weeks of the year remained subdued.
B. Market developments in the first two weeks of January
With  a  view  to  ensuring  a  smooth  transition  to  the  euro,  the  Governing  Council  took  two
important decisions already on 22 December 1998, in order to give guidance to the markets on
the  monetary  conditions  at  the  outset  of  Monetary  Union.  First,  it  was  decided  to  start  the
provision of liquidity via the first tender operation, which was carried out in the first week, at a
fixed  rate  of  3%.  The  Governing  Council  also  agreed  that  the  interest  rate  for  the  marginal
lending  facility  would  be  set  at  4.50%  and  the  interest  rate  for  the  deposit  facility  at  2%.
Together, these two rates form the so-called “corridor” for movements in short-term rates.
However,  the  Governing  Council  considered  the  possibility  that  market  participants  may  need
some time to accustom themselves to the new environment for monetary policy. To this end, it
was decided to use a relatively narrow corridor of interest rates for the standing facilities of the
Eurosystem  in  the  first  three  weeks  of  Stage  Three  as  an  automatic  device  to  reduce  the
maximum  range  of  fluctuations  in  the  overnight  interest  rate.  Accordingly,  the  Governing
Council temporarily introduced an exceptionally narrow corridor of only 50 basis points, with the
interest rate for the marginal lending facility at 3.25% and the interest rate for the deposit facility
at 2.75%. This measure will be terminated on 21 January 1999.
Indeed,  this  guidance  given  to  the  markets  proved  to  be  justified,  since  market  developments
over the first days showed that the formation of the single European money market would not
happen overnight.
•  There were signs that short-term market rates in the different countries were not fully aligned
and, in particular, that the spreads between the highest and lowest rates were larger than is
normal in an integrated money market.
•  The counterparties of the Eurosystem made very high use of the marginal lending facility at
3.25% (EUR 27.5 billion on Monday, 4 January), since this rate was only slightly higher than
the  prevailing  market  conditions  for  overnight  borrowing  in  the  euro  area.  The  overnight
EONIA  rate  for  effective  market  transactions  was  3.20%  and  credit  institutions  may  have
preferred to pay a slightly higher rate instead of entering into market transactions with other
banks across the border.
•  The  counterparties  also  deposited  large  amounts  overnight  with  the  Eurosystem  (EUR  9.2
billion),  as  they  may  not  have  been  willing  or  able  to  lend  them  to  other  market
counterparties.
BIS Review   6/1999
– 3 –
In  the  meantime,  this  situation  has  been  overcome.  The  spread  between  the  highest  and  the
lowest rates reported to the ECB by banks of the EONIA (Euro Overnight Index Average) panel
has narrowed from 21 basis points on 4 January to below 10 basis points. Moreover, the use of
the  marginal  lending  facility  and  the  deposit  facility  has  been  significantly  reduced  to  a  more
normal level.
A  further  confirmation  of  the  increasing  integration  of  money  markets  in  the  euro  area  is  the
growing use of payment and securities settlement systems. On 5 January 1999 the value of cross-
border transactions settled through TARGET had already exceeded EUR 310 billion. Including
domestic  real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  transactions,  which  themselves  accounted  for  at
least another EUR 660 billion, the total value of transactions settled was therefore almost EUR
1,000 billion. This amount corresponds to about 17% of last year’s GDP of the euro area. In the
meantime, the total volume of transactions has increased further. Moreover, the extensive use of
the so-called correspondent central banking model (CCBM) – a mechanism which permits banks
to  make  cross-border  use  of  eligible  assets  as  collateral  in  monetary  policy  operations  and
payment systems– suggests that market integration is proceeding well.
The  TARGET  system,  the  cross-border  payment  system  of  the  ESCB,  has  contributed
substantially to the integration of the euro money market and has made possible the consolidation
of  the  treasury  management  of  institutions  with  different  activity  centres  throughout  Europe.
TARGET  has  processed  more  cross-border  payments  than  anticipated  in  these  early  days  of
Monetary Union and, in so doing, has amply demonstrated its processing capacities. Given the
extensive  use  of  the  system,  the  ECB  recently  decided  to  extend  the  operating  hours  of  the
TARGET system by one hour to 7 p.m. for a limited period ending on 31  January  1999.  This
should alleviate some of the time pressure on commercial banks when familiarising themselves
with  the  TARGET  rules.  Similarly,  the  Governing  Council  decided  that,  during  this  transition
period, the deposit facility of the Eurosystem would be available until one hour after the closure
of TARGET.
I should also like to mention the results of the two first main refinancing operations of the ECB.
EUR 75 allocated at a fixed rate of 3% to the banking system under the first operation, while the
amount for the second operation was, under the same conditions, EUR 48 billion. In addition, on
13 January 1999 the ECB allocated EUR 45 billion in three tranches with maturities of 42, 70
and  105  days  through  its  first  longer-term  financing  operation,  at  marginal  single  rates  of,
respectively, 3.13 %, 3.10 % and 3.08 %. We have provided sufficient liquidity to allow credit
institutions, on aggregate, to neutralise their monetary reserve deficit relatively soon within the
first reserve maintenance period.
C. Current economic developments and prospects
The  Governing  Council’s  decisions  on  the  initial  level  of  interest  rates  for  the  euro  area,
announced on 22 December 1998, have been made with a view to the objective of maintaining
price stability. The decisions were taken on the basis of a thorough assessment of the monetary,
financial  and  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  and  against  the  background  of  the  stability-
oriented monetary policy strategy. As you will be aware, the Governing Council has announced a
quantitative definition of price stability, measured on the basis of a year-on-year increase in the
Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  for  the  euro  area  of  below  2%.  The  monetary
policy strategy further consists of two key elements: first, a reference value of 4 1/2% for annual
growth  in  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3;  and,  second,  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the
outlook  for  price  developments  and  the  risks  to  price  stability.  The  views  of  the  Governing
Council  on  the  monetary  and  financial  situation,  the  economic  conjuncture  and  prospects  for
BIS Review   6/1999
– 4 –
price developments in the euro area which underpinned its decisions on the appropriate monetary
policy stance to be adopted were set out at a press conference at the time of the announcement. In
addition,  a  more  detailed  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  underlying  the  Governing
Council’s monetary policy decisions will be released in the ECB’s first Monthly Bulletin, to be
published tomorrow. This will include a commentary on the economic situation in the euro area.
Let me briefly summarise the main features of our assessment of the current economic situation
and outlook.
As regards monetary developments, which are monitored on the basis of a three-month moving
average  of  the  12-month  growth  rate  of  M3  (in  order  to  minimise  distortions  from  erratic
monthly figures), the Governing Council set the first reference value at 4 1/2%. The latest three-
month  moving  average  of  annual  growth  in  M3  was  around  4.7%,  which  is  very  close  to  the
reference value and compatible with the maintenance of price stability.
A broader assessment of economic and financial developments supported the available monetary
data in signalling the absence of significant upward or downward pressures on prices. Financial
indicators  suggested  that  market  participants  expect  the  current  climate  of  price  stability  to
continue in the medium to longer term. In  this  context,  it  may  be  observed  that  at  the  start  of
Stage Three nominal short-term and long-term interest rates in the euro area have reached levels
which are very low by historical standards and that real interest rates are also significantly below
their  long-term  averages.  The  real  long-term  interest  rate  is  currently  at  a  level  of  about  3%,
which is approximately 1 percentage point below the level prevailing at the end of 1997.
Increases in consumer prices, as measured by 12-monthchanges in the HICP, have been around
1% since autumn 1998, falling to 0.9% in November. The rate of increase in service prices has
remained  unchanged  at  around  2%,  but  increases  in  goods  prices  are  much  lower,  at  0.3%,
reflecting  downward  influences  on  both  food  and  industrial  consumer  goods  prices.  Energy
prices have also continued to contribute to moderate price developments, falling by 4.3% in the
12 months to November. In addition, modest developments in unit labour costs are a further key
factor underpinning the current low rate of consumer price increases.
The preliminary data released by EUROSTAT for the third quarter of 1998 showed euro area-
wide real GDP growth at 2.4%, thus reflecting some deceleration compared with the first half of
the  year,  when  output  growth  averaged  3%.  Growth  has  increasingly  been  driven  by  domestic
demand  rather  than  net  exports  in  the  course  of  1998.  Private  consumption,  in  particular,  has
been  robust,  supported  by  growth  in  employment.  However,  unemployment  in  the  euro  area
remains  very  high  (at  13.8  million)  and  is  declining  only  gradually.  In  the  short  term,  output
growth  is  expected  to  slow  somewhat  as  a  consequence  of  a  weaker  global  environment.  In
addition  to  the  lower  real  GDP  growth  figure  in  the  third  quarter,  further  evidence  of  an
economic  slowdown  has  been  provided  by  survey  data,  most  notably  on  order  books  and
industrial  confidence,  which  have  weakened  significantly  since  the  spring  of  1998.  Industrial
production growth also slowed during the course of last year. By contrast, consumer confidence
was  quite  resilient,  providing  some  support  to  domestic  demand.  There  is  considerable
uncertainty  about  the  impact  of  external  developments  on  the  euro  area,  not  least  because  of
recent events in Brasil, but the slowdown is currently expected to be temporary. The current low
levels  of  short  and  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  should  contribute  to  sustained
confidence and domestic demand.
Overall,  the  Governing  Council  felt  that  the  risks  to  price  stability  appear  to  be  balanced.
However,  there  is  a  potential  downside  risk  to  the  global  situation,  which  could  lead  to  lower
inflation  via  a  more  pronounced  growth  slowdown  in  the  euro  area  and  weaker  import  and
BIS Review   6/1999
– 5 –
producer prices. On the other hand, higher-than-expected wage increases and/or a relaxation of
the fiscal stance could lead to  higher  price  increases.  The  ECB  will  continue  to  monitor  these
developments closely.
D. Challenges ahead
Looking  ahead,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  will
contribute  significantly  to  the  creation  of  the  conditions  necessary  for  improved  growth  and
employment  prospects.  However,  important  challenges  remain,  two  of  which  I  should  like  to
mention in particular:
• 
In  order  to  achieve  a  sustained  and  substantial  reduction  in  unemployment,  it  remains
necessary  to  press  ahead  with  structural  reforms  to  labour  and  product  markets.  As  I  have
already  mentioned,  the  rate  of  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  has  remained  very  high,  at
10.8%, despite real GDP growth of around 3% in the first half of 1998. Monetary policy will
play its part by continuing to pursue its objective of maintaining price stability, thus helping
to  keep  inflationary  expectations  and  risk  premia  in  long-term  interest  rates  low.  Some
benefits from price stability have already been seen in the decline in long-term interest rates
to below 4% by the end of last year. Moreover, as I have already mentioned, real long-term
interest rates have also declined substantially. However, while this should foster investment
and employment growth, it cannot by itself reduce structural unemployment.
•  Fiscal imbalances, reflected in both current deficit and debt levels in relation to GDP, are also
a  major  challenge.  A  sound  and  sustainable  policy  framework  is  characterised  by  fiscal
policies which are consistent with the Stability and Growth Pact. Compared with the progress
in fiscal  consolidation  achieved  in  previous  years,  only  a  small  reduction  in  the  euro  area-
wide  budget  deficit  is  estimated  to  have  occurred  in  1998:  to  2.3%  from  2.5%  in  1997.
Moreover,  the  decline  was  the  result  of  favourable  cyclical  developments  together  with
savings in interest payments. After adjusting for the cyclical effects of stronger growth, the
“structural  deficit”  actually  worsened  somewhat  in  1998.  According  to  the  European
Commission,  this  is  the  first  such  deterioration  since  1991.  The  ratio  of  euro  area  general
government debt to GDP is estimated by the European Commission to have been 73.8% in
1998, which is well above the reference level of 60%. Deficit ratios are still too high to put
debt levels on a rapidly declining path. Fiscal plans should thus be aimed at ensuring early
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact, which includes a commitment to achieving
fiscal positions “close to balance or in surplus” in the medium term. This is also required in
order to allow automatic stabilisers to work without exceeding the 3% deficit ceiling in less
prosperous times.
E. Communication policy of the Eurosystem
Coming now to the last part of my statement, I should like to touch briefly upon some decisions
related  to  the  ECB’s  communication  policy  that  have  been  taken  recently.  As  you  might  be
aware, the ECB published, on 5 January 1999, a consolidated opening financial statement of the
Eurosystem, and subsequently, on 12 January, the first weekly financial statement, containing the
assets and liabilities held by the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area  vis-à-vis
third  parties.  With  a  view  to  providing  regular  information,  in  particular  on  monetary  policy
operations and changes in foreign reserves, the ECB will continue to publish a weekly financial
statement every Tuesday, accompanied by an explanatory note, in all official EU languages.
As already indicated, the ECB will release the first edition of its Monthly Bulletin tomorrow. It
will  contain  an  assessment  of  the  current  economic  situation  underlying  the  ECB’s  monetary
BIS Review   6/1999
– 6 –
policy  decisions  and  also  tables  and  charts  covering  a  wide  range  of  statistics  relevant  to
monetary policy. In addition, the ECB will continue to release current monetary statistics on wire
services.
I should like to conclude by emphasising that these publications, together with the regular press
conferences  following  the  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  and  the  numerous
speeches given by the members of the Executive Board, demonstrate the importance which we
attach to explaining the ECB’s monetary policy in a clear and transparent manner.
 BIS Review   6/1999
