Mr Hayami discusses the challenges for the Japanese economy
Speech given by the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Mr Masaru Hayami, at the Kisaragi-kai meeting
on 27 July 1999.
 Introduction
I.
It  is  a  great  privilege  to  be  invited  to  the  Kisaragi-Kai  meeting  to  make  a  speech  in  front  of  this
distinguished audience.
First, I will make use of this opportunity to discuss the current state of the Japanese economy. Then I
will  move  on  to  the  main  theme  –  structural  problems  that  have  to  be  faced  in  revitalizing  the
economy. I hope that my view will give you some perspectives for the future.
Recent Developments in the Economy and the Outlook
II.
Let  me  begin  with  the  Bank  of Japan’s  view  on the current  state  of  the  Japanese  economy  and  the
outlook: Japan’s economy, at present, has stopped deteriorating, and corporate sentiment has improved
slightly, however, clear signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not been observed
yet. The following factors have combined to keep the Japanese economy from a further deterioration.
First,  active  fiscal  policy  has  been  stimulating  public  investments  as  well  as  housing  investments.
Second, private firms have been reducing their inventories successfully helped to some extent by the
development  of  final  demand.  Third,  financial  conditions  are  improving,  as  a  result  of  the  Bank  of
Japan’s zero interest rate policy and the injection of public funds into major commercial banks. The
buoyancy in the stock market since early spring and the improvements in corporate sector confidence
shown  in  the  Tankan,  are  based  on  the  increased  anticipation  of  better  business  and  financial
conditions in the future, as well as the current improvements in final demand, output, and inventories.
It is, however, uncertain at this stage whether the Japanese economy, is on the way to a self-sustained
recovery as anticipated above. The reasons can be summarized as follows.
To begin with, I will address two factors that will have a negative effect on the future of the economy.
First,  the  stimulus  effects  of  public  investment  will  fade  out  eventually.  Second,  the  corporate
restructuring efforts of individual firms will expose the macro economy to downside pressures. This is
an  example  where  what  are  rational  strategies  from  the  viewpoint  of  individual  firms  may  have
undesirable effects on the economy as a whole. With corporate restructuring, workers faced with harsh
income  conditions, reduce  consumption  spending,  while firms  save  the resulting  cash  or  make  debt
repayments, instead of reinvesting. This “paradox of thrift” may drive our economy into shrinkage.
Of course, there are factors that will work positively on the economy. The point is, however, whether
these factors are strong enough to outweigh the negative ones mentioned above.
Let me discuss the positive factors in detail. First, corporate restructuring may bring about a recovery
in corporate profits – and may push up stock prices in anticipation of such a recovery. For the recent
corporate  restructuring  to  have  a  positive  effect,  the  profits  recovery  should  boost  firms’  spending
sufficiently to outweigh workers’ saving.
The  second  positive  factor  is  that  the  effects  of  the  government’s  various  measures  to  ensure  the
stability of the financial system and the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy to ease financial conditions
are  permeating  throughout  the  economy,  improving  household  and  corporate  sector  confidence
somewhat.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  possibility  that  this  improved  confidence  will  stimulate  the
spending attitude of consumers and firms. In fact, household consumption has held steady even amid
the  harsh  income  conditions.  However,  corporate  expenditure  is  still  weak,  as  is  obvious  from  the
Tankan  survey  on  business  fixed  investment  plans.  While  financial  institutions  are  improving  their
skill  in  risk  management  and  striving  for  adequate  lending  margins,  bank  loans  have  not  increased
while demand for fund raising remains weak.
The  third positive  factor  is  a  recovery  in  overseas  economies,  especially  in  Asia.  Although  China’s
economy is decelerating somewhat, Korea is now on a recovery trend. Thailand and the Philippines as
well  as  Malaysia  and  Singapore  are  bottoming  out  gradually.  These  developments  will  facilitate
Japanese exports and production.
The above arguments make obvious the following fact: if foreign economic factors are not considered,
the recovery of the Japanese economy depends largely on when corporate behavior becomes active.
The  recent  improvements  in  corporate  sector confidence  are  good  signs  for  the  economy,  but  other
economic indicators and fixed investment plans show no significant signs of economic recovery. Our
judgment  is  that  it  is  too  early  to  say  that  the  Japanese  economy  is  on  the  way  to  a  self-sustained
recovery. Therefore, the downward pressure on prices will remain, although prices have been stable
recently.
It  is  in  view  of  such  economic  conditions  as  those  described  above  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  will
maintain the current monetary easing stance and continue to firmly support economic activities until
deflationary concerns subside.
Contained Dynamism of the Japanese Economy
III.
A caveat regarding fiscal and monetary policies is that they are effective in managing the economy in
the short run, but are not a panacea for all of the problems the Japanese economy faces.
This last decade of the 20th century has seen the Japanese economy experience its lowest growth since
the  end  of  the  Second  World  War.  Despite  several  economic  stimulus  measures  from  both  the
monetary and fiscal side, the response of the  economy  has  been  generally  slow  and  we  have  yet  to
confirm  any  clear  revival  of  economic  dynamism  led  by  private  demand.  Taking  into  account  the
weakness of private demand over the past ten years, it is perhaps natural to think that there might be
something “structural” which has contained economic dynamism. If this is the case, it is difficult to
expect a long-lasting recovery, if any, based solely on macroeconomic stimulus measures. Hence, to
restore  vitality  to  the  Japanese  economy  in  the  medium  term,  painstaking  efforts  must  be  made  to
resolve each structural problem so as to enable the nation’s economic potential to fully blossom. And
such efforts are also necessary if both monetary and fiscal policy are to have their full effect.
Since many structural problems stem from the supply side of the economy, resolving them  requires
that  we  send  the  appropriate  signal  and  give  the  right  incentives  to  the  public.  As  evidenced  by
Reaganomics  in  the  U.S.  and  Thatcherism  in  the  U.K.,  supply-side  policies  would  most  likely  be
accompanied by various pains and require a long period until reforms take root among the public and
bear real fruit. It is indeed for this reason that we need to reach an early consensus as to the nature of
the structural problems in Japan and thus come up with the right prescriptions.
Some  say  that  structural  problems  encompass  a  variety  of  issues,  not  only  economic  ones  but  also
demographic, educational, and environmental ones. But, today, I will focus on three economic issues
which are interrelated and have a particularly strong impact on Japan’s macroeconomic performance:
first,  the  delay  in  cleaning  up  the  balance  sheet  of  firms;  second,  changes  in  economic  growth
mechanisms under globalization; and third, the imbalance between savings and investment.
Delay in Cleaning Up the Balance Sheets of Firms
IV.
The  most  immediate  lingering  structural problem  is that  we  have  not  yet  completed the  disposal  of
assets and liabilities that ballooned during the bubble period. In the wake of the bursting of the bubble,
we  first  saw  the  collapse  of  firms  which  had  expanded  their  liabilities  based  on  aggressive
management  plans,  and  then  the  accumulation  of  non-performing  assets  on  the  part  of  financial
institutions.  This,  in  turn,  reduced  the  risk-taking  ability  of  financial  institutions  by  eroding  their
capital position, resulting in impairing the smooth circulation of money in the economy. In addition, a
loss  of  credibility  in  the  financial  system  triggered  by  the  collapse  of  some  financial  institutions
worried  depositors  and  financial  markets  alike,  and  seems  to  have  contributed  to  the  economic
deterioration witnessed during 1997 and 1998 through a worsening of household and corporate sector
confidence.
The disposal of the non-performing assets of financial institutions has made considerable progress, at
least from the accounting viewpoint, thanks to efforts on the part of financial institutions as well as
capital injection into major banks using public funds. Needless to say, financial institutions must make
further efforts, including the removal of non-performing assets from their balance sheets.
It should be noted that balance sheet erosion is not limited to firms which have already gone bankrupt
and the financial institutions which extended loans to them. Although not on the verge of suspending
business,  not  a  few  firms  misjudged  demand  during  the  bubble  period  and  made  large  fixed
investments or launched new businesses which turned out to be totally unprofitable. These firms have
only just been managing to repay the debt while suffering from worsening asset efficiency and a high
debt ratio. The often heard cases of “excess capacity” and “excess debt” have been partly attributed to
the business cycle, but fundamentally they should be interpreted in this context of the debt overhang
from the bubble period.
There  is  little  doubt  that  the  delay  in  cleaning  up  corporate  balance  sheets  lies  behind  the  slow
recovery  of  fixed  investments  despite  extremely  low  interest  rates.  Indeed,  there  are  cases  where
financial institutions have been obliged to be cautious in extending additional loans to firms lagging in
improving  their  financial  condition,  even  if  they  have  new  projects  which  are  expected  to  be
profitable.  It  is  pointed  out  that this is  partly  because financial  technology  is  not  well  developed  in
separating the risk related to a firm from that  related to  a  project  which the firm  undertakes  like  in
project finance. It thus seems unlikely that the Japanese  economy  will  regain  dynamism  without  an
improvement in the balance sheets of the corporate sector.
The U.S. Experience – A Case of “Creative Destruction”
V.
Often  asked  questions  include:  “How  can  the  corporate  sector  scrap  unprofitable  businesses  and
obsolete equipment?” “Once the corporate sector has downsized unprofitable sectors, how will it lead
to revitalization of the whole economy?” To answer these questions, it is perhaps instructive to look at
the  past  20  years’  experience  of  the  U.S.  The  U.S.  faced  such  problems  as  dwindling  productivity
growth  during  the  1970s  and  1980s  and  balance  sheet  adjustment  from  the  late  1980s  to  the  early
1990s. In solving these problems, the U.S. government, particularly since the Reagan administration,
has played a supporting role by promoting deregulation which has led to intensified competition and
industrial revitalization. In the private sector, U.S. firms reviewed their production and management
processes, and made necessary strategic adjustments, which has been labeled “re-engineering”.
Therefore,  to  look  at  developments  in  the  U.S.  is  useful  in  considering  not  only  the  balance  sheet
problem but also the kind of structural adjustment which is conducive to increasing productivity and
restoring economic dynamism to the Japanese economy.
Economic recovery in the U.S. since March 1991 has often been labeled a “jobless recovery” because
it  was  not  initially  accompanied  by  a  significant  increase  in  employment  and  private  consumption.
However, this gradually changed to a full-fledged recovery with an increase in both fixed investment
and  employment,  resulting  in  more  than  eight  years  of  expansion  until  now.  There  are,  admittedly,
various  views  with  respect  to  the  future  of  the  U.S.  economy,  but  it  deserves  attention  that  the
Schumpeterian process of “constructive destruction” has often been cited to have played an important
role in its success to date.
It should be noted that under such slogans as “re-engineering” and “strengthening core competence,”
many  U.S.  firms  have  sold  off  or  scrapped  unprofitable  sectors  and  concentrated  management
resources on profitable ones while taking full advantage of information technology. Such efforts have
been responsible for a rise in their stock prices and laid the ground for further expansion in business
areas  where  they  had  advantages  via  such  methods  as  mergers  and  acquisitions.  At  the  same  time,
many new firms specializing in “high technology” have grown rapidly with the spread of the Internet
against the backdrop of across-the-board  large  increases in investment in  information technology  to
improve  management efficiency. In addition, it helped the economy that those who lost jobs due to
corporate downsizing were smoothly reallocated to such growth areas as software and other services,
including medical and nursing care, in a highly mobile labor market.
With all these factors combined, industrial structure in the U.S. has dramatically changed over the past
10  years.  The  50  years’  history  of  U.S.  industry  since  the  Second  World  War  shows  that  the
companies in major industries remained more or less the same during the 1950s and 1970s, including
the  “Big  Three  in  the  automobile  industry,”  and  the  big  oil  and  steel  companies.  However,  when
comparing the 1990s with the 1970s, a number of firms specializing in “high technology,” which were
not even established 20 years ago, are now listed among the major firms representing U.S. industry.
This simple fact is deemed symbolic of the process of “creative destruction”.
What  about  the  situation  in  Japan?  In  the  1950s  and  the  1960s,  the  textile  industry  and  heavy
industries  such  as steel and  chemicals  developed  as  leading  industries.  In  the  1970s,  the  rise  of  the
automobile and electronics industries substantially changed the lineup of major firms. However, since
the 1970s, there have been no substantial changes.
I  hasten  to  add  that  I  am  not  saying  that  the  Japanese  economy  cannot  grow  unless  new  firms  are
created. There is no doubt that many existing major firms are actively pursuing the development of
new technology. Indeed, in this context, we can find examples of major firms in the U.S. which have
undergone a dramatic transformation from what they were 20 years ago.  Having  said  this,  recalling
Shumpeter’s belief that the function of an entrepreneur in the true sense is not so much to manage as
to create a company, I cannot help but feel slightly disappointed that we have not yet seen the creation
of  many  new  companies  which  can  lead  the  Japanese  economy.  A  main  driving  force  behind  the
buoyant  development  of  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  revitalization  through  intensified  competition,
and,  if  I  may  add  another  factor,  “a  culture  of  risk  taking”.  In  Japan,  while  existing  firms  should
concentrate their management resources on business areas where they have a comparative advantage,
new  industries  or  groups  of  new  firms  should  emerge  to  create  jobs,  thereby  achieving  growth
balancing the old and new. What is important in the process is that capital stock such as equipment
and technology and management resources such as human resources be liquidated and reallocated to
be fully utilized in growing new business areas.
 Changes in the Economic Growth Mechanism under Globalization
VI.
The  second  structural  problem  Japan  has  to  face  is  that  as  globalization  progresses  and  the
shareholdings of foreign investors increase, Japanese corporate managers have come to pursue higher
rates of return rather than expansion. At the same time, rates of return in those industries which had
been  protected  by  regulations  have  been  forced  to  decline.  Together,  these  developments  have  put
heavy adjustment pressure on the existing industrial structure.
Management Pursuing Higher Rates of Return
A.
A  recent  survey  by  the  Economic  Planning  Agency  shows  that  Japanese  corporate  managers  have
clearly  changed  to  now  emphasize  higher  rates  of  return.  Since  economic  stagnation  continues  and
hardly  any  increase  in  sales  is  expected,  it  is  natural  for  corporate  managers  to  pursue  both  higher
return on assets (ROA) and higher return on equity (ROE). In addition, major Japanese firms used to
rely on unrealized gains on shares as a buffer for the unexpected, and were able to remain profitable on
the whole even if substantial losses were incurred in some areas. But, with the stagnant economy and
sluggish stock prices, it became difficult to continue to depend on such unrealized gains, and this also
seems  to  be  partly  responsible  for  the  recent  change  in  attitude  of  corporate  managers  who  now
emphasize rates of return over the short term.
The  data  show  that  the  ROA  of  Japanese  firms  was  an  average  7.8  percent  during  the  1980s,  but
declined to 5.1 percent in the 1990s.1 While this was partly due to the business cycle factor, it is true
that the profitability of Japanese firms has been on a declining trend.
Changes in Economic Growth Mechanisms
B.
One factor behind the declining profitability of Japanese firms is that their balance sheets still carry a
huge amount of assets, either idle or underutilized, which is the negative legacy of the bubble period.
A second factor is that since Japanese firms have long adopted a management style with an emphasis
on maintaining employment, labor’s relative share inevitably rose during the long recession, thereby
squeezing capital’s relative share, which translates into declining profitability. And, a third factor is
that  as  the  economy  becomes  more  globalized,  those  Japanese  industries,  which  had  hitherto  been
protected by various measures such as regulations, are now forced to accept a declining rate of return,
leading to the imminent need for large-scale adjustment of their industrial structure.
Given  the  efforts  made  by  firms,  the  first  two  factors  may  be  mended  over  time.  The  third  factor,
however,  seems  to  stem  from  the  substantial  and  irreversible  structural  changes  that  the  Japanese
economy is currently experiencing.
Let me elucidate on this third factor. Looking at the Japanese economy from a long-term perspective,
we observe the following pattern. There is no doubt that the automobile and electronics industries have
been one of the engines supporting post-war economic development because of the rapid increase in
their  productivity.  By  exposing  themselves  to  international  competition  from  an  early  stage,  these
industries  have  remained  at  the  highest  technological  level  globally  and  enjoyed  high  profitability
through exports. Wages in these industries were raised in line with increased productivity. And, such
an  increase  in  wages  permeated  to  other  domestic  industries  with  lower  productivity,  thereby
improving the standard of living for the nation as a whole. If industries with low productivity try to
pay  the  same  wage  as  those  with  high  productivity,  the  prices  of  products  and  services  in  these
industries inevitably have to be raised. The existence of various regulations and traditional business
practices have contributed to making such price increases possible without much difficulty.
As  the  economy  became  further  globalized  in  the  1990s,  the  traditional  pattern  has  undergone  a
tremendous  change.  What  triggered  the  change  was  that  firms  in  leading  industries  have  expanded
production  overseas and  conducted operations  on  a  global  scale  while  paying  close  attention  to  the
difference in costs at home and abroad. As a result, Japanese workers who had enjoyed high wages
when compared internationally have become exposed, directly or indirectly, to global competition. In
addition,  globalized  firms  which  focus  on  cost  performance  have  pressured  their  domestic
subcontractors  and  service  providers  to  reduce  their  prices,  thereby  threatening  the  profitability  of
domestic industries which had not been operating in a competitive environment. Furthermore, with the
increase  in  travel  overseas,  Japanese  consumers  have  become  conscious  of  the  difference  between
domestic  prices  and  those  abroad.  These  factors,  combined  with  the  progress  of  deregulation,  have
created  a  situation  where  domestic  industries  which  used  to  be  protected  from  competition  find  it
increasingly difficult to secure profits just by raising prices as they used to do. Thus, the traditional
growth  mechanism  whereby  even  low  productivity  industries  could  maintain  a  certain  level  of
profitability has apparently become unsustainable.
Since the trend toward globalization is irreversible, it seems that time alone will not resolve this third
factor responsible for declining profitability. Hence, it should be regarded as one of the most difficult
structural problems facing the Japanese economy. In the U.S., such factors as technological innovation
in  telecommunications  and  intensified  competition  stemming  from  deregulation  are  said  to  have
played  an  important  role  in  improving  productivity.  Crucial  for  Japan’s  economic  future  is  how  to
raise the productivity of industries which have not operated in a competitive environment. The process
1  Based on “Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly” compiled by the Ministry
of Finance.
of “creative destruction” is deemed unavoidable to a certain extent. In this regard, we need to carefully
monitor what happens to employment in the process.
Savings and Investment Imbalance and Shortage of Risk Capital
VII.
As  may  have  become  already  clear,  keys  to  restoring  dynamism  to  the  Japanese  economy  are  the
growth of  new  industries  and  firms  as  well as the  simultaneous  revitalization  of  investment.  In  this
context, one might well ask why a country with one of the highest per capita GDP figures in the world
and  ample  household  savings  totaling  1,300  trillion  yen  finds  it  difficult  to  revitalize  domestic
investment. This brings us to the third structural problem: the savings and investment imbalance.
Decline in Capital Productivity
A.
It  is  rather  ironic  that  as  economic  globalization  progresses  and  cross-border  capital  movements
become free, Japan has become an increasingly uncomfortable place for capital to stay because of its
high level of capital accumulation. With slow growth in the labor force, Japan has accumulated capital
through  aggressive  fixed  investment  since  the  high  growth  period,  which  substantially  raised  the
amount  of  fixed  assets  per  unit  of  labor.  In  fact,  in  the  incessant  pursuit  of  economic  development
since the end of the Second World War, Japan has become a capital rich country, even more so than
the U.S.
We  should be  proud  of  the  fact  that,  through  such  capital  accumulation,  Japan’s  per  capita  GDP  is
among the highest in the world. At the same time, we should be mindful of the fact that the amount of
fixed assets necessary to produce the same GDP has been increasing, that is, the productivity of capital
has  been  declining.  Declining  productivity  of  capital  means  that  the  expected  return  has  been
declining, which is consistent with the downward trend of ROA. From an investor’s viewpoint, this is
the same as saying that capital is not efficiently employed in Japan, which might make investors both
at home and abroad hesitate to invest in Japanese companies. Hence, if Japan increases investments
only  in  existing  areas  to  raise  labor  productivity,  it  will  lead  to  a  further  deterioration  in  capital
efficiency. Therefore, Japanese firms are currently facing a difficult challenge to expeditiously dispose
of the negative legacy from the bubble period while at the same time  exploring  new  business areas
with high profitability and reallocating such resources as capital and labor to them.
High Savings Ratio
B.
The  imbalance  between  savings  and  investment  is  not  a  problem  stemming  exclusively  from  the
investment  side.  The  household  savings  ratio  (on  SNA  basis)  was  more  than  20  percent  in  the
mid-1970s, but declined to around 10 to 15 percent by the end of the 1980s. The future prediction at
that time was generally based on the following life-cycle hypothesis: When Japan becomes an aging
society in the 1990s, older generations will reduce their savings and the household savings ratio will
further  decline,  eventually  resulting  in  the  disappearance  of  Japan’s  huge  current  account  surplus.
However, the reality is that the savings ratio stopped declining in the 1990s and the prediction at that
time has turned out to be wide of the mark.
It does not seem plausible to argue that a high savings ratio, that is, lower consumption than otherwise,
is entirely due to national traits of the Japanese who regard savings a virtue. For example, surveys by
the Prime Minister’s Office and the Bank of Japan suggest that many older people are concerned about
their future livelihood and that they have reduced expenditures because of rising uncertainty regarding
the pension and social welfare system. An increase in such uncertainty  is  also seen  among  younger
generations.  People,  young  and  old  alike,  seem  to  have  been  cutting  back  on  expenditures  and
increasing savings in self-defense to prepare for future uncertainty.
One could say that we are caught in a “double savings” situation: In an aging society with a declining
birth rate, older generations are saving more from their pensions in preparation for future nursing care
needs, while younger generations are actively saving in fear of receiving less from their pensions in
the future. Thus, if the household sector considers it necessary to save more and domestic investments
are losing attractiveness, the economy will inevitably see an expansion of the fiscal deficit and current
account surplus.
To avoid such a situation, it is important to give the public a clear image of the future framework of
the pension system so as to reduce uncertainty as well as to establish a social framework for looking
after the elderly. In view of the fact that caring for the aged can be a business opportunity in the U.S.
and Europe, we should make good use of private sector vitality to create businesses in such areas as
social welfare.
Shortage of Risk Capital
C.
In addition to the high savings ratio, another marked characteristic of household savings behavior in
Japan  is  the  high  proportion  of  savings  held  in  low  risk  assets  such  as  bank  deposits  and  postal
savings. A comparison of the composition of household assets between Japan and the U.S. according
to flow of funds accounts statistics shows that: cash and deposits comprise 55 percent of total assets in
Japan,  but  only  11  percent  in  the  U.S.;  and,  while  the  figure  for  stocks  is  7  percent  in  Japan,  it  is
43 percent  in  the  U.S.  These  figures  vividly  highlight  the  difference  in  risk-taking  attitude  of  the
household  sector  between  Japan  and  the  U.S.  It  seems  that  U.S.  capital  markets,  which  tend  to
promote venture businesses, are supported by such household behavior to no small extent. In Japan,
despite the strong propensity for safe assets, it cannot be denied that how to make firms and financial
products attractive for investment purposes will warrant study.
I stated earlier that capital productivity in Japan is low and thus not attractive for either domestic or
foreign investors. This refers only to the overall trend of the economy thus far. If we closely examine
each  individual  firm  and  project,  there  must  potentially  be  many  investment  opportunities  with  an
appropriate combination of risk and return. There should not be much difference between Japan and
abroad  in  that  even  a  small  firm  will  be  able  to  become  a  big  success  if  it  takes  advantage  of
technological innovation in telecommunications and deregulation. In fact, we may detect some seeds
of new business opportunities in the recent buoyancy of the stock market. To germinate such seeds, it
is  deemed  necessary  to  encourage  new  entry  to  the  market  through  deregulation  which  leads  to
intensified competition and the revitalization of industries, and to create a variety of financial products
through which the abundant savings of the household sector can be smoothly channeled as risk capital
to investments in new businesses.
Concluding Remarks
VIII.
The  Japanese  economy  now  stands  at  a  crossroads  as  to  whether  it  can  move  onto  a  self-sustained
recovery  path.  Needless  to  say,  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  is  important  for  the  smooth
progress  of  structural  adjustment.  We  are  fully  aware  that  monetary  policy  is  expected  to  play  an
important role under such circumstances. With these considerations in mind, we will maintain current
monetary easing until deflationary worries subside.
Having said this, the three structural problems discussed here are determined by supply-side factors,
and cannot be dealt with only by demand stimulus measures from the monetary and fiscal side. For
example, in addressing the corporate balance sheet problem, to what extent firms tackle the allocation
of  management  resources  will  depend  critically  on  the  way  corporate  governance  is  being
implemented. Regarding the changes in growth mechanisms under globalization, whether new firms
emerge to bring innovation to the productivity of existing domestic-oriented industries will depend on
how regulations and traditional transaction practices change and how the capital market functions. As
to the savings and investment imbalance and the provision of risk capital, much may depend on the
future of pension, insurance, and taxation systems.
Since these supply-side measures work on the incentives of firms and households, it thus often takes
time for effects to materialize unlike measures working on the demand side.
Even if it takes time, I am not pessimistic about the future of the Japanese economy. We should be
proud of Japan’s high quality labor force, technology, and managerial ability which enabled the post-
war  economic  recovery.  Such  economic  potential  is  still  intact.  I  believe  that  dynamism  will  be
restored to the Japanese economy if, with appropriate supply-side prescriptions, industries  revitalize
themselves through the transformation of existing firms or the creation of new ones in a competitive
framework conducive to increasing risk-taking activity.
In fact, the government has been examining various measures to tackle unemployment and industrial
revitalization.  And,  in  the  private  sector,  we  can  observe  some  signs  of  future  changes  such  as  the
increase in business affiliations and mergers and the review of business areas. By promoting structural
change,  the  Japanese  economy  will  undoubtedly  exhibit  the  potential  to  transform  itself  into  an
economy with vitality and high productivity.
In coming up with specific supply-side prescriptions, cooperation between the private sector and the
government  is  essential  in  discussing  such  problems  as  how  to  guide  incentives  for  firms  and
households  in  a  desirable  direction  and  how  to  minimize  moral  hazard.  I  sincerely  hope  that  my
speech today will contribute to discussion on the very important problem of structural reform.
