Mr Duisenberg reports on the latest meeting of the ECB Governing Council on 4 March 1999
Introductory statement  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Mr  W  F  Duisenberg,  at  the
press conference in Frankfurt/Main on 4/3/99.
Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here today to report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s
meetings of the Governing Council and of the General Council of the European Central Bank.
Let  me  start  with  the  Governing  Council’s  discussion  on  recent  economic  developments  and  the
decisions that the Governing Council has taken today in the field of monetary policy.
After  a  comprehensive  and  careful  examination  of  recent  trends  and  ongoing  evaluations  of  the
economic outlook for the euro area economy, there was consensus that some of the risks identified
earlier, in particular with regard to real GDP growth, had materialised in the fourth quarter of 1998.
There  was  also  consensus  that  the  impact  of  these  developments  on  the  balance  of  risks  for  price
stability would need to be examined further in the context of the monetary policy strategy adopted by
the  Eurosystem.  At  this  juncture,  taking  into  account  all  the  information  available,  the  Governing
Council confirmed its earlier assessment of the outlook for price stability. Against this background it
decided  that  for  the  main  refinancing  operations  to  be  settled  on  10  and  17  March  1999  the  same
conditions  will  apply  as  for  the  previous  one,  i.e.  they  will  be  fixed  rate  tenders  conducted  at  an
interest rate of 3.0%. In addition, the interest rate on the marginal lending facility will continue to be
4.5% and the interest rate on the deposit facility will remain 2.0%.
Let  me  report  in  some  more  detail  on  the  Governing  Council’s  deliberations,  and  thereby  provide
explanations for the decisions we took today.
Starting  with  the  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area  at  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU,  the
broad monetary aggregate M3 expanded at an annual rate of 5.7% in January 1999, against 4.5% in
December 1998. This upturn was largely due to an acceleration in overnight deposits. This, in turn,
may  be  explained  by  the  low  level  of  interest  rates,  which  also  contributed  to  credit  to  the  private
sector to accelerate further in January 1999 to 9.4% which is particularly notable as other indicators
of the economy are signalling a slowdown in activity.
Monthly data on monetary aggregates can be volatile. M3 growth is therefore monitored on the basis
of  three-month  moving  averages  of  the  12-month  growth  rate  of  M3,  which  stood  at  4.9%  in  the
period from November 1998 to January 1999. This was 0.2 percentage point higher than the figure
recorded in the previous three-month period and is 0.4 percentage point above the reference value of
4½%. Against this background and in view of the uncertainty relating to special factors pertaining to
the  changeover  to  the  Stage  Three  environment  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  Governing
Council  does  not  consider  the  acceleration  of  M3  at  the  start  of  Stage  Three  as  a  signal  of  future
inflationary pressures. However, a close monitoring of monetary developments in the coming months
remains necessary to give more conclusive evidence of the underlying causes and the permanent or
temporary nature of the rise in M3 growth.
Turning to financial indicators, euro area capital markets underwent a correction in February, which
was mainly linked to spillovers from the United States and Japan. This followed a decline in long-
term interest rates in January which had brought bond yields in the euro area to the lowest levels seen
since the late 1940s. The euro area yield curve shifted upwards across the entire maturity spectrum
during February. Let me also point out that the nominal effective exchange rate of the euro area in
early March stood around 1% below its level on 1 February and around 4% below its starting level on
4 January 1999.
At the same time, recent developments appear to have led to a reduction in some of the uncertainties
surrounding  the  evolution  of  the  world  economy  in  1999.  This  mainly  relates  to  the  strong
1
BIS Review   25/1999
performance of the US economy, but may also be due to signs of improvement in the real economies
of some Asian countries. Nevertheless, in the view of the Governing Council, it is too early for a truly
favourable  assessment  of  the  external  environment  for  the  euro  area.  Risks  pertaining  to  external
imbalances,  continuing  risk  aversion  and  the  corresponding  weakness  of  private  long-term  capital
flows and real investment to emerging market economies will need to be examined closely.
In the euro area the latest indicators confirm that those risks which were identified earlier have now
materialised to some extent. According to preliminary and incomplete data from national sources, real
GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  weakened  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1998  when  compared  with  the
previous  quarter.  While  more  precise  estimates  will  soon  become  available  from  Eurostat,  the
evidence available suggests that activity  in  the  euro  area  has  been  slowing  down  in  recent  months.
This is particularly apparent in the production of the manufacturing sector, where output in the fourth
quarter of 1998 fell by almost 1% compared with the previous quarter. These developments broadly
confirm the pattern observed earlier in industrial confidence, which was on a declining trend in the
second half of 1998. The latest data on industrial confidence in the euro area, i.e. those released by
the  European  Commission  today,  indicate  that  industrial  confidence  has  weakened  further.  Some
recent wage developments in the euro area might have contributed to that. The level of unemployment
has remained more or less unchanged over the past four months. Finally, consumer confidence in the
euro area has remained unchanged from the high levels seen at the beginning of the year. With regard
to capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector, which fell further in the fourth quarter of 1998, and
retail sales, which up to November 1998 pointed towards broadly sustained growth, no new data are
yet available.
Overall, with regard to the cyclical situation, recent data confirm our earlier expectations that there
are still downside risks for output growth. The Governing Council will continue its thorough analysis
and  very  close  monitoring  of  underlying  trends  and  review  its  broad  outlook  for  the  euro  area
accordingly on an ongoing basis, taking into account in a forward-looking manner the impact of both
domestic and external developments.
With  regard  to  the  latest  data  on  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP),  the  annual
increase  for  January  1999  was  0.8%,  which  is  unchanged  compared  with  the  previous  two  months
(taking account of the most recent revisions). Looking at a breakdown of the HICP, a slight decline in
the rate  of  increase  in  service  prices  (from  1.9%  in  December  1998  to  1.8%  in  January  1999)  was
offset  by  a  slight  increase  in  goods  prices  (from  0.1%  to  0.2%).  The  fall  in  the  rate  of  change  in
services prices was mainly due to lower price increases for transport and communications; this may
have  been  a  reflection  of  increased  competition  in  these  sectors.  On  the  other  hand,  downward
pressure from energy prices on goods prices diminished somewhat.
On balance, the current  data  continue  to  suggest  that  there  are  no  significant  upward  or  downward
pressures on prices in the short term. The pattern of risks to price stability has also remained broadly
unchanged on balance. On the upward side, wage developments are a matter of concern, as would be
any loosening of fiscal policies and the implications of this for achieving the objectives laid down in
the Stability and Growth Pact. In addition, recent exchange rate trends need to be monitored closely
also in terms of their impact on prices. Concerning downward risks, in particular the slowdown in the
euro  area  economy  is  a  cause  for  concern.  In  conclusion,  taking  the  latest  available  evidence  into
account, at today’s meeting the Governing Council confirmed its assessment regarding the outlook for
price developments. The Governing Council therefore decided to keep ECB interest rates unchanged
at the levels currently prevailing.
I should now like to inform you about some other matters considered today.
The  auction  technique  for  the  longer-term  refinancing  operations  was  reviewed  by  the  Governing
Council  today.  In  its  first  two  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (settled  on  14  January  and  25
February  1999),  which  are  as  a  rule  conducted  by  means  of  variable  rate  tenders,  the  Eurosystem
BIS Review   25/1999
2
applied the single rate (“Dutch”) method of allotment. The single rate method was chosen in order to
encourage less experienced counterparties to participate in the tender. The Governing Council takes
the  view  that  all  interested  counterparties  should  by  now  be  sufficiently  accustomed  to  the  longer-
term refinancing operation also to be in a position to participate in this type of operation under the
more market-oriented multiple rate (“American”) method of allotment. Against this background, the
Governing  Council  has  decided  that  the  multiple  rate  method  of  allotment  will  be  applied  starting
from  the  next  longer-term  refinancing  operation  (to  be  settled  on  25  March  1999),  until  otherwise
indicated.
Finally,  let  me  inform  you  that  the  General  Council  today  discussed  the  monetary  policies  of  the
central banks of the non-participating Member States against the background of the monetary policy
set  by  the  Eurosystem.  As  you  will  know,  the  General  Council  has  taken  over  those  tasks  of  the
European Monetary Institute (EMI) which still have to be performed during Stage Three because of
the derogations of some Member States. One of these tasks relates to strengthening the co-ordination
of  the  monetary  policies  in  the  Community  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  price  stability.  The  General
Council intends to conduct these co-ordination exercises biannually in future.
3
BIS Review   25/1999
