Mr Reddy discusses issues in fixed income markets
Inaugural address by Dr Y V Reddy, a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the seminar
on  fixed  income  markets,  organised  by  the  National  Stock  Exchange  and  ISMA  in  Mumbai  on
11/02/99. (Dr Reddy expresses his gratitude to Dr A Prasad for his valuable assistance.)
I am happy to be with you today at this seminar organised by the National Stock Exchange (NSE)
and the International Securities Market Association (ISMA). The NSE needs no introduction to this
audience. Mr Patil has been, at our request, working closely with the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on
various issues and we value his advice. The NSE also has representatives on a number of committees
looking into different aspects of the market.
ISMA has been performing the role of an effective self regulatory organisation (SRO) and the rules
framed  by  ISMA  have  become  a  benchmark  for  the  fixed  income  securities  market.  Hence,  the
expertise and experience that ISMA has gained over the years would be valuable to us in RBI also as
we continue to develop our markets.
The objective of this seminar is to assess recent changes in the Indian fixed income market, review
the  international  experience  in  the  development  of  this  segment  of  financial  markets  and  flag  the
agenda for future action.
Major reform measures in the financial sector have been undertaken by the Reserve Bank of India
since the beginning of the 1990s. Reform in the government securities market is important in view of
its role in setting benchmarks in the rest of the financial markets. It is also crucial for bringing about
an effective and reliable transmission channel for the use of indirect instruments of monetary control.
A notable change was the switch from administered low coupon government borrowings to auctions
in government securities at market related rates. Introduction of primary dealers has to some extent
improved  the  liquidity  in  the  secondary  market.  Innovative  financial  instruments  were  introduced,
such as zero coupon bonds, floating rate bonds, capital indexed bonds, securities on which payment
is made in instalments, etc. In addition, 14, 91 and 364-day T-bills presented investment avenues for
deployment  of  short-term  funds  to  investors.  Counterparty  risk  in  securities  settlement  has  been
eliminated with the introduction of Delivery versus Payment system (DVP).
I had, in an earlier speech a couple of months ago on debt markets, presented an agenda for further
action,  which  covered,  among  others,  technology,  regulatory  and  legal  issues,  and  the  need  for
standardisation of practices in the debt markets. In fact, only a couple of weeks ago, I spoke at length
on reforms in the money market also. So, perhaps there is no need  to  go  into  the  details  of  either
reform measures or agenda for action in these markets today.
I observe that today’s seminar is structured in three sessions: transparency in fixed income markets,
regulation in repo markets and regulation issues in an integrated market environment. These issues
are of critical  importance  in  the  development  of  the  debt  markets  and  it  may  be  useful  to  quickly
review what we have achieved so far and what needs to be done. I will therefore address only those
issues that are receiving specific attention in the seminar today.
Transparency in fixed income markets
It is widely recognised that weaknesses in the provision and use of information played a major part
in  the  development  and  spread  of  recent  international  financial  crises.  A  number  of  international
groups have since been examining issues relating to the stability of the financial system. One such
working group of The Willard Group examined transparency and accountability issues. This group
has defined transparency as a process by which information about existing conditions, decisions and
actions is made accessible, visible and understandable. Undeniably, transparency contributes to the
efficient  allocation  of  resources  by  ensuring  that  market  participants  have  sufficient  information.
BIS Review   17/1999
– 2 –
This  information  is  meant  to  enable  them  to  identify  risks  and  to  distinguish  one  firm’s
circumstances  from  another’s.  Moreover,  transparency  helps  inform  market  expectations.  In  turn,
this helps stabilise markets during periods of uncertainty and also contributes to the effectiveness of
announced  policies.  However,  admittedly,  there  are  limits  to  transparency.  Some  categories  of
information  are  costly  to  compile.  In  such  cases,  infrequent  disclosure  may  be  justified.  Further,
confidentiality may be warranted in some circumstances.
In determining the appropriate degree of transparency, the benefits must be balanced against costs.
Transparency should not mean that there will be a one-size-fits-all  code  on  this.  Of  course,  in  the
final  analysis,  transparency  will  be  with  reference  to  factors  considered  relevant,  which  itself
depends  on  the  model  for  analysis  that  is  considered  useful.  Also,  transparency  gives  facts,  but
inference  is  a  different  matter  and  a  judgment  based  on  such  inference  is  yet  another  matter.
Personally, I believe that transparency is primarily the best test of our good intentions.
Hence, the Reserve Bank of India is disseminating exhaustive information relating to activities, both
in  the  primary  and  secondary  markets,  especially  the  government  securities  market.  For  instance,
detailed results of auctions of T-bills and dated governments securities including weighted average
price,  devolvement  on  primary  dealers  and  RBI,  and  information  on  fixed  rate  repos  are  issued
through  regular  press  statements.  The  RBI  also  issues  a  daily  press  release  giving  details  of
secondary market transactions in the government securities markets. In addition to information on T-
bills  and  dated  government  securities,  the  monthly  RBI  Bulletin  and  the  Weekly  Statistical
Supplement  to  the  RBI  Bulletin  contain  information  relating  to  open  market  operations  and  repo
transactions  of  the  RBI.  The  RBI  website,  which  has  been  appreciated  by  many,  as  emulating
international standards in excellence, also contains up-to-date information on financial markets.
Until 1994, the debt market was purely a telephone market meaning that all trades were negotiated
and  concluded  directly  by  investors.  The  NSE  introduced  a  screen-based  trading  system  with  the
objective of increasing transparency in the market. But the general  experience  is  that  while  actual
trade is still negotiated over the counter, mere reporting is done through  such  a  system.  However,
greater use of the online trading system is required rather than a mere reporting of trades in order to
enhance transparency. Success will depend mainly on an increase in the number of transactions. A
large  number  of  transactions  would  result  in  a  successful  continuous  order  book  for  matching  the
trades. If the negotiated telephone deals are moved to a screen-based system, full information about
volume and price of transacted security would be available online. This would result in better price
discovery and promote transparency and efficiency in the market.
Currently, the daily available information to the market regarding secondary market trades is based
on  actual  settlement  through  Subsidiary  General  Ledger  on  a  particular  date.  This  may  not
necessarily  reflect  a  deal  concluded  on  the  same  date  as  the  SGL  transfer  form  has  to  be  lodged
within 24 hours of the contract but not necessarily on the date of actual deal. Thus, an information
gap  exists  between  the  deal  date,  contract  date  and  actual  settlement  date.  Screen-based  trading
would obviate this shortcoming.
The RBI is actively coordinating with the Primary Dealers Association in developing an Electronic
Dealing  System  to  facilitate  dealing  in  money  market,  government  securities  and  other  debt
instruments. This will lend transparency and efficiency to market operations. It will also enable the
RBI to monitor developments in the market online.
The RBI has embarked on computerisation of its Public Debt Offices. This would link Public Debt
Offices  in  the  RBI  with  banks’  treasury  offices.  Hopefully,  primary  dealers/satellite  dealers,  other
SGL account holders and stock exchanges will also be linked.
BIS Review   17/1999
– 3 –
There  is  enormous  advantage  in  providing  member  terminals  to  SGL  account  holders  as  this  will
enable them to view RBI announcements regarding fresh auction, floatation of issue, conversion of
loans,  repo  auctions,  interest  rate  resets  for  floating  bonds  and  other  such  information.  Market
participants will also be able to tender bids in auctions of dated government securities, T-bills and
repos  from  all  centres.  The  entire  auction  process,  including  allotment,  determining  and
communicating  payment  amount,  and  advising  successful  and  rejected  bids  to  bidders,  will  be
online. The list of successful bidders and the consideration amount payable would form the input to
the settlement and servicing system.
While  the  link-up  has  advantages,  it  can  be  made  operational  only  through  electronic  SGL  forms.
Early  enactment  of  the  new  Government  Securities  Act  replacing  the  Public  Debt  Act  1944  is
essential  since  it  will  provide  the  RBI  with  substantive  powers  to  design  and  introduce  electronic
SGL transfer forms.
Regulation in the repo market
In our market, interbank repos are permitted under regulated  conditions.  After  the  irregularities  in
securities transactions in 1992, eligible participants and instruments have generally been  restricted
but subsequently liberalised in a gradual  manner.  Now,  all  government  securities  have  been  made
eligible  for  repo.  Besides  banks,  primary  dealers  are  allowed  to  undertake  repo/reverse  repo
transactions. Nonbank participants have also recently been allowed to lend money through reverse
repo to other eligible participants. In terms of instruments, repos have also been permitted in PSU
bonds and private and corporate debt securities, provided they are held in dematerialised form in a
depository and the transactions are done through a recognised stock exchange. However, this can be
operationalised after the government issues a clarification regarding applicability of stamp duties on
transactions in dematerialised instruments.
Admittedly,  the  interbank  repo  market  in  India  needs  to  be  made  more  transparent  and  better
standardised.  I  have,  time  and  again,  been  encouraging  market  participants  to  evolve  code  of  best
practices in the repo market through  the  Primary  Dealers  Association  or  FIMMDAI.  The  RBI  has
also been actively pursuing this issue in the Advisory Committee on Government Securities market
and the Standing Committee on Money Market. Issues relating to evolving a code of best practice
such as eligibility of participants and their requirements, eligibility of instruments for repo, general
standards,  systems  and  documentation,  legal  agreement,  margin,  deal  confirmations,  and  default
scenario were discussed in the recent meeting of the Standing Committee on Money Market held on
February  3,  1999.  In  fact,  pursuant  to  the  discussions  on  the  same  subject  in  the  meeting  of
Technical  Advisory  Committee  on  Government  Securities  Market  held  in  November  1998,  an
internal  subgroup  of  that  committee  is  already  looking  into  various  aspects  of  repo  market
expansion,  including  issues  comprising  legal  status,  regulatory  framework,  standardisation  of  repo
contracts  and  accounting  system  and  introduction  of  tripartite  repos.  The  subgroup  is  expected  to
complete its report by mid-March 1999. We expect that a standard repo agreement will emerge very
soon from the subgroup’s recommendations. We also expect the participants to adopt them once it is
considered appropriate by the RBI.
In this connection, I wish to recall that the RBI announced in the October 1998 review of monetary
policy  that  call/notice/term  money  market  should  purely  be  an  interbank  market  with  additional
access only to primary dealers. This implies that nonbank players have to be encouraged to deploy
their short-term surpluses in other money market instruments. For instance, they can be allowed to
borrow  and  lend  freely  through  repos  in  both  government  and  non-government  securities.  Thus,
development of repo market assumes increased significance in the interest of further reforms in the
financial markets.
BIS Review   17/1999
– 4 –
Issues in regulation under an integrated market environment
In an integrated market, the regulatory framework should ensure that there are no regulatory overlaps
or  regulatory  gaps  in  the  financial  system.  The  Deshpande  Committee  highlighted  these  gaps  and
overlaps and recommended amendment to Section 29A of the Securities Contract (Regulation) Act
1956 to enable the government to provide jurisdiction to the RBI also in regulation over money and
debt markets. With this, the respective regulatory roles of the RBI and SEBI in the debt market will
be formalised. The proposed change in the SCRA is bound to pave way for a much more active repo
market.
In the PSU and corporate bond market, an important issue relates to large resources raised through
private placement. No doubt, private placements offer a number of advantages. However, this market
remains  largely  unregulated.  Healthy  development  of  the  private  placement  market  calls  for  more
transparency, better disclosure and protection of investor interests.
A  liberalised  and  integrated  market  environment  also  means  that  risks  get  transmitted  from  one
segment of the market to another more rapidly. Market participants have to ensure that proper risk
management systems are in place. In India, banks are the major players in the financial markets. The
RBI has already circulated draft guidelines for ALM for banks, which indicate prudential limits for
call borrowings. These guidelines will be operative from April 1, 1999.
Conclusion
As I mentioned at the beginning, I have flagged some issues that are currently engaging our attention
in the fixed income market. I trust that these and other issues would be deliberated upon later during
the day. I would be happy to have feedback from the organisers about the outcome of the seminar.
 BIS Review   17/1999
