Mr Duisenberg  offers his view on the role of the European Central Bank in a united Europe
Speech by the President of the European Central Bank, Dr W F Duisenberg, at the National Bank of
Poland in Warsaw on 4 May 1999.
 Introduction
 First and foremost, I should like to congratulate the National Bank of Poland (the NBP) on its 75th
anniversary. The age of the NBP already suggests that as the President of the European Central Bank
(ECB), an institution that is even less than one year old and has only been conducting monetary policy
since January this year, I should be modest. I am aware that the role of the NBP has not been constant
over these 75 years and that in the past decade, in particular, the NBP has gone through a remarkable
restructuring  process.  My  previous  central  bank,  de  Nederlandsche  Bank,  has,  together  with  the
International Monetary Fund and many national central banks, been involved in assisting the NBP in
its efforts to adapt to the role of a central bank in a market economy. Of course, the real work had to
be done by you yourselves and I believe you can be proud of what has been achieved over the past
decade.
 Today in my speech I should like to focus on the role of the ECB, as a truly European institution.
First  of  all,  I  shall  explain  the  background  against  which  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the
establishment of the ECB should be considered. Thereafter, I shall discuss the main features of the
institutional  structure  that  determines  monetary  policy-making.  I  shall  then  turn  to  our  monetary
policy  strategy  and  the  role  of  accountability  and  transparency  in  this  strategy.  I  shall  conclude  by
briefly addressing the issue of EU enlargement.
 The process of European integration
 On  1  January  of  this  year  the  euro  was  introduced  in  11  countries  with  a  combined  population  of
almost 300 million. The ECB started to conduct a single monetary policy for the so-called euro area.
Former national currencies, such as the French franc and the German Mark are no longer autonomous
currencies, but subdivisions of the euro. Euro banknotes and coins will only be introduced in 2002.
 The voluntary transfer of monetary sovereignty from the national to the European level is unique in
history. However, it should not be seen as a single, isolated event. The introduction of the euro is part
of the process of European integration. This process started shortly after the second World War and
has now been under way for more than half a century. The aims of European integration are not only,
or even primarily, economic. Indeed, this process has been driven and continues to be driven by the
political conviction that an integrated Europe will be safer, more stable and more prosperous than a
fragmented Europe. It is true that economic integration has been the main engine of this process and
that, although it has had its ups and downs, integration has delivered important economic benefits. On
balance it has been successful.
 The introduction of the euro and the establishment of the ECB are important new steps in this process
of European integration. They are not the completion of this process, for at least two reasons. First,
the launch of the euro can be compared to the launch of a rocket. A good launch is crucial, but only
the beginning of the mission. The euro has been launched successfully. The challenge now is to make
it a success. This will not happen automatically, but will require effort on the part of many authorities,
institutions and people. Second, four EU Member States have not (yet) introduced the euro. I hope
that this will happen in the future. Moreover, as you are aware, the EU itself is likely to increase its
membership over time, also to include Poland. Ultimately, this is bound to extend the euro area. This
process,  too,  is  already  requiring  and  will  continue  to  require  great  efforts:  no  pain,  no  gain,  as  is
often the case.
1
BIS Review  49/1999
 The institutional framework of the single monetary policy
 Let me now turn to the institutional framework for the conduct of the single monetary policy. This
was laid down in the Treaty establishing the European Community, the so-called Maastricht Treaty,
and the Statute of the ESCB, which is an integral part of this Treaty. According to the Treaty the ECB
has the primary objective of maintaining price stability. Without prejudice to this objective, it is to
support the general economic policies in the Community, with objectives such as economic growth
and high employment.
 Decisions on monetary policy are made by the Governing Council of the ECB. This body comprises
the six executive directors of the ECB and the 11 governors of the national central banks (NCBs) of
the Member States which have introduced the euro. These 17 people meet every fortnight at the ECB,
in Frankfurt am Main. Decision-making on monetary policy is fully centralised. All members of the
Governing Council have one vote, whether they come from Germany or Luxembourg. This is because
of an important principle. They are not representing their country, but are obliged to take decisions on
the basis of euro area-wide considerations. Regional or national monetary policy does not and cannot
exist  in  the  euro  area.  There  is  only  one,  single  monetary  policy  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.
Therefore,  the  ECB  should  develop  into  a  truly  European  institution.  This  is  a  process  that  will
inevitably take some time, but my feeling is that we are already making good progress.
 The execution of monetary policy is to a great extent decentralised. It is in large part carried out by
the NCBs. The ECB and the 11 NCBs together are referred to as the Eurosystem. If we refer to the
ECB and the 15 NCBs of all EU Member States, we speak of the European System of Central Banks
(ESCB).  The  General  Council  of  the  ECB  meets  quarterly  and  comprises  the  President  and  Vice-
President of the ECB and the 15 governors of the NCBs of all the EU Member States. This body does
not make decisions on monetary policy, but discusses issues concerning the relationship between the
“ins”  and  the  countries  I  prefer  to  call  “pre-ins”,  such  as  exchange  rate  issues.  The  third  decision-
making body of the ECB is the Executive Board of the ECB, comprising the six executive directors of
the  ECB.  The  Executive  Board  is  responsible  for  current  business  and  the  implementation  of
monetary policy as decided by the Governing Council. The staff of the ECB will, in the course of this
year, reach a level of between 750 and 800 and is likely to grow further in the years ahead.
 The ECB is one of the most, if not the most, independent central bank in the world. Its independence
and  that  of  the  participating  national  central  banks  are  firmly  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty.
Members  of  the  Governing  Council  are  not  allowed  to  take  or  seek  instructions  from  anybody,
politicians included. Politicians are not allowed to give such instructions. Members of the Governing
Council have a term of office of at least five years. The ECB is financially independent.
 The independent status of the ECB fits into the recent worldwide trend of granting independence to
central  banks.  This  tendency  is  evidenced  by  both  practical  experience  and  academic  research.  By
shielding  monetary  policy  decisions  from  political  interference,  price  stability  can  be  maintained
without having to give up economic growth. Indeed, in that sense having an independent central bank
is a good thing for all concerned. The reason for central bank independence is that monetary policy-
making under the influence of politicians tends to focus too much on short-term considerations. This
can  easily  lead  to  temporary,  non-sustainable  increases  in  growth,  but  inevitably  results  in  lasting
increases in inflation with no lasting gains in growth and employment at all. Politicians all over the
world have come to realise this and have decided to remove the temptation to pursue short-term gains
and to make their central bank independent. It should be underlined that granting this independence is,
as it should be, a political decision. An independent central bank needs a clear legal mandate.
 The monetary policy strategy
BIS Review   49/1999
2
 The ECB has, as I mentioned earlier, such a mandate. However, the Treaty does not specify how the
ECB should pursue its primary objective of maintaining price stability; in other words: it is silent on
what is called the monetary policy strategy. The ECB therefore formulated its strategy in the second
half of last year. That was no easy task. The introduction of the euro constitutes a structural break,
which may change the behaviour of firms and individuals and make it less predictable. To a certain
extent it is comparable to what Poland experienced when it embarked on its reform process. The rules
of the game change and this makes policy-making more complicated. Our monetary policy strategy
has  taken  these  specific  circumstances  into  account.  It  is  tailored  to  this  unique  period  of  the
introduction of the euro, although it has elements of both monetary targeting and inflation targeting.
 In the context of this strategy the ECB has provided a quantitative definition of price stability. Price
stability is defined as a year-on-year increase in the harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) of
below 2% for the euro area as a whole. Price stability is to be maintained in the medium term.
 The  strategy  consists  of  two  pillars.  The  first  pillar  is  a  prominent  role  for  money.  Ultimately,
inflation is a monetary phenomenon. It is in the end result of too much money chasing too few goods.
Therefore, we have formulated a reference value for the growth of a broad monetary aggregate, M3,
of 4 ½% on an annual basis. Growth of the money stock at this pace would provide the economy with
sufficient liquidity for growth in activity in line with trend growth, without inflation. At the end of
this  year  this  figure  will  be  reviewed.  It  should  be  emphasised  that  we  did  not  define  a  target  for
money growth. The reason for this is the structural break that the introduction of the euro creates. By
calling  this  a  reference  value,  it  is  made  clear  that  money  is  one  variable  which  we  look  at  very
carefully in order to examine whether inflationary or deflationary pressures are tending to emerge. We
do not, however, react mechanistically to changes in money growth.
 The formulation of the second pillar is also prompted by the potential changes in economic behaviour
on account of the introduction of the euro. It is a broadly based assessment of the outlook for price
developments on the basis of an analysis of monetary, financial and economic developments. In this
context interest rates, the yield curve, wage developments, public finance, the output gap, surveys of
economic sentiment and many other indicators are analysed. Use is also made of forecasts produced
by other bodies and internally for inflation and other economic variables.
 This  brings  me  to  the  role  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  in  our  strategy.  Since  our  primary
objective is price stability and since the euro area as a whole is a relatively closed economy with an
export share of 14% of gross domestic product, we do not have a target for the exchange rate of the
euro, for example, against the US dollar. This does not mean, and it is good to underline this once
more, that the ECB is indifferent to the external value of the euro or even neglects it. The external
value of the euro is one of the indicators we look at in the broadly based assessment of the outlook for
price  developments.  Within  that  framework,  we  constantly  monitor  exchange  rate  developments,
analyse them and shall act on them, if and when this becomes necessary. However, such action will
never be mechanistic, nor will it be isolated. The external value of the euro and its development are
analysed and considered in the context of other indicators of future price developments. The ECB also
tries  to  assess  international  confidence  in  the  still  very  young  euro.  Of  course,  the  level  of
international confidence in the euro is not the only factor determining  its  external  value,  nor  is  the
exchange rate the only indicator of confidence in the euro. It is, for instance, encouraging to see how
the euro has been received on the international money and capital markets. I am sure that an internally
stable euro will also strongly underpin international confidence in  this  currency,  as  it  has  for  other
currencies in the past.
 As the currency of a very large area, the issue of the international role of the euro naturally arises.
The ECB takes a neutral stance regarding this role. It will neither be stimulated, nor hindered. On the
one hand, an international currency has advantages for citizens in the euro area, on the other, it may
sometimes  complicate  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  when  a  large  amount  of  euro  is  circulating
outside the euro area. We shall leave the development of the international role of the euro to market
3
BIS Review   49/1999
participants and market forces. If history is a guide as to what will happen, there will be a gradual
process  whereby  the  euro  will  have  an  increasingly  international  role.  Such  a  gradual  development
would  also  be  a  welcome  development,  if  only  to  prevent  the  euro  from  becoming  too  strong
externally  at  some  point  in  time.  It  is  likely  and  understandable  that  interest  in  the  euro  is  already
considerable  in  those  countries  aspiring  to  join  the  EU,  including  Poland.  I  shall  elaborate  on  this
issue at the end of my speech.
 Coming back to our monetary policy strategy, I should like to point out that it is important to make
clear what monetary policy can and cannot do. Monetary policy can maintain price stability, but only
in  the  medium  term.  In  the  short  term  prices  are  also  influenced  by  non-monetary  developments.
Moreover,  monetary  policy  measures  only  have  an  impact  on  prices  with  long,  variable  and  not
entirely predictable time-lags of between 1.5 and 2 years. Therefore, monetary policy-making should
have a forward-looking character. Today’s inflation is the result of past policy measures, and current
policy  measures  only  affect  future  inflation.  The  uncertainty  of  the  economic  process  in  a  market
economy  is  another  reason  for  policy-makers  to  be  modest.  The  ECB  does  not  pursue  an  activist
policy. Precise steering of the business cycle or a cyclically-oriented monetary policy are not feasible
and are likely to destabilise rather than stabilise the economy. Some commentators have interpreted
our recent interest rate reduction as a change to a more cyclically-oriented monetary policy strategy.
This is not true. Our strategy was, is and shall remain medium term-oriented and firmly focused on
maintaining the price stability which currently prevails in the euro area.
 Monetary  policy  should  be  supported  by  sound  budgetary  policies  and  wage  developments  in  line
with  productivity  growth  and  taking  into  account  the  objective  of  price  stability.  Otherwise,  price
stability  can  only  be  maintained  at  a  high  cost  in  terms  of  lost  output  and  employment.  This  also
explains why independence should not mean isolation. It is important to have a regular exchange of
information and views with other policy-makers. The Maastricht Treaty stipulates that the President
of the ECB is invited to meetings of the EU Council meeting in the composition of the Ministers of
Economy  and  Finance  whenever  there  are  issues  on  the  agenda  which  are  relevant  to  the  ECB’  s
tasks.  The  President  of  the  Council  of  Ministers  and  a  member  of  the  European  Commission  may
attend meetings of the Governing Council, although they do not have the right to vote. The President
of the Council of Ministers may submit motions for deliberation. Apart from these formal contacts,
there are many informal contacts, for example in the context of the so-called Euro-11 group of finance
ministers from the euro area countries. I regularly attend meetings of this group.
 Monetary policy cannot be used to solve structural problems, such as the unacceptably high level of
unemployment in the euro area. Structural problems call for structural solutions, in this case measures
targeted at making labour and product markets work more flexibly. The best contribution the ECB’s
monetary  policy  can  make  in  this  context  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  In  this  way  one  of  the
conditions for sustainable growth in incomes and employment is created. As important as this is, it
should  be  realised  that  jobs  are  created  by  firms  which  are  confident  about  the  future  and  not  by
central banks.
 Accountability and transparency
 Accountability for policies is the logical complement to independence in a democratic society. The
Maastricht Treaty includes a number of provisions in this respect. First, there is the mandate to pursue
price  stability.  This  provides  a  qualitative  measure  against  which  the  ECB’s  performance  can  be
measured. As I have already mentioned, we have decided to enhance this by providing a quantitative
definition of price stability. One of the aims of publishing our monetary policy strategy is to make our
policy decisions transparent.
 The ECB has to publish an annual report in which, inter alia, the monetary policy of the previous and
current  year  are  discussed.  I  present  this  Annual  Report  to  the  EU  Council  and  to  the  European
Parliament, which may hold a general debate on the basis of it. The President and other members of
BIS Review   49/1999
4
the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  may  be  heard  by  the  competent  committees  of  the  European
Parliament. I have agreed to appear before the European Parliament at  least  four  times  a  year.  The
ECB has to report on its activities at least quarterly. It has been decided to go beyond this requirement
and to publish a monthly bulletin.
 It is my view that the main way to achieve accountability is through being transparent and open. In
passing, I should like to note that transparency also enhances the effectiveness of a central bank. The
better it is understood, the more successful a central bank is. Apart from the activities I have already
mentioned,  transparency  is  achieved  in  several  ways.  Every  month,  after  the  first  meeting  of  the
Governing  Council,  the  Vice-President  and  I  give  a  press  conference.  I  start  the  conference  with  a
comprehensive  introductory  statement,  in  which  I  explain  the  decisions  taken  by  the  Governing
Council  and  the  underlying  analysis  and  arguments  for  and  against.  This  introductory  statement  is
published immediately on the ECB’s Internet  Web  site.  This  is  followed  by  a  question  and  answer
session attended by several hundred journalists. The questions and answers are also published on the
Internet shortly afterwards. All the members of the Governing Council frequently make speeches, give
interviews and contribute to journals and books. Thousands of people visit the ECB and the national
central banks each year and, for our part, we and our staff attend many conferences and other public
events.
 EU enlargement
 The  European  integration  process  continues.  The  euro  should  be  made  a  success.  I  have  already
explained how we have started the process of doing that. Some observers have criticised the EU for its
“obsession with its own internal dynamics”, in particular in the context of European Economic and
Monetary  Union  (EMU).  With  all  energies  focused  on  meeting  the  convergence  criteria  and  the
preparation for the launch of the euro, Europeans outside the EU have wondered whether EMU and
enlargement are not mutually exclusive objectives.
 Let me briefly comment on this issue. After the historic decision to complete the  European  Single
Market in the 1980s, it was felt that economic integration should not stop at that point. To fully reap
the rewards of economic integration within the Community, a single currency was felt necessary; a
logic pointedly encapsulated in the title of one report: “One market, one money”.
 Hence, the underlying idea of EMU was to advance European integration and to ensure that full use
would be made of the economic potential of the Single Market. This idea continues to be the focus of
European  policy-makers,  as  evidenced  by  the  association  agreements  and  the  ongoing  accession
negotiations with a number of European countries, Poland among them. Good and mutually beneficial
economic  relations  with  third  countries  in  Europe  and  further  afield  are  a  pillar  of  EU  policy
orientation.  Recognising  this,  the  principles  of  an  open  market  economy  with  free  competition  are
enshrined  in  the  Treaty  on  European  Union.  EMU  will  not  weaken  this  commitment,  but  rather
reinforce  it.  Closer  co-operation  in  Europe  and  the  respect  of  common  principles  in  the  political,
economic  and  social  fields  are  likely  to  form  the  basis  for  further  integration.  The  ECB  shall
contribute to this process within the scope of its responsibility.
 Countries wishing to deepen their monetary co-operation to the ultimate extent possible by forming a
monetary union will have to adapt their economic and legal systems to the standards required by the
Treaty and aim at a sufficient degree of economic convergence. In the absence of these conditions,
adjustment costs for both current and new participants could be high. Any premature decision on the
adoption  of  the  euro  could  have  severe  repercussions  on  a  country’s  competitiveness  and  trigger
painful economic adjustments. Therefore, implementation of the necessary institutional reforms and
of  a  sufficient  degree  of  convergence  should  not  be  considered  as  an  obstacle  preventing  further
integration in Europe, but rather as an essential means of ensuring the lasting success of EMU, for
existing and new participants alike. Looking at the impressive progress made in a relatively short time
5
BIS Review   49/1999
in  this  country,  there  is  no  reason  to  be  pessimistic  about  Poland’  s  chances  of  meeting  these
standards and convergence criteria. I shall not venture, however, to predict when this will be the case.
 Even at the current juncture, though, EMU in one part of Europe is already having an impact on the
whole region. Let me briefly mention two aspects:
•  If  the  euro  emerges,  as  I  believe  it  will,  as  a  strong  and  stable  currency,  it  will  provide  the
countries in the region with an important reference currency, an anchor towards which, should
the intention arise, monetary policy could credibly be oriented.
•  Furthermore,  EMU  is  set  to  bring  about  the  development  of  a  truly  unified  European  financial
market, close to that of the United States in depth and sophistication. The competitive pressures
of this euro area financial market will create more favourable financing conditions for borrowers.
A  number  of  central  and  eastern  European  countries  have  already  successfully  tapped  this
market.
 In view of these effects, it is altogether natural that the ECB has started to follow with great interest
economic and financial developments in the wider Europe, particularly in those countries which have
applied  for  EU  membership.  Moreover,  the  ECB  monitors  closely  the  exchange  rate  developments
with those countries which have established some form of exchange rate link to the euro.
 The euro has the potential to become more than just a new currency for almost 300 million people in
11 countries. It may also become a unifying symbol, standing for all that the peoples of Europe have
in common. Consequently, the public perception of the euro could endow the single currency with a
role in the European integration process reaching beyond monetary policy in the strict sense. May the
euro  contribute  to  the  establishment  of  what  the  preamble  to  the  Treaty  Establishing  the  European
Community calls: “an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe” .
BIS Review   49/1999
6
