Mr George talks about monetary policy in the United Kingdom: The Economic Prospect
Text of the Chancellor’s Lecture delivered by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr E A J
George, at Hertfordshire University on 18/02/99.
As you would expect of a central banker I will talk about monetary policy – under the title of
“The  Economic  Prospect”.  I  will  begin  by  explaining  what  it  is  that  we  are  trying  to  do
through  monetary  policy;  then  I’ll  describe  how  we’ve  been  doing,  where  we  are  now,  and
where we might be headed.
What we are trying to do
So let me begin with what it is that we are trying to do.
In one sense that’s very easy to explain these days. The previous Conservative Government
had already in 1992 defined the objective of monetary policy in terms of a target rate for retail
price  inflation.  The  new  Labour  Government,  immediately  on  assuming  office,  similarly
defined the objective in terms  of  an  inflation  target,  but  went  an  important  step  further.  As
soon as Gordon Brown became Chancellor of the Exchequer, in May 1997, he announced that
he would no longer exercise his powers to set short-term interest rates, which is the heart of
monetary policy, but instead he would set the inflation target, and delegate the achievement of
that target to a new Monetary Policy Committee to be established in the Bank of England.
This position was subsequently formalised in the new Bank of England Act which came into
effect in June of last year. That Act now defines the Bank’s objective as “the maintenance of
price stability, and, subject to that, to support the Government’s economic policy, including its
objectives for growth and employment”.
Under  the  Act  the  Chancellor  tells  the  Bank  what  precisely  we  are  to  understand  by  “price
stability” and he has done this by setting a target of 2½%  for  a  particular  measure  of  retail
price inflation (RPIX – which is the RPI excluding mortgage interest payments); and although
the Act provides for the Chancellor to set the target each year, the expectation is that it is in
practice set for the medium to longer term. That is the political decision. The task of achieving
that target – the technical implementation of monetary policy – is then delegated, transparently
and accountably, to the MPC. The Government no longer has the power – as it had under the
1946 Bank of England Act – to issue directions to the Bank in the field of monetary policy,
except, in the terms of the new Act, “in extreme economic circumstances”.
So  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  these  days,  in  this  immediate  sense,  could  hardly  be
clearer; and that objective is accepted across a broad part of the political spectrum.
But it is important to understand that this objective – of permanent effective price stability – is
not simply an end in itself.
Now a lot of people think that, because our objective is defined in terms of an inflation target,
controlling  inflation  is  all  that  we  at  the  Bank  of  England  actually  care  about.  We’re  often
described as a lot of “inflation nutters”, or even as “pointy-headed industrial hooligans” who
don’t  care  at  all  about  real  economic  activity  or  jobs  –  and  I  don’t  think  these  epithets  are
necessarily intended as terms of endearment! That view I have to tell you is profoundly and
fundamentally wrong.
1
BIS Review   19/1999
The implication, of those who take that view, is that they think there is a trade-off between
inflation  and  the  rate  of  economic  growth;  they  think  that  if  only  we  would  let  up  a  bit  on
controlling  inflation  then  we  could  all  enjoy  higher  activity  and  lower  unemployment  and
rising living standards, which are, of course, the really good things of economic life. At the
very least, they say, if you were a bit less manic  in  your  pursuit  of  low  inflation,  we  could
avoid some of the worst damage that is currently being inflicted upon agriculture, upon large
parts of manufacturing, and even some service sectors.
And that might even be true for a time. The trouble is that, in anything other than the short
term,  it  would  be  likely  to  mean  more  rather  than  less  economic  damage,  and  lower  rather
than higher growth and employment.
Often in the past in this country we behaved as if we thought that promoting higher growth
and employment – which I repeat is, of course, what we all want to see – was largely a matter
of pumping up demand. We paid too little attention to the structural, supply-side, constraints.
All too often we tried to buy faster growth and higher employment at the expense of just a bit
more inflation. But that was like trying to squeeze a quart out of a pint pot. And you all know
the result: inflation accelerated, often accompanied by a worsening balance of payments, until
it could only be brought back under control – as eventually it had to be brought back under
control  –  by  pushing  up  interest  rates  dramatically  and  forcing  the  economy  into  recession.
We get uptight these days when interest rates rise by ¼%: it was only 14 years ago that we
were driven to increase interest rates by 4% in the space of 17 days. I don’t need to remind
you – or perhaps I do – of the really miserable social as well as economic consequences, as
right  across  the  economy  people  lost  their  jobs,  their  businesses  and  their  homes.  But  even
more insidiously, repeated experience of boom and bust produced a pervasive short-termism
in  business  behaviour,  which  infected  both  industry  and  finance,  and  both  employers  and
employees, however much we all like to blame everyone else. The reality during this period
was  that  everyone  was  tempted  to  grab  as  much  as  they  could  while  the  going  was  good,
because they knew it would not last.
But we have learned from that experience. We’ve learned that in anything other than the short
term there really is no trade-off between growth and inflation. What we are trying to do now
through  monetary  policy  is  to  keep  overall  demand  in  the  economy  growing  continuously
broadly  in  line  with  the  supply-side  capacity  of  the  economy  –  as  a  whole  –  to  meet  that
demand. Both the previous Government and the present one set a low inflation target as the
immediate objective of monetary policy, not as an end in itself, but in effect as a barometer of
our success in keeping demand in line with supply. So the real aim of monetary policy these
days is to achieve stability across the economy as a whole in this much wider sense.
Now, there is not a lot, frankly, that we can do, directly through monetary policy, to affect the
supply side – the underlying rate of growth that can be sustained without causing inflation to
rise.  That  depends  ultimately  on  the  ingenuity,  the  productivity,  and  the  flexibility,  of  the
economy, though it can, of course, be influenced by the whole raft of Government policies,
ranging  from  education  and  health,  through  taxation  and  social  security,  to  the  balance
between regulation in all its forms, including regulation of the labour market, and productive
efficiency.  Like  the  setting  of  the  objective  of  monetary  policy,  these  are,  of  course,  quite
rightly, matters for elected politicians.
Monetary policy operates on the demand side. And the best help that we can give is to keep
overall demand consistently in line with supply-side capacity – symmetrically not letting it run
BIS Review   19/1999
2
above capacity but not letting it fall below capacity either – as reflected in achievement of the
inflation  target.  That  way  we  can  moderate  rather  than  aggravate  the  unavoidable  ups  and
downs of the business cycle, enabling steadier growth, high levels of employment and rising
living standards to be sustained into the medium and longer term. And if we can do that, then
we will contribute indirectly to the supply side by creating an environment which encourages
more rational, longer-term, decision-making throughout the economy.
So  that,  Chancellor,  is  what  we  are  trying  to  do.  The  debate  about  monetary  policy  is  not
about  the  ends,  it  is  about  the  means.  We  are  every  bit  as  concerned  with  growth  and
employment  as  we  are  about  price  stability  –  as  anyone  in  their  right  mind  must  be.
Permanently  low  inflation  is  a  necessary  means  of  achieving  growth  and  employment
sustained into the medium and long term. I don’t think that any of us at the Bank of England
or on the MPC would get half the satisfaction that we do in fact get from our involvement in
monetary policy, if we thought that controlling inflation was simply an end in itself.
How we’ve been doing
So much, then, for what we are trying to do. How, then, are we doing? Well – whatever you
read  in  the  newspapers  –  the  answer  is  that  since  we  adopted  an  inflation  target  as  the
immediate policy objective, we’ve actually been doing pretty well.
Inflation  over  the  past  six  years  or  so  has  in  fact  averaged  about  2¾%  a  year  on  the  target
measure and it has recently been almost spot on its 2½% target.
But  equally  important,  total  output  in  this  country  has  grown  consistently  for  almost  seven
years – 27 consecutive quarters – up to the final quarter of last year, at an average annual rate
of around 3%, and that is well above our long-term rate of growth of underlying capacity of
some  2-2½%.  We  were,  in  fact,  over  this  period  steadily  reabsorbing  the  economic  slack
created by the earlier recession.
Employment has risen on the most recent figures published yesterday, by some 1.8 mn since
1992, to an all-time high of 27.3 mn. And the unemployment rate is at a near 20-year low, not
just for the UK as a whole, but in nearly every region in the Kingdom.
Encouragingly these developments in the labour market produced only a rather gradual pick-
up in earnings growth compared with past periods of labour market tightening, which was an
important  factor  helping  to  contain  inflation.  And  our  balance  of  payments  remained  in
surplus on the latest available data – for Q3 last year.
Short-term interest rates – which are currently at 5½% – actually peaked last year at 7½%. For
much  of  my  37  years  at  the  Bank  I’d  have  given  my  eye-teeth  for  them  to  trough  at  7½%.
Long-term  interest  rates,  which  have  recently  been  at  around  4½%,  are  lower  than  they’ve
been  since  the  late  1950’s.  That’s  certainly  good  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  though  I
recognise that it does not necessarily feel good to people living on interest on their savings,
even though those savings keep their real value far better than during the earlier period of high
inflation.
The public sector’s balance sheet is in excellent shape compared with most of the rest of the
world – and the Government’s borrowing requirement position is strong and sustainable. And
3
BIS Review   19/1999
the same is true of the balance sheets of the banking system, and of both the household and
corporate sectors.
And on top of all that, England beat the Springboks at rugby – even if our cricketers didn’t do
so well down under!
Yet all that one reads about – all that anyone wants to talk about apparently – is the bad news.
So let me not disappoint you this evening, and now come on to the bad news.
Where are we now?
By around the beginning of 1997 it was becoming clear that we were once again in danger of
having too much of a good thing. Overall output growth needed to moderate if we were not to
run up against overall capacity constraints – particularly in the labour market. In fact output
growth actually picked up during the course of 1997, from a rate of close to 3% to around 4%,
partly under the impact of the windfall effect of building society demutualisation on consumer
spending.  Aggregate  demand  growth,  in  other  words,  needed  to  slow  if  we  were  to  avoid
overheating,  and  that  essentially  was  the  background  to  the  tightening  of  monetary  policy
during 1997 and the first half of 1998.
But there was a major complication. In the autumn of 1996 sterling’s exchange rate against
the  core  European  currencies  started  to  strengthen,  and  by  early  1997  it  had  already
appreciated by some 17% against the deutschemark. Although sterling appreciated rather less
against  the  dollar  –  which  also  strengthened  against  the  core  European  currencies  over  this
period – sterling’s effective exchange rate index (ERI) still rose by some 13.5%. Sterling went
up further against the deutschemark right up until the spring of last year.
It  was  never  entirely  clear  just  why  sterling  –  and  the  dollar  –  strengthened  in  this  way,  or
perhaps more appropriately why the core European currencies weakened, when they did.
It appeared to have little  to  do  with  relative  monetary  conditions  between  the  Anglo-Saxon
countries and the Continent. It may have had more to do with market perceptions – or market
misperceptions – about the future prospects for the euro. Financial markets appeared at that
time  to  take  the  view  that  European  Monetary  Union  was  being  driven  increasingly  by
political  determination  –  even  if  that  meant  softening  the  interpretation  of  the  economic
convergence  criteria  written  into  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  They  concluded  that  this  implied  a
broad  rather  than  a  narrow  initial  euro  membership;  and  that  that,  in  turn,  implied  a  weak
rather than a strong euro.
But  whatever  the  reason  –  and  whether  it  was  valid  or  not  –  the  effect  of  sterling’s
appreciation was to introduce a pronounced imbalance into the UK economy. It dampened net
external demand, and had a restraining influence on cost and price inflation, at a time when
domestic demand growth remained unsustainably strong, and when we were approaching full
capacity.
We  understood  very  well  that,  after  a  relatively  favourable  exchange  rate  environment,
following  our  exit  from  the  ERM,  the  abrupt  appreciation  meant  that  the  internationally-
exposed sectors of the economy, including large parts of manufacturing industry, were now
suddenly confronted with much harsher trading conditions. That, as I say, had a dampening
BIS Review   19/1999
4
effect  on  the  UK  economy  and  on  inflation.  But  we  couldn’t  just  rely  on  that  to  cool  the
economy  for  us.  Clearly  at  some  point  the  exchange  rate  would  stop  appreciating,  and  this
external dampening effect would have worked its way through. In the meantime, we needed to
slow the rate of growth of domestic demand sufficiently to avoid overheating in the economy
as a whole. The strong exchange rate gave us somewhat more time than we would otherwise
have had to bring about this domestic slowdown – it meant that monetary policy did not need
to  be  tightened  as  aggressively  as  would  have  been  necessary  otherwise.  But  we  could  not
avoid  tightening  policy  altogether,  even  though  we  realised  that  this  would  be  likely  to
increase the pressures on the internationally-exposed sectors, because in anything other than
the short term that would have put the whole economy – including the internationally-exposed
sectors we were trying to shelter – at risk of accelerating inflation. I would remind you that
right  up  until  the  summer  of  last  year  we  were  seeing  signs  of  increasing  pressures  in  the
labour market, even in the manufacturing sector – reflected in increasing skills shortages and
recruitment  difficulties,  in  the  employment/unemployment  data,  and  in  gradually  increasing
pay  settlements.  The  uncomfortable  reality,  as  I’ve  said  very  often  before,  is  that  monetary
policy can only target the economy as a whole – it can’t seek to protect individual firms, or
sectors, or regions, however much we might wish it otherwise. That – as I’ve discovered – is
not exactly a popular idea, but there’s no question that that is the reality of it.
Over the past year the world – and I mean the world – has changed very substantially.
The exchange rate has, in fact, tended gradually to soften since last spring when the decision
to  go  ahead  with  the  euro  was  finally  confirmed;  but  increasingly  since  the  autumn  the
internationally-exposed sectors of the economy have been dealt a further massive blow as a
result of global economic turbulence.
This started, in fact, with the financial disturbances in Asia in the latter half of 1997, but even
as late as the beginning of last summer it seemed as if it might have only limited impact on the
overall world economy. The IMF, for example, was then still projecting 3-3¾% world growth
in 1998 and 1999 respectively, which was certainly a setback compared with their forecast of
over 4% just six months before, but it was hardly catastrophic.
Since last summer it has become increasingly clear  that  things  are  likely  to  be  significantly
worse than that. The financial collapse in Russia, deepening recession in Japan, the long battle
– then sudden defeat – in Brazil to hold its exchange rate, and fluctuating fears of  possible
knock-on  effects  on  the  major  countries’  financial  markets,  all  contributed  to  an  increased
sense of financial fragility, which has not been easy to contain, though I am now hopeful that
we will be able to stop the financial rot.
But even if we can – and the financial markets’ response to the latest developments in Brazil,
as  well  as  the  beginnings  of  a  recovery  in  capital  flows  to  some  countries  in  Asia,  are
reasonably encouraging in this respect – we are now having to cope with the economic after-
effects of these earlier financial disturbances. The IMF has  cut  its  most  recent  forecasts  for
world growth to close to 2%. And the risks almost certainly remain on the downside. That’s
still  not  global  slump  or  recession.  But  large  parts  of  the  world  economy  are  in  fact  in
recession and the prospect for the world as a whole turns very much on what happens in the
major industrial countries.
In  essence,  what  we  have  seen  is  a  brutally  sharp  cutback  in  capital  flows  to  much  of  the
emerging world and to some of the transition economies, creating a corresponding need for
5
BIS Review   19/1999
urgent improvement in their current accounts. This has caused massive currency depreciations
and forced the emerging countries to make equally sharp cutbacks in domestic demand. The
counterpart is a sharp decline in net external demand in the industrial countries, which, if it
were not to be offset by action to stimulate domestic demand in those countries, could indeed
lead to weakening global activity and price deflation.
In fact to varying degrees, reflecting differing assessments of how far our particular currency
areas are expected to be affected by the world slowdown and different starting points, relating
both to our assessment of trends in domestic demand, and of how close we were initially to
full capacity, both the UK and the Euro-zone, as well as the US, have acted fairly aggressively
to reduce interest rates since the autumn; and Japan has moved to more active fiscal stimulus.
And if the global economic prospect, and net external demand in the industrial countries, were
to  deteriorate  further,  then  it  would  be  right  to  contemplate  further  moves  in  the  same
direction – consistently with our aim of effective price stability. What we all aim to do – as I
said earlier – is to keep aggregate demand in line with the supply capacity of our economies.
We  have  no  interest  in  the  creation  of  unnecessary  spare  capacity  in  our  economies  as  a
whole, nor in a fall in the underlying general price level.
But  that  will  still  inevitably  mean  a  sharp  deterioration  in  the  balance  of  payments  of  the
industrial countries, collectively and probably individually, reflecting the imbalance between
external and domestic demand growth in the industrial economies. And that in turn is bound
to mean substantial pressure on the internationally-exposed sectors of the economy, not just in
this country but throughout the industrial world, and we are already seeing ample evidence of
that.
In the case of this country these adverse international influences really began to affect us just
as overall demand was already weakening in response to the earlier monetary, and incidentally
fiscal, tightening. The result was a very sharp decline in industrial – especially manufacturing
–  confidence,  and  widespread,  and  often  exaggerated,  fears  of  recession,  which  in  turn
appeared to undermine consumer confidence. The slowdown – or soft landing – we had been
consciously seeking to engineer threatened quite rapidly to become a much sharper decline –
or harder landing – than we had either expected  or  needed.  And  that,  of  course,  is  why  we
promptly changed our monetary policy stance as we did, cutting interest rates by 2% to 5½%
in the space of five months.
In doing so, we have demonstrated that the inflation target is – as we have frequently said it is
– symmetrical, so that we would be at least as determined and aggressive in cutting rates if we
thought we were likely to undershoot the inflation target as we had been earlier in raising rates
to avoid an overshoot of the inflation target.
So, where do we go from here?
I  would  strongly  advise  you  to  regard  anyone  who  claims  to  know  with  any  great  certainty
where we go from here with the gravest possible suspicion. Forecasting the economy is very
definitely  an  art  rather  than  a  science  –  though  some  artists  craft  their  work  rather  more
carefully than others.
But, for what it is worth, the Monetary Policy Committee’s view – described in considerable
detail  in  our  recent  quarterly  Inflation  Report,  which  I  can  make  available  to  you  for  a
remarkably modest fee if you care to get in touch with me afterwards – is that while we will
BIS Review   19/1999
6
not  see  much  growth  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  –  certainly  in  the  internationally-exposed
sectors of the economy – overall output growth will pick up on the back of stronger domestic
demand as we move towards the Millennium to around trend or above from the second half of
next year. We can’t of course altogether rule out an actual downturn in total output over the
next few months, though the odds are against that for the economy as a whole. And we are
reasonably  confident  that  the  slowdown  will  be  relatively  mild  and  short-lived  –  certainly
compared with equivalent periods in the past, for example at the beginning of the 1980’s and
1990’s. The good news is that we expect inflation to remain close to the Government’s 2½%
target over the next two years, which should allow the relatively steady growth we have seen
in the overall economy since 1992 to resume on a sustainable basis.
Within  this  overall  picture,  we  are  still  confronted  with  the  difficult  problem  of  imbalance
between external and domestic demand and the sectoral and regional stresses that this implies.
At  some  point,  as  global  economic  activity  begins  to  recover,  we  will  again  need  to  act  to
restrain the growth of domestic demand, but that is a problem for the future.
Given the present international economic environment, and given the present advanced stage
of our own economic cycle, if the outturn over the next couple of years is anything close to
this – that is about the best we can realistically hope for.
7
BIS Review   19/1999
