Mr Greenspan presents the Federal Reserve’s semi-annual report on monetary policy to the US
Senate
Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,
before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the US Senate on 23/02/99.
Chairman  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  present  the  Federal
Reserve’s semiannual report on monetary policy.
The U.S. economy over the past year again performed admirably. Despite the challenges presented by
severe economic downturns in a number of foreign  countries  and  episodic  financial  turmoil  abroad
and at home, our real GDP grew about 4 percent for a third straight year. In 1998, 2¾ million jobs
were created on net, bringing the total increase in payrolls to more than 18 million during the current
economic  expansion,  which  late  last  year  became  the  longest  in  U.S.  peacetime  history.
Unemployment edged down further to a 4¼ percent rate, the lowest since 1970.
And despite taut labor markets, inflation also fell to its lowest rate in many decades by some broad
measures, although a portion of this decline owed to decreases in oil, commodity, and other import
prices that are unlikely to be repeated. Hourly labor compensation adjusted for inflation posted further
impressive  gains.  Real  compensation  gains  have  been  supported  by  robust  advances  in  labor
productivity,  which  in  turn  have  partly  reflected  heavy  investment  in  plant  and  equipment,  often
embodying innovative technologies.
Can this favorable performance be sustained? In many respects the fundamental underpinnings of the
recent U.S. economic performance are strong. Flexible markets and the shift to surplus on the books
of the federal government are facilitating the build-up in cutting-edge capital stock. That build-up in
turn is spawning rapid advances in productivity that are helping to keep inflation well behaved. The
new  technologies  and  the  optimism  of  consumers  and  investors  are  supporting  asset  prices  and
sustaining spending.
But,  after  eight  years  of  economic  expansion,  the  economy  appears  stretched  in  a  number  of
dimensions,  implying  considerable  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  economic  outlook.  The  robust
increase of  production  has  been  using  up  our  nation’s  spare  labor  resources,  suggesting  that  recent
strong  growth  in  spending  cannot  continue  without  a  pick-up  in  inflation  unless  labor  productivity
growth increases significantly further. Equity prices are high enough to raise questions about whether
shares  are  overvalued.  The  debt  of  the  household  and  business  sectors  has  mounted,  as  has  the
external debt of the country as a whole, reflecting the deepening current account deficit. We remain
vulnerable to rapidly changing conditions overseas, which, as we saw last summer, can be transmitted
to U.S. markets quickly and traumatically. I will be commenting on many of these issues as I review
the developments of the past year and the prospects going forward. In light of all these risks, monetary
policy  must  be  ready  to  move  quickly  in  either  direction  should  we  perceive  imbalances  and
distortions developing that could undermine the economic expansion.
Recent Developments
A hallmark of our economic performance over the past year was the continuing sharp expansion of
business investment spending. Competitive global markets and persisting technological advances both
spurred the business drive to become more efficient and induced the price declines for many types of
new equipment that made capital spending more attractive.
Business success in enhancing productivity and the expectation of still further, perhaps accelerated,
advances buoyed public optimism about profit prospects, which contributed to another sizable boost
in equity prices. Rising household wealth along with strong growth in real income, related to better
pay, slower inflation, and expanding job opportunities, boosted consumption at the fastest clip in  a
decade and a half. The gains in income and wealth last year, along with a further decrease in mortgage
rates, also prompted considerable activity in the housing sector.
1
BIS Review   21/1999
The  impressive  performance  of  the  private  sector  was  reflected  in  a  continued  improvement  in  the
federal budget. Burgeoning receipts, along with continuing restraint on federal spending, produced the
first unified  budget  surplus  in  thirty  years,  allowing  the  Treasury  to  begin  to  pay  down  the  federal
debt held by the public. This shift in the federal government’s fiscal position has fostered an increase
in  overall  national  saving  as  a  share  of  GDP  to  17¼  percent  from  the  14½  percent  low  reached  in
1993.  This  rise  in  national  saving  has  helped  to  hold  down  real  interest  rates  and  to  facilitate  the
financing of the boom in private investment spending.
Foreign  savers  have  provided  an  additional  source  of  funds  for  vigorous  domestic  investment.  The
counterpart  of  our  high  and  rising  current  account  deficit  has  been  ever-faster  increases  in  the  net
indebtedness  of  U.S.  residents  to  foreigners.  The  rapid  widening  of  the  current  account  deficit  has
some  disquieting  aspects,  especially  when  viewed  in  a  longer-term  context.  Foreigners  presumably
will not want to raise indefinitely the share of their portfolios in claims on the United States. Should
the sustainability of the build-up of our foreign indebtedness come into question, the exchange value
of the dollar may well decline, imparting pressures on prices in the United States.
In the recent economic environment, however, the widening of the trade and current account deficits
had  some  beneficial  aspects.  It  provided  a  safety  valve  for  strong  U.S.  domestic  demand,  thereby
helping to restrain pressures on U.S. resources. It also cushioned, to some extent, economic weakness
in our trading partners.
Moreover, decreasing import prices, which partly came  from  the  appreciation  of  the  dollar  through
mid-summer,  contributed  to  low  overall  U.S.  inflation,  as  did  ample  manufacturing  capacity  in  the
United States and lower prices for oil and other commodities stemming from the weak activity abroad.
The  marked  drop  in  energy  prices  significantly  contributed  to  the  subdued,  less  than  1  percent,
increase  in  the  price  index  for  total  personal  consumption  expenditures  during  1998.  In  addition,
supported by rapid accumulation of more efficient capital, the growth of labor productivity picked up
last  year,  allowing  nominal  labor  compensation  to  post  another  sizable  gain  without  putting  added
upward pressure on costs and prices. I shall return to an analysis of the extraordinary performance of
inflation later in my remarks.
The Federal Open Market Committee conducted monetary policy last year with the aim of sustaining
the remarkable combination of economic expansion and low inflation. At its meetings from March to
July, the inflation risks accompanying the continued strength of domestic demand and the tightening
of labor markets necessitated that the FOMC place itself on heightened inflation alert. Although the
FOMC  kept  the  nominal  federal  funds  rate  unchanged,  it  allowed  the  real  funds  rate  to  rise  with
continuing  declines  in  inflation  and,  presumably,  inflation  expectations.  In  August,  the  FOMC
returned  to  an  unbiased  policy  predilection  in  response  to  the  adverse  implications  for  the  U.S.
outlook of worsening conditions in foreign economies and in global financial markets, including our
own.
Shortly thereafter, a further deterioration in financial market conditions began to pose a more serious
threat  to  economic  stability.  In  the  wake  of  the  Russian  crisis  and  subsequent  difficulties  in  other
emerging  market  economies,  investors  perceived  that  the  uncertainties  in  financial  markets  had
broadened  appreciably  and  as  a  consequence  they  became  decidedly  more  risk  averse.  Safe-haven
demands for U.S. Treasury securities intensified at the expense of private debt securities. As a result,
quality  spreads  escalated  dramatically,  especially  for  lower-rated  issuers.  Many  financial  markets
turned  illiquid,  with  wider  bid-asked  spreads  and  heightened  price  volatility,  and  issuance  was
disrupted in some private securities markets. Even the liquidity in the market for seasoned issues of
U.S. Treasury securities dried up, as investors shifted toward the more actively traded, recently issued
securities and dealers pared inventories, fearing that heightened price volatility posed an unacceptable
risk to their capital.
Responding  to  losses  in  foreign  financial  markets  and  to  pressures  from  counterparties,  highly
leveraged investors began to unwind their positions, which further weighed on market conditions. As
credit became less available to business borrowers in capital markets, their demands were redirected
BIS Review   21/1999
2
to  commercial  banks,  which  reacted  to  the  enlarged  borrowing,  and  more  uncertain  business
prospects, by tightening their standards and terms on such lending.
To cushion the domestic economy from the impact of the increasing weakness in foreign economies
and  the  less  accommodative  conditions  in  U.S.  financial  markets,  the  FOMC,  beginning  in  late
September,  undertook  three  policy  easings.  By  mid-November,  the  FOMC  had  reduced  the  federal
funds  rate  from  5½  percent  to  4¾  percent.  These  actions  were  taken  to  rebalance  the  risks  to  the
outlook, and, in the event, the markets have recovered appreciably. Our economy has weathered the
disturbances  with  remarkable  resilience,  though  some  yield  and  bid-asked  spreads  still  reflect  a
hesitancy  on  the  part  of  market  participants  to  take  on  risk.  The  Federal  Reserve  must  continue  to
evaluate,  among  other  issues,  whether  the  full  extent  of  the  policy  easings  undertaken  last  fall  to
address the seizing-up of financial markets remains appropriate as those disturbances abate.
To date, domestic demand and hence employment and output have remained vigorous. Real GDP is
estimated  to  have  risen  at  an  annual  rate  exceeding  5½  percent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year.
Although some slowing from this torrid pace is most likely in the first quarter, labor markets remain
exceptionally tight and the economy evidently retains a great deal of underlying momentum despite
the  global  economic  problems  and  the  still-visible  remnants  of  the  earlier  financial  turmoil  in  the
United States. At the same time, no evidence of any upturn in inflation has, as yet, surfaced.
Abroad, the situation is mixed. In some East Asian countries that, in recent years, experienced a loss
of  investor  confidence,  a  severe  currency  depreciation,  and  a  deep  recession,  early  signs  of
stabilization  and  economic  recovery  have  appeared.  This  is  particularly  the  case  for  Korea  and
Thailand.  Authorities  in  those  countries,  in  the  context  of  IMF  stabilization  programs,  early  on
established  appropriate  macroeconomic  policies  and  undertook  significant  structural  reforms  to
buttress the banking system and repair the finances of the corporate sector. As investor confidence has
returned, exchange rates have risen and interest rates have fallen. With persistence and follow-through
on reforms, the future of those economies has promise.
The  situations  in  some  other  emerging  market  economies  are  not  as  encouraging.  The  Russian
government’s decision in mid-August to suspend payments on its domestic debt and devalue the ruble
took  markets  by  surprise.  Investor  flight  exacerbated  the  collapse  of  prices  in  Russian  financial
markets  and  led  to  a  sharp  depreciation  of  the  ruble.  The  earlier  decline  in  output  gathered
momentum,  and  by  late  in  the  year  inflation  had  moved  up  to  a  triple-digit  annual  rate.  Russia’s
stabilization program with the IMF has been on hold since the financial crisis hit, and the economic
outlook there remains troubling.
The Russian financial crisis immediately spilled over to some other countries, hitting Latin America
especially  hard.  Countering  downward  pressure  on  the  exchange  values  of  the  affected  currencies,
interest rates moved sharply higher, especially in Brazil. As a consequence of the high interest rates
and  growing  economic  uncertainty,  Brazil’s  economic  activity  took  a  turn  for  the  worse.  Higher
interest rates also had negative consequences for the fiscal outlook, as much of Brazil’s substantial
domestic debt effectively carries floating interest rates. With budget reform legislation encountering
various  setbacks,  market  confidence  waned  further  and  capital  outflows  from  Brazil  continued,
drawing down foreign currency reserves. Ultimately, the decision was taken to allow the real to float,
and it subsequently depreciated sharply.
Brazilian  authorities  must  walk  a  very  narrow,  difficult  path  of  restoring  confidence  and  keeping
inflation contained with monetary policy while dealing with serious fiscal imbalances. Although the
situation  in  Brazil  remains  uncertain,  there  has  been  limited  contagion  to  other  countries  thus  far.
Apparently, the slow onset of the crisis has enabled many parties with Brazilian exposures to hedge
those positions or allow them to run off. With the net exposure smaller, and increasingly held by those
who both recognized the heightened risk and were willing to bear it, some of the elements that might
have contributed to further contagion may have been significantly reduced.
3
BIS Review   21/1999
The Economic Outlook
These  recent  domestic  and  international  developments  provide  the  backdrop  for  U.S.  economic
prospects.  Our  economy’s  performance  should  remain  solid  this  year,  though  likely  with  a  slower
pace of economic expansion and a slightly higher rate of overall inflation than last year. The stocks of
business equipment, housing, and household durable goods have been growing rapidly to quite high
levels relative to business sales or household incomes during the past few years, and some slowing in
the  growth  of  spending  on  these  items  seems  a  reasonable  prospect.  Moreover,  part  of  the  rapid
increase  in  spending,  especially  in  the  household  sector,  has  resulted  from  the  surge  in  wealth
associated with a run-up in equity prices that is unlikely to be repeated. And the purchasing power of
income  and  wealth  has  been  enhanced  by  declines  in  oil  and  other  import  prices,  which  also  are
unlikely  to  recur  this  year.  Assuming  that  aggregate  demand  decelerates,  underlying  inflation
pressures, as captured by core price measures, in all likelihood will not intensify significantly in the
year  ahead,  though  the  Federal  Reserve  will  need  to  monitor  developments  carefully.  We  perceive
stable prices as optimum for economic growth. Both inflation and deflation raise volatility and risks
that thwart maximum economic growth.
Most Governors and Reserve Bank Presidents foresee that economic growth this year will slow to a
2½ to 3 percent rate. Such growth would keep the unemployment rate about unchanged. The central
tendency of the Governors’ and Presidents’ predictions of CPI inflation is 2 to 2½ percent. This level
represents a pick-up from last year, when energy prices were falling, but it is in the vicinity of core
CPI inflation over the last couple of years.
This outlook involves several risks. The continuing downside  risk  posed  by  possible  economic  and
financial  instability  around  the  world  was  highlighted  earlier  this  year  by  the  events  in  Brazil.
Although financial contagion elsewhere has been limited to date, more significant knock-on effects in
financial markets and in the economies of Brazil’s important trading partners,  including  the  United
States,  are  still  possible.  Moreover,  the  economies  of  several  of  our  key  industrial  trading  partners
have shown evidence of weakness, which if it deepens could further depress demands for our exports.
Another  downside  risk  is  that  growth  in  capital  spending,  especially  among  manufacturers,  could
weaken  appreciably  if  pressures  on  domestic  profit  margins  mount  and  capacity  utilization  drops
further. And it remains to be seen whether corporate earnings will disappoint investors, even if the
slowing  of  economic  growth  is  only  moderate.  Investors  appear  to  have  incorporated  into  current
equity  price  levels  both  robust  profit  expectations  and  low  compensation  for  risk.  As  the  economy
slows to a more sustainable pace as  expected,  profit  forecasts  could  be  pared  back,  which  together
with  a  greater  sense  of  vulnerability  in  business  prospects  could  damp  appetites  for  equities.  A
downward correction to stock prices, and an associated increase in the cost of equity capital, could
compound a slowdown in the growth of capital spending. In addition, a stock market decline would
tend to restrain consumption spending through its effect on household net worth.
But on the upside, our economy has proved surprisingly robust in recent years. More rapid increases
in  capital  spending,  productivity,  real  wages,  and  asset  prices  have  combined  to  boost  economic
growth far more and far longer than many of us would have anticipated.
This  “virtuous  cycle”  has  been  able  to  persist  because  the  behavior  of  inflation  also  has  been
surprisingly favorable, remaining well contained at levels of utilization of labor that in the past would
have  produced  accelerating  prices.  That  it  has  not  done  so  in  recent  years  has  been  the  result  of  a
combination  of  special  one-time  factors  holding  down  prices  and  more  lasting  changes  in  the
processes determining inflation.
Among  the  temporary  factors,  the  sizable  declines  in  the  prices  of  oil,  other  internationally  traded
commodities,  and  other  imports  contributed  directly  to  holding  down  inflation  last  year,  and  also
indirectly by reducing inflation expectations. But these prices are not likely to fall further, and they
could  begin  to  rise  as  some  Asian  economies  revive  and  the  effects  of  the  net  depreciation  of  the
dollar since mid-summer are felt more strongly.
BIS Review   21/1999
4
At the same time, however, recent experience does seem to suggest that the economy has become less
inflation prone than in the past, so that the chances of an inflationary breakout arguably are, at least
for now, less than they would have been under similar conditions in earlier cycles.
Several  years  ago  I  suggested  that  worker  insecurity  might  be  an  important  reason  for  unusually
damped  inflation.  From  the  early  1990s  through  1996,  survey  results  indicated  that  workers  were
becoming much more concerned about being laid off. Workers’ underlying fear of technology-driven
job obsolescence, and hence willingness to stress job security over wage increases, appeared to have
suppressed  labor  cost  pressures  despite  a  reduced  unemployment  rate.  More  recently,  that  effect
seems  to  have  diminished  in  part.  So  while  job  loss  fears  probably  contributed  to  wage  and  price
suppression  through  1996,  it  does  not  appear  that  a  further  heightening  of  worker  insecurity  about
employment prospects can explain the more recent improved behavior of inflation.
Instead, a variety of evidence, anecdotal and otherwise, suggests that the source of recent restrained
inflation  may  be  emanating  more  from  employers  than  from  employees.  In  the  current  economic
setting, businesses sense that they have lost pricing power and generally have been unwilling to raise
wages any faster than they can support at current price levels. Firms have evidently concluded that if
they try to increase their prices, their competitors will not follow, and they will lose market share and
profits.
Given the loss of pricing power, it is not surprising that individual employers resist pay increases. But
why  has  pricing  power  of  late  been  so  delimited.  Monetary  policy  certainly  has  played  a  role  in
constraining the rise in the general level of prices and damping inflation expectations over the 1980s
and 1990s. But our current discretionary monetary policy has difficulty anchoring the price level over
time in the same way that the gold standard did in the last century.
Enhanced opportunities for productive capital investment to hold down costs also may have helped to
damp inflation. Through the 1970s and 1980s, firms apparently found it easier and more profitable to
seek relief from rising nominal labor costs through price increases than through cost-reducing capital
investments.  Price  relief  evidently  has  not  been  available  in  recent  years.  But  relief  from  cost
pressures  has.  The  newer  technologies  have  made  capital  investment  distinctly  more  profitable,
enabling firms to substitute capital for labor far more productively than they would have a decade or
two ago.
Starting in 1993, capital investment, especially in high-tech equipment, rose sharply beyond normal
cyclical  experience,  apparently  the  result  of  expected  increases  in  rates  of  return  on  the  new
investment. Had the profit expectations not been realized, one would have anticipated outlays to fall
back. Instead, their growth accelerated through the remainder of the decade.
More direct evidence confirms improved underlying profitability. According to rough estimates, labor
and  capital  productivity  has  risen  significantly  during  the  past  five  years.  It  seems  likely  that  the
synergies  of  advances  in  laser,  fiber  optic,  satellite,  and  computer  technologies  with  older
technologies  have  enlarged  the  pool  of  opportunities  to  achieve  a  rate  of  return  above  the  cost  of
capital. Moreover, the newer technologies have facilitated a dramatic foreshortening of the lead times
on the delivery of capital equipment over the past decade, presumably allowing businesses  to  react
more expeditiously to an actual or expected rise in nominal compensation costs than, say, they could
have  in  the  1980s.  In  addition,  the  surge  in  investment  not  only  has  restrained  costs,  it  has  also
increased  industrial  capacity  faster  than  factory  output  has  risen.  The  resulting  slack  in  product
markets  has  put  greater  competitive  pressure  on  businesses  to  hold  down  prices,  despite  taut  labor
markets.
The role of technology in damping inflation is manifest not only in its effects on U.S. productivity and
costs,  but  also  through  international  trade,  where  technological  developments  have  progressively
broken down barriers to cross-border trade. The enhanced competition in tradable goods has enabled
excess capacity previously bottled up in one country to augment worldwide supply and exert restraint
on prices in all countries’ markets. The resulting price discipline also has constrained nominal wage
gains in internationally tradable goods industries. As workers have attempted to shift to other sectors,
5
BIS Review   21/1999
gains in nominal wages and increases in prices in nontradable goods industries have been held down
as well.
The  process  of  price  containment  has  potentially  become,  to  some  extent,  self-reinforcing.  Lower
inflation in recent years has altered expectations. Workers no longer believe that escalating gains in
nominal wages are needed to reap respectable increases in real wages, and their remaining sense of
job insecurity is reinforcing this. Since neither firms nor their competitors can count any longer on a
general  inflationary  tendency  to  validate  decisions  to  raise  their  own  prices,  each  company  feels
compelled to concentrate on efforts to hold down costs. The availability of new technology to each
company and its rivals affords both the opportunity and the competitive necessity of taking steps to
boost productivity.
It  is  difficult  to  judge  whether  these  significant  shifts  in  the  market  environment  in  which  firms
function are sufficient to account for our benign overall price behavior during the past half decade.
Undoubtedly, other factors have been at work as well, including those temporary factors I mentioned
earlier and some more lasting I have not discussed, such as worldwide deregulation and privatization,
and the freeing-up of resources previously employed to produce military products that was brought
about by the end of the cold war. There also may be other contributory forces lurking unseen in the
wings that will only become clear in time. Over the longer run, of course, the actions of the central
bank determine the degree of overall liquidity and hence rate of inflation. It is up to us to validate the
favorable inflation developments of recent years.
Although the pace of productivity increase has picked up in recent years, the extraordinary strength of
demand  has  meant  that  the  substitution  of  capital  for  labor  has  not  prevented  us  from  rapidly
depleting the pool of available workers. This worker depletion constitutes a critical upside risk to the
inflation  outlook  because  it  presumably  cannot  continue  for  very  much  longer  without  putting
increasing pressure on labor markets and on costs.
The number of people willing to work can be usefully defined as the unemployed component of the
labor  force  plus  those  not  actively  seeking  work,  and  thus  not  counted  in  the  labor  force,  but  who
nonetheless say they would like a job if they could get one. This pool of potential workers aged 16 to
64 currently numbers about 10 million, or just 5¾ percent of that group’s population – the lowest such
percentage  on  record,  which  begins  in  1970,  and  2½  percentage  points  below  its  average  over  that
period.  The  rapid  increase  in  aggregate  demand  has  generated  growth  of  employment  in  excess  of
growth in population, causing the number of potential workers to fall since the mid-1990s at a rate of
a  bit  under  1  million  annually.  We  cannot  judge  with  precision  how  much  further  this  level  can
decline without sparking ever greater upward pressures on wages and prices. But, should labor market
conditions continue to tighten, there has to be some point at which the rise in nominal wages will start
increasingly outpacing the gains in labor productivity, and prices inevitably will begin to accelerate.
Ranges for Money and Credit
At its February meeting, the Committee elected to ratify the provisional ranges for all three aggregates
that it had established last July. Specifically, the Committee again has set growth rate ranges over the
four quarters of 1999 of 1 to 5 percent for M2, 2 to 6 percent for M3, and 3 to 7 percent for domestic
nonfinancial  debt.  As  in  previous  years,  the  Committee  interpreted  the  ranges  for  the  broader
monetary  aggregates  as  benchmarks  for  what  money  growth  would  be  under  conditions  of  price
stability and sustainable economic growth, assuming historically typical velocity behavior.
Last  year,  these  monetary  aggregates  far  overshot  the  upper  bounds  of  their  annual  ranges.  While
nominal  GDP  growth  did  exceed  the  rate  likely  consistent  with  sustained  price  stability,  the  rapid
growth of M2 and M3 also reflected outsized declines in their velocities, that is, the ratio of nominal
GDP to money. M2 velocity dropped by about 3 percent, while M3 velocity plunged by 5¼ percent.
Part  of  these  velocity  declines  reflected  some  reduction  in  the  opportunity  cost  of  holding  money;
interest  rates  on  Treasury  securities,  which  represent  an  alternative  return  on  non-monetary  assets,
dropped more than did the average of interest rates on deposits and money market mutual funds in
BIS Review   21/1999
6
M2, drawing funds into the aggregate. Even so, much of last year’s aberrant behavior of broad money
velocity  cannot  readily  be  explained  by  conventional  determinants.  Although  growth  of  the  broad
aggregates  was  strong  earlier  in  the  year,  it  accelerated  in  the  fourth  quarter  after  credit  markets
became  turbulent.  Perhaps  robust  money  growth  late  in  the  year  partly  reflected  a  reaction  to  this
turmoil  by  the  public,  who  began  scrambling  for  safer  and  more  liquid  financial  assets.  Monetary
expansion  has  moderated  so  far  this  year,  evidently  in  lagged  response  to  the  calming  of  financial
markets  in  the  autumn.  Layered  on  top  of  these  influences,  though,  the  public  also  may  have  been
reapportioning  their  savings  flows  into  money  balances  because  the  huge  run-up  in  stock  prices  in
recent years has resulted in an uncomfortable portion of their net worth in equity.
For the coming year, the broad monetary aggregates could again run high relative to these ranges. To
be sure, the decline in the velocities of the broader aggregates this year should abate to some extent,
as money demand behavior returns more to normal, and growth in nominal GDP should slow as well,
as suggested by the Governors’ and Presidents’ central tendency. Both factors would restrain broad
money expansion relative to last year. Still, the growth of M2 and M3 could well remain outside their
price-stability  ranges  this  year.  Obviously,  considerable  uncertainty  continues  to  surround  the
prospective behavior of monetary velocities and growth rates.
Domestic nonfinancial debt seems more likely than the monetary aggregates to grow within its range
for  this  year.  Indeed,  domestic  nonfinancial  debt  also  could  grow  more  slowly  this  year  than  last
year’s  6¼  percent  pace,  which  was  in  the  upper  part  of  its  3  to  7  percent  annual  range.  With  the
federal  budget  surplus  poised  to  widen  further  this  year,  federal  debt  should  contract  even  more
quickly  than  last  year.  And  debt  in  each  of  the  major  nonfederal  sectors  in  all  likelihood  will
decelerate  as  well  from  last  year’s  relatively  elevated  rates,  along  with  the  projected  slowing  of
nominal GDP growth.
The FOMC’s Disclosure Policy
The FOMC at recent meetings has discussed not only the stance of policy, but also when and how it
communicates its views of the evolving economic situation to the public. The FOMC’s objective is to
release as much information about monetary policy decision making, and as promptly, as is consistent
with maintaining an effective deliberative process and avoiding roiling markets unnecessarily. Since
early  1994,  each  change  in  the  target  nominal  federal  funds  rate  has  been  announced  immediately
with a brief rationale for the action. The FOMC resolved at its December meeting to take advantage
of an available, but unused policy, originally stated in early 1994, of releasing, on an infrequent basis,
a statement immediately after some FOMC meetings at which the stance of monetary policy has not
been changed. The Federal Reserve will release such a statement when it wishes to communicate to
the public a major shift in its views about the balance of risks or the likely direction of future policy.
Such an announcement need not be made after every change in the tilt of the directive. Instead, this
option would be reserved for situations in which the consensus of the Committee clearly had shifted
significantly,  though  not  by  enough  to  change  current  policy,  and  in  which  the  absence  of  an
explanation risked misleading markets about the prospects for monetary policy.
Year 2000 Issues
Before closing, I’d like to address an issue that has been receiving increasing attention – the century
date  change.  While  no  one  can  say  that  the  rollover  to  the  year  2000  will  be  trouble  free,  I  am
impressed by the efforts to date to address the problem in the banking and financial system. For our
part,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  has  now  completed  remediation  and  testing  of  101  of  its  103
mission-critical applications, with the remaining two to be replaced by the end of March. We opened
a test facility in June at which more than 6000 depository institutions to date have conducted tests of
their Y2K compliant systems, and we are well along in our risk mitigation and contingency planning
activities.  As  a  precautionary  measure,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  acted  to  increase  the  currency  in
inventory  by  about  one-third  to  approximately  $200  billion  in  late  1999  and  has  other  contingency
arrangements available if needed. While we do not expect currency demand to increase dramatically,
the Federal Reserve believes it is  important  for  the  public  to  have  confidence  in  the  availability  of
7
BIS Review   21/1999
cash in advance of the rollover. As a result of these kinds of activities, I can say with assurance that
the  Federal  Reserve  will  be  ready  in  both  its  operations  and  planning  activities  for  the  millennium
rollover.
The banking industry is also working hard, and with evident success, to prepare for the event. By the
end of the first quarter, every institution in the industry will have been subject to two rounds of on-
site Y2K examinations. The Federal Reserve, like the  other  regulators,  has  found  that  only  a  small
minority  of  institutions  have  fallen  behind  in  their  preparations,  and  those  institutions  have  been
targeted for additional follow-up and, as necessary, formal enforcement actions. The  overwhelming
majority  of  the  industry  has  made  impressive  progress  in  its  remediation,  testing,  and  contingency
planning efforts.
Concluding Comment
Americans  can  justifiably  feel  proud  of  their  recent  economic  achievements.  Competitive  markets,
with open trade both domestically and internationally, have kept our production efficient and on the
expanding  frontier  of  technological  innovation.  The  determination  of  Americans  to  improve  their
skills and knowledge has allowed workers to be even more productive, elevating their real earnings.
Macroeconomic policies have provided a favorable setting for the public to take greatest advantage of
opportunities to improve their economic well being. The restrained fiscal policy of the Administration
and the Congress has engendered the welcome advent of a unified budget surplus, freeing up funds for
capital investment. A continuation of responsible fiscal and, we trust, monetary policies should afford
Americans the opportunity to make considerable further economic progress over time.
BIS Review   21/1999
8
