Mr Tietmeyer talks about systemic risk and lender of last resort facilities
Speech by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof Hans Tietmeyer, at the conference entitled
“Systemic Risk and Lender of Last Resort Facilities” organised by the Center for Financial Studies in
Frankfurt on 11 June 1999.
I
Thank you very much for the invitation to speak to this distinguished audience. As a financial center,
Frankfurt has to be more than a center of commercial and central banking. Undoubtedly, it also needs
to be a center of critical scientific analysis. Therefore, I appreciate very much the contribution which
the Center for Financial Studies is making to the intellectual capabilities of Frankfurt.
II
The subject of this conference “Systemic risk and Lender of Last Resort Facilities” is likewise both
important and tricky. There is no doubt about the fact that recent events have placed questions about
the soundness of global financing on the intellectual and political agenda. On the one hand, we have
experienced  severe  financial  crises  in  different  regions  over  the  past  few  years.  In  terms  of  their
impact,  the  speed  with  which  the  events  occurred  and  the  ensuing  contagion  effects,  the  crises
revealed a new dimension. On the other hand, new games and players have entered global financial
markets;  for  example,  highly  leveraged  activities  and  institutions.  We  have  learned,  in  one  case  in
particular, that such institutions can cause serious troubles if their working assumptions on the future
development of market prices fail.
So, besides all the old or new-fashioned macroeconomic questions, the discussion on the soundness of
appropriate  financial  and  supervisory  structures  is  an  important  one.  And  the  consideration  of
systemic risk is part of that discussion. However, we should be careful when using the label “systemic
risk”.
Firstly, not every financial crisis of a country or an institution necessarily causes a systemic risk. That
does not mean that the international community should or could neglect such crisis. But in order to
assess which measures are appropriate, the nature of the crisis has to be clear.
And secondly, systemic risk is not a given quantity. To a large extent, it is an endogenous variable
which depends on the structures of the financial market, on the supervisory framework at the national
and international levels and on the decisions taken by the political and monetary authorities.
Therefore the topic of systemic risk has a lot of different aspects. The aspect on which this conference
focuses, namely the lender of last resort, is certainly not the most prominent point.
The  first  and  most  fundamental  question  in  that  context  is  how  to  make  a  substantial  reduction  in
systemic risk. Or, to be more precise, how to reduce systemic risk without restraining or patronizing
financial markets but rather by improving their functioning. A lot of work is under way to find ways
of doing this. Improved transparency should foster the self-control and self-discipline of the markets.
That  includes  different  aspects  such  as:  more  and  better  data  on  the  debt  structure  of  individual
countries, the application of standards for banking supervision, improved disclosure of risk positions
of market participants.
Of  course,  in  the  case  of  a  national  sovereign  crisis,  financial  assistance  too  might  play  a  role.
Therefore,  we  have  agreed  to  fill  up  the  IMF’s  reserve  tanks.  Such  assistance,  however,  has  to  be
bound  to  conditionality,  to  an  incentive  to  redeem  the  official  credits  and  to  a  fair  burden-sharing
between  official  and  private  sectors.  If  the  talk  of  a  lender  of  last  resort  means  only  that  kind  of
1
BIS Review   72/1999
financial assistance, I don’t mind. Even though that expression might not be absolutely accurate. But
we should not argue about words.
But if lender of last resort in a broader sense means that draining liquidity and offering generous or
even unlimited credit lines should be regarded as main response and that the international community
should  place  its  highest  priority  on  such  measures,  I  would  be  strongly  opposed.  A  lender  of  last
resort of that kind may be of intellectual interest for academic textbooks. In reality, such a role for the
IMF or another institution would severely hamper the functioning of the markets.
The main point is: Whatever the international community intends to do, the measure should — as far
as possible — avoid creating incentives for moral hazard behaviour. For domestic policy-makers, this
means that international assistance must not be seen as insurance either against dangerous exchange
rate experiments or against a loss of credibility. For the  markets,  there  should  as  few  incentives  as
possible to underrate country-specific risks based on the hope of a later bail-out.
So, in the first place, financial crisis and systemic risk do not lead to the question of the lender of last
resort. Instead, they lead to the question how to improve the framework. And that was the background
to  my  report  I  presented  to  the  Group  of  Seven  (G-7)  Ministers  and  Governors  at  their  meeting  in
Bonn  on  February  20,  1999.  Professor  Illing  asked  me  to  add  some  remarks  on  that  report.  I  will
follow that suggestion.
III
As you know, my proposal to the G-7 included convening a Forum of Financial Stability.
What is the philosophy behind that proposal?
Firstly, there is the conviction that sweeping institutional changes are not necessary. Instead, a process
to  improve  coordination  between  existing  national  and  international  authorities  and  groupings  is
important for improving the functioning of the market and, in doing so, promoting the stability of the
financial system.
Secondly,  a  permanent  body  which  brings  together  major  experts  on  supervisory  issues,  either
technical  or  political  representatives,  either  at  the  national  or  at  the  international  level  has  more
potential to be a driving force for practical change than several ad-hoc-groups may have.
How is the Forum composed?
Members of the Forum are: representatives of the IFIs, the BIS and the OECD, representatives of key
international regulatory groupings, namely the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, IOSCO, the
International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors,  central  bank  experts  concerned  with  market
infrastructure  from  the  Committee  on  Payment  &  Settlement  Systems  and  the  Committee  on  the
Global  Financial  System  and  —  not  least  —  representatives  of  the  national  authorities  —  the
ministries  of  Finance,  central  banks  and  senior  supervisory  authorities  —  initially  of  the  G-7
countries.
What  is  the  Forum’s  field  of  activity?  The  G-7  report  identifies  three  areas  where  improvement  is
necessary.
The  first  potential  area  concerns  the  assessment  of  vulnerabilities  affecting  the  global  financial
system.  These  kinds  of  information-pooling-and-processing  activity  must  be  clearly  separated  from
normal  macro-economic  policy  assessment.  The  Forum  should  obviously  not  attempt  the  IMF’s
systematic  surveillance  of  individual  countries,  although  cases  may  arise  where  financial
vulnerabilities in individual counties merit the Forum’s attention.
BIS Review   72/1999
2
A  second  potential  area  of  activity  for  the  Forum  is  identifying  and  overseeing  actions  needed  to
address  the  vulnerabilities  affecting  the  global  financial  system,  including  encouraging  the
development or strengthening of international best practice and standards and defining priorities for
addressing and implementing them.
A third potential area of activity for the Forum is improving mutual coordination and the exchange of
information  among  the  various  authorities  responsible  for  financial  stability  (a  sort  of  permanent
round-table).  In  this  respect,  the  forum  should  be  a  vehicle  for  the  regular  in-depth  exchange  of
information among the international financial institutions and the international regulatory groupings.
How should the Forum work?
The Forum should not duplicate work being undertaken elsewhere. The Forum should, rather, work
through  its  members,  taking  due  account  of  their  comparative  advantages.  Specifically,  the  Forum
should  bring  together  information  about  activities  taking  place  in  diverse  groupings  and  coordinate
overlapping  activities.  In  addition,  the  Forum  should  identify  gaps  in  existing  work,  and  propose
appropriate means of filling such gaps. Finally, the Forum should, wherever possible, aim to produce
concrete,  implementable  recommendations,  as  distinct  from  analytical  reports  stating  alternative
views. And it should monitor the implementation of those recommendations.
Two particular points have to be addressed further.
IV
Firstly, the involvement of the private sector. The Forum is asked to find flexible ways of drawing on
private sector expertise. One way is for the Forum to meet with the private sector immediately before
or after the meeting. It would also be possible for sub-groups of Forum members to meet the private
sectors on other occasions.
Secondly,  countries  outside  the  G-7  should  be  more  involved.  That  can  be  done  either  be  inviting
qualified experts from outside the G-7 to contribute to the activities of the Working Groups. Or by
inviting representatives from national authorities as guests in the forthcoming regular meeting of the
Forum.
In  the  meanwhile,  the  first  meeting  has  taken  place.  Upon  my  proposal,  the  G-7  Ministers  and
Governors have appointed Andrew Crockett to be the Chairman of the Forum for three years. That
guarantees  the  necessary  experience  as  well  as  continuity.  Three  Working  Groups  have  been
established:
-  The Working Group on Highly  Leveraged  Activities  and  Institutions;  Howard  Davis  (UK)  has
the chair.
-  The Working Group on Short-term Capital Flows; Mario Draghi (Italy) has the chair.
-  The Working Group on Offshore Centres; John Palmer (Canada) has the chair.
The  second  meeting  is  scheduled  for  mid-September.  I  am  personally  following  the  work  of  the
Forum with great interest, of course, but also at some distance because from September 1st onwards I
shall be only an outside observer, but an interested one.
And  let  me  end  with  the  following  remark:  if  the  Forum  can  help  to  improve  the  international
financial framework, it may make a greater contribute to coping with systemic risk than a lender of
last resort ever could.
3
BIS Review   72/1999
BIS Review   72/1999
4
