Mr Carse speaks about the regulatory framework of e-banking
Keynote Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at the “Symposium on Applied R&D: Enhancing Global Competitiveness in the Next Millennium” on
8 October 1999.
 Introduction
There is no doubt that technology is now the single biggest strategic issue in banking. In particular,
bankers like other businessmen are, or should be, urgently reviewing the opportunities provided by the
internet. Although it is tempting to dismiss much of what is said about the internet as media hype, I do
believe that it is true to say that we are living in the “Age of the Internet”, and businesses that do not
adapt to the opportunities and challenges which this presents, will have a limited future.
Obviously this also creates challenges for regulators such as the HKMA, not least because the current
regulatory framework is still largely based on the more traditional physical frame of reference. As a
bank  regulator,  the  HKMA’s  primary  responsibility  in  this  regard  is  to  ensure  that  the  regulatory
framework continues to evolve and keep pace with technological developments. At the same time, the
HKMA  recognises  that  technological  innovations  such  as  e-banking  services  and  electronic  money
products are desirable advances that should not be impeded.
Development of e-banking in Hong Kong
Before  I  talk  about  the  regulatory  framework,  it  will  be  useful  to  take  stock  of  the  present  state  of
development of e-banking in Hong Kong. A regulatory framework is clearly needed only if the present
situation, or the outlook, requires it.
E-banking is a rather generic term and we need to be clear what we are talking about. In the HKMA,
we  tend  to  separate  e-banking  into  two  streams:  electronic  money  products,  mainly  in  the  form  of
stored value cards, and electronic delivery channel products.
As regards electronic money, I think that it is fair to say that the progress so far has been somewhat
disappointing as far as banks are concerned. There are two main stored value card schemes operated
by banks, Mondex and Visa Cash. Both have been in the market place for some time now. However, it
seems that these products have not yet gained wide acceptance. This is not unique to Hong Kong. In
fact,  the  reaction  to  these  products  around  the  world  has  been  lukewarm  so  far.  It  appears  that  the
product  is,  for  the  present  time  at  least,  ahead  of  customer  demand.  This  may  change  when  the
electronic purse function provided by a stored value card is integrated into a chip card and combined
with credit and debit card functions.
The other route to success is to link the electronic purse function more specifically to a particular type
of purchase which people have to make in their everyday lives. That has been demonstrated in Hong
Kong by the success of the Octopus card. As at end-September, 5.6 million Octopus cards have been
issued, recording 3.8 million transactions per day. At  this  level,  Octopus  must  be one  of  the  largest
stored value card systems in the world.
As  regards electronic  delivery  channels,  five  banks  have  already  launched  transactional  websites  in
Hong Kong, and a further twelve have told us that they are at the planning and development  stage.
Mobile phone banking is also very much a live issue. Once Y2K is out of the way, I think that we will
see a spate of further activity in this area. This reflects the fact that banks are increasingly becoming
aware of the need to supply the e-banking product while Hong Kong has a population very ready and
willing to accept new technology. Moreover, with 200,000 km of fibre optic cabling, linked to more
1
BIS Review 108/1999
than 1,500 buildings, Hong Kong has one of the finest telecommunications infrastructures in Asia. The
financial  infrastructure  is  also  one  of  the  most  advanced.  On  the  legal  front,  the  Government  has
already  introduced  a  draft  Bill  into  the  Legislative  Council  to  facilitate  electronic  commerce  by
granting legal recognition to digital signatures and by establishing a licensing system for certification
authorities. Hong Kong Post is establishing a public key infrastructure for Hong Kong and will launch
its Certificate Authority service before the end of this year. The HKMA welcomes and fully supports
these initiatives.
Implications for banks
The prospects for e-banking in Hong Kong are therefore favourable. However, there are also risks to
be managed, and I shall be looking at these more closely. Banks are of course already used to dealing
with at least some of the issues that crop up in an electronic banking environment, and so have built up
experience and expertise to deal with these. However, I do believe that the internet, because of its low
cost, global reach and versatility raises the stakes for the banks – both in terms of the opportunities it
presents as well as the risks.
Strategic risk
In talking about these risks, let me start at the top – with the issue of strategic risk. In other words, will
the bank get it right? Will it make the right choices when it comes to investing in e-banking or will it
waste  money  by  going  down  a  technological  blind alley?  Should  it  attempt  to  take  the lead  in new
technology ahead of its competitors, or should it be a follower and adopt a “wait and see” approach?
The latter may be the safer course of action for smaller banks, though it does create the risk of being
left behind.
The  advantages  of  e-banking,  and  internet  banking  in  particular,  are  quite  clear  –  the  ability,  for
example, to disseminate information widely and instantaneously at low cost and to cross-sell products
in a much more effective way. But there are also strategic threats. The cheapness and global reach of
the internet opens up the threat of increased competition from new entrants who will no longer need a
branch network to operate effectively in any given market. This competition can be launched across
national frontiers. In the meantime, existing players are faced with the problem of what they do with
the branch networks they have so painstakingly built up over the years. Unless they can give the right
incentives  to  existing  customers  to  migrate  to  the  new  electronic  delivery  channels,  and  scale  back
their branch networks accordingly, the promised cost-savings from the internet may not be realised.
Moreover,  one  of  the  key  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  internet  is  the  ability  which  it  gives
customers to access and compare the offers of many different retailers, including banks. This greatly
increases  the  power  to  “shop  around”.  This  will  increasingly  be  done  with  the  help  of  automatic
shopping agents that will travel the net looking for the best deal on behalf of customers or through the
use of intermediaries who will offer consolidated product information and price quotes. This will drive
down  margins,  particularly  on  commodity-type  products,  and  erode  customer  loyalty.  As  has  often
been said, the Internet Age is all about customer empowerment.
What in this situation is a traditional bank to do? Is it simply a matter of waiting to be overtaken by a
trendy new virtual bank with a catchy name? Luckily, for the existing players it is not as simple as
that. Banking is not simply about cheap delivery, although that will become more and more important.
Running a bank is not like selling books or CDs: there is a whole range of other types of risk – credit,
liquidity, interest rate risk and market risk – that need to be taken into account. Moreover, while the
internet  does  indeed  lower  the  barriers  to  entry,  its  anonymity  and  the  vast  range  of  choices  also
increase  the  importance  of  brand  name.  Depositors  in  particular  will  feel  more  comfortable  with  a
name that they know and trust, and perhaps one whose name they see everyday in the street on signs
above physical bricks and mortar.
So banks with an existing brand name still have some advantage, but it is not something that can be
wholly taken for granted. The banks will have to work hard to maintain and build their brand image,
BIS Review 108/1999
2
and to offer products which differentiate themselves from their competitors. This is a tough challenge,
but it is one which the boards and senior management of banks in Hong Kong will have to confront.
Operational risk
Operational risk, including security risk, is of course one of the more frequently mentioned risks  in
connection with electronic banking. Security is not a new risk. We are all  familiar  with  the  various
security issues that banks are facing  on  a  day-to-day  basis,  e.g. robberies, thefts  of  ATM  machines,
frauds. However, banking transactions over the internet do pose new issues.
A  major  concern  about  the  internet  is  its  open  nature.  In  relation  to  banking  on  the  internet,  this
translates into increased risk of unauthorised access to, and alteration of, information. Accordingly, the
fundamental objectives that internet security arrangements should try to achieve are to:
• 
• 
authenticate the identity and authority of the parties concerned to ensure the enforceability of
transactions conducted through the internet;
restrict access to the system to those users who are authorised;
 maintain the secrecy of information while it is in passage over the communications network;
ensure  that  the  data  has  not  been  modified  either  accidentally  or  fraudulently  while  in
passage over the network; and
prevent unauthorised access to the bank’s central computer system and database.
• 
The security of transactions over  the  internet  was  one  of  the  issues  that  was  considered  by  a  Study
Group on Electronic Banking formed by the HKMA in July 1997. The results of this exercise were
published as an article in our Quarterly Bulletin in November of the same year. Based on the work of
the Study Group, the HKMA takes the view that developments in internet security technology have
generally  reached  a  point  where  adequate  security  for  banking  transactions  is  obtainable  in  a
commercially viable manner. The use of  sophisticated  cryptographic techniques, firewalls  and  other
security  tools  can  provide  security  that  is  comparable  to  that  offered  in  physical  transactions.
However, as with a physical transaction, the effectiveness of such measures is largely dependent on
their proper implementation and the establishment of a set of comprehensive policies and procedures
that are rigorously enforced.
However,  it  should  be  noted  that  this  is  only  a  temporary  assessment.  Continuing  developments  in
security  technology  are  required  to  maintain  the  effectiveness  of  security  measures  on  an  ongoing
basis as new threats to existing systems arise over time. Banks should accordingly be responsible for
ensuring that they keep up with such developments on a continuing basis. Unless they do this, their
existing security measures can quickly become obsolete. If security breaches arise from this, it would
not only expose the banks to risk of loss, but also more generally undermine the confidence of their
customers in the use of the internet for banking purposes. All the evidence suggests that security  is
very much at the forefront of customers’ minds in deciding whether to use this new medium.
Legal risk
In this connection, legal risk becomes an important issue in internet banking, and one aspect of this is
how any losses from security breaches should be apportioned between banks and their customers. In
this regard, the views of the HKMA are quite clear and have been communicated to the banks. Our
position, put simply, is that we do not believe that customers should be responsible for any security
breach or system problem that is not due to negligence on their part, and we have requested that this
should be reflected in the contractual agreements for internet banking services.
Reputational risk
Risk of damage to the bank’s reputation goes along with the other risks I have mentioned. It can arise,
for example, from operational risk even if customers suffer no actual damage. If a hacker successfully
3
BIS Review 108/1999
breaks into a bank’s website and makes alterations, the bank concerned can suffer substantial damage
to its reputation although customers’ balances are safe and the hacker has not obtained any financial
benefit. This does not only affect the individual bank concerned but may also undermine confidence in
the security of e-banking more generally and therefore slow down development in this area. Systems
breakdown,  even  if  only  temporary,  is  another  example  of  how  banks  may  be  affected  by  bad
publicity. Given the fact that the element of trust is so fundamental to banks’ business, banks will find
it  increasingly  important  to  adopt  measures  to  manage  reputational  risk  and  incorporate  public
relations strategies into their overall risk management framework.
Banking risks
As I have already mentioned, an internet-based bank is faced with the same types of banking risk as its
traditional counterparties. In some ways, the internet may heighten these risks. For example, the ability
to transfer funds between different bank accounts may increase deposit volatility and could, in extreme
situations,  lead  to  “virtual  bank  runs”.  Banks  will  need  to  build  this  possibility  into  their  liquidity
management  policies.  Similarly,  it  is  possible  that  credit  risks  could  increase  in  the  future  if  the
relationship with customers becomes more distant and more transitory, and if the banks relax credit
standards because of competitive pressures. On the other hand, banks will be better placed to obtain
and organise information about their customers in an electronic banking environment, and this could
help to improve credit evaluation techniques as well as to assist marketing. It all depends how much
information each bank has about a given customer. If the customer spreads his financial affairs across
a  large  number  of  internet-based  banks,  each  one  will  have  only  one  piece  of  the  overall  customer
profile.
Regulatory Framework
So  how  do  we  regulators  address  these  various  kinds  of  risk?  The  first  point  to  make  is  that  our
approach to the regulation and supervision of e-banking is still at an early stage, like the product itself,
and  is  still  evolving.  We  recognise  that  we  have  a  lot  of  work  to  do  in  keeping  abreast  of,  and
monitoring,  developments.  This  is  part  of  our  general  approach  of  trying  to  improve  our  ability  to
determine that banks have in place adequate systems to measure, identify and control the various types
of risk with which they are faced. In the case of electronic banking, this will require us to recruit more
bank examiners with specialist knowledge in information technology.
As already indicated, our existing regulatory framework is split into two parts, e-money in the form of
stored value cards and electronic delivery channels.
As regards the first of these, Hong Kong is one of the jurisdictions around the world that has chosen to
put in place a specific legal framework to deal with the issue of stored value cards. This is contained in
the Banking Ordinance. The thinking behind the legislation was that the issue of multi-purpose stored
value cards such as Mondex and Visa Cash is an activity akin to the taking of deposits or the issue of
banknotes, and should be confined to licensed banks. On the other hand, we wanted to allow flexibility
for non-banks to issue limited purpose cards which would have a distinct core use, such as payment
for transport services, but could also be used for a restricted range of ancillary or incidental purposes.
There  is  provision  for  the  issuers  of  such  cards  to  be  licensed  as  a  special  type  of  deposit-taking
company  under  the  Banking  Ordinance.  If  the  range  of  non-core  uses  is  very  limited,  it  can  be
exempted altogether. The Octopus card presently falls into this latter category, although the issuer has
stated  publicly  its  intention  to  broaden  the  range  of  permitted  usages  and  to  apply  for  DTC  status.
Although there are no candidates at present, it would be open to other non-bank issuers to go down the
same route – in which case, if we received an application, we would want to be sure that the issuer was
financially  sound  and  that  the  card  scheme  itself  is  sound  in  terms  of  chip  security  and  risk
management policies and procedures surrounding it.
When it comes to electronic banking channels, our regulatory approach is, at this stage, less specific in
nature. The first step is to know what the banks are actually up to in areas such as internet banking.
We therefore issued a letter to authorised institutions in 1997 saying that while banks do not need to
BIS Review 108/1999
4
seek formal approval from the HKMA to offer their services through the internet, they should discuss
with us in advance their plans to do so. This is to enable the HKMA to assess whether the institution’s
proposed  internet  banking  system  is  sound  and  the  service  provided  through  the  internet  will  have
adequate security. Note that we are not looking for absolute security. This does not exist in either the
electronic or physical world of banking. However, the level of security should  be  “fit for  purpose”,
i.e. appropriate  to  the  type  of  transactions  to  be  conducted.  The  important  thing  is  for  the  banks  to
undertake a rigorous analysis of what their security needs are in the context of the particular service
that they are planning to offer. The HKMA therefore expects that the security aspects of the system
will have been reviewed by qualified independent experts and that the risk management systems and
internal controls will be reviewed and evaluated on a regular basis e.g. by external or internal auditors.
We  also  discuss  with  the  banks  their  approach  to  the  other  types  of  risk  described  earlier,  with
particular focus on how the risks from the internet banking service are shared between the bank and its
customers.
Apart  from  these  general  considerations,  a  number  of  specific  issues  arise  in  relation  to  internet
banking. The first is how we would treat the pure internet bank, i.e. a “virtual bank” that delivers its
services  entirely  over  the internet.  If  such a  bank  wished to  be authorised  to take  deposits  in  Hong
Kong,  it  could  not  be  allowed  to  exist  wholly  in  cyberspace.  It  would  need  to  have  a  physical
establishment here, either as a locally incorporated bank or as a branch of a foreign bank. This would
be necessary to provide a point of contact with the bank in Hong Kong for  both  customers  and the
HKMA. In particular, we would require books and records to be held in Hong Kong which we could
inspect. Also, like any other bank, a virtual bank would have a balance sheet and would need to hold
capital  and  liquidity  against  the  risks  in  that  balance  sheet.  Parentage  would  also  be  important  –  it
would be highly desirable from our point of view that an internet bank was itself majority-owned by
another  well-established  bank  that  could  provide  guidance  and  financial  support  if  necessary.  In
general,  we  would  need  to  be  assured  that  the  virtual  bank  has  “substance”,  and  is  not  simply  a
“concept”,  taking  advantage  of  the  popularity  of  the  internet.  On  this  basis,  our  authorisation  and
supervisory regime for virtual banks would be similar to that for conventional banks.
However,  an  offshore  internet  bank,  whether  wholly  “virtual”  or  not,  might  not  attempt  to  take
deposits  in  Hong  Kong  in  the  strict  legal  sense  –  in  other  words,  the  deposit  contract  might  not
necessarily  be  created  in  Hong  Kong.  Instead,  the  offshore  internet  bank  might  invite  potential
customers to send their money to a location abroad, where the deposit would be legally created. In this
case, the bank would be taking deposits outside Hong Kong and would not require authorisation under
the Banking Ordinance to carry on a deposit-taking business here.
But that is not the end of the story. It is also an offence to advertise for deposits in Hong Kong, even if
they are to be taken outside the territory, unless the disclosure requirements of the Fifth Schedule of
the Banking Ordinance are adhered to. An advertisement would include one contained on a website.
The  problem  is  how  to  determine  whether  a  particular  offshore  website  is  targeted  at  Hong  Kong.
Here, we would have to look at the circumstances of each case – whether, for example, the offshore
internet  bank  advertised  its  services  in  the  local  Hong  Kong  press  or  accepted  Hong  Kong  dollar
deposits or refused to take deposits from a number of specified jurisdictions, but did not include Hong
Kong  among  these.  If  we  come  across  such  cases  of  illegal  advertisements targeted  at  Hong  Kong,
how would we deal with them? The easiest case would be where the bank itself is respectable and is
based in an overseas location which is properly supervised. We could then write to the bank itself and
to its supervisors to notify them of the advertising rules in Hong Kong, and request the bank either to
comply with these rules or to add Hong  Kong  to  the  list  of the jurisdictions from  which it  was  not
prepared  to  take  deposits.  If  necessary,  we  would  seek  the  cooperation  of  the  home  supervisor  to
enforce this request. It might also be necessary to supplement this with a reminder to  local  Internet
Service Providers about the advertising rules in the Banking Ordinance and to seek their cooperation
to block offending websites. The problem with this, however, is that the website in question may not
actually be posted on the local ISP’s server – in which case, there may be little that the ISP can do.
If the bank concerned is not respectable and it is based in an uncooperative jurisdiction, the situation
would be more difficult to handle. This reinforces the point that the public in Hong Kong should be
very careful about sending money to any bank which advertises on the internet and which is based in a
5
BIS Review 108/1999
jurisdiction where the degree of regulation is in doubt. In the final analysis, no form of regulation can
replace  individuals  taking  care  in  selecting  the  party  with  whom  they  do  business.  Again,  this
reinforces the importance of brand name and reputation in the internet banking context.
Conclusion
To conclude, I think that e-banking is the way forward for the banking industry, and banks in Hong
Kong  are  well-placed  to  capitalise  upon  this.  E-banking  does  bring  new  challenges  and  perhaps
additional risks for banks, consumers and regulators. But it also brings new opportunities to improve
the  efficiency  of  the  payment  system  and  the  quality  of  banking  service.  There  is  no  question  of
avoiding the changes. The question is how to manage them. This is mainly an issue for the banks. But
the HKMA can  help  by  providing  a  regulatory  environment  in  which the  risks  of  such changes  are
minimised, and the potential benefits can be safely realised. This is an on-going task which has only
just begun. We have already made a reasonable start and I hope we will see encouraging developments
in the next few years to come.
BIS Review 108/1999
6
