Mr Remsperger addresses the imbalances in global savings and
analyses the savings process and investment structure in Germany*
Lecture given by Prof Dr Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at
the  “Seminar  for  Central  Banks  and  Governmental  Institutions”,  held  in  Kempfenhausen  on
21 October 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to present my ideas in two parts. In the first part I shall address the imbalances in global
savings. The second part will then focus on analysing the savings process in Germany. In doing so, I
shall mainly deal with the decline in the savings ratio, although I shall also go into the globalisation of
German savings.
Global savings imbalances in the 1990s – the “absorption effect” of the United States
Let me start by reminding you that after the fall of the “Iron Curtain” the question was raised as to
whether  the  world  financial  markets  were  at  all  able  to  provide  the  considerable  additional  funds
needed both for investing in the developing and emerging market economies and for reconstructing the
Central  and  East  European  countries  in  transition  along  market  economy  lines,  if  major  western
industrial countries such as the United States1 were simultaneously requiring a significant amount of
international resources as a result of their public sector budget deficits. There was talk of a risk of a
global “savings gap”. At the IMF, which at the time was undertaking an in-depth examination of the
problem of savings in a growing world economy, this was put in the following words:
“With  today’s large  potential  investment  demands,  especially  in  emerging  market  economies  in  the
developing world and among the countries in transition from central planning, the question naturally
arises whether the supply of saving will be adequate to finance worthwhile projects around the world.
The  question  is  made  sharper  because  of  growing  pressures  on  savings.  Since  the  early  1980s,
government  absorption  of  private  sector  saving  has  increased  sharply,  and  the  retirement-age
populations of some industrial countries are starting to increase rapidly.”2
But today, we may say that global savings have obviously grown more sharply than the total demand
for funds. A major contributing factor to this has been the reduction in excessive government deficits
which  was  prompted  in  Europe,  not  least  by  compliance  with  the  fiscal  criteria  for  entry  into  the
planned  monetary  union.  In  terms  of  gross  domestic  product,  the  budget  deficits  in  the  European
Union fell from 6% to slightly below 2%3 in the period between 1993 and 1998. In the United States,
the considerable budget deficits have even turned into surpluses. On the demand side, the fact that the
development  of  capital  spending  in  many  countries  was  subdued  following  the  1993  recession  also
contributed  to  an  easing  of  the  situation,  insofar  as  external  financing  requirements  of  the  private
sector remained limited.
 I am grateful to Peter Heinelt and Gerhard Ziebarth for helpful comments. Due to illness of the author the speech was
given by G Ziebarth.
1 The financing deficit of the federal budget was 3½% of GDP on average in the years 1990-93.
2
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, May 1995, p. 67.
3 The IMF’s estimates for 1999 are 1½% altogether.
1
BIS Review 115/1999
In  the  meantime,  the  turbulence  emanating  from  South-East  Asia  which  rapidly  shook  the  financial
and foreign exchange markets one after another, as well as the severe structural crisis in Japan, have
led to the emergence of new macroeconomic imbalances. This is characterised by the high aggregate
surpluses  of  the  economies  in  the  emerging  markets  of  South-East  Asia  which,  with  their  own
absorption being weak, set off a massive export offensive. An additional factor is the large surplus in
the Japanese external balance. By contrast, the United States has a large external deficit, whereas the
European economies have been less affected – at least directly – by the shocks from the Far East.4
Above all, the “sucking-in” of imports which went with the  robust  domestic  economy  led,  within  a
short  period,  to  a  rapid  expansion  of  the  current  account  deficit  in  the  United  States.  In  1998,  it
accounted for around 2½% of gross domestic product and was one and a half times as high as on an
average of the years 1995-97 and is likely to rise even further in 1999. The United States’ increasing
recourse to foreign resources, which is reflected by those figures, is closely linked to the decline in
private savings of US citizens. This decline has not even been offset by the notable progress made in
consolidation by the public sector.5 The savings ratio of the US population was almost halved in the
1980s.6  Thereafter,  it  weakened  further.  In  1998,  the  savings  volume  was  only  one-seventh  of  the
amount at the beginning of the 1990s. The private savings ratio has now reached negative territory.
The  continuous  and  steep  decline  in  savings  primarily  reflects  a  sharp  expansion  of  private
consumption. Along with the similarly strong growth in fixed capital expenditure, private consumption
has played a key part in stabilising economic growth in the United States for more than seven years
now and in creating almost 14 million new jobs. Consumption has been given an additional stimulus
by the sharp increases in asset values.7 The general assumption is that only 5% of each one-dollar gain
in value results directly in an expansion of consumer spending.8 If the volume of capital gains from the
exceptional boom in the stock market is added to the equation, however, the wealth effect is indeed of
some quite considerable relevance.
The US population’s net financial assets at the end of 1998 were slightly less than USD19,000 billion
and have hence more than doubled since 1990. Only around one-third of the growth in assets was due
to current savings, two-thirds was mainly attributable to capital gains from direct and indirect private
equity holdings. On an annual average, this meant a valuation gain of just under USD1,000 billion or
almost one-fifth of disposable income. As a result, the distribution of wealth is likely to have widened
further. Moreover, it is likely that capital gains in assets have also been regarded as a substitute for
savings.
At  this  point,  please  allow  me  to  make  the  cautious  observation  that  it  is  only  the  existence  of  a
favourable growth-interest rate situation accompanying a given external primary balance which makes
it possible for the total use of funds for consumption and investment to exceed the scope for income of
the economy as a whole for any extended period of time. If that is not the case, the country in question
has  a  sustainability  problem.  At  any  rate,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  the  funding  of  current
consumption  by  capital  imports  represents  a  burden  on  future  incomes,  since,  in  this  case,  the
servicing of debt cannot be generated from a higher capital stock. At the same time, there is a cyclical
4
5
See  also  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  External  economic  adjustments  in  the  industrial  countries  after  the  crises  in  major
emerging markets, Monthly Report, September 1999, p. 27 ff.
In 1998 the Federal budget alone closed with a surplus of 1.6% of GDP; an even better result is expected for 1999.
6 According to the NIPA concept, from slightly below one-tenth to no more than 5%.
7
See  H  C  Sherman,  Die  amerikanische  Sparquote  sinkt  auf  Null,  IFO  Schnelldienst  8/99  p. 10  ff.;  BHF-Bank,  USA:
Entwicklung des Aktienmarktes beeinflußt Sparquote und Konsum, Wirtschaftsdienst Nr. 1926 vom 24.3.1999; L Boone,
C  Giorno  and  P  Richardson,  Stock  market  fluctuations  and  consumption  behaviour:  some  recent  evidence,  OECD
Economics Department Working Papers, No. 208, Dec. 1998.
8
See S Ludvigson and Ch Steindel, How important is the stock market effect on consumption? in FRBNY Economic Policy
Review, July 1999, p. 32.
BIS Review 115/1999
2
downside  risk  associated  with  the  savings  gap  in  the  national  economy  caused  in  part  by  wealth
effects.
Scale and underlying causes of the decline in private savings in Germany
Unlike  in  the  United  States,  savings  trends  in  Western  Europe  as  a  whole,  and  in  Germany  in
particular, have been less dramatic and rather quiet. Even so, there have been some major structural
changes in Germany, too. For example, the private savings ratio has been declining in Germany since
the early-1990s as well. If, as an initial stage of adjustment to the new methodology of the ESA 95, the
calculation of savings is extended to include the purchase and use of private residential property and
the  related  financing  process,  then  the  private  savings  ratio  is  estimated  to  have  fallen  by  around
3 percentage points between 1991 and 1998. At around 10½% latterly it roughly corresponded to the
1967  level. The  decline  in savings  in  Germany  has  thus  been  somewhat  weaker  than  in  the  United
States, although it stands in marked contrast to the development in other countries (such as France and
the United Kingdom).9
Since German unification the declining trend in savings also contrasts quite clearly with the cyclical
savings pattern which – although quite often eclipsed by special factors – had prevailed in  Western
Germany  since  1970  in  line  with  the  development  of  households’  real  incomes.  The  pro-cyclical
savings  behaviour  suggests  that  German  households  basically  preferred  as  steady  a  supply  of
consumer goods as possible. In doing so, they were guided by the experience that changes in income
growth are often not of a permanent nature. Furthermore, there exists the tendency of adjusting only
gradually  to  a  new  income  situation.  Both  factors  resulted  in  the  savings  ratio  cushioning
discontinuities in the income trend at least for some period of time and thus helped in a certain sense
to smooth consumption over time.
The fact that the previous savings pattern gave way to a continuous downward trend from the early
1990s initially reflected a return to normal from the high level reached in 1990. At that time, the 1986-
90 tax reform had considerably expanded households’ scope of action in the old Länder. Thereafter,
both cyclical and structural factors led to a lower propensity to save. In the period from 1992–1998
real  disposable  income  per  capita  grew  at  an  average  of  ¾%  and  hence  less  strongly  than  real
consumption (+1%).
The deceleration of income growth was accompanied by a marked divergence of the income situation
within  the  households  sector  which  already  becomes  evident  in  the  differing  developments  in  the
individual  categories  of  income.  There  was  a  sharp  reduction  in  employment  in  the  1990s.  The
resultant losses in income led to labour income becoming continuously less important as a source of
savings  within  private  income  budgets.  Transfer  payments  were  not  able  to  provide  an  adequate
counterweight to this.
An equally negative effect came from  the  sharp  fall in interest rates  since autumn  1990  which  –  in
terms of the yield on bonds outstanding – reached almost 5½ percentage points by the end of 1998. As
a result, income from financial assets lost a considerable amount of momentum and was no longer able
to act as a mainstay of savings in its own right to the same degree as it had done before. The stronger
preference  for  investments  with  potential  capital  appreciation  had  the  same  statistical  effect.
According  to  the  usual  methodological  definitions  of  the  national  accounts,  revaluation  gains  are
reflected neither in income nor in savings.
As a rule, a certain part of the  received  interest  payments  and  dividends  is  reinvested,  although  the
level  cannot  be  quantified  exactly.  Over  the  longer  term,  this  self-alimentation  of  savings  has
undoubtedly  increased.  This  is  revealed,  for  example,  by  the  preference  for  insurance  savings  and
9
See  also  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Overall  financial  flows  in  1998,  Monthly  Report,  June  1999,  p. 26  ff.;  Deutsche
Bundesbank, Changes in households’ asset situation since the beginning of the nineties, Monthly Report, January 1999,
p. 33 ff.
3
BIS Review 115/1999
portfolio  investments.  If,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  total  income  from  financial  assets  is  used  as  a
yardstick, in the years 1997/1998 this accounted for around three-quarters of the concurrent financial
asset formation, but this was well down on the comparable figure at the time of the last peak in interest
rates (82%).
The cumulative negative influences emanating from labour and property income could no longer be
offset by the relatively higher savings resulting from the stronger expansion of entrepreneurial income.
Households in the new Länder were affected by this much more than those in Western Germany. The
considerable boost to income in the first few years after German unification – a good part of which
was  financed  by  western  transfer  payments  –  led  to  East  German  savings  ratios  initially  rapidly
approaching  a  level  comparable  to  that  in  Western  Germany.  The  fact  that  the  catching-up  process
subsequently faltered had a significant adverse  impact  on  the  savings  activities  of  the  population in
Eastern Germany.
The deterioration of the income situation was further aggravated by the increasing burden of taxes and
social security contributions. In 1998, the wage tax and social security contributions alone, accounted
for around 22% of private gross income, that means 1½ percentage points above its 1991 level. Higher
indirect taxes were an additional factor.
Besides the sluggish development of the economy as a whole, the declining power of self-alimentation
and the upward movement of the fiscal burden, the increasing share of households with a low savings
ratio also had a contractionary impact on savings in the  longer term.  Those  households  include, for
example,  single-person  households,  whose  number  has  risen  more  than  twice  as  fast  as  that  of  all
households  in  the  old  Länder  in  the  past  20  years.  Firstly,  this  reflects  the  ageing  of  society.10
Secondly, changes in the spending behaviour of people growing up can also be observed. Evidently,
present consumption has gained ground at the expense of future consumption.
The  younger  generation’s  higher  propensity  to  consume  has  probably  been  boosted  as  well  by
expectations of future inheritances and gifts which are regarded as a substitute for own provisions for
the future. The inheritance volume alone probably amounts at present to between DM200 billion and
DM250 billion annually. The importance of financial asset transfers between the generations is likely
to increase further. It remains to be seen whether this will have a dampening effect on private savings
and the domestic supply of capital in the future.11
With a view to the Anglo-Saxon countries it is justified to ask whether wealth effects might not also
have played a role in the decline in savings in Germany in the 1990s. In my opinion, such influences
can be more or less neglected in Germany so far. For example, four-fifths of the increase in private
financial assets from 1990–1998 was due to the accumulation of current savings and only one-fifth –
on account of the limited holding of shares – was attributable to capital gains.12 In the United States
and the United Kingdom the corresponding ratio was around two-thirds. Though I am sometimes told
by some of  my friends that they could finance a nice holiday from higher stock prices, I am firmly
convinced that the phenomenon of consuming capital gains tends to be an alien one for shareholders in
Germany.
10 Demographic  changes  may,  according  to  empirical  evidence,  have  a  strong  impact  on  private  savings.  See  also
M Higgins, Demography, National Savings and International Capital Flows, International Economic Review, Vol. 39 (2)
1998, p. 343-369.
11 The importance of inheritances is emphasised, for example, by D N Weil, The Saving of the Elderly in Micro and Macro
Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109 (1), 1994, p. 55-81.
12 Based on disposable income the holding gains accounted for an estimated 3% on average in the years 1991-98, compared
with slightly below one-fifth in the United States.
BIS Review 115/1999
4
Shifts in the investment structure
The  decline  in  savings  in  Germany  was  mainly  reflected in  lower  private  financial  asset  formation,
which contrasted with an increasing preference for the acquisition of fixed assets. Firstly, the shortage
of  housing  accommodation  owing  to  the  considerable  inflow  of  immigrants  in  the  late-1980s  and
early-1990s and the ensuing rise in rents was a strong incentive for capital spending  in the  housing
sector. Secondly, this trend was further reinforced by the sustained fall in mortgage costs and the many
different  public  sector  promotional  measures  which  favoured  external  financing  and,  moreover,
directed a considerable amount of private capital into the new Länder. Whereas private gross capital
spending  on  residential  property  accounted  for  around  7½%  of  disposable  income  in  1991,  it
reached 10% in the peak years of 1994-95, when residential housing construction boomed. Owing to
weaker demand for residential property as investment, this ratio had gone down again somewhat by
1998, although the preference for owner-occupied accommodation had a stabilising effect.
Private  financial  asset  formation  has  fallen  from  slightly  more  than  13%  at  the  time  of  German
unification  to  10%  of  disposable  income  in  1998.  Given  the  continuing  decline  of  interest  rates,
yield-oriented  investors  preferred  forms  of  saving  with  a  comparatively  favourable  return  or  a
correspondingly  high  potential  for  capital  gains.  Investment  in  shares  benefited  from  this  trend,
receiving  an  additional  stimulus  from  the  upturn  in  the  stock  market  as  well  as  from  the  Deutsche
Telekom  going public and the introduction  of  new stock  market  segments.  Purchases  of  investment
fund  certificates  expanded,  with  the  focus  of  investment  recently  shifting  increasingly  towards
share-based funds. The turbulences on stock exchanges in the past few years have so far not had much
of  an  effect  on  the  growing  preference  for  equity  investments.  Furthermore,  a  large  number  of
corresponding commitments are being stabilised by investment savings plans.
Purchases of certificates  have  proved  to  be  an  ideal  vehicle  for  diversifying  private  financial  assets
internationally.  An  estimated  DM40  billion  alone  flowed  into  foreign  share  certificates  or  into  the
certificates of internationally operating German share-based funds in 1998. This was twice the amount
as in the previous year. All in all, one-fifth of German private gross financial asset formation might
have taken place abroad last year. Private foreign assets – as far as they can be recorded statistically13
– thus rose to an estimated DM500 billion by the end of 1998. This figure was twice as high as at the
beginning of the 1990s and corresponded to almost one-tenth of total private financial assets.
Private households invested a steady flow of funds into what is known as contractual saving. Apart
from tax considerations, the driving force behind the investment of funds with insurance enterprises,
was mainly uncertainty about the statutory pension system, along with the high degree of  monetary
stability  and  the  comparatively  attractive  rates  of  return.  Private  net  savings  with  life  insurance
enterprises  alone  almost  doubled  to  around  DM77  billion  (including  accumulated  interest  payments
and  profit  credits)  between  1991  and  1998.  By  contrast,  the  “free”  financial  investments,  i.e.  those
without any longer-term contractual link, shrank by around one-quarter in the same period. Given the
low  interest  rates  this  was  especially  at  the  expense  of  funds  placed  with  banks  or  bond  market
investments.  Credit  institutions  were  only  temporarily  able  to  buck  this  trend  by  offering  special
savings instruments at attractive interest rates.
If private investments with life insurance enterprises (and pension funds) and in investment funds are
taken  together,  this  produces  an  investment  volume  of  DM1,650  billion  as  of  end-1998  –  almost  a
doubling  in  volume  since  1990.  Its  share  in  the  statistically  recordable  private  financial  assets  rose
from around one-fifth to almost 30% during that period. The proportion accounted for by equities also
increased  to  almost  one-tenth.  The  bond  portfolio  has  been  just  about  able  to  hold  its  place  in  the
ranking of investment vehicles since 1990. The overall proportion of certificates, shares and interest
bearing  securities  in  private  assets  has  increased  quite  considerably  from  24%  to  32%  during  the
nineties,  whereas  funds  placed  with  banks  continued  to  lose  considerable  ground  (from  48½%  to
40%).
13 Mainly in the form of direct and indirect securities holdings.
5
BIS Review 115/1999
With the increasing focus on real assets, individuals’ propensity to borrow also rose temporarily in the
1990s. However, in terms  of their level  of  indebtedness,  German  households  remained  at  the lower
end of the international league. As in similar earlier periods, higher external financing of private fixed
asset investments was stimulated by declining interest rates and a government promotion policy which
favoured  borrowing.  However,  the  peak  is  likely  to  have  been  passed  in  1993-94.  In  the  ensuing
period, the shifts of emphasis in  residential  construction  and  the  gradual  reduction  of  tax  privileges
tended rather to support higher internal financing again. By contrast, the decline in interest rates has
not  significantly  increased  the  propensity  to  raise  consumer  borrowings;  this  is  also  supported  by
relevant studies.14
Implications for economic policy
The  long-term  changes  in  asset  formation  and  investor  behaviour  show  not  only  that  German
households have a consistently strong preference for the acquisition of real estate, but also that they
have  become  increasingly  sensitive  in  their  portfolio  allocation.  As  far  back  as  the  early-1970s,  an
increased yield awareness – not least under the impact of the inflationary pressure at that time – gave
rise  to  a  greater  diversification  of  private  financial  investments.  As  a  result,  investments  with
insurance companies or in the bond market moved to the fore in investor’s preferences. In the 1990s a
greater  willingness  to  incur  risks  –  undoubtedly  encouraged  by  the  stock  market  rally  –  and  an
open-minded attitude towards new developments in the capital markets has boosted the preference for
securities. This benefited not only the expansion of a share-buying “culture” in Germany, but also the
professionalisation and globalisation of private portfolios.
To secure a high-quality domestic supply of funds in the long term, the process of maturing among
German  investors  should  not  be  disturbed  politically.  It  is  equally  important  to  encourage  private
savings,  which  in  Germany  –  unlike  in  the  United  States  –  has  mainly  been  suffering  since  the
early-1990s from a gloomier economic situation and a variety  of  unresolved  economic  problems.  A
number of economic and fiscal policy considerations can be derived from this.
First  of  all,  this  includes  substantial  and  continuous  progress  in  the  labour  market.  I  believe  that  a
reliable moderate wage policy, a differentiation of the wage structure and a greater flexibility of labour
input  remain  indispensable  in  this  context.  In  addition,  fiscal  policy  has  to  provide  enterprises  and
households  with  greater  planning  certainty  and  better  incentives  for  performance.  A  more  equal
distribution  of  burdens  between  the  generations  is  also  essential,  as  are  stimuli  to  increase  private
provisions  for  old  age  in  order  to  create  a  third  pillar  alongside  statutory  and  company  pension
systems.
Such  ideas  have  now  been  incorporated  into  the  Federal  government’s  plans  to  reform  the  pension
system.  This  might  even  be  underpinned  by  specifically  targeted  fiscal  measures.15  With  a  view  to
enterprises,  it  will  be  particularly  important,  given  the  global  challenges,  to  produce  a  sustained
strengthening  of  the  earnings  base  for  forming  sufficient  risk  capital,  since  this  is  the  only  way  to
create a macroeconomic counterweight to offset a decline in private savings.
The necessary reforms entail budgetary burdens. The only way to cope with them will be by ensuring
that  the  state  spending  ratio  is  simultaneously  lowered  over  the  medium  term.  A  sustained
consolidation of  public  sector  finance  would tend to increase the  savings  ratio in the  economy  as  a
whole and would hence take account of future demographic change.16 Recently, Alan Greenspan also
14 See  H-J  Hansen,  The  impact  of  interest  rates  on  private  consumption  in  Germany,  Economic  Research  Group  of  the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Discussion paper 3/96.
15 See also M Feldstein, Fiscal policies, capital formation, and capitalism, in European Economic Review 39 (1995), p. 418.
“Instead of correcting the tax and transfer problems that have contributed to the low rate of capital formation and growth,
the  natural  tendency  of  the  political  process  may  be  to  emphasize  policies  that  appear  to  have  favourable  short-term
effects but that ignore the longer term consequences.”
16 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The economic scene in Germany in spring 1999, Monthly Report, May 1999, p. 67.
BIS Review 115/1999
6
drew attention to this point again in a statement he made on the statutory pension system to the House
of Representatives.17
In Germany, up to now households have been the most important provider of savings. Of course, the
funds  provided  by  them,  were  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  enormous  financing  requirements  of  the
German  unification  process.  This  development  is  also  reflected  by  the  fact  that  net  foreign  assets,
which were around DM500 billion at the end of 1990, have now declined to one-tenth of that volume
owing to transactions and revaluations. This was primarily attributable to the dramatic expansion of
the  government’s  and  banks’  bond  market  liabilities  to  foreign  lenders.  The  likewise  strongly
expanding direct investments and portfolio investments of domestic enterprises and individuals abroad
could not keep pace with that. Thus, the public sector’s securities liabilities abroad rose from around
DM150 billion at the end of 1990 to DM691 billion in the middle of 1998. In the same period, the
banks’  securities  liabilities  abroad  increased  from  slightly  less  than  DM45  billion  to  almost
DM450 billion. In other words, this also means that foreign investors’ exposure towards Germany has
risen sharply in the 1990s. In the past few years the decline in net external assets has slowed down
markedly. However, this was due less to a government fiscal policy which also tended to be geared
towards consolidation than it was to an easing of the credit markets triggered by enterprises. First, the
slowdown in residential housing after 1994 curbed demand for construction financing. Second, for a
long  time  stimuli  from  exports  failed  to  have  a  significant  impact  on  capital  spending  activities.  A
good part of the overall modest fixed investment could therefore be financed from internal funds.
Major  tensions  are  to  be  feared  if  individuals’  propensity  to  save  remains  at  a  low  level,  the
consolidation of public sector budgets is not making consistent and rapid progress, while enterprises’
investments are again rising more strongly. To avoid a recourse to external resources, the necessary
strengthening in profitability of the private sector would then become imperative. Viewed this way, a
strengthening  of  enterprises  would  not  only  be  a  contribution  to  improving  financial  conditions  in
Germany, but also to enhancing stability in Europe.
17 See  A  Greenspan,  Statement  to  the  Congress,  in  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin,  May  1999,  p. 304,  “Only  an  increase  in
national  saving  or  an  increase  in  the  efficiency  with  which  we  use  our  saving  can  help  us  meet  the  retirement
requirements of the coming years”.
7
BIS Review 115/1999
