Mr Duisenberg and Mr Noyer report on the
outcome of the latest meeting of the ECB Governing Council
Introductory statement given by Mr Willem Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank and
Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  the  Press  Conference,  held  in
Frankfurt, on 7 October 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
The Vice-President and I are here today to report on the outcome of today’s meetings of the Governing
Council of the ECB, which was attended by the European Commissioner, Mr Solbes Mira.
The outcome of today’s discussion was that the Governing Council has decided to leave the prevailing
ECB interest rates unchanged. The interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem
will thus remain 2.5%. In addition, the interest rate on the marginal lending facility will continue to be
3.5% and that on the deposit facility has been kept at 1.5%.
The  Governing  Council  conducted  an  intensive  discussion  of  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  in
which it was concluded that the balance of risks to price stability remains on an upward trend.
With  regard  to  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area,  the  three-month  average  of  the  12-month
growth  rates  of  M3  for  the  period  June  to  August  1999  increased  to  5.6%,  from  5.5%  in  the
three-month period ending in July 1999. While a good deal of caution is required when interpreting
short-term  monetary  developments,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  12-month  growth  rate  of  M3  has
displayed an upward trend during 1999. The high growth of M3 seems to be related to the low level of
opportunity costs of holding monetary assets, particularly the most liquid components. Furthermore,
the gradual improvement in the real economic situation may have fostered the expansion of M3.
Credit  to  the  private  sector  also  continued  to  expand  at  a  fast  rate  in  August  1999,  namely  10.7%.
Since the start of Stage Three credit to the private sector has been expanding at rates of around 10%.
Developments in credit growth in August tend to confirm that the demand for loans remains strong,
supported  by  low  bank  lending  rates,  indicating  that  euro  area  residents  do  not  face  borrowing
constraints.
On balance, the Governing Council believes that monetary conditions, especially the sustained growth
of M3 in excess of the reference value, signal a rather generous liquidity situation in the euro area.
Long-term nominal interest rates in the euro area continued to increase in September. While it is likely
that this increase is related to expectations of a recovery of activity in the euro area, expectations of
increasing inflationary pressure may also play a role.
The  more  favourable  expectations  for  economic  development  in  the  euro  area  are  partly  connected
with  a  further  improved  outlook  for  the  world  economy,  as  is  also  reflected  in  the  recent  upward
revision of the forecast for world growth by the IMF. The growth of the US economy continues to be
strong, and in Japan economic indicators are now more clearly pointing towards an improvement in
economic activity. In addition, in some Asian countries the recovery in growth appears to be taking
place  somewhat  earlier  than  expected.  Notwithstanding  individual  downside  risks  in  the  countries  I
have  just  mentioned  and  a  more  general  uncertainty  regarding  the  recovery  in  Latin  America,  the
world economy seems to be set for higher growth.
As regards economic activity in the euro area, some important data have been released since we last
met. A first estimate by Eurostat for real GDP growth in the second quarter of 1999 points to slightly
lower quarter-on-quarter growth compared with the first quarter of this year. However, these data do
not appear to impinge on the view that there is an upturn in growth in the course of this year. In fact,
industrial production data for the period up to July confirm the gradual improvement of recent months,
1
BIS Review 108/1999
and  various  survey  data  suggest  that  there  was  a  further  strengthening  of  output  growth  in  the
industrial  sector  over  the  summer  months.  Evidence  for  the  consumer  sector  continues  to  point  to
broadly  robust  consumption  growth.  The  outlook  for  a  continuing  improvement  in  overall  activity
therefore remains favourable.
In line with our expectations, the annual rate of change in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
(HICP)  saw  a  further  rise  in  August  1999  to  1.2%,  up  from  1.1%  a  month  earlier.  This  upward
movement was mainly caused by the ongoing increase in oil prices. Some counterweight came from a
decline  in  unprocessed  food  prices  and  from  a  lower  rate  of  increase  in  services  prices.  Largely
reflecting  this  development in  services  prices,  the  HICP  rate  excluding  more  volatile components  –
namely  energy  and  seasonal  food  –  declined  to  0.9%  in  August,  having  risen  to  1.0%  in  July.  Oil
prices continued to increase further in September and, given the relatively short time of pass-through
to consumer prices, expectations of further increases in the overall HICP rate in the coming months
have become firmer.
In  conclusion,  monetary  and  credit  developments  indicate  that  continuous  close  attention  must  be
given  to  upward  risks  to  price  stability.  In  the  light  of  the  medium-term  orientation  of  the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy, the rising trend of M3 growth calls for great vigilance on the part of
monetary policy. The recent increase in oil prices will continue to impose additional upward pressure
on the HICP. Seen in isolation, the increase in energy prices should have only a temporary effect upon
consumer price increases, but it is essential that this effect does not trigger wage claims which prove
incompatible with price stability in the medium term.
Against the background of the medium-term outlook for a sustained acceleration in economic activity,
decisive structural reform is warranted in order to prevent early upward pressure on prices. In fact, the
Governing Council sees a strong case for enhancing structural reform in labour and product markets.
The anticipation of an expected cyclical improvement should not lead to a weakening of efforts in this
regard,  but  rather  it  should  be  used  as  a  welcome  opportunity  to  make  convincing  progress.  This,
together with continued wage moderation and fiscal adjustment in line with the Stability and Growth
Pact, would greatly facilitate the monetary policy task of maintaining price stability in an environment
of stronger growth.
Let  me  now  give  the  floor  to  the  Vice-President  to  introduce  three  additional  topics  which  we
discussed during our meeting:
In addition to reviewing the main monetary, financial and other economic indicators, the Governing
Council  formally  adopted  the  Decision  of  the  ECB  on  fraud  prevention,  according  to  which  an
independent  Anti-Fraud  Committee  will  be  established  to  enforce  an  anti-fraud  scheme  within  the
ECB.  The  Committee  will  be  composed  of  three  independent  persons  of  recognised  standing  and
professional  experience  in  the  fields  of  central  banking,  justice  and  policing.  Within  the  ECB,  the
Directorate Internal Audit is entrusted with the task of conducting all investigations relating to fraud
prevention  and  detection.  For  the  purpose  of  combating  fraud,  the  Director  of  Internal  Audit  will
report to the Anti-Fraud Committee. A cooperative relationship will be established with the European
Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF).
As I already emphasised at the last press conference, the  ECB  shares  the  concerns  of the  European
Parliament, the EU Council and the European Commission about the need to combat fraud and other
activities detrimental to the financial interests of the Communities and the ECB. You will find further
information relating to this Decision in the separate press release which has been issued today.
I  should  also  like  to  mention  that  the  Governing  Council  had  a  preliminary  discussion  on  EU
accession countries.
The  accession  of  new  members  to  the  European  Union  is  an  area  of  development  in  which  the
Eurosystem will be increasingly involved. As you are well aware, 12 countries are official candidates
for  membership  and  negotiations  have  already  started  with  a  “first  wave”  of  six  countries.  The
negotiations with these countries are intensifying and the chapters on Economic and Monetary Union
and on Free Movement of Capital have been opened this autumn.
BIS Review 108/1999
2
Against this background, the Governing Council has already considered a number of issues related to
EU  enlargement  in  areas  of  relevance  to  the  Eurosystem.  Furthermore,  the  Governing  Council  has
decided  to  organise  a  high-level  seminar  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the  central  banks  of  the
12 accession  countries  to  be  held  in  Helsinki  on  10–12 November  1999.  Following  a  number  of
bilateral contacts which the ECB has already had this year, the meeting in Helsinki will be attended by
the  governors  of  the  central  banks  of  the  accession  countries.  It  will  provide  the  opportunity  to
strengthen  the  working  relationships  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the  central  banks  of  accession
countries and to deepen the dialogue between the two sides.
Finally, the Governing Council approved 21 additional links established between securities settlement
systems which can be used for the transfer of foreign collateral in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy
and  intraday  credit  operations.  With  the  approval  of  these  links,  the  number  of  links  which  are
currently  eligible  to  be  used  by  the  Eurosystem  increased  from  26  to  47.  You  will  find  further
information relating to this decision in the separate press release which has been issued today.
3
BIS Review 108/1999
