Mr Nyberg comments on how EMU may affect the
Swedish housing loan market and its financing
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Föreningssparbanken  in
Warsaw on 14 October 1999.
 Thank you for giving me the opportunity to come here and give some points of view on how EMU
may affect the Swedish housing loan market and its financing. This is undeniably an issue which we
have every reason to take an interest in whether we take part in the monetary union or not.
One  of  the  ideas  with  EMU  is  to  create  a  more  efficient  market  for  goods  and  services  where
competition is increasing and  consumers  obtain  better  products  at  lower  prices.  In  the  housing  loan
market, this should mean that borrowers expect a greater range of products, more suppliers and lower
interest rates. How should the Swedish housing loan institutions handle this challenge?
Competition for customers
As we know, the national housing loan markets in Europe look rather different, which is illustrated by
the following diagram (figure 1). In countries such as Germany, Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands
and the United Kingdom, the total outstanding stock of loans with mortgages in property totalled over
50% of GDP. In other countries, including Greece and Italy, the equivalent figure is under 10%. The
differences depend on factors such as the systems of rules, tax legislation and market structure which
vary from country to country. Housing finance has, as in Sweden, often been an issue of great political
interest, which is reflected in all the above factors.
Outstanding residential
mortgage loans /GDP 1998. Per cent
 70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
k
r
a
m
n
e
D
s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N
K
U
n
e
d
e
w
S
y
n
a
m
r
e
G
U
E
d
n
a
n
F
i
l
a
i
r
t
s
u
A
d
n
a
e
r
I
l
l
a
g
u
t
r
o
P
i
m
u
g
e
B
l
n
i
a
p
S
e
c
n
a
r
F
y
l
a
t
I
e
c
e
e
r
G
Source: EMF 1998
It might be thought that standardised financial products such as housing loans should be very suitable
for cross-border sales, but cross-border activity has been little to date. This is probably related to the
housing loan market being primarily focused on private customers, who are difficult to reach without a
local distribution network. It remains to be seen what internet can change in that respect. However,
1
BIS Review 113/1999
why  should  people  not purchase  a  housing  loan  on  the  net,  when  they  now  pay  bills  and  carry  out
other transactions that way. There are already today good possibilities for finding the cheapest housing
loan  on  the  market  via  internet,  so  technology  will  certainly  increase  transparency  and  competition
even within the traditional more inert private sector. We are far from the time when Swedish house
owners waited respectfully for years to move their building credit at the bank to a real five-year loan at
a housing loan institution.
Those wishing to sell housing loans on the Swedish market must, however, accept offering loans in
kronor  for  the  time  being  if  they  are  to  meet  anything  other  than  sporadic  interest.  This  restricts
competition to those who really actively want to sell their products in Sweden. If we enter EMU, it
will be a different matter. We can then borrow in euro without being exposed to an exchange risk and
access to potential lenders will increase dramatically.
Mainly as a result of the deregulations in the 1980s and 1990s and the ensuing increasing competition,
the Swedish housing loan sector has been condensed to five companies, of which four are subsidiaries
of banks and the fifth is state-owned. These five companies cover around 95% of the market (figure 2).
As housing loans are very standardised products, it is natural that the price, i.e. the interest rate, will be
a  crucial  factor  in  competition  for  customers.  This  means  in  turn  that  refinancing  costs  will  be
absolutely decisive for running a profitable business.
Market share for lending of major swedish banks
end 1998. Per cent
Venantius
2%
S E Bolån
10%
Stadshypotek 
(inkl SHB Hyp)
32%
NB Hyp
12%
SBAB
14%
Spintab
29%
In the light of this, there is every reason to discuss what EMU and the euro can mean for the future
financing opportunities and how Swedish businesses stand up to European competition?
Traditional housing loan finance – a good alternative
The  Swedish  mortgage  institutions  have  traditionally  been  financed  with  collateral  in  their  entire
balance sheet. There is thus no direct link between a particular loan and the collateral belonging to it
on the one hand and certain issued bond loans on the other. In many countries, mortgage companies
are obliged to collect a number of housing loans and then issue bond loans in the market with these as
collateral. There are different techniques for this to which I will return later.
The Swedish model thus has advantages to the extent that borrowing can take place without a fixed
link  to  lending.  In  this  way,  large  loans  can  be  placed  in  the  market,  which  will  make  it  easier  to
maintain regular trade and good liquidity in the loans. This has occurred with the so-called benchmark
bonds. However, housing loan institutions, among other things due to considerable loan volumes and a
good  price  formation  for  domestic  loans  have  also  been  able  to  successfully  compete  in  the
international bond market.
BIS Review 113/1999
2
If one is to borrow on the balance sheet, it must naturally be in such a state as to be accepted by the
lenders. The Swedish institutions have managed this by strict operating rules, which place limits on
what the institutions may engage in and allow lenders to ensure that the institutions get involved in
what they have said they are going to do and nothing else. However, a not inconsiderable risk capital
or guarantees from the owners have also been required. Capital adequacy in the Swedish companies is
shown in figure 3. If – or rather when – the owners’ requirements for return on the capital contributed
increase this can be problem.
Mortgage banks capital ratio and tier 1
capital ratio 1998. Per cent
(cid:127)  Handelsbanken Hypotek
(cid:127)  Stadshypotek 
(cid:127)  Spintab 
(cid:127)  SBAB
 (cid:127)  Nordbanken Hypotek
(cid:127)  S E B BoLån
Capital
ratio
10,7
13,1
16,0
10,6
10,5
  8,4
Tier 1
capital ratio
10,0
12,7
11,1
  6,9
  8,8
  4,3
During  the  financial  crisis  in  Sweden,  the  balance  sheets  were  for  obvious  reasons  insufficient  to
enable the institutions to borrow at competitive prices in the international market. This uncertainty on
asset values was all too great for a while. Since then, however, creditworthiness has been continually
increased, which is reflected in a gradually improved international rating.
The  Swedish  housing  loan  institutions  have  today  around  13%  of  their  borrowing  abroad.
Traditionally  the  Swedish  insurance  companies  and  pension  boards  have  been  large  purchasers  of
housing institution bonds.
A  part of the international  borrowing  has taken  place in  Europe,  in  particular in  London,  while  the
major part has originated from investors in  the  USA  and Japan.  An  interesting  issue  is  whether the
ability to borrow in euro will make the Central European investors more interested in Swedish risks
than  before?  It  remains  to  be  seen.  However,  obtaining  capital  in  the  international  market  is  a
laborious  and  long-term  work  that  requires  a  systematic  build-up  of  confidence.  Every  new  lender
must become acquainted with the borrower’s name and history and eventually request a limit in his
board.  This  takes  time  and  the  process  is  not  simplified  by  a  common  currency.  With  regard  to
building up the international investment base, the Swedish housing credit institutions have perhaps had
slightly different approaches and priorities. Having a well-established network of contacts among the
European investors is surely not a bad idea the day that the euro becomes our own currency.
It  is  interesting  to  note  the  rapid  increase  in  Swedish  corporate  bonds  issued  in  euro  during  the
autumn.  The  supply  of  government  bonds  has  decreased  which  has  led  investors  to  look  for  other
alternatives,  but  they  have  clearly  become  increasingly  interested  in  assuming  additional  risk  in
exchange for some additional interest rate percentage points in the return. Eriksson, Volvo and now
most recently Birka Energi are making company presentations at places in Europe where few investors
have  previously  shown  interest.  And  Birka  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  a  familiar  name  in  the  market
outside Sweden. This development should also include opportunities for the housing loan institutions.
3
BIS Review 113/1999
Gilt-edged bonds
If  we  wish  to  see  how  EMU  can  affect  housing  finance,  it  is  close  to  hand  to  study  conditions  in
Germany  since  these,  together  with  the  Danish  model  of  housing  finance  will  be  given  special
treatment in the EC  directives  in the area.  In  Germany,  housing  loans  are traditionally  financed  via
so-called Pfandbriefen, which are essentially housing bonds with a clearly specified body of collateral.
As has  been  pointed  out, the  Swedish  housing  companies  finance the  whole  of  their  balance  sheets
without linking particular collateral to each loan issued. With regard to Pfandbriefen, legal regulation
moreover plays an important role for the nature of collateral and checks on the parts of the authorities.
The  Government  has  had  a  committee  of  inquiry  investigate  how  the  so-called  “gilt-edged  bonds”
could be designed in Sweden and the legislation and supervision that should be required. In brief, this
proposal means that the right of priority would apply to this type of bond, that clear limits would be
introduced  for  the  extent  of  borrowing  against  them  (at  most  75%  for  housing  properties)  and  that
collateral would be identified in a special register controlled by Finansinspektionen. The Ministry of
Finance is at present considering its standpoint on these proposals.
When  the  discussion  on  gilt-edged  bonds  was  initiated  in  Sweden  at  the  beginning  of  the  90s,  the
background  was  concern  that the  new  investment  rules  planned  for  the  insurance  companies  would
make  it  more  difficult  for  the  housing  institutions  to  obtain  finance.  The  requirements  for
diversification  of  assets  would  introduce  stringent  restrictions  on  the  ability  of  the  insurance
companies to hold housing bonds. Representatives of the industry claimed that considerable volumes
of housing bonds would be sold by the insurance companies for this reason and that this would affect
the market and increase costs for borrowers sharply. The gilt-edged bonds could at least partly solve
the problem since, according to the EC directive, they would not be affected so much by the rules for
single-party commitment.
Others  were  doubtful  about  introducing  special  rules  for  insurance  companies  to  give  them  an
incentive to have a larger proportion of housing bonds in their  portfolios  than  they  would  normally
choose. There are no good arguments for letting insurance policyholders subsidise either housing loan
institutions or their customers.
Now the new investment rules were  introduced  for the insurance  companies  without this  leading  to
any  of  the  terrible  consequences  that  had  been  predicted.  The  housing  loan  institutions  began  to
borrow abroad to an increasing extent, which was a good idea from many respects. Hopefully, then the
desire to create space for a larger proportion of housing bonds in the Swedish insurance companies’
portfolios will then no longer serve as a motivation for the gilt-edged bonds.
As  long  as  the  insurance  companies  had  their  undertakings  in  kronor,  some  concentration  of
investments was explicable. However, the day that Sweden becomes a member of EMU and we have
the  euro  as  currency,  the  portfolios  of  the  insurance  companies  will  appear  rather  remarkable  if  a
predominant part of the risks in interest-bearing securities is in five housing loan institutions. Even if
housing bonds are as gilt-edged as possible, the insurance companies in this situation will feel a need
of increased diversification.
The main argument for enabling the Swedish housing companies to issue gilt-edged bonds is naturally
that competitors in Europe issue them and they are established in the market. They would be easier to
sell  to  investors,  carry  a  higher  liquidity  and  provide  lower  interest  rates  than  traditional  Swedish
housing bonds. This would facilitate financing and hopefully give the consumers lower interest rates.
There is undoubtedly something in this line of reasoning.
However, the Riksbank has taken a critical attitude to this proposal more for reasons of principle. The
housing institutions have every opportunity themselves – via clauses in the bond contracts or even in
articles of association – to create the collateral arrangements that they consider appropriate and thus
give their bonds the gilt edge that they consider necessary to facilitate financing. If the state assumes
the  responsibility  of  legislating  about  the  design  of  bonds  and  moreover  to  check  compliance  by
institutions, this is a regulation that cannot be motivated by concern for the stability of the financial
system but rather aims at improving  the  institution’s  profitability  by  reducing  financing  costs.  Such
regulations are usually called into question by both the industry and the legislative authorities.
BIS Review 113/1999
4
There is undeniably something to be said for their view of this matter as well. It is, moreover, easy to
create the impression that the state by its control takes a special responsibility for the collateral in the
bonds, which is not the intention.
Perhaps one should also ask whether a gilt edge to the bonds would really give the effects hoped for.
The  large  liquid  securities  with  the  best  creditworthiness  (AAA-rated)  in  the  European  mortgage
market (Öffentliche Pfandbriefen) have in the  first  place  collateral  in  loans to local  governments  or
federal states and not in the market that the Swedish housing companies can use. They would rather
issue “Hypotheken Pfandbriefe” with collateral in office premises and housing and both interest and
liquidity  are  less  favourable  in  the  market.  It  does  not  seem  either  as  if  any  uniform  market  for
mortgages is in process of being established, but the regulatory framework differs considerably from
country to country. Investors will hardly avoid making separate appraisals for each of these markets.
Moreover, it seems, not wholly unexpectedly, as if EMU would affect developments in the direction
from relatively rule-governed national markets such as the Danish and German to internationally open
markets, where new instruments can be developed in a flexible way as the need arises. In the light of
this, one cannot avoid wondering whether it is wise and really in the market’s interest to lock certain
instruments into a separate legislation, which can be difficult to change once in place. If EMU really
leads to the European market for borrowed capital being  improved,  which  we  all  believe  and  hope,
developments  may  move  in  a  completely  different  direction.  We  shall  have  to  see  what  the  future
holds in store.
Securitisation
The existing Swedish form for housing finance is, as pointed out, not necessarily a bad financing form
in a developed European market with a uniform currency. On the contrary. The Swedish housing loan
institutions  are  known  and  respected  in  the  market,  have  large  outstanding  volumes  that  provide  a
basis for good liquidity and a transparent price formation and can moreover benefit from a rating that
is improving as Sweden’s does.
The great challenge from EMU is rather on a different level. When competition gradually increases,
not only on the corporate side but also in the market for apartment blocks, tenant-owned apartments
and houses, this will probably eventually reduce profit margins. The return on equity will then  also
fall.  An  issue  that  naturally  arises  is  whether  it  is  possible  to  find  housing  forms  that  make  more
economical use of equity provided by the owners.
In  my  opinion,  it  is  in  this  perspective  that  the  discussion  on  securitisation  is  to  be  viewed.
Securitisation  means  that  a  given  loan  stock  with  the  collateral  pertaining  to  it  is  lifted  out  of  the
balance  sheet  in  the  housing  loan  institution  and  invested  in  a  company  separately  created  for  the
purpose (a so-called special purpose vehicle), which is then financed in the market by issuing bonds.
This company has a clearly defined risk scenario and does not carry out any activity besides holding
the specified loans. It need not therefore be subject to the capital adequacy rules that apply for housing
loan institutions.
Assume  that  the  housing  loan  institution  must  set  aside  four  million  kronor  of  a  loan  stock  of
100 million while the market accepts financing the securitised stock with a capital of 1 million kronor
in the company created for the purpose. If the stock provides a return of SEK400,000 after financing
and operating expenses, this gives a return on capital in the housing loan institution of 10% before tax.
The same loan invested in the special company will provide a return on capital of 40% before tax. A
buffer for investors can also be added on via credit guarantees, which further reduce the requirement
of equity.
A  number  of  objections  can  be  raised  to  this  example,  but  it  serves  well  to  illustrate  the  driving
mechanism behind a securitisation. In practice there are many difficulties. One such is naturally that it
is not possible to build special purpose companies in Sweden without their being subject to the Act on
Financing Operations and thus being affected by the same capital adequacy rules as the housing loan
institutions.  In  a  ministerial  memorandum  from  1998  dealing  with  better  prerequisites  for
securitisation, a change is proposed inter  alia in  this respect.  Such  a  change  is  also  proposed in  the
5
BIS Review 113/1999
banking  legislation  committee’s  report  from  last  spring.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  is  at  present
considering these proposals as well as gilt-edged bonds. It is planned to introduce proposed legislation
early next year.
Now there  are  also  other  objections to  securitisation.  It  has to  date  been  relatively  complicated  and
therefore expensive to create special purpose vehicles and it has not been possible to invest their bonds
with  such  good  interest  rates  as  their  rating  should  occasion.  One  reason  for  this  may  be  that  the
market is undeveloped, and that issues have been few and small in this context and that liquidity in the
bonds  has  consequently  been low.  Another  cause  may  be  found  in  the  regulatory  framework,  since
securitised bonds in banks and other financial institutions, which are expected to create a market for
bonds, are affected by higher capital adequacy requirements than ordinary housing bonds.
In the USA, as we know, securitisation of housing loans is a common occurrence, which is partly due
to institutional reasons. In Europe, housing finance has mainly taken other forms. If now EMU leads
to  increased  competition  in  the  housing  loan  market,  which should  be  an  effect  of  monetary  union,
there will also be an expanded need to finance housing loans in way that is economical with capital. It
is not unreasonable to believe that securitisation in this perspective will attract increasing interest.
Increased  competition  can  accordingly  drive forward  a  growing  market  for  securitisation.  However,
the causal connection can also be the opposite, namely that improved opportunities for securitisation
will  increase  competition.  This  is  the  experience  in  Australia,  where  the  housing  loan  market  was
deregulated in the 1990s. A legislation that facilitates securitisation reduced the previously high entry
barriers  which  existed  in  the  market,  cleared  the  way  for  new  players  and  reduced  costs  for  the
housing loan customers – in fact by as much as a couple of percentage points.
Some conclusions
Taken as a whole, we seem to be moving towards greater competition in the housing finance sector.
New  financing  forms,  new  technology  and  possible  EMU  membership  are  driving  factors  that  will
together  reduce  entry  barriers  and  thus  increase  competition.  Since  housing  loans  are  standardised
products, it is above all price which is the means of competition. The financing issues will thus be at
the centre of interest.
The traditional Swedish form for housing finance where the entire balance sheet constitutes one body
of collateral has many advantages. It is possible that the investors’ demands for collateral in the form
of equity may  gradually  make  this  form  too  expensive.  A  more  developed  market  for  securitisation
may be one way of tackling this problem. It requires, however, assistance from the authorities in the
form of a simplified regulatory framework. A well-developed market for gilt-edged bonds may also
work in the same direction, but this also requires the approval of the authorities.
A  general  reflection  is  that  the  financial  innovations  in  a  new  market  develop  best  if  they  are
controlled by the wishes of investors and issuers. It is impossible to say what these wishes will be like
in  future.  The  role  of  authorities  is  to  create  a  body  of  rules  that  provides  scope  for  changes  and
preferably avoids locking the market into special structures or instruments.
The Swedish housing loan institutions are well run and should have good opportunities for borrowing
competitively  in  the  European  market  however  it  develops.  However,  no  one  can  borrow  without
systematically  building  up  relations  with  the  funds,  insurance  companies  and  other  institutional
investors which make up the so-called investor base. All the Swedish institutions have a task here in
the market for euro.
BIS Review 113/1999
6
