Ms Hessius speaks on a number of topics
including the “new economy”, the “long boom” and the actual
and potential role of asset prices in monetary policy
Speech delivered by Ms Kerstin Hessius, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Mjärdevi
Science Park, Linköping on 29 October 1999.
 It is no exaggeration to say that the prospects for Sweden’s economy look much brighter today than
when  I  spoke  here  in  Linköping  a  year  ago.  At  that  time  there  was  discussion  of  whether  private
consumption,  which  was  then  the  main  driving  force  behind  demand,  would  be  able  to  reverse  the
negative trend in the industrial sector. However, as it turned out, the financial turbulence in the global
economy had limited real impact, and the turnaround in Asia came much earlier than expected. The
lowering of interest rates by central banks probably contributed to the rapid recovery.
The  international  economic  outlook  is  therefore  much  brighter  today.  There  is  great  optimism  in
Sweden about the future, both in households and business, and domestic demand is expected to remain
strong in the years to come. Employment is also increasing at a satisfactory pace and public finances
are being consolidated.
Most observers, including the Riksbank, have substantially revised their forecasts for GDP growth for
this year and for following years. As the economy has improved, expectations that inflation will rise
have increased slightly, but they are still at a low level. The repo rate is currently 2.9% and monetary
policy is expansive, which may cause real GDP to increase faster than the economy can cope with in
the long  run.  If  this  is  allowed  to continue  for too  long,  different  types  of  bottleneck  problems  and
inflationary tendencies will emerge. Such a development must be prevented.
During earlier booms, in the 1970s and 1980s, the brakes were often applied too late, as a result of
which the growth in production and employment came to an abrupt halt. This must not be allowed to
happen this time. The purpose of monetary policy is to adjust GDP growth to the long-term growth
trend, thus promoting continued growth in employment and an unemployment rate that is as low as the
structure of the economy will allow.
To sum up, the future for Sweden’s economy looks rather bright, and it is the task of monetary policy
to try to prolong this period of favourable economic development.
The “new economy” and the “long boom”
A common view, mainly inspired by the debate in the US, is that this favourable development not only
reflects a cyclical economic recovery, but is largely attributable to “the new economy”. Definitions of
the “new economy” vary, but most people seem to mean that for various reasons the growth potential
of today’s economy is higher than before. Among the reasons given for this are increased globalisation
and the development and dissemination of information technology.
This is an interesting hypothesis, but it must be pointed out that it is difficult to prove whether, and, if
so, how much growth potential has actually changed. This obviously restricts the room for manoeuvre
in  monetary  policy  to  a  certain  extent.  What  we  must  do  here  is  to  strike  a  balance  between  not
holding the economy back more than necessary while at the same time making sure that the credibility
of our inflation target policy, which has taken so much effort to build up, is not lost.
1
BIS Review 128/1999
However, there is another aspect of the American debate that has received much less attention than the
“new economy”, but that I think is at least as important, and that is the role that monetary policy is
assumed to have played in the favourable developments of the last twenty years. There is much talk in
the US about the “long boom”, i.e. the period lasting from the early-1980s to the present, which has
been characterised by a high rate of growth, with only one rather mild recession in 1990-91.
Household sectors’  saving rate and
debt ratio in USA
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
Source: Ecowin
There are various theories about the reasons for this positive trend. However, it is often assumed that
the monetary policy pursued by the American central bank (“the Fed”) has played a decisive part. The
Fed’s policy during the last twenty years differ from the policy in the preceding period in their more
active and determined use of monetary policy to keep inflation low and stable. As a result, it has been
possible  to  avoid  both  the  overheating  and  the  recessions  that  often  occur  when  an  overheated
economy  suddenly  comes  to  a  halt.  In  other  words,  the  Fed  is  credited  with  succeeding  in  making
recessions  fewer,  smaller  and  shorter,  mainly  by  ensuring  that  the  economy  does  not  become
overheated. It is important to point out that the favourable trend in the US economy during the last
twenty  years  is  not,  as  you  might  gather  from  following  the  Swedish  debate,  due  to  the  American
central bank “leaning back” and basically letting the economy “take care of itself”. Quite the contrary,
in fact.
If we were to try to draw a lesson from all this that would be relevant to the Swedish context, it would
mean that in future the Riksbank should try to avoid the great fluctuations in economic activity that
were caused by the devaluation policy of the 1970s and 1980s. During those years there was a long
succession of cost crises and exchange rates were adjusted so many times that in the end devaluations
were virtually accepted as a fact of life.
Obviously,  it  is  difficult  to  decide  exactly  how  much  interest  rates  should  be  increased  in  order  to
ensure  that  the  present  surge  in  the  economy  does  not  lead  to  overheating,  particularly  since  the
current monetary policy regime with declared inflation targets has never really been subjected to such
a test. We simply do not have any experience to fall back on. However, most people, including the
Executive Board of the Riksbank, agree that the current repo rate will have to be raised sooner or later,
although opinions differ as to when and how much.
Whatever the Riksbank decides to do, the main lesson of the long boom in the USA remains valid: a
long period of sound  real economic  growth  is not necessarily  the result  of any  exceptional  external
events, such as the emergence of a “new economy”. It is just as likely to be the result of a carefully
conceived monetary policy which applies an active and sometimes rather forceful policy to make sure
BIS Review 128/1999
2
that  overheating  -  and  subsequent  deep  recessions  -  are  avoided.  Naturally,  a  more  detailed
comparison between the USA and Sweden would have taken into account other differences too, such
as the functioning of the labour market.
The role of asset prices
I should like to devote the rest of my speech to another topical issue in the American debate, and that
is the actual and potential role of asset prices in monetary policy. The debate in the USA focuses on
GDP growth in USA
percentage change
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
Source: Ecowin
the stock market, which many consider to have been overvalued for a long time, even if there has been
a slight fall in the Dow Jones Index recently.
The main question at issue seems to be if, and in that case how, a central bank should act when certain
asset  prices  rise  very  sharply.  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Fed,  has  famously  said  that  stock
prices seem to be the result of “irrational exuberance”.
Although the current discussion of the role of asset prices in monetary policy focuses mainly on the
situation in the  USA,  I  think  this  issue  is relevant to the  Swedish  debate  too.  For  one  thing,  it  is  a
matter of general interest and of principle, and for another there is no guarantee that, sooner or later,
Swedish asset markets will not experience a situation similar to that in the USA today.
How do fluctuations in asset prices affect the economy?
One question of crucial importance in this connection is how fluctuations in asset prices affect the real
economy. There are several different factors involved here. One mechanism is the wealth effect, which
US Stock Market Prices
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Index: 1990-1999
Index: 1980-1989
Index: 1970-1979
3
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
BIS Review 128/1999
means that households consume more since rising asset prices make them feel richer, and vice versa.
Another factor - which many regard as at least as important - has to do with the interaction between
the credit market and companies’ balance sheets. When asset prices rise, the value of the collateral that
households and enterprises can provide when they borrow for consumption and investment rises too.
Higher  assets  make  it  easier  for  them  to  borrow,  or  to  borrow  at  lower  cost,  as  a  result  of  which
aggregate demand increases. Large fluctuations in asset prices can have substantial effects on the real
economy.
Why should a central bank worry about the development of asset prices? One obvious reason is that it
is natural for a central bank with a declared inflation target to follow asset price trends since, as I just
mentioned,  they  can  affect  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  And  changes  in  demand  in  turn
ultimately affect inflation, as we all know.
However, the discussion in recent years has mainly focused on another reason why the central bank
might want to keep an eye on asset price trends, and this is that the collapse of inflated asset markets
can have a serious impact on the real economy and in some cases eventually threaten the stability of
the  financial  system.  Apart  from  protecting  monetary  value,  which  is  perhaps  their  best-known
function,  it  is  also  the  task  of  central  banks  to  promote  financial  stability,  whether  directly  or
indirectly. This is even suggested by the Swedish legislation, which lays down that the Riksbank shall
seek to “promote a secure and effective payment system”.
Dramatic events following the  collapse  of  asset  markets  are  usually  assumed  to be  triggered  by  the
consequences  in  the  credit  market  and  company  balance  sheets.  When  asset  prices  rise  more  than
economic fundamentals justify, a fall in prices is inevitable sooner or later. Such an adjustment can be
very costly if financial institutions have widely accepted assets as collateral for loans during the period
of rising asset prices. When there is a sudden sharp fall in prices, the value of the collateral diminishes.
In such a process falling asset prices can cause losses to banks and other financial intermediaries and,
if  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  a  full-scale  financial  crisis.  These  problems  can,  moreover,  be
exacerbated  by  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  In  the  crisis  in  Southeast  Asia,  which  is  the  most
spectacular  example  of  such  a  financial  crisis  in  recent  memory,  the  real  value  of  foreign  currency
loans often rose when domestic currencies depreciated sharply.
This  kind  of  dramatic  event  only  occurs  when  asset  prices  rise  higher  than  the  levels  justified  by
underlying economic factors. This kind of situation in an asset market is what is known as a bubble.
It might be worthwhile at this point to stop and reflect for a moment on the fundamental relationship
between monetary policy and asset markets, on the one hand, and product and commodity markets on
the other. The purpose of explicit inflation targeting policy that has been introduced in Sweden and
many  other  countries  in  the  last  decade  is  to  address  recurrent  overheating  in  product  and  labour
markets. It might be said - even if it is strictly speaking not quite correct - that the aim is to avoid the
“bubbles” that tend to appear in these markets from time to time. Generally speaking, inflation targets
have  hitherto  proved  their  worth  in  this  respect,  and  inflation  targets  appear  today  to  constitute  a
credible basis - a nominal anchor - for price and wage formation. However, no corresponding anchor
exists in asset markets. This means that there is nothing to prevent the prices of various assets rising to
levels  higher  than  those  justified  by  economic  fundamentals  owing  to  psychological  factors,  or
“irrational exuberance” if you like. The fact that low inflation is not sufficient to achieve a moderate
price trend in asset markets is illustrated by the development of the American stock market in the last
few years. Naturally, this represents something of a dilemma.
What should central banks do?
Does this mean, then, that monetary policy should, to a greater extent than hitherto, be used to take
firm  action  in  response  to  rapid  price  increases  in  asset  markets?  There  is  no  easy  answer  to  this
question,  but  the  predominant  view  nowadays  is  that  the  answer  is  no.  Nevertheless,  as  a
decision-maker I must keep my options open on this one. Situations may arise in the future that we
cannot predict today in which monetary policy might have a role to play.
BIS Review 128/1999
4
Perhaps the main reason why it is normally not advisable to try to influence asset prices is that it is
extremely difficult, if not impossible, to be sure when a bubble has formed and when rising prices are
due  to  improvements  in  underlying  economic  factors.  The  appropriate  monetary  policy  must  be
determined by the fundamental causes of the rise in asset prices. Let us assume, for example, that a
rise  in  share  prices  reflects  better  prospects  of  higher  future  corporate  profits  as  a  result  of  faster
underlying growth in productivity. In that case, the rise in prices is the result of an improvement in
fundamental  economic  factors,  which  means  that  it  is  based  on  “real”,  rather  than  psychological,
causes.  That  being  so,  monetary  tightening  would  not  be  a  very  good  move  and  might  in  fact  be
counterproductive,  since  future  inflation  would  probably  actually  be  lower  as  a  result  of  higher
productive capacity in the economy due to the underlying growth in productivity.
Another reason why it is not usually a good idea to use monetary policy to take action against rises in
asset prices is that even if you do succeed in identifying a bubble, it is probably very hard to burst it
with such precision that you do not damage the financial markets and the rest of the economy in the
process.
Therefore, the general view nowadays is that central banks should not try to use interest rate policy to
control asset price trends by seeking to burst any bubbles that may form. The normal strategy is rather
to  seek,  firmly  and  with  the  help  of  a  great  variety  of  instruments,  to  restore  stability  on  the  few
occasions when asset markets collapse.
Inflation targets are an effective instrument
According to many observers, the kind of monetary policy regime with declared inflation targets that
is  applied  in  Sweden  and  other  countries  is  a  suitable  instrument  for  dealing  with  the  problems
associated with fluctuating asset prices. One reason for this is that setting inflation targets means that
monetary policy automatically has a stabilising effect in the event of instability in asset markets. Since
asset prices, as I have already mentioned, affect aggregate demand in the economy, interest rates will
be raised when asset prices rise and vice versa. Although we know from experience that there are no
guarantees,  this  is  likely  for  various  reasons  to  have  a  stabilising  effect  on  asset  markets.  For  one
thing, macroeconomic stability in itself has a stabilising effect on financial markets. For another, there
is less likelihood of over-reaction, since participants in the financial markets will expect central banks
to pursue a policy dictated by their inflation targets. Thirdly, lowering interest rates helps to mitigate
the imbalances that may occur as a result of rapid falls in asset prices. In addition, a credible inflation
target  allows  monetary  policy  more  room  for  manoeuvre  when  it  comes  to  preventing  a  financial
crisis.
However,  a  monetary  policy  strategy  that  waits  until  the  market  collapses  before  responding  to
changes in asset prices may, at least hypothetically, pose a dilemma. The fact is that we still do not
know  very  much  about  how  the  incentives  of  players  in  asset  markets  are  affected  by  such
“asymmetrical” action on the part of a central bank, i.e. being largely passive while asset prices are
rising and then acting forcefully when they fall. Perhaps the devaluation policy that was pursued in
Sweden in the 1970s and 1980s is a relevant parallel in this context. During that period expectations
about the rate of inflation were determined by an economic policy which responded to excessive rises
in  prices  and  wages  by  devaluing  the  krona.  According  to  one  theory,  similar  mechanisms  could
emerge  in  response to an  asymmetrical  policy  vis-à-vis  asset  prices.  If  central  banks  took  action  to
stop  asset  prices  falling  below  a  certain  level,  the  players  in  financial  markets  might  attach  less
importance to a rigorous analysis of economic fundamentals. The strategy of waiting for bubbles to
burst  by  themselves  might  then  establish  a  climate  that  actually  encouraged  bubbles.  This  must  of
course be regarded as an unproven but interesting theory, and it certainly calls for a great deal more
careful thought.
Conclusion
In my speech today I have dealt with some issues that at the moment are being debated particularly in
the USA. This is not due to a special interest in developments in the USA but because the conditions
5
BIS Review 128/1999
under  which  monetary  policy  is  pursued  in  the  USA  and  Sweden  are  quite  similar.  Many  of  the
problems and issues that are being addressed there are also of interest here, or may be so in the future.
Therefore I feel that we have something to learn from them.
As I see it, one important lesson is that monetary policy, at least today, should take a greater interest in
the “long boom” than the “new economy”. In other words, I think that it is a wiser basic strategy to
concentrate on making sure that the economy does not overheat - which leads to recessions - than to
count on large hypothetical improvements in future productivity which, if they do not materialise, will
involve  loss  of  credibility  and  a  drastic  slowing  down  of  the  economy  similar  to  those  we  have  so
often witnessed in the last couple of decades.
I have also discussed various aspects of fluctuations in asset prices. One encouraging conclusion that I
think we can draw in this connection is that the present monetary policy framework in Sweden, with
built-in inflation targets, provides a reasonable basis for tackling any problems that may arise.
BIS Review 128/1999
6
