Mr Grenville deliberates on Asia’s
financial markets and on capitalising on reform
Notes for a talk given by Mr Stephen Grenville, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to
the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Seminar, held in Sydney on 30 November 1999.
 Causes of the crisis
In  early  diagnosis  of  the  cause  of  the  Asian  crisis,  there  was  much  emphasis  on  the  mistakes  of
domestic  policy.  There  was  talk  of  over-valued  exchange  rates,  and  much  emphasis  on  “crony
capitalism”.  There  were,  it  needs  to  be  emphasised,  serious  problems  in  domestic  policy  in  these
countries, and some of these were an important ingredient in the problems. But it should be noted that,
no matter how unattractive crony capitalism, it existed during the 30 years of outstanding economic
performance.
Over  time,  serious  commentators  came  to  realise  that,  whatever  the  problems  of  domestic
policy-making,  there  also  seemed  to  be  serious  problems  in  the  international  financial  order,
particularly  relating  to  the  volatility  of  foreign  capital  flows.  So  it  was  not  too  long  before  a  more
balanced and operationally useful assessment appeared, in which the central issue was identified as the
juxtaposition  of  two  fatal  flaws  –  huge  and  volatile  foreign  capital  flows,  and  a  fragile  and  poorly
functioning domestic financial system.
How to address these problems?
The answer is not to draw back from the broad path of development these countries were on, relying
predominantly on markets for the allocation of resources. No one, to my knowledge, has suggested a
fundamental  departure  from  the  market-based  path.  The  issue,  rather,  is  the  recognition  that  the
transition  from  regulated  to  unregulated  financial  markets  is  a  difficult  one,  with  very  significant
vulnerability  along  the  way.  It  seems  that  when  the  transition  is  over,  and  markets  and  institutions
have  adapted,  many  of  the  dangers  disappear,  and  the  benefits  are  more  prominent.  It  is  like  the
relatively calm waters above and below the Niagara Falls, but with very significant turbulence in the
transition between the two tranquil states. This problem has produced a number of  different  images
with  a common  theme:  the  central  bank  governor  in  one  of  the  crisis  countries  said  that  they  were
asked  to  host  a  house-warming  party  while  the  house  foundations  were  still  being  constructed.
Another observer talked about the problem of plugging into a high-voltage power grid.
Some have drawn the connection with the old sequencing debate, common in the economic literature
for  some  decades.  The  broad  thrust  of  this  message  was  that  the  most  general,  ubiquitous  and
far-reaching elements of deregulation should be done last. In particular, financial deregulation should
come  last,  because,  if  it  did  not,  the  price  distortions  inherent  in  a  regulated  economy  would  be
exacerbated,  exaggerated  and  exploited  by  a  deregulated  financial  system.  But  the  reality  is  that
deregulation  can  and  should  take  place  when  the  opportunities  are  available.  Carpe diem  is  the
watchword  of  reformers.  This  was  certainly  the  case  in  Australia,  where  financial  deregulation
preceded  other  important  deregulation  –  most  notably,  in  the  labour  market.  So  there  is  no  simple
answer in sequencing. The uncomfortable reality is that much of the “plumbing” that needs to be put
in  place  during  the  process  of  financial  deregulation  –  in  terms  of  the  experience,  reputation  and
institutional structures – takes time to create. Waiting for some propitious moment does not solve the
problem,  because  it  is  largely  a  process  of  “learning  by  doing”.  But  at  least  if  the  transition  is
recognised as tricky, then it may be possible to spread it out over a period to reduce the vulnerability.
It  might  be  worth  noting  that  in  Australia  we  went  through  this  awkward  and  vulnerable  transition
period,  with  the  most  obvious  manifestation  being  the  “Banana  Republic”  difficulties  in  the
mid-1980s.  We  clearly  did  not  come  through  this  unscathed,  but  we  were  lucky  that  our  foreign
1
BIS Review 131/1999
exchange problems (which occurred in the mid-1980s) did not coincide with our prudential problems
(which occurred in the late-1980s and early-1990s). The two elements – often seen coinciding in the
transition – were nicely out of phase for us, and we should be thankful for that.
What  could  be  done?  In  the  course  of  looking  at  possible  changes  to  the  international  financial
architecture, various ideas have been put forward which, provided they are not seen as panaceas, might
help. There are efforts currently underway to obtain more disclosure from hedge funds, and to develop
some procedures for “bailing in” private-sector creditors. Some have suggested that collective action
clauses should be built into bonds, and this seems broadly a good idea. Other suggestions about private
contingent credit lines seem, to me, less likely to contribute much to “shock-proofing” the transition,
principally because those providing the private-sector contingent credit lines will have an incentive to
do offsetting transactions if it seems likely that the contingency will arrive.
One helpful change is one of attitude. One problem with the process of financial deregulation that has
taken place in the Asian countries over the last 10 years or so is that it was driven partly by doctrine.
This doctrinal imperative reflected two separate forces, which came together more or less by accident.
The first of these forces was the dominance in academic circles of the “efficient markets paradigm”.
This  is  a  powerful  analytical  device,  which  has  taken  thinking  in  economics  down  very  useful
directions. But it, like all paradigms, is an imperfect representation of the real world.  Perhaps  more
seriously, in the course of academic debate, it became quasi-religious, with beliefs and facts becoming
confounded. This made it hard to leaven the efficient markets paradigm with some real-world facts –
principally, that markets are imperfect. The second force was a simple commercial imperative on the
part of foreign financial institutions to gain access to new markets and compete in the most vigorous
way.  This  commercial  imperative  was  successfully  transplanted  into  the  political  processes,  so  we
saw,  for  example,  the  OECD  insisting  on  capital  market  deregulation  as  a  condition  of  Korea’s
membership  of  the  organisation.  These  forces  combined  to  form  powerful  rhetorical  pressures,  to
deregulate as fully as possible, with special virtue being attached to those who opened their markets at
the most breakneck speed.  One  of  the  notable  manifestations  of this  was the  Bangkok  International
Banking  Facility,  whereby  small  Thai  businesses  were  presented  with  a  frictionless  conduit  to
international financial markets, where they could borrow at attractively low interest rates, in foreign
currency. In Australia, we know, from our small taste of the Swiss loans in the 1980s, how dangerous
it  is  to  have  relatively  unsophisticated  borrowers  given  the  opportunity  and  incentives  to  take  on
sophisticated products involving foreign exchange risk. But in Australia this was relatively modest in
macro-economic  terms.  In  Thailand, the inflow through  the  Bangkok  International  Banking  Facility
was not far short of 10% of GDP.
With  this  change  of  attitude,  it  should  be  easier  to  insert  some  common  sense  into  the  process  of
deregulation, and have the courage to say “no” (or “not yet”) to some aspects of deregulation which
seem  to  make  countries  more  vulnerable.  So  it  may  be  quite  sensible,  from  this  viewpoint,  to  put
various  restrictions  on  short-term  capital  inflows,  and  on  foreign-currency  borrowing.  This  is
compatible with free-market principles, because these are properly seen as transition measures, to be
modified and ultimately abandoned.
The  other  place  where  common  sense  might  usefully  prevail  over  doctrine  is  in  recognising  that,
despite  the  very  strong  pressures  for  uniformity  of  rules  and  regulations  internationally  (in
Thomas Friedman’s  terminology,  adoption  of  the  “Golden  Straitjacket”),  there  is  still  some
opportunity for tailoring the set of rules to the particular needs (and political consensus) of a country.
Just to give one example, it would be a mistake to think that the full minutiae of bankruptcy laws have
to  be translated  precisely  and  uniformly  across all  countries. The  particular balance  between  debtor
and  creditor  which  is  seen  in  Anglo-Saxon  law  is  a  product  of  the  particular  social  values  of  these
societies.  Other  countries  have  come  up  with  different  relationships  –  I  have  heard  it  said  that  one
important reason why creditors have traditionally been in a weak position in Indonesia is the conscious
recognition  that creditors  would often  be  Chinese businessmen  and  money-lenders,  and  the  societal
judgment  was  that  it  was  not  going  to  give  powerful  legal  remedies  to  these  creditors.  The  forces
tending  to  push  people  towards  a  rather  uniform  Golden  Straitjacket  are  powerful  indeed,  but
individual countries can assess to what extent they can and should modify these rules, to make them
more palatable to their societies, without at the same time making them more costly. This debate has
BIS Review 131/1999
2
yet  to  be  joined,  or  even  defined,  but  it  is  nonetheless  important.  The  central  point  here  is  that
Thomas Friedman’s Golden Straitjacket is not  an axiom  of  market  economics,  but  rather is  a set  of
rules which have emerged to meet the needs of current-day developed-country markets.
The role of banks
One  of  the  lessons  commonly  drawn  from  the  crisis  experience  is  that  countries  should  quickly
diversify  their  financial  institutions,  to  become  less  dependent  on  banks  and  foreign  bank  inflows.
Chairman Greenspan has referred to the need for a “spare wheel”, which he envisages to be alternative
forms of funding when bank financing dries up. There may well be a good case for developing new
financial markets, particularly in bonds. But one of the intrinsic problems is shortage of knowledge,
particularly commercial intelligence. In a world where information is scarce and at a premium (where
the “model” is not well defined), markets which are continuously repricing assets will tend to be very
volatile, as small accretions or revisions to information are absorbed by the market. It would seem to
me to be a mistake to shift quickly away from the world in which banks are the fundamental financial
intermediary, because banks are, par excellence, the institutions which focus on information collection
and the assessment of idiosyncratic risk. Information about borrowers is their stock-in-trade. They do
not have to reassess and reprice their assets continuously. Given past performance, there seems little
likelihood  that  the  credit-rating  agencies  can  quickly  improve  their  performance  to  the  stage  where
they can provide sufficient information to allow investors to make smooth, non-disruptive investment
decisions in markets which are constantly being repriced. If this assessment is correct, then the task is
to make sure that the banks do a better job in acting as the guardians of the gateway to investment.
This is a formidable task, but there seems a better prospect that banks will be able to act as a filter and
provide  a  second  opinion  on  investment  projects,  rather  than  rely  on  the  much  more  sophisticated,
information-intensive and indirect process that we see operating in developed financial markets.
Growth
In the wash-up to the Asian crisis, one could easily come to the view that the answer was to shift down
a  gear  and  grow  more  slowly.  Within  reason,  this  may  be  sensible  and  inevitable.  But  it  would  be
neither  sensible  nor  inevitable  for  these  countries  to  adopt  the  lower  rates  of  growth  which  are
regarded as normal in developed countries. The problem is that higher growth is far more vital to these
countries than it is to us. For us there are unfilled needs in education and health, but the reality is that
much of any extra growth in Australia would go to far less pressing priorities. Given the extraordinary
problems and pressing nature of the needs in the crisis countries of Asia, it is not sensible to see the
answer  being  to  slow  growth.  So  whatever  system  and  changes  are  put  forward  to  address  the
problems of the last couple of years, they should pass the test of being compatible with a good pace of
growth.  One  shouldn’t  be  too  pessimistic  about  this,  because  if  the  sort  of  efficiency-enhancing
reforms which are being pursued on so many fronts are successful, then the potential rate of growth of
these countries should be enhanced rather than diminished.
In conclusion
It is a pleasure to take part in this symposium, which addresses so directly what seems to me to be the
central issue – how to make Asia’s financial markets work better. I have touched, today, on some of
the measures which go under the rubric of the International Architecture, but I have no doubt that the
main task is in the hands of the policymakers of these countries. Central to this is to work much harder
on  prudential  supervision,  to  create  a  set  of  rules  which  is  both  feasible  of  application  and
thoroughgoing in keeping the banking system as a whole safe. It is a formidable task, which will take
dedication and the persistent application of common sense. I wish them well.
3
BIS Review 131/1999
