Mr Bäckström reviews international financial turbulence in the 1990s
Speech given by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board
of  Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Jönköping  University
Contact, Jönköping on 18 November 1999.
 First I want to express my thanks for the invitation to visit the University here in Jönköping and talk
about the turbulence we have experienced over the past decade in both the international economy and
in Sweden.
What makes this topic particularly interesting is that from time to time the financial unrest, in Sweden
as well as elsewhere, has shaped the economic situation in many countries and sometimes also in the
world in general.
Early in the 1990s the Nordic countries were beset by severe problems in the financial system. These
difficulties were exacerbated by the turbulent situation at that time in Europe’s ERM system.  Japan
has  had  to  grapple  with  a  crisis  for  most  of  the  decade.  Mexico  encountered  problems  in  the
mid-1990s,  as  did  countries  in  Southeast  Asia  just  a  few  years  ago.  Last  autumn,  global  financial
market  unrest  arose  again  when  Russia  chose  to  suspend  payments  on  a  part  of  government  debt.
When  this  was  compounded  by  problems  with  an  American  hedge  fund,  Long  Term  Capital
Management, the situation in Western financial markets became critical, fortunately only for a time.
This year, it is Brazil that has experienced financial difficulties. In addition to the extensive financial
worries of this type, there have been relatively abrupt shifts in interest rates, exchange rates and share
prices.
In some instances the financial turbulence has stemmed from inconsistent economic policies, as well
as from notable shortcomings in the supervision of banks and other institutions. It has not infrequently
coincided  with  and  even  been  the  direct  cause  of  far-reaching  macroeconomic  adjustments  in  the
economies  concerned.  In  Sweden,  for  instance,  GDP  fell  for  three  consecutive  years,  from  1991  to
1993, by a total of 6% and unemployment shot up. Other countries have experienced similar and even
greater setbacks. Large loans have been provided by the International Monetary Fund to assist various
countries.
In  the  light  of  all  this,  it  is  hardly  remarkable  that  in  recent  years  matters  to  do  with  the  global
financial system and how it works have been discussed more intensively throughout the world. So my
subject today is indeed topical. But let me say at once that I will be considering just a couple of the
aspects the title of my talk encompasses. Time is obviously a consideration here but a more important
reason is that we do not yet know enough about many of the complex matters in this field.
I  shall  begin  with  the  crisis  in  Sweden  in  the  early-1990s  because  it  illustrates  some  underlying
problems that  crises  in  other countries have  had in  common.  If  we  can  understand the fundamental
mechanisms involved in earlier periods of turbulence, perhaps it will be possible to avoid or mitigate
similar developments in the future. That naturally leads me on to consider what can be done and the
role of the authorities.
The crisis in Sweden
Many reasons can probably be found to explain why Sweden in the early-1990s was hit by the gravest
crisis since the 1930s. Some of them  go back a long way and others probably had more to do with
contemporary developments. Macroeconomic factors played a part and so did more structural matters.
Many  aspects  have  been  thoroughly  penetrated  in  various  studies  in  recent  years.  Today  I  shall  be
concentrating on the financial field.
1
BIS Review 127/1999
The deregulation of credit and currency markets in the 1980s was followed by a rapid expansion of
credit and strong price increases for various types of asset, including shares and real estate. The GDP
ratio  for  private  sector  debt  rose  in  five  years  from  100%  to  150%  (Diagram  1).  Moreover,  in  the
second half of the 1980s asset prices rose in real terms by over 70%.
1. Real asset prices and total loans in
proportion to GDP
270
240
210
180
150
120
90
1,6
1,4
1,2
1,0
0,8
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
Real asset prices, index 1980 = 100
(left scale) 
Loans in proportion to GDP 
(right scale)
There are a number of reasons why an expansion of credit leads to rising asset prices and vice versa.
The value of an asset can be defined as the present value of the future income the asset is expected to
generate. So rising asset prices can be said to mirror expectations of future increases in income, which
in  turn  strengthens  both  the  propensity  and  the  possibility  of  borrowing.  That  implies  increased
demand  for  credit.  On  the  supply  side,  rising  asset  prices  increase  the  availability  of  credit  in  that
borrowers are in a better position to pledge collateral. The prospect of rising income and cash flows
also implies that borrowers will be more able to service and repay debt.
As  long  as  this  process  is  based  on  reasonable  assessments  of  the  future,  all  is  well  and  good.
Problems arise when asset prices and the provision of credit both rise unduly, so that the expectations
on  which  they  are  based  become  unrealistic.  Looking  back,  this  is  evidently  what  happened  in
numerous cases. The head of the US Federal Reserve has labelled it “irrational exuberance”, a phrase
that is now a byword.
A bubble will burst sooner or later. The precipitating factors vary but the event as such is simply a
matter  of  time.  The  collapse  in  Sweden  began  in  1991.  Share  prices  were  already  declining  and
property prices soon followed suit.
The real economy is liable to be affected by falling asset prices, just as it is when asset prices rise.
Households perceive a loss of wealth that prompts them to restrain their consumption. Another effect
comes from the interaction of the credit market and the balance sheets of households and firms: when
asset  prices  and  their  value  as  collateral  fall,  creditors  become  less  willing  to  provide  loans.  In
addition, falling asset prices may  make banks generally less inclined to  provide  credit, so  that even
profitable  projects  suffer.  This  can  ultimately  paralyse  the  supply  of  credit  and  lead  to  the  total
collapse of the financial system.
While  Sweden  can  be said  to  have  avoided a  financial  crisis  in  that  sense,  both  the  wealth  and  the
balance-sheet effects probably contributed to the course of the worst economic recession here since the
1930s. Demand in general fell, financial saving rose and credit was rapidly repaid. The steep reduction
of the loan stock in the first half of the 1990s is evident from Diagram 1.
BIS Review 127/1999
2
However, a severe bank crisis was only one of the factors that hit the Swedish economy. At times in
the  early-1990s  there  was  also  heavy  pressure  on  the  krona.  In  November  1992  the  Riksbank  was
finally obliged to change to a floating exchange rate.
One of several causes of the exchange rate turbulence was the short-term external liabilities that had
accumulated in the late-1980s. In that period, households and firms had  borrowed  the  equivalent  of
around  SEK300  billion  in  foreign  currency  through  the  Swedish  bank  system  (Diagram  2).  That
corresponded  to  around  20%  of  GDP.  I  mentioned  earlier  that  borrowing  from  banks  rose  quite
remarkably in the second half of the 1980s; about 20% of this took the form of foreign-currency loans.
Much of the borrowing was short-term but the funds were not infrequently used for projects with a
longer duration, such as property investment. All went well as long as the loans could be renewed and
the banks were able to borrow the corresponding amounts in the international market.
2. Banks’ lending in foreign currency,
SEK Billion
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
It  was  not  a  classic  run  on  the  banks,  with  depositors  withdrawing  their  savings,  that  triggered  the
crisis  in  the  Swedish  bank  system.  It  was  a  lack  of  international  confidence  and  problems  with
financing  in  the  international  market.  Growing  loan  losses  made  it  increasingly  difficult  for  some
Swedish banks to obtain the necessary funds abroad. What we saw was a more modern kind of bank
run. That was certainly a major reason why the Swedish bank crisis coincided with an exchange rate
crisis.
So what induced Swedish households and firms to borrow in foreign currency? The main explanation
is perhaps that interest rates abroad were lower than in Sweden. Borrowing in a foreign currency was
perceived to be cheaper. While some households and firms may have wondered why and found that
the higher Swedish rates were simply a risk premium to cover the possibility of a future devaluation,
the  consequences  of  this  analysis  were  generally  ignored  (a  devaluation  would  have  increased  the
amount of a loan expressed in Swedish kronor, making the burden of repayment heavier). The fixed
exchange rate policy was perceived as credible, at least by these borrowers. They were lulled, or lulled
themselves, into thinking that the exchange risk, even though it was occasioning higher interest rates
than in the rest of the world, would be absorbed by the Riksbank. That meant they could try to benefit
from the interest rate differential with impunity. As many of these foreign currency borrowers were
players who could not afford loans in Swedish kronor, they had no margin when the liabilities became
more costly after the krona’s fall and this accentuated the problems.
3
BIS Review 127/1999
What lessons can we learn?
I have now identified three features of the Swedish crisis: rising asset prices, a strong  expansion  of
credit and short-term borrowing in foreign currency. These three factors have in fact preceded almost
all the financial crises that have hit various countries in the past decade. This does not apply to last
autumn’s turbulence over the Russian suspension of payments and the LTCM hedge-fund problems. I
am thinking instead of, for example, Mexico, Indonesia, Thailand, South Korea, Malaysia and Brazil.
In these cases, inflated asset prices and both domestic and external debt had an important bearing on
the subsequent course of events.
One important lesson is that a floating exchange rate with an explicit inflation target makes it easier to
avoid  a  situation  with  rapidly  rising  asset  prices,  an  unduly  strong  expansion  of  credit  and  high
short-term borrowing abroad. That does not mean that a fixed, but adjustable, exchange rate is bound
to result in problems of this type. Experience from Denmark is a good example.
A clear problem in Sweden’s case, however, was that in the 1980s monetary policy could not be used
to counter the tendencies to strong credit growth and rapid asset price increases. Another problem, as I
just mentioned, was that the fixed exchange rate policy lulled people into a false sense of security and
provided an incentive for short-run borrowing in foreign currency.
With  a  floating  exchange  rate,  the  krona’s  fluctuations  make  the  exchange  risk  more  evident
(Diagram 2).  Such  a  regime  may  have  other  drawbacks  but  it  does  show  potential  borrowers  that
foreign-currency loans involve a risk. The stock of foreign-currency loans to households and firms is
in fact smaller today than it was a decade ago.
A point to bear in mind is that the problem in the late-1980s was not the strong asset price rise as such
but the combination of this and heavy borrowing in Sweden and abroad. The wealth effect tends to be
symmetric, in the sense that economic activity is stimulated by rising asset prices to much the same
extent as it is checked when asset prices fall. Neither are wealth effects usually all that great. Problems
arise when they coincide with an expansion of credit. The effects may then be asymmetric in that they
are more extensive when asset prices fall. The balance-sheet effects lead to loan losses and, in more
serious cases, to the suspension of payments. In the worst case there will be a financial crisis.
The situation today does not resemble what happened in the second half of the 1980s, as can be seen
from Diagram 1. Asset prices have indeed risen strongly in recent years but credit has not grown to the
same extent. It seems that at least to date in the present upswing, Swedish banks and their customers
have had another approach to the provision of credit and to borrowing.
A  pause  may  be  called  for  here  to  take  a  look  at  monetary  policy’s  attitude  in  principle  to  asset
markets compared with markets for goods and services. The inflation targeting policy that has been
introduced in  Sweden  and other  countries in  the  past decade  has  in  many  cases  had  the  purpose  of
mastering  recurrent  overheating  in  product  and  labour  markets.  It  might  be  said,  somewhat
improperly, that the policy aims to avoid the “bubbles” that have tended to arise in these markets from
time to time. To date, the inflation targeting policy must be said to have done well on the whole in this
respect; today, the inflation target seems to function as a credible benchmark, a nominal anchor, for
price  and  wage  formation.  That  wage  formation  does  not  yet  seem  to  have  been  fully  adjusted  -
unemployment in Sweden remains high - is another matter. It probably has more to do with structural
factors.
For asset markets, however, there is no such clear benchmark. So neither is there anything to prevent
psychological  factors  -  irrational  exuberance,  if  you  like  -  from  continuing  to  inflate  various  asset
prices  beyond  what  is  reasonable  in  relation  to  underlying  economic  conditions.  The  path  of  the
American  stock  exchange  in  recent  years  demonstrates  that  low  inflation  is  often  not  sufficient  to
ensure a restrained development of asset prices. That this can be seen as something of a dilemma is
understandable.
Does  this  imply  that  monetary  policy  should  in  fact  be  used  more  than  hitherto  for  actively  and
directly  countering  sizeable  price  increases  in  asset  markets?  There  is  no  obvious  answer  to  that
question but the dominant opinion at present is that the answer should be no. This is because central
banks would find it difficult to identify true bubbles in the development of asset prices and judge the
BIS Review 127/1999
4
appropriate measures correctly. Still, I would like to leave the door ajar. Situations may arise that are
hard to foresee today and where monetary policy may need to play a part. If risks of a new financial
crisis were to mount up in some distant future, a central bank could not stand idly by.
The type of monetary policy regime with an explicit inflation target that applies in Sweden and other
countries  does,  however,  provide  ways  of  coming  to  terms  with  problems  from  fluctuating  asset
prices.  For  one  thing,  the  regime  means  that  in  the  event  of  asset  market  instability,  the  monetary
stance is adjusted automatically in a stabilising direction. As asset prices affect aggregate demand and
this is an important mechanism for inflation, interest rates will be raised when asset prices move up
and  vice  versa.  This  can  be  expected  to  exert  some  stabilising  effect  on  asset  markets.  For  another
thing, macroeconomic stability as such should have a stabilising influence on financial markets.
Focus on the provision of credit
While  a  credible  macroeconomic  policy  is  needed  to  prevent  financial  crises,  it  is  probably  not
sufficient by itself. It is also necessary to oversee and supervise the financial system, which includes
having appropriate rules for the operations of banks and other credit institutions.
In the final analysis, it was the provision of credit that lay at the heart of the events in the 1990s to
which  I  have  referred.  Extensive  credit  risks  constituted  the  problem  and  it  seems  that  banks  made
similar mistakes time and again. This applies to the generosity of domestic banks in financing asset
investments  of  private  players,  as  well  as  to  the  propensity  of  international  banks  to  place  foreign
currency at the disposal of domestic counterparties. Lending to financial institutions tends to be highly
concentrated and this exacerbates the situation in times of financial turbulence. It may also be asked
whether credit assessments were as thorough as they should have been.
What  are  the  reasons  for  this?  One  is  probably  the  difficulties  for  both  banks  and  supervisors  in
judging  the  risks  in  credit  commitments.  Credit  risks  are  not  simple  to  handle,  neither  is  it  easy  to
obtain  a  clear  picture  of  different  players’  loan  portfolios.  So  genuine  difficulties  in  making
assessments are one explanation. Another is that in certain cases, instead of attempting to assess risks
independently, banks appear to have simply followed the herd.
A recurrent theme in the decade’s crises accordingly seems to be the underestimation of credit risks. It
is therefore up to the banks to establish a better credit policy in their institutions. This credit policy
must pervade the whole establishment, from individual credit managers up to the more comprehensive
strategies of executives and boardrooms. But that is not sufficient, or rather it probably will not happen
unless measures are also taken by the regulatory and supervisory authorities. This is because in their
lending and general behaviour, banks are influenced by their expectations of how authorities will act
in the event of a crisis.
Role of the authorities
Oversight in Sweden is the responsibility of the Riksbank. We are required by law to “promote a safe
and efficient payment system”. The payment system is such a large component of the financial system
that  our  role  can  really  be  described  as  being  to  promote  the  latter’s  general  safety  and  efficiency.
Supervision, however, is the function of the Financial Supervisory Authority.
What this means is that the Riksbank primarily oversees developments in a system or a market, while
the Financial Supervisory Authority, besides monitoring the stability of the entire system, focuses on
the  situation  in  each  institution.  In  practice,  however,  these  two  roles  are  difficult  to  distinguish
clearly, so close cooperation between the two authorities is important. It is indeed a hallmark of our
relationship, from the executive level down to managers and their personnel.
Still,  the  Riksbank  is  in  a  position  to  detect  more  direct  problems  at  an  early  stage,  since  they  are
likely to show up in the payment system, for which we are responsible. Our possibilities of affecting
the course of events then lie in talking with bank executives and informing the Financial Supervisory
Authority. Moreover, our series of Financial Stability Reports can no doubt exert a more continuous
5
BIS Review 127/1999
influence  in  this  respect.  In  the  longer  run  the  Riksbank  can  also  contribute  to  stability  through
international cooperation, as well as by participating  in  Sweden  in  work  on  new  legislation  and  the
promotion of structural changes in various systems.
I  should  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  international  cooperation  between  authorities  in  different
fields, particularly now that problems in one country tend to spread to other countries more quickly
than  before.  The  Riksbank  accordingly  participates  in  the  work  of  the  Group  of  Ten,  the  Bank  for
International Settlements, the International Monetary Fund and so on.
The  recurrent  crises  in  financial  markets  clearly  show  that  work  on  strengthening  systems  is  a
continuous endeavour and that much remains to be done. Banks and other financial institutions have
admittedly done a great deal to improve risk management, not least as regards loan portfolios. But the
pace  of  developments  in  the  financial  sector  is  so  rapid  that  neither  financial  institutions  nor
authorities can rest on their laurels.
It should also be realised that the extensive work in progress on reinforcing the financial system does
not mean that in future the system will be completely immune to problems.
Moreover, our knowledge of phenomena of this type is limited. It may be asked whether it will ever be
possible to predict financial crises. The models with leading indicators that are being tested at present
tend to be too blunt. They sound the alarm about things that never happen and are silent about those
that actually occur.
The  authorities  must  therefore  focus  on  doing  everything  so  that  banks  and  other  financial  systems
have such good systems for risk management that the probability of financial crises is  reduced  to  a
minimum. We must also work to mitigate any effects and try to ensure that crises which do occur are
not as extensive and economically costly as those we have experienced in recent years.
The  objective,  in  other  words,  must  be  to  combine  the  necessary  regulation  and  supervision  of  the
markets  with  the  benefits  that  a  well  developed  financial  system  can  confer.  The  regulation  and
supervision of financial firms are necessary for various reasons. But these functions must be carried
out in such a way that they do not throttle the potential that can contribute to greater prosperity in the
global economy.
Conclusion
Many  countries  have  deregulated  their  financial  systems  in  the  past  two  decades.  For  the  first  time
since  the  outbreak  of  World  War  One,  capital  is  again  more  or  less  free  to  move  across  national
borders. Moreover, major changes in communications and information technology have provided new
methods  and instruments for  risk  management.  As  a  result  of  all  this,  today  the  financial  system  is
more extensive and globalised than ever before. This holds even though capital flows relative to GDP
were also large at the turn of the nineteenth century. At the time, however, it was other countries that
received the flows, which also took a somewhat different form.
The rapid pace of financial developments and internationalisation is really a logical consequence  of
the globalised production of goods and services, with the strong growth of cross-border trade in the
world economy. These developments have accentuated the need of new financial solutions for firms
and  households.  Expanding  foreign  trade  and  globalisation  of  the  production  of  goods  and  services
call for the development and internationalisation of the financial system so that the opportunities of
greater prosperity can be fully  utilised.  A  well-developed  financial  system  is  particularly  important,
moreover, when advances in tele- and data-communications are beginning to have more far-reaching
consequences for production processes.
At  the  same  time,  the  transition  to  a  more  global  financial  system  has  not  been  straightforward.
Developments have often been so rapid that systems have been “left behind”. But this does not mean
that the problems lie in the deregulated financial system or in capital mobility as such. Turning back
the clock would be difficult but the notion is worth a thought to indicate the consequences that a return
to a highly regulated financial sector would have in terms of growth and employment.
BIS Review 127/1999
6
Here I have tried instead to show how the system itself, as well as the authorities around the world, are
endeavouring  in  various  ways  to  contribute  to  greater  financial  stability  at  the  same  time  as  the
positive  characteristics  of  the  new  financial  system  are  allowed  to  contribute  to  the  growth  of
prosperity in the world.
7
BIS Review 127/1999
