Mr Macfarlane’s statement to the House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Economics, Finance and Public Administration
Opening Statement given by Mr L J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration on
29 November 1999.
 It is a pleasure to be here in these dignified surroundings to appear before the Committee again. As
you know, we take these hearings very seriously because we regard them as an important channel for
Parliament,  through  its  representatives,  to  question  the  Reserve  Bank  in  depth.  It  thus  plays  an
important role in ensuring the Bank’s accountability and in the democratic process.
As usual, I would like to make an opening statement, but it will not be comprehensive because we put
out  our  Semi-Annual  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  earlier  in  the  month.  Its  contents  are  still  very
current and I will refer to it from time to time during the hearing.
Also following past practice, I would like to start by reviewing what I said to you in June about how
we saw the economy developing. There was still a fair bit of uncertainty around at that stage as to the
extent of the expected slowdown in GDP growth from the 4½% plus that had occurred in 1997 and
1998. That is why we had a relatively wide range of projected outcomes from 3% to 4%. The top of
that  range  would indicate  almost  no  slowdown,  while  the  bottom  would  probably  indicate  we  were
heading still lower and would represent genuine weakness in economic activity.
We  think  the  position  is  a  little  clearer  now  –  our  forecast  for  growth  through  1999  is  3½%,  and
through  the  financial  year  1999/2000  is  4%.  A  through-the-year  growth  rate  of  4%  implies  a
year-on-year growth rate of 3½%, the same as the Treasury is forecasting in its mid-year review. Thus,
these numbers do show a modest slowdown for the Australian economy, but most of it is behind us. It
incorporates the low June quarter figure and reflects weakness in business investment, and particularly
a decline in net exports in the first half of 1999. Because the latter is unlikely to be repeated, we expect
to see growth of around 4% through the year ahead.
There  has  been  no  reason  to  change  our  view  on  inflation.  We  thought  inflation  in  the  year  to
December quarter 1999 would be 2%, whether measured by the CPI or some underlying measure. We
still think 2% for the CPI and a shade over 2% in underlying terms. When we look out to June 2000,
our guess for the CPI is 2¾%, with 2¼% for underlying.
On unemployment, we have also not changed our view. When we met last time, the unemployment
rate had been averaging 7½%, and we expected it to edge down over the remainder of the year. This is
what it has done, so that now it has averaged 7.2% over the past three months. We expect that it will
go down further so that we will see some numbers less than 7 by June next year.
The balance of payments has also turned out very much as expected. For quite a while, we had been
forecasting the quarterly current account deficit to reach 6% of GDP, and it finally did so in the June
quarter and will probably remain at about this level through this financial year. It was surprising that
the current account did not deteriorate faster and further, given the disparity between our growth rate
and  that  of  our  trading  partners.  While  the  slowness  of  the  deterioration  has  been  a  pleasing
development, we think that the improvement could be some time in coming.
In  summary,  we  are  expecting  that  the  current  financial  year  will  be  another  good  one  for  the
economy.  Growth  will  be  a  little  lower  than  its  recent  peak,  but  still  good,  and  inflation  should  be
within the average we aim for. Considering that this is the ninth year of the expansion, such a result
would mean that no major imbalances had emerged. The aim, as usual, is to keep the expansion going
and to avoid the emergence of problems that would threaten its continuation.
BIS Review 130/1999
1
Monetary policy
This  brings  me  to  monetary  policy.  The  most  important  development  here  was  the  tightening
immediately after our November Board Meeting when the overnight cash rate was raised from 4.75%
to 5%. While I think this adjustment has been quite well received by the community, it is still worth
spelling out some aspects which lay behind the decision.
I would like to start by putting it in the international context, not because we have to follow what other
countries do, but because there are some international developments that are a common background to
all countries. One such development was the changed perceptions about the world economic outlook
in 1999 and 2000. If you remember, 1998 was a weak year for the world economy, largely because of
the widespread fallout from the Asian crisis. At the beginning of this year, things looked as though
they were getting worse, and most forecasters – public and private – expected 1999 to be weaker than
1998. In the event, it turned out the other way – 1999 has been better than 1998, and 2000 should be
better again.
As our Semi-Annual Statement said:
“This change has led to an increase in both short-term and long-term interest rates in most
industrial countries, as markets questioned the continuation of the accommodative monetary
stance central banks have generally been following over the past year or two. The upward
pressure in interest rates began in the US, the country most advanced in its economic cycle,
but quickly spread to other English-speaking countries and, more recently, to Europe.”
The  market  reaction  was  a  bit  quicker  than  it  needed  to  be,  but  it  was  broadly  correct.  The  United
States was the first to  tighten, followed  by  the  United Kingdom.  Our  tightening  in  early  November
was quickly followed by the European Central Bank, and the central banks of Sweden, Canada and
New Zealand.
I would now like to turn to the Australian economy, where a similar expectation of weakness in 1999
did not come to pass. Real GDP grew by over 4% in the 12 months to the June quarter (the latest data
we have) and will probably still be showing a similar rate in the 12 months to the September quarter.
This measure  may  slip  for  a time  as  we  drop  off  some  of  the  high  quarterly  growth  rates  from  our
calculations  but,  as  explained  earlier,  we  think  growth  will  be  about  4%  in  the  12  months  to  June
2000.
Similarly, the quite lengthy period during which inflation was undershooting our target seems to have
come to an end. The CPI inflation rate would already be a bit over 2% apart from the Government’s
reduction  in  the  Health  Insurance  Rebate.  Although  some  of  this  result  has  been  due  to  rises  in  oil
prices, measures of underlying or core inflation, which are largely unaffected by oil prices, have also
risen by about 2% over the past 12 months.
Thus, the period where the Australian economy was experiencing a contractionary impact from abroad
and where the outlook was for weaker growth and sub-2% inflation  has now  passed. The  monetary
policy that was appropriate for that period is no longer appropriate to the new circumstances that we
face. That is the reason behind the tightening of monetary policy we undertook after our November
Board Meeting.
At the risk of being overly technical, I would like to spell out some aspects of our flexible inflation
targeting regime a little more fully at this stage. In doing so, I want to distinguish between two types
of situation: the first is where inflation has been comfortably averaging 2 point something per cent for
some  time  and  the  economy  is  performing  roughly  in  line  with  its  potential  so  there  is  no  obvious
upward or downward pressure on the inflation rate. The second is  where the  starting  point is either
above or below the range we expect inflation to average.
In the first case, where inflation is where we want it, monetary policy would be set to keep it there.
The economy would be in a type of dynamic equilibrium and there would be no need for policy action.
We then ask ourselves what are the circumstances under which we would wish to change monetary
policy. Would we do it if our forecast for inflation rose from 2½% to 2¾% or fell to 2¼%? My answer
is that we do not worry about small variations in inflation of that magnitude. To trigger a change in
BIS Review 130/1999
2
policy would require a forecast which had inflation going clearly above 3% or below 2% and likely to
stay there for a while. Our flexible inflation targeting framework does not aim for rigorous fine tuning,
and requires a significant variation in the inflation forecast to trigger monetary policy action.
This brings me to the second type of situation. This is where we start from a position where inflation is
above  or  below  our  desired  target  range.  In  this  case,  where  the  initial  situation  is  one  of  dynamic
disequilibrium, the prescription is a little more complex. Let us look at the situations defined by the
two possible starting points.
• 
The  first  is  when  inflation  is  above  the  target.  In  this  situation,  the  inflation  targeting
framework would say to raise interest rates to a setting which would bring inflation back to
the target. But once the higher rates had done their job, they should be gradually reduced to
more normal levels. This is what happened in 1996. We did not wait until our forecast had
inflation falling below 2% before we started to ease.
 The second is when inflation is below the target. In this case, the framework would first call
for a setting of interest rates which would, over time, allow inflation to go  back  up  to  the
target. Once it is clear that such a setting had done its job, the framework calls for it to be
replaced by one more likely to keep inflation at the target. The framework does not envisage
the low interest rate setting being maintained until something goes wrong.
It is this reasoning which lies behind the recent tightening of monetary policy and why we refer to it as
pre-emptive.  To  argue  against  it  on  the  grounds  that  we  should  not  act  until  our  inflation  forecast
clearly exceeded 3% would be to argue for a very “stop-go” approach to monetary policy. It would be
equivalent  to  saying  that  the  most  expansionary  setting  reached  during  the  downward  phase  of  the
interest rate  cycle  should  be  maintained  until  such  time  as  a  move  to  a  clearly  restrictive  setting  is
required,  and  only  then  should  a  move  be  made.  This  would  virtually  guarantee  that  such  a  move
would be a large one.
What about the GST?
Not  everyone  will  be  convinced  by  the  arguments  I  have  used  above.  Some  people  still  cannot
understand why you would tighten unless the economy was overheating, and assume that there must
be a hidden agenda. Others are keen to play the old game of trying to find a political dimension to
monetary policy. This has led to claims that the real reason is our fear of the inflationary effects of the
GST, but that we are too diplomatic to say so. I am sorry to disappoint the proponents of this view, but
that is not the case.
• 
If the GST was the reason for tightening monetary policy, why have the Fed, the Bank of
England, the ECB, the Bank of Canada, the Reserve Bank of  New  Zealand, etc.  tightened
monetary policy? As I have said elsewhere, I am not aware of the forthcoming introduction
of a GST in any of these countries.
  Our  starting  point  has  always  been  that the imposition  of  the  GST  will  affect  the  level  of
prices, but not the ongoing inflation rate. This will require that businesses do not engage in
opportunistic pricing by raising their prices by more than is warranted by the net impact of
the  GST  and  reductions  in  indirect  taxes.  If  that  is  the  case,  the  GST  should  not  have  an
effect on wages because wage earners will gain more from the accompanying fall in income
tax  rates  than  they  will  lose  from  the  introduction  of  the  GST.  The  net  effect  of  the  tax
changes will be to increase the disposable income of wage earners by more than the increase
in  their  expenditure,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  the  package  involves  a  cost  to  the
Budget.
Monetary  policy  is  based  on  a  view  that  inflation  will  be  within  the  target  immediately
before the GST is introduced and that it will be back within the target a year later. This view,
in turn, is based on the assumption that there will be no second round effects due to higher
wage outcomes or opportunistic price behaviour as outlined above. If we started to observe
behaviour that indicates that this assumption was not correct, then monetary policy would act
BIS Review 130/1999
3
upon it. We are not acting at present on the expectation that this assumption will be violated
– we are acting in the expectation that it will hold.
Y2K and all that
I would now like to make a few comments about Y2K, which is very topical because there are now
only 32 days to go to the new century.
When I appeared before the Committee in June, I said that Australian banks, building societies  and
credit unions were very well prepared for Y2K. They had not completed all their final testing at that
stage, but now they have, and everything has been done to make sure that their computer systems will
be able to handle the change into the new century. This includes not only all their internal accounting
and record-keeping systems, but also their ATM, EFTPOS and credit card systems. As well as making
sure  their  systems  are  compliant,  they  have  also  been  sending  out  very  clear  messages  to  their
customers about the safety of their deposits. We are very pleased to see this because, as I said in June,
the simple fact is that deposits are safe and records are not at risk from Y2K-related problems.
I should also say a few words about my own institution. You will not be surprised to know that we
have also put a lot of effort into our own systems to make sure they are Y2K compliant. One of our
most  important  is  our  electronic  direct  entry  system  which  handles  all  of  Australia’s  pension
payments. You will be pleased to know that all these payments will be made on time.
I  mentioned  last  time  that  it  is  not  just  a  matter  of  getting  the  technical  side  right,  but  it  is  also
important that we do not run into a problem of public over-reaction. All the indications here are that
the vast majority of the public are taking a sensible and calm approach and have not been influenced
by alarmist stories or  predictions of  doom  –  not  that there  have  been  a lot  of  these anyhow.  In  our
judgment, the Australian media coverage, with only a few exceptions, has been accurate and balanced.
don’t take the risk of having too much cash on your person or in your home;
I am often asked by people whether they should take out extra cash to see them over the New Year
period. My advice is generally along the following lines:
• 
• 
• 
the safest place for your savings is in the financial institution that it is presently in;
don’t fear that the country will run out of cash. We have printed enough notes to provide for
any conceivable demand; and
 remember  you  are  only  really  dealing  with  a long  weekend.  Banks,  building  societies  and
credit unions will be open on the three days before New Year’s Day, which is the Saturday,
and will re-open on the Tuesday.
New Year’s Eve is going to be rather unusual this year in that a lot of people will not be out enjoying
the festivities but will be at work to make sure that nothing goes wrong. At the Reserve Bank, we will
have a team in place, including myself, and a communications centre to receive up-to-date information
from  financial  institutions  on  what  is  happening.  This  centre  will  be  linked  to  the  Commonwealth
Government’s  National  Coordination  Centre  in  Canberra  and  to  various  international  networks  that
have been established.
Because Australia (and New Zealand) will be the first  countries  to  enter the  new  millennium,  there
will be a lot of international attention focussed on us, including a fair bit of live television coverage to
other countries about what is happening in Australia. Remember the United States will only be starting
its working day on Friday when we cross over into the new millennium. I am confident that Australia
will acquit itself well once again in the eyes of the world when the great day comes.
BIS Review 130/1999
4
