Mr Duisenberg presents the ECB’s Annual Report 1998
to the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, to the
European Parliament in Strasbourg on 26 October 1999.
 I  have  great  pleasure  in  presenting  the  first  Annual  Report  of  the  European  Central  Bank  to  the
European Parliament at today’s plenary session. Almost ten months have passed since the euro was
successfully introduced and the ECB took over full operational responsibility for the single monetary
policy.  Many  of  us  feel  that,  with  the  launch  of  the  single  currency,  the  process  of  European
integration has gained a new quality. Indeed, the transfer of a core competency of the modern state,
namely monetary policy, to a truly European and independent organisation such as the ECB must be
regarded  as  a  historic  event  which  marks  an  unprecedented  degree  of  economic  and  political
integration within the European Union.
The smooth transition to this new era of European integration and the successful operational start of
the ECB was the outcome of several years of intense and thorough preparation. The Annual Report of
the ECB gives a detailed account both of the final preparatory work conducted by the Eurosystem in
the  run-up  to  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  and  of  the  main  economic  and  monetary
developments within the European Union in 1998 and in the first few weeks of 1999.
To  mention  some  of  the  issues  addressed  by  the  Annual  Report,  it  explains  the  Eurosystem’s
stability-oriented monetary policy strategy, the operational framework for the implementation of the
single monetary policy and the foreign exchange rate policy framework of the euro. The Report also
contains  chapters  on  the  other  tasks  conferred  upon  the  Eurosystem  by  the  Treaty  establishing  the
European  Community,  including  the  implementation  of statistical requirements  for  Stage  Three,  the
Eurosystem’s responsibilities in the area of payment systems, the preparations for the introduction of
the euro banknotes, the Eurosystem’s tasks related to banking supervision and financial stability and
the Eurosystem’s cooperation with other international and European institutions and forums.
However,  since  the  information  contained  in  the  Annual  Report  is  of  a  self-explanatory  nature,  it
might  be  more  useful  if  I  concentrate  my  remarks  on  some  of  the  issues  addressed  by  the  draft
Resolution prepared by your Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs. I shall then be happy to
answer any questions you might have.
Accountability and transparency of the ECB
1.
I  should  like  to  start  by  commenting  on  the  discharge  of  the  ECB’s  accountability  vis-à-vis  the
European Parliament. The Treaty establishing the European Community contains various provisions to
ensure  the  democratic  accountability  of  the  ECB,  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  which  is  certainly  the
presentation of the Annual Report to the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union.
However,  apart  from  this  annual  exercise,  the  ECB  and  the  European  Parliament  have  established
several other contacts.
First  and  possibly  most  importantly,  I  should  like  to  mention  the  regular  hearings  held  by  the
European  Parliament’s  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs.  Within  the  scope  of  these
hearings, which – in line with the European Parliament’s rules of procedure – take place on a quarterly
basis,  I  provide  detailed  explanations  regarding  both  our  assessment  of  current  economic  and
monetary  developments  and  the  decisions  taken  by  the  ECB.  Transcripts  of  these  hearings  are
published  on  the  websites  of  both  the  European  Parliament  and  the  ECB.  Moreover,  the  European
Parliament has invited members of the Executive Board of the ECB and staff of the ECB to participate
1
BIS Review 116/1999
in  additional  hearings  on  a  number  of  specific  issues,  including  the  external  representation  of  the
Eurosystem, the preparation of euro banknotes and statistical matters.
Furthermore,  the  ECB  has  also  had  the  opportunity  to  welcome  delegations  of  members  of  the
European  Parliament’s  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  to  its  premises  in  Frankfurt.
The ECB attaches great importance to these visits and will be pleased to continue to host such events.
However, since these visits to the ECB are of a more informal nature, it goes without saying that they
have to be considered as an additional tool for communication between the two institutions and cannot
be seen as a substitute for regular public hearings at the European Parliament.
In setting up its communication policy, the ECB decided to go beyond the transparency requirements
of the Treaty. Thus, while the Treaty requires the ECB to publish a quarterly report on its activities,
the ECB has decided to publish such a report on a monthly basis, the Monthly Bulletin, which gives a
detailed presentation of economic and monetary developments.
In addition, there are a number of other communication tools that the ECB regularly uses. First, let me
mention the extended press conferences that the Vice-President and I hold immediately after the first
meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB every month, transcripts of which are also accessible
via the ECB’s website. You may also be aware of the broad range of publications that the ECB has
issued on specific subjects related to its fields of responsibility. I should like to draw your attention, in
particular, to the ECB’s series of working papers, the aim of which is to disseminate the findings of
the  ECB’s  internal  research.  Finally,  various  statistical  data,  as  well  as  the  speeches  held  by  the
members of the Executive Board, can also be accessed via the ECB’s website.
The ECB’s communication policy gives clear priority to maintaining and enhancing the credibility of
the  Eurosystem  and  confidence  in  the  euro,  both  of  which  are  crucial  elements  in  the  successful
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In  this  context,  one  should  always  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  the
Governing  Council  acts  as  a  collegial  body,  and  that  all  decisions  have  to  be  communicated  to  the
public  in  a  clear  and  consistent  way.  Speaking  a  common  language  is  particularly  important  for  a
central  bank  operating  in  a  monetary  union  comprising  several  countries.  Contradictory  indications
about the decisions taken by the ECB and the underlying reasons might trigger unwarranted market
expectations  and  increase  uncertainty,  thereby  running  counter  to  the  very  objective  of  being
transparent with regard to the conduct of monetary policy. I should like to stress that the information
provided at the press conferences held after the meetings of the Governing Council, together with the
analysis contained both in the ECB Monthly Bulletin and in the other channels of communication I
mentioned earlier, comes very close, in substance, to the publication of “summary minutes”. In view
of the broad variety of publicly available information issued by the ECB, it is my firm belief that the
ECB can stand comparison with other central banks in the field of transparency.
Publication of forecasts and national data relating to the euro area
2.
In  this  context,  I  should  also  like  to  comment  briefly  on  the  request  to  publish  the  ECB’s  internal
forecasts. First, it would clearly be premature to consider such a step since the Eurosystem has yet to
gain  experience  with  its  forecasts.  More  time  will  be  needed  before  we  can  assume  that  all  the
technical  issues  have  been  addressed  properly,  and  the  publication  of  forecasts  can  be  considered
without endangering the ECB’s credibility. I am confident that we can achieve this in the course of
next year. Let me also emphasise that the role of the ECB’s internal forecasts in the decision-making
process  should  not  be  overestimated.  Such  forecasts  constitute  one  piece  of  information  made
available  to  the  Governing  Council,  but  certainly  not  the  only  one.  The  role  of  the  ECB’s  internal
forecasts  within  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  therefore  differs  from  the  role  of
inflation  forecasts  in  a  strategy  of  direct  inflation  targeting.  Finally,  I  should  like  to  recall  that  the
Monthly Bulletin – especially in its extended quarterly version – provides a forward-looking analysis,
including reviews of the outlook for price developments.
The  ECB  has  also  been  asked  to  publish  reports  featuring  national  data  relating  to  countries
participating in the euro area. However, the publication of such data would be misleading  since the
single  monetary  policy  cannot  be  directed  at  country-specific  situations.  On  the  contrary,  the
BIS Review 116/1999
2
Eurosystem  must  take  a  euro  area-wide  perspective  in  its  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  in
general and the outlook for price stability in particular. Publication by the ECB of detailed reports for
each country participating in the euro area would run counter to the necessary creation of an area-wide
perspective in the conduct and discussion of monetary policy. However, it should be recognised that
the national central banks of the Eurosystem continue to produce their own regular reports that address
national economic and financial developments in some detail.
The ECB’s contribution to the general economic policies in the Community
3.
I should now like briefly to expand upon another issue which I know to be a fundamental concern of
the European Parliament, namely the contribution of monetary policy to the general economic policies
in the Community. The Treaty provides for a fundamentally sound allocation of objectives and policy
instruments  between  the  monetary  and  governmental  authorities  in  Europe.  The  Eurosystem  is
responsible for maintaining price stability. To this end, the Eurosystem has adopted a monetary policy
strategy that is forward-looking and acts promptly to address threats to price stability. The Treaty also
states that, without prejudice to its primary objective of price stability, the Eurosystem shall support
the general economic policies in the Community.
By maintaining price stability, monetary policy makes the best contribution it can to achieving a high
level of output and employment in the medium term. Price stability has beneficial effects on general
economic  performance  –  including  growth  and  employment  prospects  –  through  many  channels,  of
which I should like to mention the following:
• 
first, in an environment of price stability, the market mechanism will allocate resources more
efficiently  to  their  most  productive  uses.  Markets  function  most  effectively  when  relative
price signals are not distorted by fluctuations in the general price level;
  second,  a  climate  of  price  stability  reduces  the  inflation  risk  premia  in  interest  rates,
particularly  in  longer-term  rates,  and  thereby  improves  the  conditions  for  financing
investment;
third,  lasting  price  stability  serves  the  interests  of  social  justice  and  helps  to  protect  the
weakest  members  of  our society,  such  as  pensioners  and the  unemployed,  who  depend  on
fixed  incomes  and  who cannot  protect  themselves  against  the  costs of inflation  with  other
assets, such as property or shares.
Broad  agreement  exists  that  there  is  no  long-term  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  economic
growth. Attempting to use monetary policy to raise real economic activity above its sustainable level
will,  in  the  long  run,  simply  lead  to  ever  higher  inflation,  not  to  faster  economic  growth.  Such  an
attempt will simply forfeit the benefits of stable prices which I have just outlined and would therefore
prejudice growth and employment prospects over the medium term.
While the contribution it makes through maintaining price stability must not be overlooked, monetary
policy clearly cannot solve the serious structural unemployment problem in the euro area. Other policy
areas  have  the  instruments  needed  and  are  thus  responsible  for  solving  the  structural  problems.
Decisive action in this field is certainly required to improve growth and employment prospects.
Safeguarding sound government finances is a means of strengthening the conditions for price stability
and achieving strong sustainable growth which is conducive to employment creation. In this context,
the Stability and Growth Pact sets the right incentives for the conduct of sound and disciplined fiscal
policies  across  all  participating  Member  States.  In  addition,  structural  reforms  in  labour  and  goods
markets,  as  well  as  a  moderate  development  of  wage  costs,  can  best  address  the  root  causes  of
currently high unemployment in Europe.
The clear division of policy responsibilities I have just described enhances the credibility of monetary
and economic policies in Europe, increases transparency and facilitates accountability. It provides the
proper incentives for the policymakers in individual policy areas. If all parties concerned respect the
fundamental allocation of these responsibilities and act accordingly, the achievement of the objectives
of all policy areas will be the natural outcome of their individual policy choices.
3
BIS Review 116/1999
In  this  regard  the  Eurosystem  supports  the  idea  of  a  dialogue  between  monetary  policy  and  other
policy  areas  in  the  form  of  an  open  exchange  of  information.  However,  such  a  dialogue  should  be
clearly  distinguished  from  any  attempts  to  coordinate  policies  ex  ante,  so  as  to  achieve  a  certain
“policy mix”, which would blur the fundamental responsibilities I described. Such coordination would
tend to decrease accountability, reduce the transparency of  the  policy  framework  for the  public  and
increase uncertainty about policy actions, potentially threatening to destabilise the economy. Finally,
the debate on a “balanced and appropriate policy mix” should not be used to deflect attention from the
structural reforms that are urgently needed to address the euro area’s serious structural unemployment
problem.
The ECB’s contribution to financial stability
4.
The  ECB’s  contribution  to  financial  stability,  and  in  particular  the  question  of  the  provision  of
emergency liquidity to financial institutions in distress, is another issue upon which the interest of the
European Parliament is focused. Allow me to explain some of the main considerations in this regard.
The  main  guiding  principle  within  the  Eurosystem  with  reference  to  the  provision  of  emergency
liquidity  to  individual  financial  institutions  is  that  the  competent  national  central  bank  would  be
responsible  for  providing  such  assistance  to  those  institutions  operating  within  its  jurisdiction.  The
ECB  does,  however,  have  to  be  informed  of  this  in  a  timely  manner.  In  addition,  in  operations  of
relevance  to  the  single  monetary  policy,  the  decision-making  bodies  of  the  Eurosystem  will  be
involved  in  assessing  the  compatibility  of  the  envisaged  operations  with  the  pursuit  of  monetary
stability. In the case of a general liquidity crisis resulting from a gridlock in the payment system, for
instance, the direct involvement of the Eurosystem could be expected.
For  the  markets  it  would  be  sufficient  to  know  that  there  is  a  clearly  articulated  capability  and
willingness to act if really necessary. It is not common practice among central banks to disclose the
conditions  and  practicalities  of emergency  liquidity  assistance  arrangements.  In  particular,  there  are
typically no official documents describing the conditions under which emergency liquidity would be
extended  or  what  procedures  would  be  followed.  Indeed,  ex  ante  commitments  would  be
counter-productive  in  this  field,  since  they  would  restrict  the  ability  of  the  central  bank  to  act  to
contain  systemic  disturbances  with  unforeseen  features.  Moreover,  this  policy  of  “constructive
ambiguity” can limit the associated problem of moral hazard.
Improving cross-border retail payment services in the euro area
5.
Finally, I should like to turn to a different issue which has also been raised by the European Parliament
on several occasions, namely the question of cross-border retail payment services in the euro area. The
ECB is aware of the criticism that has been expressed with reference to the low level of efficiency and
high costs involved in the processing of such payments and fully shares the concerns expressed by the
European Parliament in this regard. The current situation is particularly unsatisfactory in the area of
cross-border  credit  transfers,  whereas  the  situation  in  the  area  of  cross-border  card-based  payments
raises fewer concerns.
As  you  will  be  aware,  one  of  the  basic  tasks  conferred  upon  the  Eurosystem  by  the  Treaty  is  the
promotion of the smooth functioning of payment systems. However, the involvement of central banks
in retail payment systems is, in general, less pronounced than in large-value payment systems, mainly
because retail payment systems entail significantly lower systemic risks. Nevertheless, the Eurosystem
is concerned with efficiency issues related to cross-border retail payments.
At  present,  the  performance  of  cross-border  retail  payment  systems  is  clearly  lagging  behind  the
policy objectives of Economic and Monetary Union and, indeed, the expectations of many European
citizens  and  small  enterprises.  After  the  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  on  1  January
2002,  these  differences  in  service  levels  for  national  and  cross-border  payments  within  the  single
currency area will become even more apparent.
BIS Review 116/1999
4
Against this background, the ECB strongly advocates the creation of a single payment area in order to
fully reap the benefits of the single currency. In order to give a clear signal to the banking industry and
the public, the ECB published a number of objectives in September which it expects the industry to
fulfil  and  which  should  contribute  towards  substantial  improvements.  The  current  inadequacies  are
linked, in  part, to the still  predominant  recourse to  correspondent  banking  and the lack  of  adequate
interbank infrastructures. More efficient funds transfer arrangements have been set up in recent years,
but they are too fragmented and economies of scale are very limited. One pre-condition, therefore, for
achieving a substantial enhancement in the processing of cross-border retail payments is undoubtedly
the  fact  that  the  banking  industry  must  implement  common  technical  features  in  the  processing  of
funds between banks.
However,  this  is  unlikely  to  be  sufficient. The  banking  industry  must  also  improve  substantially  its
internal  procedures  for  processing  cross-border  payments,  as  well  as  its  communication  with  the
customer.  This,  in  turn,  requires  a  more  extensive  use  of  automation  and  standardisation.  In  this
respect, I should like to draw attention to the standards agreed within the framework of the European
Committee  for  Banking  Standards,  which  I  consider  to  be  of  particular  importance.  The  ECB  is
organising  meetings  with  all  parties  involved  in  order  to  bring  the  implementation  of  the  standards
forward.
Once the conditions related to interbank processing and internal procedures have been met, it should
be possible for the banking industry to decrease substantially the price of cross-border credit transfers
and to reduce the execution time to that needed for domestic payments plus one day.
The ECB expects the banks in the euro area to achieve substantial improvements by 1 January 2002 at
the latest. The ECB will act as a catalyst for change and will, together with the national central banks
of  the  Eurosystem,  discuss  these  issues  with  the  euro  area  banking  industry  in  order  to  play  a
supportive  and  coordinating  role  in  this  regard.  At  present,  an  operational  involvement  of  the  ECB
does  not  appear  to  be justified  since there  are  some  indications  that  the  general  appreciation  of  the
problem  by  the  private  sector  is  now  increasing.  The  ECB  will,  however,  closely  monitor  further
developments in this area and will inform the European Parliament and the general public about the
progress achieved.
5
BIS Review 116/1999
