 Bimal Jalan: Corporate Governance and Financial Sector: Some Issues 
Excerpts of the speech delivered by Dr Bimal Jalan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
National Institute for Bank Management, Pune, 6 January 2002. 
 Mr. Bhide, Dr. Saha, Distinguished Chairpersons of banks, FIs, and friends, 
The Annual Day of the NIBM has become an important event in the Bank’s calendar that all of us look 
forward to, and I am glad to be with you once again. I am thankful to Mr. Bhide and the Board of the 
NIBM for giving me this opportunity for an exchange of views on the important subject of Corporate 
Governance in banks and financial institutions.  
This is a timely initiative as the events of last year have made it clear that we in India still have some 
ground to cover in order to make all our banking institutions safe, sound and efficient. Banks including 
co-operative  banks,  NBFCs  and  FIs,  are  the  custodians  of  public  money,  and  it  is  of  utmost 
importance that the public – as depositors, borrowers, and as participants in the economy - has full 
confidence in the banking system and the sanctity of banking transactions.  
This is not possible until each and every  institution participating in the financial system has internal 
management, governance and accountability structures which are upto the best possible standards. 
This is the reason – the overwhelming public interest – why this subject is so important.  
I am also happy to know that, as part of its Annual Day celebrations, NIBM has organised seminars on 
two other important subjects - interest margins/cost of funds and convergence of business strategies 
with IT plan. The technical seminars make the Annual Day. – not only an occasion for celebration, but 
also for an interchange of views on important subjects of common interest among bankers. This is an 
important initiative and I would like to convey my appreciation to NIBM for organising the seminars at 
RBI’s request.   
Needless to say that both these subjects are exceedingly important and have tremendous long term 
significance for improving the performance of banks, particularly public sector banks. The question of 
differences in interest spreads in different segments of the banking sector, and the high operational 
costs of public sector banks in particular was discussed by the Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) 
of RBI, and NIBM was requested to conduct a study sometime ago.  The study has been extensively 
discussed by banks and further refined in the light of comments. The seminar today will no doubt help 
in working out an action plan to reduce costs and make the interest rate structure more flexible.  
Similarly, the study done by NIBM at the request of RBI on IT is of immense interest. Introduction of 
computerisation and IT is no longer a matter of choice – unless banks provide easy and fast access to 
their services, they are bound to lose business. This matter was also discussed by BFS, and followed 
up  with  a  supplemental  comparative  study  by  the  RBI  on  actual  productivity  and  financial  gains 
associated with IT in banks with different levels of computerisation and inter-branch connectivity. The 
technical sessions this afternoon on this subject, I am sure will be of interest to all the representatives 
of banks present here. 
I am also glad that, in order to participate in the seminars and to give the benefit of his views, Shri 
Malegam, a member of the BFS and Board of RBI in addition to the RBI Deputy Governors, is also 
here. We are thankful to him for sparing his valuable time.    
I  have  no  special  experience  on  issues  relating  to  Corporate  Governance,  on  which  volumes  have 
been written by management and business experts as well as some important committees in several 
organisations and countries, including OECD, U.K., U.S., and also in India. So with your permission, I 
would like to just share some random thoughts with you without any rigorous structure. I hope some of 
the general issues that I mention would be of relevance to your more technical discussions later. 
Banks, corporations, financial institutions have been around for a very long time, and an interesting 
question to ask ourselves is – why this sudden flurry of interest in Corporate Governance? In the last 
few years, this subject has come to the fore, and a number of committees – the Cadbury Committee, 
the OECD Code, Combined Code of London Stock Exchange, the Blue Ribbon Committee in U.S, and 
the  Kumara  Mangalam  Birla  Committee  in  India  -  why?  Why  has  this  subject  attracted  so  much 
attention in 2002 and not 10 or 20 years ago when all the institutions, banks, and corporations were 
very much there. 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 1
 2. 
3. 
It  seems  to  me  that  there  are  some  fundamental  reasons  why  Corporate  Governance  issues  have 
become crucial. 
1. 
First,  liberalisation  and  deregulation  the  world  over.  The  regulatory  framework  and  the 
sophistication of financial markets. In India, for example, earlier either the Government or the 
RBI  will  tell  you  what  to  do,  today  there  are  policies  and  priorities  but  considerable 
deregulation – who to lend, what maturity structure, interest rates, asset management – have 
to be decided by each bank.  Greater freedom implies greater responsibilities. And there are 
many  more  players  –public  sector  banks,  private  banks,  co-operatives  and  NBFCs,  etc. 
Markets are free and more complex. 
You may ask – so what? It is upto each corporation or its shareholders – if it does well, they 
will  gain;  if  they  don’t,  they  will  lose  and  so  be  it.    It  is  their  business,  why  should  we 
collectively  worry?  Here,  banks  and  financial  institutions  are  in  a  completely  different 
category.  What  happens  in  a  particular  bank  is  a  concern  of  all.  Fear  of  contagion  and 
systemic  implications.  Think  of  some  recent  bad  cases  involving  banks,  including 
co-operative banks. Relatively small, but affected a lot of institutions, including some several 
times  larger.  In  India,  because  of  the  dominance  of  public  sector  institutions,  investors 
expect more. (Example of LTCM Fund in U.S).  
Another  factor  is  that  we  live  in  a  more  volatile  and  inter-  linked  world.  Effects  are 
instantaneous. If one Letter of Credit fails, it may affect other countries and other institutions. 
So much greater international attention. Examples of East Asia and Japan. So international 
institutions are getting involved – in codes and standards, and in  assessment of Corporate 
Governance Structure.  
So, for all these reasons, this subject has acquired a completely new dimension and wider interest. 
And we can no longer avoid it. As you discuss the subject, please keep this in mind.  
What is the core of Corporate Governance – for private entities, it may be profit. In the banking sector, 
it seems that it is risk containment, and early warning systems and prompt corrective action to avoid 
failure. It is not risk aversion, but risk assessment and providing adequately to cover risks.  It is also 
clear that earlier the detection, the lesser the cost.  
Obviously, without a viable and accountable Corporate Governance structure, all this is not possible, 
however able the CEO. The three essential ingredients of Corporate Governance in this context are: 
(a) 
Checks  and  Balances:  Auditing  Committees,  External  and  Internal  accounting  systems 
which are independent of decision making on credit and borrowings. 
Clear division of responsibility: Both vertical and horizontal, so that responsibility is taken by 
those who make the decisions.   
Disclosure and Transparency: So nothing stays hidden for long, once a decision has been 
made. 
(b) 
(c) 
How  do  we  in  India  fare  in  Corporate  Governance  in  the  financial  sector?  I  am  told  that  there  are 
number of models of Corporate Governance –  
(a) 
the “Outsider” model of the U.S. and U.K. type where there is separation of Ownership and 
Management; and  
the  “Insider”  model  –  as  in  Europe  or  Asia,  where  a  small  group  of  inter-connected 
shareholders exercise control over management. East Asian model is more family oriented 
while European model involves inter-connected entities. In the “insider” model, it is difficult to 
distinguish between shareholder and management respectively. 
(b) 
In India, in the financial sector, we now have all the three varieties with certain important differences 
with  the  U.S., Europe or  Asia. Public sector  banks/FIs, for example, are more  akin to the ‘outsider’ 
model with separation of “Ownership’ and ‘Management’. Private sector banks/NBFC/Co-ops – much 
more “insider” models with families, inter-connected  entities  or promoters running the management. 
There is some uniformity  in the  Corporate Governance structure in  the “outsider model” consists of 
relatively large public institutions, and which are also relatively old.  
On the positive side: 
(a) 
difference in ‘Ownership’ and ‘Management’;  
2 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 (b) 
(c) 
Disclosure and transparency(with one or two exceptions). They are also becoming subject to 
better accounting standards;  
Prudential norms – Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR), provisioning, rec. norms are fairly good. 
Because of sovereign risk, money is also safe with one - two aberrations. 
On the negative side: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
there is separation of ‘Ownership’ and ‘Management’, but no checks and balances. CEO as 
well as the Board is appointed by the owner, i.e Government 
Very little accountability to the Board as Board cannot remove the Chairman; 
Substantial  limitations  on  management  as  staff  issues  are  outside  the  purview  of 
management;  
Weak on internal auditing and risk management. 
(d) 
The crucial issue that the country has to debate is whether Corporate Governance is compatible with 
public ownership, which makes the system accountable to political institutions and not to the economic 
institutions or even regulators. This is a big and fundamental issue which our country has to debate 
and  decide.  Is  a  “via  media”  possible?  Could  we  have  public  ownership  without  Government  or 
political control or do we need to change to a corporate structure? Is it possible to make the Boards 
responsible for appointment of CEOs, and make the Board appointments less discretionary on the part 
of the Government in power? 
I don’t want to express a view, but these are real issues. As the resolution of these issues will take 
considerable time, our task is to see what can be done within the present public sector structure.  
Something can be done – better internal checks and balances, better auditing, better transparency, 
better enforcement of policies, better action over NPAs, timely action against frauds. I hope you will 
give consideration to these in the interim, while we debate the larger issues. 
As  regards  the  “insider”  model,  there  is  a  tremendous  variation  both  in  terms  of  risk  as  well  as 
Corporate  Governance  structure.  By  and  large,  the  structure  is  very  weak  in  Co-operatives  and 
NBFCs for historical reasons, local practices, and multiplicity of regulators and laws. Old private banks 
also  have  very  poor  auditing  and  accounting  systems.  New  private  banks  –  generally  good  on 
accounting, but poor on accountability. More modern and computerised, but less risk conscious, One 
thing  which  is  common  to  all  is  that  Corporate  Governance  is  highly  centralised  with  very  little  real 
check on the CEO, who is generally also closely linked to the largest owner groups. Boards or auditing 
systems are not very effective. 
So, in all the segments, and all different sizes of institutions, we have a great deal of work to do in the 
area  of  Corporate  Governance.  RBI  has  been  working  on  new  accounting,  auditing  and  disclosure 
standards. Work is also in progress in setting better internal auditing and better system of checks and 
balances. A Committee of Ind. Dir. has also been set up under Dr. Ganguly, Member of the BFS to 
learn  from  the  past  experience.  RBI  and  other  regulators  would  do  their  best  to  bring  about  better 
standards, but ultimately it is upto the individual institutions, and the people managing them to ensure 
what actually happens on the ground. 
Let  me  conclude.  Corporate  Governance  has  never  been  more  imp  than  now.  It  is  not  only  the 
business of an individual bank or entity, but of all of us. 5 or 10 years down the line, you would not be 
able to operate unless we have Corporate Governance of the best standards. In many areas, we have 
made progress in laying down what needs to be done. The important task now is to put appropriate 
mechanisms in place to enforce accountability, asset liability management, early warning and prompt 
corrective action systems. With your help, and the leadership shown by NIBM, I am sure we will get 
there. 
In the end, let me congratulate Mr. Bhide and Dr.Saha once again. As you know, following Tarapore 
Committee, RBI has introduced important changes in the management structure of NIBM.  NIBM has 
made substantial progress in the last couple of years I have no doubt that with the help of all of you, 
NIBM  would  become  a  truly  national  institution  of  distinction  for  improving  the  management  and 
Corporate Governance in banks and financial institutions.  
BIS Review 3/2002 
 3
