 Willem F Duisenberg: The introduction of the euro: a (critical) retrospect and a 
preview 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
meeting of the Dutch Society of Editors-in-Chief, The Hague, 15 March 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  talk  to  you  today  about  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  If  we  take  the 
introduction of the euro banknotes and coins as a benchmark, then the process can be said to have 
been  completed  –  and,  if  I  might  add,  very  smoothly  and  successfully  so.  However,  if  we  take  a 
broader perspective, then the introduction of the euro can be said to be an ongoing process. The euro 
area economy is large, in some respects complex and still very new on the map of major economic 
entities. These features imply that the policy challenges are manifold and will remain so for a long time 
to come. I would thus like to talk today not only about the cash changeover, but also about the policy 
challenges facing the euro area economy.  
The  policy  area  with  which  I  am  most  closely  involved  is,  of  course,  the  monetary  one,  and  the 
challenge for the ECB is to deliver what is required of it – namely price stability over the medium term. 
However, the existence of a single monetary policy and a single market implies that almost all fields of 
economic  policy  are  affected  by  European  economic  and  monetary  integration  –  most  importantly 
budgetary  and  structural  policy.  If  I  may  be  permitted  to  state  the  obvious,  the  challenges  are  to 
maintain sound fiscal policies, foster efficiency in public expenditure and tax systems and improve the 
functioning of labour and product markets in order to enhance the euro area's growth potential. 
The unique framework of monetary, fiscal and structural policies in the euro area has fostered recent 
discussion  about  its  economic  governance,  that  is  the  "interplay"  between  monetary,  fiscal  and 
structural  policies  and  the  issue  of  whether  and  to  what  extent  fiscal  and  structural  policies,  in 
particular, should become more centralised at the European level. This is an extensive list of issues 
(as requested by Mr. Broertjes), meaning that my focus must necessarily be a broad one. Let me now 
make a few remarks about the cash changeover, before proceeding to a brief discussion of the three 
key  policy  areas,  namely  monetary,  fiscal  and  structural  policy.  I  will  finish  my  speech  by  briefly 
touching upon the issue of the economic governance of the euro area.  
Cash changeover 
With the end of the changeover period on 28 February 2002 the euro became the sole legal tender in 
all euro area countries with effect from 1 March 2002. Both in terms of acceptance by consumers and 
the achievement of logistical targets, the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins has surpassed 
all expectations. Here and there some minor mishaps have occurred, but this is quite normal for such 
a  huge  and  complex  undertaking.  In  any  case,  with  the  support  of  European  citizens,  who  have 
accepted  their  new  money  both  rapidly  and  enthusiastically,  these  minor  difficulties  have  been 
overcome. European citizens have clearly chosen to be actors and not merely spectators in the euro 
changeover. According to the latest eurobarometer of the European Commission, over 80% of euro 
area  citizens  see  the  euro  changeover  as  having  been  successful,  and  almost  70%  declare 
themselves happy that the euro has become their new currency.  
But what were the logistical factors which contributed to the success of the euro cash changeover? 
First, measures were taken to ensure an early return of national banknotes and coins. One example 
which I would mention in this context are the campaigns which aimed at encouraging people to pay 
any surplus banknotes and coins into their bank accounts well before the end of 2001. Overall, the 
number of legacy currency banknotes in circulation fell by almost one-third during the course of 2001. 
By the end of the cash changeover period, some EUR 38 billion – or a little over 10% of the original 
amount of legacy currency banknotes – was still in circulation. 
Second, the pre-distribution or "frontloading" of the "critical mass" of euro banknotes and coins made a 
crucial contribution to ensuring a smooth changeover in all euro area countries. A four-month lead time 
was required in order to ensure that sufficient euro banknotes and coins were available within banks 
and other target groups on 1 January 2002. This pre-distribution was a key factor in the successful 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 1
 attainment of one of the primary goals of the changeover process, namely to ensure that the bulk of 
cash transactions in euro could be effected within a fortnight of the new currency's introduction. All in 
all, more than 6 billion euro banknotes were distributed by the central banks of the euro area prior to 
"€-day". Nearly 38 billion euro coins were frontloaded in parallel. To put these figures into perspective, 
four-fifths of euro banknotes and almost all euro coins were frontloaded during this period.  
Third,  given  that  in  normal  circumstances  around  70%  of  banknotes  are  put  into  circulation  via 
automated  teller  machines  (ATMs),  a  quick  adaptation  of  these  machines  was  crucial  to  a  smooth 
changeover. It was necessary to convert a total of more than 200,000 ATMs, either "on-site" in bank 
branches  or  "off-site"  –  for  example  in  shopping  centres.  Following  thorough  and  highly  efficient 
preparations by the banking sector, the adaptation process was extremely rapid, with virtually all ATMs 
converted by 4 January 2002.  
A  fourth  factor  which  contributed  to  the  smooth  changeover  was  the  particular  commitment  of  the 
banking sector to putting the low-denomination banknotes of up to EUR 20 into circulation on a large 
scale at the beginning of 2002. This reduced considerably the need for retailers to hold large amounts 
of cash during the first few days of 2002. In addition, in countries where welfare payments are paid 
largely in cash, these were effected in low denominations. All this ensured that, at the beginning of the 
year, low-denomination banknotes accounted for over 80% of the total number of banknotes and for 
40%  of  their  value.  This  is  clearly  more  than  the  usual  share  of  low-denomination  banknotes  in 
banknote circulation. 
Monetary policy 
Let  me  now  talk  about  the  introduction  of  the  euro  from  a  broader  perspective.  I  shall  begin  with 
monetary policy and the primary objective of the ECB, namely to maintain price stability in the euro 
area.  
For the sake of this presentation, I would like to divide the first few years of the single monetary policy 
into three phases – rather artificially on the basis of whether inflationary pressures were seen as rising 
or  falling.  In  the  first  of  these,  which  began  at  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union  (EMU),  inflationary  pressures  in  the  euro  area  were  abating  during  a  phase  of  economic 
slowdown at the global level which had started in 1998, following several episodes of financial turmoil 
around  the  world.  The  decline  in  economic  growth  was  accompanied  by  a  sharp  reduction  in 
commodity  prices,  which  contributed  to  a  significant  fall  in  import  prices.  In  this  environment,  the 
Governing Council decided, in April 1999, to reduce the key interest rates, to a level of 2.50% for the 
main refinancing rate. This was a precautionary move, aimed at reducing the risk that inflation could 
head towards and hover around very low levels. 
In the course of 1999, the second phase in my breakdown, signs gradually emerged that a recovery in 
economic activity was taking place in the euro area. At the same time, oil prices were gradually but 
steadily increasing, and the exchange rate of the euro depreciated significantly. The resulting increase 
in  import  prices  was  having  a  substantial  effect  on  consumer  price  inflation.  In  an  environment  of 
accelerating economic growth, to levels above potential, this could have been followed by what are 
known as second-round effects, with possible longer-lasting effects on inflation. In addition, the high 
growth of M3 – well above the reference value of 4½% – and the development of credit aggregates 
clearly  indicated  that  risks  to  price  stability  were  moving  to  the  upside.  The  Governing  Council 
therefore  increased  the  key  rates  a  first  time  in  November  1999,  reversing  the  precautionary  move 
made in April, and a further six times in the period up to October 2000, by a total of 225 basis points. 
Moving on to the third period, there were signs in late 2000 and in early 2001 that economic growth 
was gradually stabilising to levels in line with potential. This followed the effects of oil price increases 
on real disposable income in the euro area and accompanied a deterioration in the global economic 
climate, in particular the economic climate in the United States. At the same time, monetary growth 
was gradually declining to levels in line with the reference value and, in the course of the spring (when 
M3  growth  could  be  corrected  for  some  statistical  upward  distortions  which  were  previously  not 
known), even fell below it. However, in the spring of 2001 inflation was still above the ECB's definition 
of price stability, namely a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the 
euro area of below  2%, to a certain extent owing to increases in unprocessed food prices resulting 
from the BSE crisis and the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in some countries. As these effects 
were expected to be temporary, in a situation in which it was anticipated that medium-term inflationary 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2002
 pressures would decline, the Governing Council acted in a forward-looking way and cut the key rates 
twice, in May and August 2001.  
In the course of 2001 it gradually became more evident that the global economic downturn would be 
deeper  and  more  protracted  than  initially  expected,  with  repercussions  on  euro  area  economic 
developments. In addition, the terrorist attacks in the United States in September 2001 constituted a 
major shock to the world economy, the implications of which were entirely unpredictable at the time. In 
the  first  instance,  these  attacks  threatened  to  disrupt  the  functioning  of  financial  markets.  Thus, 
immediately  after  the  terrorist  attacks,  the  ECB  took  measures  to  ensure  the  normal  functioning  of 
financial  markets.  The  Governing  Council  also  reacted  to  the  events  by  holding  an  extraordinary 
teleconference meeting, at which it was decided to reduce the key ECB interest rates in concert with 
the Federal Reserve System of the United States. In the following period, as signs emerged that the 
slowdown  in  economic  activity  was  significant,  pointing  in  the  direction  of  a  further  decline  in 
inflationary pressures, the Governing Council again cut the key rates in November 2001, bringing the 
total reduction of the key rates in 2001 to 150 basis points. Since then, economic developments, which 
point to a gradual economic recovery in the euro area in the course of 2002, have been largely in line 
with the Governing Council's expectations, and we consider the current level of the key ECB interest 
rates appropriate to maintaining price stability over the medium term. 
To briefly conclude on monetary policy, the ECB has, in my view, proved itself capable of adapting to 
and  operating  in  a  difficult  economic  environment.  While  inflation  has  been  above  the  definition  of 
price  stability  for  some  time,  medium-term  inflationary  expectations,  as  implied  in  bond  yields  or  in 
forecasts and surveys, have consistently been below 2%. This is a sign that the credibility of the ECB 
is firmly established and that the public is confident that price stability will prevail. 
Fiscal policy 
The economic environment with which we at the ECB were confronted was also the day-to-day reality 
of  the  fiscal  policy-makers  in  the  individual  euro  area  countries.  In  2001,  mainly  as  a  result  of  the 
economic  slowdown,  the  average  budgetary  balance  in  the  euro  area  deteriorated  for  the  first  time 
since 1993. Automatic stabilisers played a significant role in budgetary outcomes in 2001. Major tax 
cuts also contributed to the deterioration, as they were often implemented without adequate offsetting 
expenditure restraints. As a result, a large majority of countries failed to meet the budgetary balances 
targeted in the stability programmes for 2001. By the same token, most countries rightly refrained from 
introducing  a  discretionary  fiscal  relaxation  in  response  to  the  economic  slowdown.  Moreover, 
countries  with  remaining  fiscal  imbalances  reaffirmed  their  commitment  to  attaining  safe  budgetary 
positions by 2003 or 2004. 
Developments in 2001 and the projected outcomes for 2002 confirm the vulnerability of public finances 
–  especially  in  the  countries  with  remaining  imbalances.  The  European  Commission  recommended 
issuing an early warning to Germany and Portugal. The ECOFIN Council considered the subsequent 
reaffirmation  and  even  strengthening  of  the  fiscal  commitments  made  by  these  two  countries  a 
sufficient  response  to  the  concerns.  Vigilance  is  now  needed  to  ensure  both  strict  adherence  to 
medium-term plans and rigorous implementation of the procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
To briefly conclude on fiscal policies, recent experience shows how rapidly a budgetary position can 
deteriorate in adverse cyclical circumstances. This is of concern when the starting position is not fully 
sound. In my view, then, the main lesson to be drawn from recent experience is that, under normal 
circumstances, countries need to be in budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus.  
And let us not forget that the medium-term challenges of coping with an ageing society also call for 
fiscal  consolidation.  Moreover,  the  2000  Lisbon  European  Council  put  structural  reform  of  public 
finances high on the agenda, with an eye to strengthening the European Union's growth potential.  
Structural policies 
At  the  summit  in  Lisbon,  the  European  Council  also  emphasised  the  need  for  product  and  labour 
market reforms as a key condition for the EU to become the most competitive and dynamic economy 
in  the  world.  Structural  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  the  flexibility  of  euro  area  product  and  labour 
markets would, it was underlined, have substantial economic benefits and lower the adjustment costs 
associated  with  economic  shocks.  That  we  still  need  further  structural  reforms  is,  I  think,  beyond 
doubt. To take an example from the labour market: the strong employment growth witnessed in recent 
BIS Review 18/2002 
 3
 years  suggests  that  labour  market  reforms  have  been  progressing  in  the  right  direction,  and,  in 
particular,  it  suggests  that  the  process  of  wage  moderation  in  the  euro  area  during  this  period  has 
been beneficial. At the same time, however, the need for further reform is evident from the still high 
and persistent levels of unemployment and from low labour market participation in several euro area 
countries. For example, despite continued high unemployment, firms continue to report difficulties in 
recruiting  suitably  qualified  workers,  suggesting  that  improvements  are  needed  in  matching  labour 
supply and demand.  
Economic governance 
Finally, let me turn briefly to the issue of economic governance. With the start of Monetary Union, the 
Maastricht  Treaty  created  a  unique  institutional  structure.  While  there  is  a  supranational  European 
monetary order, most other policy areas are  predominantly  a national matter. This unity in diversity 
reflects  Europe,  with  its  wealth  of  different  histories,  cultures,  political  systems and  constitutions.  In 
principle,  this  structure  has  functioned  relatively  well  and  there  is  no  need  for  a  major  overhaul.  In 
some areas there is a clear case for permanently adopting a differentiated approach, for example in 
the  case  of  labour  market  policies.  Harmonisation  in  this  field  would  hamper  the  very  flexibility  of 
prices and wages that each country, or even region or sector of the national economy should pursue 
for  Monetary  Union  to  be  successful.  In  other  areas,  such  as  tax  policies,  there  may  be  a  gradual 
development towards more co-ordination between Member States. 
Diversity  and  differentiation  should  not  in  themselves  be  viewed  as  reflecting  a  lack  of  economic 
governance. On the contrary, the experience of the recent past bears out that this form of governance 
works well in practice. For instance, decentralised wage setting has led to broadly appropriate wage 
development  in  the  recent  past  and  contributed  to  employment  growth.  Monetary  policy  has  kept 
inflation under control and reacted swiftly under circumstances which have sometimes been difficult. 
On the whole, fiscal policies have also reacted in a way which is compatible with both the economic 
environment  and  their  medium-term  objectives.  All  in  all,  there  is  clear  evidence  that  policy-makers 
have acted appropriately in all three areas.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  cash  changeover  has  been  a  resounding  success.  From  a  logistical  point  of 
view this operation proceeded very smoothly, thanks in large part to the comprehensive preparatory 
work  undertaken  by  all  involved.  The  people  of  the  euro  area  countries  have  adapted  to  the  new 
currency  much  more  quickly  than  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  anticipated.  In  addition, 
notwithstanding  the  adverse  price  shocks  to  which  the  euro  area  has  recently  been  subject,  the 
prospects are good that annual inflation rates will return to below 2% in the coming months. Overall 
the ECB's monetary policy has been successful in maintaining stable long-term inflation expectations 
in a difficult environment. It is important to maintain the disciplinary effect of the Stability and Growth 
Pact; recent experience has shown how quickly a budgetary position can deteriorate, thus highlighting 
the importance of reaching and maintaining medium-term budgetary positions close to balance or in 
surplus.  Structural  policy  is  an  area  in  which  further  action  is  also  urgently  needed.  Finally,  the 
economic  policy  framework  of  the  euro  area  has  been  functioning  satisfactorily,  even  in  the  largely 
unprecedented circumstances of 2001.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now open to questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2002
