 Kristina Persson: Monetary policy and competition 
Speech  by  Ms  Kristina  Persson,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Roslagens  Sparbank(cid:146)s 
annual general meeting, Norrt(cid:228)lge, 17 April 2002. 
 Thank you for the invitation to come here to Roslagen Sparbank(cid:146)s annual general meeting.1 Today, I 
do not intend to discuss current monetary policy, but rather to concentrate on an area that is of great 
significance  for  inflation  and  monetary  policy,  namely  the  competitive  conditions  in  the  Swedish 
economy. 
The objectives for monetary policy are clearly stated in the Sveriges Riksbank Act (cid:150) to maintain price 
stability and to promote a safe and efficient payment system. The Riksbank has further defined the 
first of these objectives in an inflation target, i.e. that the annual rate of change in consumer prices 
shall be 2 per cent, with a tolerated deviation interval of – 1 percentage point. Interest rate decisions 
influence price trends partly via the effects on resource utilisation, which means that the impact of the 
decisions has a certain time lag. It is partly for this reason that monetary policy is based on the total 
assessment of how the rate of price increase will develop one to two years ahead. 
There are a number of factors in the economy that affect inflation, but over which the Riksbank has no 
control. These include the exchange rate, fiscal policy, international economic developments, potential 
growth, the functioning of the labour market and competition conditions on the product markets. Today 
I intend to primarily focus on the relationship between monetary policy and competitiveness. 
Let  me  first  of  all  state  that  the  Riksbank  has  no  responsibility  for  competition  issues  (cid:150)  our 
responsibility is monetary policy (cid:150) and our most important instrument, the repo rate, does not affect 
competitive conditions on the different markets. However, changes in competitive conditions can have 
significance for price trends on certain sub-markets. 
From textbook to reality 
If  there  were  perfect  competition  and  total  information,  conditions  that  only  prevail  in  university 
textbooks, market prices would be determined by companies(cid:146) marginal costs. As there is competition 
between a large number of producers on every market, no company has any power over pricing and 
all  consumers  meet  the  same  prices.  On  a  market  characterised  by  perfect  competition,  more 
companies would establish themselves as long as the prices exceeded the marginal costs and they 
could make a profit. As there would be no entry barriers in this simplified, but pedagogical textbook 
world, and no lack of skilled entrepreneurs, the profits of all companies would be zero when the market 
was in balance. In a market with perfect competition, the impact of a cost change (possibly resulting 
from a weaker exchange rate or a rise in the rate of wage increase) would be total, as the price is set 
as equal to the marginal cost. 
Reality  is,  of  course,  rather  different.  Many  markets  have  only  a  small  number  of  companies 
competing, partly because production requires large investments or because there are other barriers 
to  establishment  on  the  market.  Nor  are  there  unlimited  entrepreneurial  skills.  It  is  costly  for 
consumers  to  obtain  information,  which  means  that  no  one  has  total  information.  On  this  type  of 
market, prices deviate from marginal costs and not all consumers meet the same price levels. Similar 
products can fetch different prices because they have different brand names or are sold in different 
regions.  These  companies  will  normally  make  a  profit.  Companies  that  operate  on  a  market  with 
imperfect competition also tend to be less cost-conscious. 
In  a market  with  imperfect  competition,  price  changes  involve  a  more  long  drawn  out  process.  The 
effect  of  changes  in  marginal  costs  also  depends  on  factors  such  as  demand  and  the  initial  profit 
margin. Most empirical studies indicate that tougher competition (measured as the degree of company 
concentration) leads to a  more rapid price adjustment after a shock, but there are also studies that 
                                                      
1   Sara T(cid:228)gtstr(cid:246)m, of the Monetary Policy Department, has contributed to the writing of this speech. 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 1
 have reached the opposite conclusion.2 In a market with imperfect competition, expectations play an 
important role. If companies believe that a change in marginal costs is only temporary, they will be less 
likely to allow it to affect their prices, while more permanent changes will have a quicker impact. The 
low impact from changes in the exchange rate in recent years is merely one example of how changes 
in marginal costs that are perceived as temporary tend to affect profit margins rather than consumer 
prices. 
It is possible to observe how competition affects inflation through a concrete example. Let us take a 
look at the book trade. If we assume that the Internet means that more consumers will choose to buy 
cheaper books over the net instead of going to their local bookshop, then bookshops will be forced to 
lower their prices in order to retain customers. The next stage is for the bookshops to try to rationalise 
their operations. Productivity in the book trade will increase. If they are successful in their work, they 
can retain their profit margins. Another possibility is that they will not require such high wage increases 
in the next round of wage negotiations as they would have done otherwise, or that they will pay less 
when they purchase books from the publishing companies. 
When a market is exposed to competition, this can have both direct and indirect effects on prices and 
wages. The price-dampening effects of increased competition can contribute to subduing inflation for a 
period  of  time.  One  example  of  this  is  the  deregulation  of  the  electricity  and  telecommunications 
markets that contributed to the low inflation rate during 1999 and 2000, although the price-dampening 
effects  disappeared  at  the  end  of  2000.  Since  then,  electricity  and  telecommunications  prices  have 
contributed  to  higher  inflation.  Increased  competition  means  that  companies  have  to  use  their 
resources  more  effectively  and  be  more  cost-conscious.  Growth  and  productivity  will  therefore 
increase. Lasting effects on productivity growth could affect the potential growth rate, i.e. how quickly 
the economy can grow given the amount of labour and capital  available and  without a rapid rise in 
inflation.3 
However,  this  type  of  development  is  not  without  problems.  If  there  is  a  series  of  improvements  in 
productivity, the result will be higher growth and limited pressure on prices. During such periods there 
may be slightly exaggerated optimism over long-term sustainable growth in profits and income, which 
will also tend to affect prices of various assets, such as shares, houses and apartments. If the central 
bank makes the mistake of conducting an overly mild monetary policy during such a period, perhaps 
because  inflation  is  below  the  target  level  for  a  period  of  several  years,  there  is  a  risk  that  the 
underlying price pressure will increase and future inflation will soar. 
The relationship between  potential  growth  and competition  is not unambiguous. It may be the case 
that a new invention gives rise to a temporary monopoly (cid:150) partly due to legislation regarding patents 
and  partly  because  it  involves  technological  progress.  Some  economists,  and  in  particular  Joseph 
Schumpeter,  have  even  claimed  that  the  endeavour  to  achieve  these  temporary  innovation 
monopolies  is  one  of  the  most  important  driving  forces  behind  technological  developments  (which 
together  with labour supply comprise the motor for long-term potential growth). One example is the 
pharmaceuticals industry, where the development of new products would probably not be possible at 
the  same  rate  if  new  medicines  were  not  protected  by  patent  laws.  Incomplete  competition  is  thus 
important  for  ensuring  that  product  development  takes  place  within  research-intensive  operations. 
There  may  even  be  special  circumstances  that  make  production  most  effective  under  limited 
competition. This applies in particular to various types of infrastructure, for instance the trunk network 
for electricity and water, which are what is known as natural monopolies, where it is more effective to 
society to only have one producer. 
These assertions are important to monetary policy. The Riksbank’s target is expressed in terms of the 
rate of change in consumer prices, not in terms of maintaining a particular price level. It is important to 
distinguish between the effects on the price level and the change in the price level. If competition is 
incomplete and leads to a low level of cost consciousness or high profit margins, it may contribute to 
high price levels, but will not necessarily affect the rate of change in prices. It is conceivable that a 
country could have a high price level to start with, but a low expected inflation rate. An example of this 
is that several countries with high price levels, such as Sweden, Switzerland and Japan, have been 
among the countries with the lowest inflation rates in recent years. 
                                                      
2  For an outline, see Asplund, M. & Friberg, R. (1998), (cid:147)Links between competition and inflation(cid:148), Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly 
Review 3,  Sveriges Riksbank. 
3   See, for instance, Dutz, M. & Hayri, A., (1999), "Does more intense competition lead to higher growth?", Discussion paper 
No. 2249, Centre for Economic Policy Research. Nickell, S, (1996), "Competition and Corporate Performance", Journal of 
Political Economy, No. 4. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2002
 The relative price level in Sweden 
The  price  level  in  Sweden  is  approximately  28  percentage  points  higher  than  the  EU  average  and 
Sweden is thus, along with the other Nordic countries, one of the most expensive countries in the EU.4 
There is a considerable spread of price levels within the EU, as illustrated in diagram 1. The price level 
in the most expensive country (Sweden) is twice as high as that in the cheapest country (Portugal). 
Sweden in general has higher prices on goods and services not traded across borders, while the price 
level for trade goods such as clothes and furniture is below or in line with the EU average. 
Diagram 1: Differences in price levels for private 
consumption in relation to the EU average 2000.
Percentage points
30
28
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
21 21
18
5
2
2
0
0
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-3
-3
-14
-17
-20
A
L NL
I
-26
E EL P
S DK FIN UK IRL D F
B
Note. SV=Sweden, DK=Denmark, FIN=Finland, UK=United 
Kingdom, IRL=Ireland, D=Germany, F=France, B=Belgium, 
A=Austria, L=Luxembourg, NL=Netherlands, I=Italy, 
E=Spain, EL=Greece, P=Portugal.
Source: Eurostat.
  
The fact that there exist price differences between countries is  partly  due to structural factors. One 
important  factor  is  the  income  level  (richer  countries  usually  have  higher  prices).  Taxes,  wages, 
population density and changes in the exchange rate are also of considerable significance. Sweden 
has,  for  instance,  higher  VAT  and  unit  labour  costs,  i.e.  payroll  expense  including  social  security 
contributions adjusted for productivity, than the EU average. Sweden(cid:146)s geographical situation and the 
fact  that  we  are  a  sparsely-populated  country  mean  that  we  are  also  affected  by  higher  transport 
costs, lower economies of scale and thereby have higher prices. 
It is estimated that approximately one half of the Swedish price level difference from the EU average 
can be explained by structural factors. The other half is attributed to a lack of competition.5 Calculated 
in krona, this means that a family with two children pays approximately SEK 30,000 more a year for 
their purchases than they would otherwise. One can therefore say that there are considerable welfare 
losses connected with weak competition. 
How does competition function in Sweden? 
Competitive conditions have improved during the 1990s and the relative price level has fallen, as can 
be  seen  from  diagram  2.  The  factors  behind  the  improved  competition  situation  are  increased 
internationalisation, deregulation, technological developments, EU membership and the more stringent 
competition  laws  introduced  in  1993.  The  fall  in  relative  price  levels  in  1993  is  largely  due  to  a 
weakening of the exchange rate in connection with the floating of the krona in November 1992, when 
                                                      
4  Preliminary statistics from Eurostat for the year 2000.  
5   The Swedish Competition Authority, (2000), (cid:147)Why are Swedish prices so high?(cid:148), The Swedish Competition Authority’s report 
series no. 2. 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 3
 Sweden  became  a  relatively  inexpensive  country  in  terms  of  euro.  Sweden  has  also  had  a  lower 
inflation rate than other EU countries, which has contributed to keeping down the relative price level. 
 
Diagram 2: The difference between the price level 
in Sweden and the EU average 1991-2000.
Percentage points
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Source: Eurostat.
  
The part of household consumption that takes place in Swedish markets exposed to competition has 
increased during the 1990s (cid:150) from 25 per cent in 1991 to 32 per cent in 1999.6 However, this level is 
still below the EU, where 46 per cent of consumption is in markets exposed to competition. A number 
of different markets have been opened up to competition over the past ten  years and Sweden is in 
many aspects a model for other countries to follow. Examples of markets that have been exposed to 
competition are the electricity market, post and telecommunications, the capital and foreign exchange 
market and a large part of the transport sector. The main areas where competitive pressure in Sweden 
is  tangibly  lower  than  in  the  EU  and  prices  are  higher  are  the  food  and  housing  sectors  (and  the 
construction sector). Swedish food prices are just over 20 per cent higher than in the rest of the EU, 
while housing is around 35 per cent more expensive.7 These areas of expenditure together comprise 
more than … of the CPI basket and are also responsible for a large part of low income earners’ total 
expenditure. 
The absence of competition in the greater part of the public sector, which constitutes approximately 30 
per cent of the Swedish economy, entails both a risk of lower efficiency and that a significant part of 
the  economy  is  not  offered  alternatives  in  the  form  of  new  business  ventures  with  the  growth  and 
flexibility that small companies can offer. During the 20th century there was a development towards a 
greater element of competition and use of alternative operating forms within the public services sector. 
In 
the 
telecommunications  administration  and  the  state-owned  energy  company  have  been  opened  up  to 
competition.  Examples  of  remaining  state-owned  monopolies  are  Apoteksbolaget,  Systembolaget, 
Swedish  Railways,  Svensk  Bilprovning,  Svenska  Spel  and  Statens  Pensionsverk.  The  county 
council/local authority sector has now chosen to expose to competition many of the businesses it runs. 
This includes waste transport, property maintenance, local bus routes, care of the elderly, cleaning, 
                                                      
6   SNS Economic council (2002), Unlimited competition, SNS-f(cid:246)rlag. Exposure to competition is here defined on the basis of 
concentration and other barriers to competition such as companies’ actions, regulations limiting competition, entry and exit 
barriers. 
the  central  government  sector,  state-owned  monopolies  such  as 
the  post  office, 
7   Price comparisons for housing are difficult. Differences in quality and structure between the Swedish and European housing 
markets makes accurate price comparisons difficult. For instance, there is a large supply of rental apartments in Sweden, 
while in other countries there are few of these and they are often greatly subsidised. Statistics Sweden estimates that the 
relative price for housing in Sweden is probably rather exaggerated. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2002
 primary  healthcare  and  dental  treatment.  Studies  by  the  Swedish  Association  of  Local  Authorities 
show that increased competition in the county council/local authority sector operations have increased 
efficiency and led to lower costs. 
One  indicator  that  competition  is  not  functioning  satisfactorily  is  that  price  levels  vary  even  within 
Sweden. Western  Sweden  (Halland  and  V(cid:228)stra  G(cid:246)taland  county  council)  is  on  the  whole  cheaper, 
while the Stockholm region is more expensive than the country as a whole.8 In terms of money, these 
differences entail, for instance, that a family with two children in Western Sweden pays SEK 4,300 less 
a year for food than a similar family in the Stockholm region. 
Why is competition lower in Sweden? 
Sweden has more markets with a high level of company concentration. Concentration is higher than in 
the rest of the EU, particularly within the retail trade, while the difference in the producer sector is not 
as great. The Swedish Competition Authority has estimated that the higher concentration in the retail 
trade may explain 2-4 percentage points of the difference in prices between Sweden and the EU. 
In the everyday commodities market, 3 retain chains (ICA, KF and Axfood) account for 90 per cent of 
total  sales.  These  chains  control  both  the  retail  trade  and  the  distribution  system,  which  makes  it 
difficult for new business to establish. Access to shop premises is also a narrow sector, as the right to 
establish a business is regulated by the local authorities through the planning and construction laws 
(PBL).9  Unlike  the  rest  of  the  EU,  Sweden  does  not  have  very  many  low-price  retail  chains.  At  the 
moment, a German low-price retail chain is planning to establish itself on the Swedish market, which 
could have a dampening effect on prices. 
A high concentration of companies also increases the risk of forming cartels. Recently, several cartels, 
or suspected cartels, have been revealed  in the building, aviation and petrol trades. According to a 
recently published SIFO survey, 80 per cent of small companies in Sweden and 50 per cent of large 
companies state that they believe cartels arise very often or quite often in Swedish trade and industry. 
In  other  words,  consumers  may  be  losing  considerable  sums  of  money.  With  regard  to  the  "petrol 
cartel",  amounts  in  the  order  of  half  a  billion  kronor  were  discussed.  By  eliminating  market 
mechanisms, companies also avoid the competitive pressure that could otherwise ensure they make 
their operations more efficient and develop new products. In the long term, it also leads to a loss of 
competitiveness from an international perspective, lower growth and fewer jobs. 
The government has proposed measures against unlawful co-operation in the bill on combating cartels 
that was put forward recently.10 The bill aims to make the war against cartels more efficient by allowing 
a company that  exposes a cartel  in future to  avoid paying  the fine for damage  to competition or  to 
have  its  fine  reduced.  The  government  also  proposes  a  stronger  confidentiality  protection  for  those 
who report or provide information on cartels. 
The question is  whether this tightening of the laws  will be sufficient; the incentives for following the 
competition  laws  are  still  fairly  weak.  It  is  individuals  (company  managers,  directors,  owners)  who 
prepare  and  make  the  decisions  on  limiting  competition  in  contravention  of  the  law,  but  the  current 
legislation  is  fairly  weak  with  regard  to  personal  responsibility.  In  the  USA,  on  the  other  hand, 
legislation is more stringent - the responsible decision-makers can be personally  sentenced to  high 
fines or to imprisonment. Perhaps we need to have the same principle in Sweden. The government 
has also said that if the proposed tightening of the competition laws does not prove sufficient, it may 
consider designating these matters a criminal offence. 
The existence of what is known as non-tariff trade barriers creates difficulties for import competition, 
which  could  otherwise  have  subdued  prices.  One  example  is  the  building  materials  market,  where 
special  national  regulations  and  voluntary  product  standards  make  import  competition  difficult. 
Sometimes the endeavour to satisfy information and protection interests can lead to trade barriers that 
hamper competition. The requirement that chemical products such as washing powder and cleaning 
fluids (which are more than 90 per cent more expensive  in Sweden than the  EU average) must be 
                                                      
8  The Swedish Competition Authority, (2001), "Why are construction goods more expensive in Sk(cid:229)ne and food cheaper in 
Western Sweden?", Swedish Competition Authority’s report series, no. 1.  
9   The  Swedish  Competition  Authority,  (2001),  "Can  local  authorities  push  down  food  prices?",  Swedish  Competition 
Authority’s report series no. 4. 
10  Government Bill 01/02:167, "Changes in the Competition Act for more efficient combating of cartels, etc.". 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 5
 registered  in  a  special  product  register  containing  information  on  the  exact  contents  also  hampers 
import  competition  as  most  other  countries  do  not  have  such  registers.  The  fact  that  the  Swedish 
market  is  small  means  that  it  is  not  economically  viable  for  foreign  manufacturers  to  make  the 
adaptation required by Swedish rules or legislation. The existence of recycling systems for cans and 
bottles  also  makes  import  competition  more  difficult  in  the  soft  drinks  market  (soft  drinks  are 
approximately 40 per cent more expensive in Sweden than the rest of the EU). 
The fact that requirements motivated by concern for the environment could impede competition does 
not, of course, mean that they should be abolished. On the other hand, this is a good argument for co-
ordinating the various regulatory systems in Europe. 
The bank sector 
As I am today speaking to people who work in the bank sector, I thought I would take the opportunity 
to say a few words on competitive conditions in this sector. 
The bank sector was characterised by extensive regulations right up until the mid-1980s, which acted 
as  an  impediment  to  dynamic  development  in  this  sector.  Few  new  operators  could  enter  and 
competitive  pressure  was  fairly  low.  However,  the  deregulation  that  has  occurred  since  then  has 
radically  changed  this  picture.  Today,  the  Swedish  bank  market  is  far  more  dynamic  and  a  large 
number of both Swedish and foreign financial companies offer products covering everything from unit 
trusts to mortgages. Although competition could probably be improved even more, developments are 
moving in the right direction. 
From  a  European  perspective,  the  Swedish  banks  currently  make  relatively  low  charges  for  their 
services and have low profit margins on their deposits and lending - these are in any case no higher 
than in the rest of Europe.11 Today the Swedish banks are in the forefront with regard to technology 
and have rationalised their operations, with fewer offices and employees than banks out in Europe. 
Despite this, profitability is relatively modest, which indicates that the price level is under pressure and 
competition is functioning. 
However,  the  company  concentration  is  still  very  high  on  the  bank  market.  The  four  major  banks 
together have a market share of 70-90 per cent within most product segments. A number of "niche" 
banks have become established over the past year, but they still account for a small, albeit growing, 
share of the market. 
The bank market differs from, for instance, the retail trade in that the confidence and personal contact 
with  the  bank  is  perceived  as  very  important.  The  customers  also  face  complex  choices;  it  is  often 
difficult to assess and compare different services and suppliers. In addition, establishing new banking 
and  insurance  relations  involves  work  for  the  customer.  Small  companies  may  find  it  particularly 
difficult  to  change  bank,  as  a  long-term  relationship  between  the  company  and  the  bank  is  an 
important part of the bank’s credit assessment. These factors mean that few customers change banks; 
only 14 per cent of the population have changed one or more banking commitments during the past 
three-year period. 
The fact that bank customers do not readily change bank may mean that there is less price pressure 
on certain products than would otherwise be the case. However, regulations and tax legislation may 
also have the effect of subduing competition. One area that is worth particular attention is saving in 
funds.  Although  competition  appears  to  be  good  for  new  savings,  there  is  a  considerable  deadlock 
effect resulting from regulations on capital gains tax. This helps dampen competitive pressure. 
One area that is still an object for old-fashioned, national limitations is cross-border payments. Despite 
electronic systems and the fact that the EU is supposed to comprise a single market, substantial costs 
are involved in transferring payments between banks in the different countries. 
                                                      
11  This applies if one compares with other profit-making banks. The non profit-making banks, for instance, co-operative banks, 
which are common in Germany and France, have even lower profit margins. The margins are calculated as the difference 
between the interest rate offered to consumers and the interest the bank receives if they invest the money without risk, e.g. 
in treasury bonds. 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2002
 The EU and EMU 
EU  membership  is  one  of  the  structural  factors  that  are  assumed  to  have  increased  competition  in 
recent  years.  The  idea  in  creating  the  EU’s  common  market  was  to  abolish  the  legal  and 
administrative impediments to trade and thereby increase competition between and within the member 
states of the EU. This, together with better usage of economies of scale, would cause price levels to 
converge. It is now 9 years since the common market came into force and we can conclude that the 
price  differences  between  the  member  states  still  remain.  There  are  also  considerable  differences 
between the USA and the EU with regard to price spread. Almost one-third of all brands has a price 
spread of between 60 and 100 per cent within the EU. The corresponding figure in the USA is 9 per 
cent. 
One reason for this is that even if the legal trade impediments have been largely removed, there still 
remain a significant number of non-tariff trade barriers in the form of, for instance, various standards 
that segment the national markets. Transport costs and differences in consumer preferences are also 
factors  that  counteract  market  integration.  A  clear  sign  of  market  segmentation  is  that  the  price 
differences between the countries are significantly larger than within the countries. 
The  EU/EEA  countries  trade  almost  90  per  cent  with  one  another.  Internal  trade  is  therefore 
approximately as important or more extensive here than it is in the USA. The fact that the European 
market is much more segmented than the  North American market reduces the efficiency  within the 
EU. 
Competition could be improved further throughout the whole of the EU. This is one of the areas where 
efforts will be made to contribute to improving productivity and growth within the EU to make the union 
one of the world’s most competitive economies in 2010. At the moment, there remains much work to 
be  done  before  this  goal,  which  was  established  at  the  Lisbon  meeting  in  2000,  can  be  achieved. 
Some small steps forward were taken at the Barcelona meeting last month. For instance, the countries 
agreed to open up the electricity and gas markets to corporate customers in 2004 and to open up the 
common air space by 2004. 
The single currency, the euro, could lead to stiffer competition as it will be easier for consumers and 
companies to compare prices of consumer goods and input goods in different countries when they are 
expressed in the same currency. The EMU could in the long term be expected to increase trade and 
integration between the member states. The studies that have been made indicate varying effects on 
trade  from  EMU  membership  for  Sweden.  Berkeley  Professor  Andrew  K.  Rose  has  estimated  that 
Sweden’s trade could increase by 30-50 per cent over the space of a few decades, which would lead 
to an increase in Swedish welfare of more than ten per cent in the long term. Other economists, such 
as Professor Torsten Persson at Stockholm University, estimate the trade gain at one fifth of this. 
An increased openness towards other countries has a positive effect on growth and on incomes. The 
European integration should therefore, in my opinion, not be limited to the borders of the EU, but be 
the  first  stage  towards  greater  global  openness.  This  openness  would  also  contribute  to  increased 
competition, but would not replace a domestic competition policy. Both openness and a tightening up 
of the domestic conditions for competition would also lead to lower prices and increased welfare. 
Conclusion 
During  the  1990s  there  were  a  number  of  structural  changes  in  the  Swedish  economy,  which  are 
together assumed to have increased potential growth. There were extensive reforms in the taxation, 
social insurance and pension systems. Deregulation, increased internationalisation, EU membership, 
a credible low inflation policy and stable public finances are other factors which should also have had 
positive effects. 
It was also proven during several years in the 1990s that a high growth rate was compatible with a low 
inflation  rate.  However,  the  strong  growth  in  demand  in  recent  years  has  gradually  reduced  the 
amount of available resources. The Riksbank concluded in its most recent Inflation Report, which was 
published on 19 March, that a significant part of the high inflation rate over the past year can be an 
indicator that resource utilisation was slightly higher than was compatible with the Riksbank’s inflation 
target. During 2001, growth was mainly in sectors with a relatively low growth in productivity, such as 
the private services sector and public authorities. 
At  the  same  time,  absence  due  to  illness  has  increased  considerably,  which  may  also  have 
contributed to a poor growth in productivity and rising costs for both companies and the public sector. 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 7
 The rate of wage increase has risen, particularly within the services sectors, which appears to have 
contributed  to  pushing  up  the  rate  of  price  increase  in  the  Swedish  economy.  This  is  an  important 
reason why the Riksbank raised its repo rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 4.0 per cent, in connection 
with the publication of the Inflation Report just over one month ago. We also signalled on that occasion 
that  if  the  trends  regarding  economic  activity  and  inflation  propensity  in  the  Swedish  economy 
remained the same, there may be cause for further increases in the interest rate. 
Growth in demand now appears to be on the right path both in Sweden and abroad. Swedish fiscal 
policy is currently conducted in a very expansionary direction, which made it natural for the Riksbank 
to wish to ease up on the accelerator to ensure the inflation target is achieved. Some people might 
think  that  this  target  means  that  the  Riksbank  is  forced  to  give  less  priority  to  employment  and 
production in a situation where a recovery is still in its infancy. However, first one must remember that 
changes in the repo rate have an effect one to two  years ahead. Secondly, there is no antagonism 
between growth and price stability in the long term; it is potential growth that sets the limits for how fast 
the economy can grow. Stable prices actually create the best conditions for sustainable growth. The 
Riksbank  cannot  affect  potential  growth.  Other  operators  can  do  this  -  trade  and  industry  primarily 
through  investments and  the government and parliament, which  decide  over the regulatory system, 
education  and  the  infrastructure,  etc.  This  is  probably  the  most  important  contribution  to  both  good 
growth and stable prices. 
Thank you! 
8 
 BIS Review 25/2002
