 Willem F Duisenberg: What are the political consequences of the euro? 
Introductory  remarks  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Karlspreis-Europa-Forum, Aachen, 8 May 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
You have invited a central banker to open this round-table discussion on the political consequences of 
the  euro.  Some  may  consider  this  a  somewhat  odd  choice  of  speaker.  As  you  are  well  aware, 
independent central bankers are anxious to keep a certain distance from the political process. At the 
same time, I will not deny that my job as a European central banker is inextricably linked to the wider 
historical process of building an "ever closer union" of the peoples of Europe. The move to Economic 
and Monetary Union was a profoundly political act – despite the fact that the underlying rationale was 
predominantly economic, namely that a single market requires a single currency. 
Understood in this sense, EMU itself is a "political consequence" of earlier decisions. A "product" of a 
functionalist  approach  to  European  integration.  Successfully  applied  by  the  founding  fathers  of  the 
Community, it has led us from a limited pooling of sovereignty in the coal and steel sectors to today's 
European Union. With ups and downs, pauses and great advances, and through grand visions and 
incremental  steps.  But  throughout  the  process,  integration  has  been  driven  forward  by  the  inherent 
dynamics  of  market  opening,  of  deepening  economic  interdependence  and  of  continuous  political 
engagement  in  common  institutions.  With  the  euro,  this  network  of  interrelations  and  mutual 
dependencies has undoubtedly acquired a new quality. 
So where do we go from here? This round-table discussion will look precisely at this question. Its title 
refers  to  "political  consequences  of  the  euro"  and  insinuates,  in  this  way,  some  kind  of  watertight 
relationship between cause and effect. As a central banker and economist, I am only too aware of the 
danger of misinterpreting concurrent developments as causal relationships and of the risk of treating 
simple extrapolations from current trends as predictions of future developments. Therefore, rather than 
talking about consequences, allow me to use the term "implications" and to distinguish between the 
likely "policy" implications and possible "political" implications. 
By policy implications, I mean further policy measures that are needed to shore up the success of the 
single  currency,  and  to  ensure  that  the  benefits  of  complementing  a  single  market  with  a  single 
currency are reaped  in full. They are, one might say, the  logical consequence  of the euro, deriving 
from the same functional logic that I referred to earlier. My colleague, Otmar Issing, will elaborate on 
this later. 
Trying to talk about the possible political implications of the euro, I am entering uncharted territory. As 
Niels Bohr famously once said, "prediction is very difficult, especially about the future". But there are 
fundamental questions about the future of Europe to be answered, and the subsequent discussion will 
hopefully  provide  interesting  insights:  Can  Monetary  Union  function  properly  without  some  form  of 
political union? Is a "currency without a state" a viable construct? Indeed, the question of whether a 
single currency requires – or inevitably leads to – a single state is hotly debated, not only among us, 
but also and especially in the three EU Member States where citizens and policy-makers have yet to 
make up their minds about adopting the euro. 
I  think  that  one  of  the  reasons  for  this  confused  state  of  affairs  is  that  "political  union"  is  a  rather 
abstract concept. It can mean different things to different people. On the one hand, "political union" 
can be broadly understood as a dense network of integrated policies, common rules and established 
procedures, as a Union with strong and active supranational institutions, with common symbols and a 
common identity. Measured against this yardstick, the EU already exhibits many of these features . 
If, on the other hand, we understand "political union" as the establishment of an entity that resembles 
the traditional nation state, the European Union may still have some way to go, if indeed this is the 
direction  we  want  to  take.  Today's  Union  is  not  a  European  Federation,  for  example,  or  a  United 
States  of  Europe,  with  a  constitution  and  a  single  executive,  playing  an  active  role  in  international 
affairs. 
Will  the  euro  lead  us  straight  to  a  European  constitution?  The  euro  marks  the  achievement  of  full 
integration in the monetary field. In purely functional terms, it is therefore an endpoint, rather than an 
BIS Review 30/2002 
 1
 intermediate step. However, with the euro, we now form a "Schicksalsgemeinschaft". Our economies 
are tied together, and so our policy decisions become a matter of concern for all. We have a legitimate 
interest in developments and political actions in other euro area countries, since we are affected by 
them – for better or worse. If I may use a "domestic" metaphor, the marriage in which the euro has 
joined our countries is more than just living under the same roof, it is about sharing a common vision 
and about managing life together. 
This is why  we are  witnessing, in parallel to the establishment of Monetary Union, a move towards 
deeper political integration. Over the past decade, the political and constitutional edifice of the Union 
has  resembled  an  almost  perennial  construction  site.  Today,  the  EU  is  faced  with  the  challenge  of 
devising  a  viable,  transparent  and  democratic  structure  for  a  political  community  that  encompasses 
almost our entire continent, a union that is capable of meeting the expectations of its citizens and is 
equipped  to  assume  international  responsibility  commensurate  with  its  size  and  importance.  The 
Convention on the future of Europe is debating these issues, reflecting on what can be best achieved 
through central institutions and common rules, and what should instead be left to the Member States. 
The mandate of the Convention, as laid down by the Heads of State or Government, is a broad one, 
and  the  outcome  of  the  process  could  be  a  European  constitutional  treaty,  or  even  a  European 
constitution. We should realise, however, that we have already achieved a lot, particularly in the field 
of monetary integration. 
But for this constitutional process to succeed, Europe has to become more tangible, something that 
inspires  a  true  sentiment  of  togetherness,  not  only  among  policy-makers,  but  also  and  especially 
among  the  citizens  of  Europe.  With  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  we  have  taken  a  big  step  in  this 
direction.  One  of  the  most  powerful  symbols  of  a  common  identity,  money,  is  now  shared  by 
12 European countries. In this sense, "the euro, our money" can provide a new and even more solid 
basis for the EU to discuss its finalité politique, the ultimate destination of its continuous process of 
building an "ever closer union". 
Ladies and gentlemen, I look forward to a fruitful, informed and hopefully enlightening debate. Thank 
you very much for your attention.  
2 
 BIS Review 30/2002
