 Y V Reddy: Public sector banks and the governance challenge - the Indian 
experience 
Paper presented by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the World Bank, 
International Monetary Fund, and Brookings Institution Conference on Financial Sector Governance: 
The Roles of the Public and Private Sectors, New York, 18 April 2002. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of India(cid:146)s website. 
 The objective of this paper is to detail the Indian experience in meeting the governance challenge with 
special reference to public sector banks (PSBs) or State-owned banks as they are described in some 
countries.  The  paper  sets  out  the  historical  context  of  the  Indian  experience  since  the  governance 
challenge  is  significantly  related  to  the  background  in  which  state  ownership  emerged.  This  will  be 
followed  by  an  account  of  the  pre-reform  status  encompassing  the  policy,  regulatory  and  structural 
environments. The measures undertaken to tackle the governance issues during the reform follow. In 
the  context  of  the  recent  on-going  exercise  relating  to  India(cid:146)s  status,  vis-(cid:224)-vis  the  international 
standards and codes, an assessment would be made on the governance issues with special reference 
to  the  banking  sector,  based  essentially  on  the  assessment  of  independent  advisory  groups  and 
current proposals under consideration for enhancing corporate governance in the public sector banks 
are discussed. An attempt would be made to highlight what may be termed as tentative issues and 
lessons emerging from the Indian experience. By way of a summing up, some random thoughts are 
set out to provoke analysis and debate on the subject. 
Historical context  
India had a fairly well developed commercial banking system in existence at the time of independence 
in  1947.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  was  established  in  1935. While  the  RBI  became  a  state 
owned institution from January 1, 1949, the Banking Regulation Act was enacted in 1949 providing a 
framework for  regulation  and  supervision  of  commercial  banking  activity.  The  first  step  towards  the 
nationalisation  of  commercial  banks  was  the  result  of  a  report  (under  the  aegis  of  RBI)  by  the 
Committee of Direction of All India Rural Credit Survey (1951) which till today is the locus classicus on 
the subject. The Committee recommended one strong integrated state partnered commercial banking 
institution to stimulate banking development in general and rural credit in particular. Thus, the Imperial 
Bank was taken over by the Government and renamed as the State Bank of India (SBI) on July  1, 
1955  with  the  RBI  acquiring  overriding  substantial  holding  of  shares.  A  number  of  erstwhile  banks 
owned by princely states were made subsidiaries of SBI in 1959. Thus, the beginning of the Plan era 
also saw the emergence of public ownership of one of the most prominent of the commercial banks. 
There was a feeling that though the Indian banking system had made considerable progress in the 
(cid:145)50s  and  (cid:145)60s,  it  established  close  links  between  commercial  and  industry  houses,  resulting  in 
cornering of bank credit by these segments to the exclusion of agriculture and small industries.  
To  meet  these  concerns,  in  1967,  the  Government  introduced  the  concept  of  social  control  in  the 
banking  industry.  The  scheme  of  social  control  was  aimed  at  bringing  some  changes  in  the 
management and distribution of credit by the commercial banks. The close link between big business 
houses and big banks was intended to be snapped or at least made ineffective by the reconstitution of 
the Board of Directors to the effect that 51 per cent of the directors were to have special knowledge or 
practical  experience.  Appointment  of  whole-time  Chairman  with  special  knowledge  and  practical 
experience of working of commercial banks or financial or economic or business administration was 
intended to professionalise the top management. Imposition of restrictions on loans to be granted to 
the  directors(cid:146)  concerns  was  another  step  towards  avoiding  undesirable  flow  of credit  to  the  units  in 
which  the  directors  were  interested.  The  scheme  also  provided  for  the  take-over  of  banks  under 
certain circumstances.  
Political  compulsion  then  partially  attributed  to  inadequacies  of  the  social  control,  led  to  the 
Government of India nationalising, in 1969, 14 major scheduled commercial banks which had deposits 
above a cut-off size. The objective was to serve better the needs of development of the economy in 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 1
  conformity  with  national  priorities  and  objectives.  In  a  somewhat  repeat  of  the  same  experience, 
eleven  years  after  nationalisation,  the  Government  announced  the  nationalisation  of  six  more 
scheduled  commercial  banks  above  the  cut-off  size.  The  second  round  of  nationalisation  gave  an 
impression  that  if  a  private  sector  bank  grew  to  the  cut-off  size  it  would  be  under  the  threat  of 
nationalisation. 
From  the  fifties  a  number  of  exclusively  state-owned  development  financial  institutions  (DFIs)  were 
also  set  up  both  at  the  national  and  state  level,  with  a  lone  exception  of  Industrial  Credit  and 
Investment Corporation (ICICI) which had a minority  private share  holding. The mutual fund activity 
was also a virtual monopoly of Government owned institution, viz., the Unit Trust of India. Refinance 
institutions  in  agriculture  and  industry  sectors  were  also  developed,  similar  in  nature  to  the  DFIs. 
Insurance, both Life and General, also became state monopolies.  
Pre-reform status 
The  regulatory  framework  for  the  banking  industry  under  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  was 
circumscribed by the special provisions of the Bank Nationalisation Act both of which had elements of 
corporate  governance  incorporated  with  regard  to  composition  of  Board  of  Directors  in  terms  of 
representation  of  directors,  etc.  While  technically  there  was  competition  between  banks  and  non-
banks and among banks, substantively, competition was conditioned by policy as well as regulatory 
environment,  common  ownership  by  the  Government  and  agreement  between  the  Government  of 
India as an owner and the workers represented by the Unions. Subsequent efforts during the reform 
period in terms of hesitancy in permitting industrial houses as well as foreign owned banks should be 
viewed in this historical context. 
As  regards  the  policy  environment,  it  must  be  recognised  that  almost  the  whole  of  financial 
intermediation  was  on  account  of  public  sector,  with  PSBs  being  the  most  important  source  of 
mobilisation  of  financial  savings.  Resources  for  DFIs  were  also  made  available  either  by  banks  or 
mostly  created  money  and  governmental  support.  The  major  thrust  was  on  expansion  of  banks(cid:146) 
branches,  provision  of  banking  services  and  mobilisation  of  deposits.  The  interest  rate  regime  was 
administered with interest rates fixed both on deposits and lending. At the same time, there was large 
pre-emption of banks(cid:146) resources under the cash reserve ratio or in the form of statutory liquidity ratio. 
The delivery of credit was also by and large directed through an allocative mechanism or as an adjunct 
to  the  licensing  regime.  In  the  process,  the  private  sector  banks  tended  to  be  confined  to  the  local 
areas and were unable to expand in such an environment. Banks, mainly public sector banks became 
the most dominant vehicle of the financial intermediation in the country. To a large extent, entry was 
restricted and exit was impossible and there was little or no scope for functions of risk assessment and 
pricing of risks. The Government, thus combined in itself the role of owner, regulator and sovereign.  
The  legal  as  well  as  policy  framework  emphasised  co-ordination  in  the  interest  of  national 
development  as  per  Plan  priorities  with  the  result,  the  issue  of  corporate  governance  became 
subsumed in the overall development framework. To the extent each bank, even after nationalization, 
maintained  its  distinct  identity,  governance  structure  as  incorporated  in  the  concerned  legislations 
provided for a formal structure of relationship between the RBI, Government, Board of Directors and 
management. The role of the RBI as a regulator became essentially one of being an extended arm of 
the Government so far as highest priority was accorded to ensuring coordinated actions in regard to 
activities particularly of PSBs. The SBI, which was owned by the RBI, was in substance no different 
from  the  other  banks  owned  by  the  Government  in  terms  of  Board  composition,  appointment 
procedures of the executives and non-executive members of the Board of Directors. Both Government 
and RBI were represented on the Board of Directors of the PSBs. There has been significant cross 
representation  in  terms  of  owner  or  lender  and  in  other  relationships  between  banks  and  all  other 
major financial entities. In other words, cross holdings and inter-relationships were more a rule than an 
exception  in  the  financial  sector,  since  the  basic  objective  was  coordination  for  ensuring  planned 
development,  with  the  result,  the  concepts  of  conflicts  of  interests  among  players,  checks  and 
balances etc., were subordinated to the social goals of the joint family headed by the Government. 
Reform measures 
The major challenge of the reform has been to introduce elements of market incentive as a dominant 
factor gradually replacing the administratively coordinated  planned actions for development. Such  a 
paradign shift has several dimensions, the corporate governance being one of the important elements. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2002
 The  evolution  of  corporate  governance  in  banks,  particularly,  in  PSBs,  thus  reflects  changes  in 
monetary  policy,  regulatory  environment,  and  structural  transformations  and  to  some  extent,  on  the 
character of the self-regulatory organizations functioning in the financial sector.  
is  on  efficiency 
through  competition 
Policy environment 
During  the  reform  period,  the  policy  environment  enhanced  competition  and  provided  greater 
opportunity for exercise of what may be called genuine corporate element in each bank to replace the 
elements of coordinated actions of all entities as a (cid:147)joint family(cid:148) to fulfill predetermined Plan priorities. 
The measures taken so far can be summarized as follows:  
First, greater competition has been infused in the banking system by permitting entry of private sector 
banks (9 licences since 1993), and liberal licensing of more branches by foreign banks and the entry 
of  new  foreign  banks. With  the  development  of  a  multi-institutional  structure  in  the  financial  sector, 
emphasis 
irrespective  of  ownership.  Since  non-bank 
intermediation has increased, banks have had to improve efficiency to ensure survival.  
Second, the reforms accorded greater flexibility to the banking system to manage both the pricing and 
quantity  of  resources.  There  has  been  a  reduction  in  statutory  preemptions  to  less  than  a  third  of 
commercial  banks  resources.  The  mandatory  component  of  market  financing  of  Government 
borrowing  has  decreased.  While  directed  credit  continues  it  is  now  on  near  commercial  terms. 
Valuation of banks’ investments is also attuned to international best practices so as to appropriately 
capture market risks. 
Third,  the  RBI  has  moved  away  from  micro-regulation  to  macro-management.  RBI  has  replaced 
detailed individual guidelines with general guidelines and now leaves it to individual banks(cid:146) boards to 
set  their  guidelines  on  credit  decisions.  A  Regulation  Review  Authority  was  established  in  RBI, 
whereby any bank could challenge the need for any regulation or guideline and the department had to 
justify the need and usefulness for such guideline relative to costs of regulation and compliance. 
Fourth,  to  strengthen  the  banking  system  to  cope  up  with  the  changing  environment,  prudential 
standards have been imposed in a progressive manner. Thus, while banks have greater freedom to 
take  credit  decisions,  prudential  norms  setting  out  capital  adequacy  norms,  asset  classification, 
income recognition and provisioning rules, exposure norms, and asset liability management systems 
have helped to identify and contain risks, thereby contributing to greater financial stability. 
Fifth, an appropriate legal, institutional, technological and regulatory framework has been put in place 
for  the  development  of  financial  markets. There  is  now  increased  volumes  and  transparency  in  the 
primary  and  secondary  market  operations.  Development  of  the  Government  Securities,  money  and 
forex  markets  has  improved  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy,  facilitated  the 
development of an yield curve and enabled greater integration of markets. The interest rate channel of 
monetary policy transmission is acquiring greater importance as compared with the credit channel. 
 Regulatory environment 
Prudential regulation and supervision have formed a critical component of the financial sector reform 
programme  since  its  inception,  and  India  has  endeavoured  to  international  prudential  norms  and 
practices.  These  norms  have  been  progressively  tightened  over  the  years,  particularly  against  the 
backdrop of the Asian crisis. Bank exposures to sensitive sectors such as equity and real estate have 
been curtailed. The Banking Regulation Act 1949 prevents connected lending (i.e. lending by banks to 
directors or companies in which Directors are interested).  
Periodical inspection of banks has been the main instrument of supervision, though recently there has 
been  a  move  toward  supplementary  ’on-site  inspections’  with  ’off-site  surveillance’.  The  system  of 
’Annual Financial Inspection’ was introduced in 1992, in place of the earlier system of Annual Financial 
Review/Financial  Inspections.  The  inspection  objectives  and  procedures,  have  been  redefined  to 
evaluate the bank(cid:146)s safety and soundness; to appraise the quality of the Board and management; to 
ensure compliance with banking laws & regulation; to provide an appraisal of soundness of the bank’s 
assets; to analyse the financial factors which determine bank’s solvency and to identify areas where 
corrective action is needed to strengthen the institution and improve its performance. Inspection based 
upon the new guidelines have started since 1997. 
A high powered Board for Financial Supervision (BFS), comprising the Governor of RBI as Chairman, 
one  of  the  Deputy  Governors  as  Vice-Chairman  and  four  Directors  of  the  Central  Board  of  RBI  as 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 3
 members  was  constituted  in  1994,  with  the  mandate  to  exercise  the  powers  of  supervision  and 
inspection in relation to the banking companies, financial institutions and non-banking companies.  
A supervisory strategy comprising on-site inspection, off-site monitoring and control systems internal 
to the banks, based on the CAMELS (capital adequacy, asset quality, management, earnings, liquidity 
and  systems  and  controls)  methodology  for  banks  have  been  instituted.  The  RBI  has  instituted  a 
mechanism for critical analysis of the balance sheet by the banks themselves and the presentation of 
such analysis before their  boards to  provide an  internal assessment of the health  of the bank. The 
analysis,  which  is  also  made  available  to  the  RBI,  forms  a  supplement  to  the  system  of  off-site 
monitoring of banks. 
Keeping in line with the merging regulatory and supervisory standards at international level, the RBI 
has  initiated  certain  macro  level  monitoring  techniques  to  assess  the  true  health  of  the  supervised 
institutions. The format of balance sheets of commercial banks have now been prescribed by the RBI 
with  disclosure  standards  on  vital  performance  and  growth  indicators,  provisions,  net  NPAs,  staff 
productivity,  etc.  appended  as  ’Notes  of  Accounts’.  To  bring  about  greater  transparency  in  banks’ 
published  accounts,  the  RBI  has  also  directed  the  banks  to  disclose  data  on  movement  of  non-
performing  assets  (NPAs)  and  provisions  as  well  as  lending  to  sensitive  sectors.  These  proposed 
additional disclosure norms would bring the disclosure standards almost on par with the international 
best practice. 
Structural environment of banking 
The nationalized banks are enabled to dilute their equity of Government of India to 51% following the 
amendment to the Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer of Undertakings) Acts in 1994, bringing 
down the minimum Government’s shareholdings to 51 per cent in PSBs. RBI’s shareholding in SBI is 
subject  to  a  minimum  of  55  per  cent.  Ten  banks  have  already  raised  capital  from  the  market.  The 
Government  proposed,  in  the  Union  Budget  for  the  financial  year  2000-01  to  reduce  its  holding  in 
nationalised banks to a minimum of 33 per cent, while maintaining the public sector character of these 
banks. The diversification of ownership of PSBs has made a qualitative difference to the functioning of 
PSBs since there is induction of private shareholding and attendant issues of shareholder(cid:146)s value, as 
reflected by the market cap, representation on board, and interests of minority shareholders. There is 
representation of private shareholder when the banks raise capital from the market. 
The governance of banks rests with the board of directors. In the light of deregulation in interest rates 
and  the  greater  autonomy  given  to  banks  in  their  operations,  the  role  of  the  board  of  directors  has 
become more significant. During the years, Boards have been required to lay down policies in critical 
areas  such  as  investments,  loans,  asset-liability  management,  and  management  and  recovery  of 
NPAs.  As  a  part  of  this  process,  several  Board  level  committees  including  the  Management 
Committee are required to be appointed by banks.  
In 1995, the RBI directed banks to set up Audit Committees of their Boards, with the responsibility of 
ensuring efficacy of the internal control and audit functions in the bank besides compliance with the 
inspection  report  of  the  RBI,  internal  and  concurrent  auditors.  To  ensure  both  professionalism  and 
independence, the Chartered Accountant Directors on the boards of banks are mandatory members, 
but  the  Chairman  would  not  be  part  of  the  Audit  Committee.  Apart  from  the  above,  Board  level 
committees  that  are  required  to  be  set  up  are  Risk  Management  committee,  Asset  Liability 
Management committee (ALCO), etc. The Boards have also been given the freedom to constitute any 
other committees, to render advice to it. 
Government introduced a Bill in Parliament to omit the mandatory provisions regarding appointment of 
RBI  nominees  on  the  Boards  of  public  sector  banks  and  instead  to  add  a  clause  to  enable  RBI  to 
appoint its nominee on the boards of public sector banks if the RBI is of the opinion that in the interest 
of the banking policy or in the public interest or in the interest of the bank or depositors, it is necessary 
so to do. 
As  regards,  appointment  of  Additional  Directors  on  the  Boards  of  private  sector  banks,  since 
December  1997,  the  RBI  has  been  appointing  such  directors  only  in  such  of  those  ’banks  making 
losses  for more  than  one  year,  having  CRAR  below  8%,  NPAs  exceeding  20%  or  where  there  are 
disputes in the management. 
Appointment  of  Chairman  and  Managing  Directors  and  Executive  Directors  of  all  PSBs  is  done  by 
Government. The Narasimham Committee II had recommended that the appointment of Chairman and 
Managing Director should be left to the Boards of banks and the Boards themselves should be elected 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2002
 by shareholders. Government has set up an Appointment Board chaired by Governor, Reserve Bank 
of India for these appointments. More recently, in case of appointment of Chief Executive Officer of the 
PSBs identified as weak, the Government has formed a Search Committee with two outside experts. 
Appointment  as  well  as  removal  of  auditors  in  PSBs  require  prior  approval  of  the  RBI.  There  is  an 
elaborate procedure by which banks select auditors from an approved panel circulated by the RBI. In 
respect of private sector banks, the statutory auditors are appointed in the Annual General Meeting 
with the prior approval by the RBI. 
Self regulatory organizations 
India  has  had  the  distinction  of  experimenting  with  Self  Regulatory  Organisations  (SROs)  in  the 
financial  system  since  the  pre-independence  days.  At  present,  there  are  four  SROs  in  the  financial 
system  -  Indian  Banks  Association  (IBA),  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers  Association  of  India  (FEDAI), 
Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI) and Fixed Income Money Market Dealers Association of 
India (FIMMDAI). 
The  IBA  established  in  1946  as  a  voluntary  association  of  banks,  strove  towards  strengthening  the 
banking industry through consensus and co-ordination. Since nationalisation of banks, PSBs tended to 
dominate IBA and developed close links with Government and RBI. Often, the reactive and consensus 
and coordinated approach bordered on cartelisation. To illustrate, IBA had worked out a schedule of 
benchmark service charges for the services rendered by member banks, which were not mandatory in 
nature,  but  were being adopted by  all banks. The practice of fixing rates for services of banks was 
consistent  with  a  regime  of  administered  interest  rates  but  not  consistent  with  the  principle  of 
competition.  Hence,  the  IBA  was  directed  by  the  RBI  to  desist  from  working  out  a  schedule  of 
benchmark service charges for the services rendered by member banks. 
Responding to the imperatives caused by the changing scenario in the reform era, the IBA has, over 
the years, refocused its vision, redefined its role, and modified its operational modalities.   
In the area of foreign exchange, FEDAI was established in 1958, and banks were required to abide by 
terms and conditions prescribed by FEDAI for transacting foreign exchange business. In the light of 
reforms, FEDAI has refocused its role by giving up fixing of rates, but plays a multifarious role covering 
training of banks(cid:146) personnel, accounting standards, evolving risk measurement models like the VaR 
and accrediting foreign exchange brokers.  
In the financial markets, the two SROs, viz., the PDAI and the FIMMDAI are of recent origin i.e. 1996 
and  1997.  These  two  SROs  have  been  proactive  and  are  closely  involved  in  contemporary  issues 
relating to development of money and  government securities markets. The representatives of PDAI 
and FIMMDAI are members of important committees of the RBI, both on policy and operational issues. 
To illustrate, the Chairmen of PDAI and FIMMDAI are members of the Technical Advisory Group on 
Money and Government Securities market of the RBI. These two SROs have been very proactive in 
mounting  the  technological  infrastructure  in  the  money  and  Government  Securities  markets.  The 
FIMMDAI  has  now  taken  over  the  responsibility  of  publishing  the  yield  curve  in  the  debt  markets. 
Currently,  the  FIMMDAI  is  working  towards  development  of  uniform  documentation  and  accounting 
principles in the repo market.  
Assessment of corporate governance in PSBs 
A Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes was constituted to, inter alia, 
assess  the  status  in  India  vis-(cid:224)-vis  the  best  global  practices  in  regard  to  standards  and  codes.  An 
Advisory Group on Corporate Governance (Chairman: Dr. R. H. Patil) made detailed assessment and 
gave  recommendations  of  which  those  relating  to  PSBs  is  an  important  component.  The  Report 
provides the most comprehensive set of recommendations on the subject, summarised in Box 1.  
Box 1 
Advisory Group on Corporate Governance 
 Currently  in  India,  about  four-fifths  of  the  banking  business  is  under  the  control  of  public 
sector  banks  (PSBs),  comprising  the  SBI  and  its  subsidiaries  and  the  nationalised  banks. 
Corporate  governance  in  PSBs  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  effective  management  of 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 5
     these banks vests with the government and the top managements and the boards of banks 
operate  merely  as  functionaries.  The  ground  reality  is  such  that  the  government  performs 
simultaneously  multiple  functions  vis-(cid:224)-vis  the  PSBs,  such  as  the  owner,  manager,  quasi-
regulator,  and  sometimes  even  as  the  super-regulator.  Unless  the  issues  connected  with 
these multiple, and sometimes conflicting, functions are resolved and the boards of banks 
are  given  the  desired  level  of  autonomy  it  would  be  difficult  to  improve  the  quality  of 
corporate governance in PSBs. One of the major factors that impinge directly on the quality 
of corporate governance is the government ownership. It is desirable that all the banks are 
brought  under  a  single  Act  so  that  the  corporate  governance  regimes  do  not  have  to  be 
different just because the entities are covered under multiple Acts of the Parliament or that 
their ownership is in the private or public sector. 
Even  when  the  government  dilutes  its  holdings  to  bring  them  significantly  below  the 
threshold limit of 51 per cent, efforts to institute good governance practices would remain at 
superficial  level  unless  the  government  seriously  redefines  its  role  de  novo.  The  changes 
proposed  in  the  composition  of  the  boards  as  per  legislation  under  contemplation  would 
result in government directly appointing 9 out of the 15 directors including the 4 whole time 
directors.  Moreover,  the  voting  rights  of  any  of  the  other  shareholders  will  continue  to  be 
restricted, thereby  negating the basic principle of equal rights to all  the shareholders. The 
rights of private shareholders(cid:146) of SBI/PSBs are abridged considerably, since their approval is 
not required for paying dividend  or adopting annual  accounts. The subsidiaries of the  SBI 
enjoy very limited board autonomy as they have to get clearance on most of the important 
matters from the parent even before putting them up to their boards. Further, as things stand 
today, there is no equality among the various board members of the PSBs. Nominees of RBI 
and Government are treated to be superior to other directors. 
Another  major  problem  affecting  banks  has  been  the  representation  given  to  the  various 
interest groups on the boards of the banks. The main objective behind these representations 
was to give voice to various sections of the society at the board level of the banks. Hence, a 
major reform is needed in the area of constitution of the boards of the banks. The Chairmen, 
Executive  Directors  and  non-executive  directors  on  the  boards  of  the  PSBs  (including  the 
SBI and its subsidiaries) need to be appointed on the advice of an expert body set up on the 
lines of the UPSC, with similar status and independence. Such a body may be set up jointly 
by RBI and the Ministry of Finance. There is also no need to have directors that represent 
narrow sectional and economic interests. All the objectives that the banks are supposed to 
achieve  should  become  an  integral  part  of  the  corporate  mission  statements  of  these 
institutions. 
Although  RBI  maintains  a  tight  vigil  and  inspects  these  entities  thoroughly  at  regular  time 
intervals,  the  quality  of  corporate  level  governance  mechanism  does  not  appear  to  be 
satisfactory.  In  its  role  as  the  regulator,  RBI  need  not  have  representation  on  the  bank 
boards, given the fact that it leads to conflicts of interests with its regulatory functions. This 
should apply even in the case of SBI where RBI is the major shareholder. Further, any policy 
measures  to  protect  banks  that  are  less  careful  in  their  lending  policies  at  the  cost  of  tax 
payers(cid:146)  money  need  to  be  tempered  in  such  a  way  that  they  do  not  encourage  profligate 
lending by banks. 
Current regulatory provisions do not permit a bank to lend money to a company if any of its 
board members is also a director on the board of that company. The negative impact of this 
rule has been that the banks are not able to get good professionals for their boards. This 
archaic rule should be modified immediately so that the professionals who are on the boards 
of non-banking companies as professional or independent directors do not suffer from any 
handicaps.  The  current  rule  may,  however,  be  continued  only  in  respect  of  directors  of 
companies  who  are  their  promoters  and  have  a  stake  in  their  companies  beyond  being 
merely  a  director.  In  the  interest  of  good  governance,  it  is  desirable  that  government 
directors  should  not  participate  in  the  discussion  on  such  matters  and  also  abstain  from 
voting.  
The  Report  of  the  Advisory  Group  on  Banking  Supervision  (Chairman  :  Mr.  M.S.  Verma)  has  also 
made some recommendations on corporate governance, which are summarised in Box 2. 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2002
 Box 2 
Advisory Group on Banking Supervision 
 The  quality  of  corporate  governance  should  be  the  same  in  all  types  of  banking 
organisations  irrespective  of  their  ownership.  The  process  of  induction  of  directors  into 
banks(cid:146)  boards  and  their  initial  orientation  may  be  streamlined.  Banks  need  to  develop 
mechanisms,  which  can  help  them  ensure  percolation  of  their  strategic  objectives  and 
corporate values throughout the organisation. Boards need to set and enforce clear lines of 
responsibility  and  accountability  for  themselves  as  well  as  the  senior  management  and 
throughout the organisation. Linkage between contribution and remuneration/reward should 
be  established.  Compensation  Committees  of  the  board  could  be  set  up  for  the  purpose. 
Nomination Committees to assess the effectiveness of the board and direct the process of 
renewing and replacing board members are desirable. Disclosures in respect of committees 
of the board and qualifications of the directors, incentive structure and the nature and extent 
of transactions with affiliated and related parties need to be encouraged. Finally, a provision 
on the lines of Section 20 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, which prohibits loans and 
advances to directors and their connected parties, will have to be made in respect of large 
shareholders also. Information on transactions with affiliated and related parties should be 
disclosed. 
Current proposal 
It  would  be  evident  that  the  Reports  of  Advisory  Groups  contain  far  reaching  proposals  to  improve 
corporate governance and many, if not all, do require legislative processes and they are necessarily 
time  consuming  and  often  realizable  only  in  medium-term.  While  proceeding  with  analysis  and 
possible legislative actions, it may be necessary to consider and adopt changes that could be brought 
about within the existing legislative framework.  
To this end, Governor Jalan in his Monetary and Credit Policy Statement of October 2001 constituted 
a Consultative Group of Directors of banks and financial institutions (Chairman Dr. A.S. Ganguly) to 
review the supervisory role of Boards of banks and financial institutions and to obtain feedback on the 
functioning of the Boards vis-(cid:224)-vis compliance, transparency, disclosures, audit committees etc. and 
make recommendations for making the role of Board of Directors more effective. The Group made its 
recommendations very recently after a comprehensive review of the existing framework as well as of 
current  practices  and  benchmarked  its  recommendations  with  international  best  practices  as 
enunciated  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  as  well  as  of  other  committees  and 
advisory bodies, to the extent applicable in the Indian environment. The report has been put in public 
domain for a wider debate and its major recommendations are summarized in Box 3 : 
Box 3 
Report of the Consultative Group of Directors of Banks/Financial Institutions 
  On appointment of Directors, due diligence of the directors of all banks (cid:150) be they in public or 
private  sector,  should  be  done  in  regard  to  their  suitability  for  the  post  by  way  of 
qualifications and technical expertise. Involvement of Nomination Committee of the Board in 
such  an  exercise  should  be  seriously  considered  as  a  formal  process.  Further,  the 
Government  while  nominating  directors  on  the  Boards  of  public  sector  banks  should  be 
guided by certain broad (cid:147)fit and proper(cid:148) norms for the Directors. The criteria suggested by 
the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) may be suitably adopted for considering (cid:147)fit and 
proper(cid:148) test for bank directors.  
In the present context of banking becoming more complex and knowledge-based, there is an 
urgent need for making the Boards of banks more contemporarily professional by inducting 
technical and specially qualified individual. While continuing regulation based representation 
of  sectors 
the  appointment/nomination  of 
independent/ non-executive directors to the Board of banks (both public sector and private 
sector)  should  be  from  a  pool  of  professional  and  talented  people  to  be  prepared  and 
maintained by RBI. Any deviation from this procedure by any bank should be with the prior 
approval of RBI.  
like  agriculture,  SSI,  cooperation,  etc., 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 7
        8 
  them 
to  an 
induction  briefing  need-based 
On the functioning, the independent/non-executive directors should raise in the meetings of 
the  Board,  critical  questions  relating  to  business  strategy,  important  aspects  of  the 
functioning  of  the  bank  and  investor  relations.  In  the  case  of  private  sector  banks  where 
promoter  directors  may  act  in  concert,  the  independent/non-executive  directors  should 
provide effective checks and balances ensuring that the bank does not build up exposures to 
entities  connected  with  the  promoters  or  their  associates.  The  independent/non-executive 
directors  should  provide  effective  checks  and  balances  particularly,  in  widely  held  and 
closely controlled banking organizations. 
As  a  step  towards  effective  corporate  governance,  it  would  be  desirable  to  take  an 
undertaking  from  every  director  to  the  effect  that  they  have  gone  through  the  guidelines 
defining the role and responsibilities of directors, and understood what is expected of them 
and  enter  into  a  covenant  to  discharge  their  responsibilities  to  the  best  of  their  abilities, 
individually and collectively.  
In  order  to  attract  quality  professionals,  the  level  of  remuneration  payable  to  the  directors 
should be commensurate with the time required to be devoted to the bank(cid:146)s work as well as 
to  signal  the  appropriateness  of  remuneration  to  the  quality  of  inputs  expected  from  a 
member. The statutory prohibition under section 20 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 on 
lending  to  companies  in  which  the  director  is  interested,  severely  constricts  availability  of 
quality professional directors on to the Boards of banks. This would require a change in the 
existing legal framework. We need to move towards this goal.  
It would be desirable to separate the office of Chairman and Managing Director in respect of 
large  sized  public  sector  banks.  This  functional  separation  will  bring  about  more  focus  on 
strategy  and  vision  as  also  the  needed  thrust  in  the  operational  functioning  of  the  top 
management  of  the  bank.  The  directors  could  be  made  more  responsible  to  their 
organization  by  exposing 
training 
programme/seminars/workshops  to  acquaint  them  with  emerging  developments/challenges 
facing the banking sector. RBI as the regulator, could take the initiative to organizing such 
seminars. RBI may bring out an updated charter indicating clear-cut, specific guidelines on 
the role expected and the responsibilities of the individual directors. The whole-time directors 
should have sufficiently long tenure to enable them to leave a mark of their leadership and 
business acumen on the bank(cid:146)s performance. All banks should consider appointing qualified 
Company Secretary as the Secretary to the Board and have a Compliance Officer (reporting 
to the Secretary) for monitoring and reporting compliance with various regulatory/accounting 
requirements.    
The  information  furnished  to  the  Board  should  be  wholesome,  complete  and  adequate  to 
take  meaningful  decisions.  A  distinction  needs  to  be  made  between  statutory  items  and 
strategic  issues  in  order  to  make  the  material  for  directors  (cid:145)manageable(cid:146).  The  Reviews 
dealing with various performance areas could be put up the Supervisory Committee of Board 
and a summary of each such review could be put up to the Main Board. The Board(cid:146)s focus 
should  be  devoted  more  on  strategy  issues,  risk  profile,  internal  control  systems,  overall 
performance, etc. The procedure followed for recording of the minutes of the board meetings 
in  banks  and  financial  institutions  should  be  uniform  and  formalized.  Banks  and  financial 
institutions  may  adopt  two  methods  for  recording  the  proceedings  viz.,  a  summary  of  key 
observations and a more detailed recording of the proceedings.  
It  would  be  desirable  if  the  exposures  of  a  bank  to stockbrokers  and market-makers  as  a 
group, as also exposures to other sensitive sectors, viz., real estate etc. are reported to the 
Board  regularly.  The  disclosures  in  respect  of  the  progress  made  in  putting  in  place  a 
progressive risk management system, the risk management policy, strategy followed by the 
bank, exposures to related entities, the asset classification of such lendings/investments etc. 
conformity  with Corporate  Governance  Standards etc., be made by banks to the Board of 
Directors at regular intervals as prescribed.  
As regards Committees, there could be a Supervisory Committee of the Board in all banks, 
be  the  public  or  private  sector,  which  will  work  on  collective  trust  and  at  the  same  time, 
without  diluting  the  overall responsibility of the Board. Their role and responsibilities could 
include monitoring of the exposures (credit and investment) review of the adequacy of risk 
management  process  and  upgradation  thereof,  internal  control  systems  and  ensuring 
compliance with the statutory/regulatory framework. The Audit Committee should, ideally be 
  BIS Review 25/2002
  constituted with independent/non-executive directors and the Executive Director should only 
be a permanent invitee. However, in respect of public sector banks, the existing arrangement 
of  including  the  Executive  Director  and  nominee  directors  of  Government  and  RBI  in  the 
Audit Committee may continue. The Chairman and Audit Committee need not be confined to 
the  Chartered  Accountant  profession  but  can  be  a  person  with  knowledge  on  (cid:145)finance(cid:146)  or 
(cid:145)banking(cid:146)  so  as  to  provide  directions  and  guidance  to  the  Audit  Committee,  since  the 
Committee  not  only  looks  at  accounting  issues,  but  also  the  overall  management  of  the 
bank.  It  is  desirable  to  have  a  Nomination  Committee  for  appointing  independent/non-
executive directors of banks. In the context of a number of public sector banks issuing capital 
to  the  public,  a  Nomination  Committee  of  the  Board  may  be  formed  for  nomination  of 
directors,  representing  shareholders.  The  formation  and  operationalisation  of  the  Risk 
Management  Committees  in  pursuance  of  the  guidelines  issued  by  the  RBI  should  he 
speeded up and their role further strengthened. With a view of building up credibility among 
the investor class, the Group recommends that a Committee of the Board may be set up to 
look  into  the  grievance  of  investors  and  shareholders,  with  the  Company  Secretary  as  a 
nodal point. 
Finally the banks could be asked to come up with a strategy and plan for implementation of 
the governance standards recommended and submit progress of implementation, for review 
after twelve months and thereafter half yearly or annually, as deemed appropriate. 
 Tentative issues and lessons 
The  Indian  experience  shows  recognition  of  (a)  the  importance  of  corporate  governance  and  the 
challenges in redefining institutional relations in the financial sector in respect of PSBs; (b) the need 
for a broader view of enhancing corporate governance to take account of law and policy as well as the 
operating  and  institutional  environment;  and  (c)  the  desirable  changes  in  the  composition  and 
functioning of the board. The processes by which some progress has been made so far and actions 
contemplated are also instructive (cid:150) needless to add that these issues and lessons have to be viewed 
as tentative, and of course, contextual. 
Corporate governance in PSBs is important, not only because PSBs happen to dominate the banking 
industry,  but  also  because,  they  are  unlikely  to  exit  from  banking  business  though  they  may  get 
transformed.  To  the  extent  there  is  public  ownership  of  PSBs,  the  multiple  objectives  of  the 
government  as  owner  and  the  complex  principal-agent  relationships  cannot  be  wished  away.  PSBs 
cannot be expected to blindly mimic private corporate banks in governance though general principles 
are  equally  valid.  Complications  arise  when  there  is  a  widespread  feeling  of  uncertainty  of  the 
ownership and public ownership is treated as a transitional phenomenon. The anticipation or threat of 
change in ownership has also some impact on governance, since expected change is not merely of 
owner but the very nature of owner. Mixed ownership where government has controlling interest is an 
institutional structure that poses issues of significant difference between one set of owners who look 
for  commercial  return  and  another  who  seeks  something  more  and  different,  to  justify  ownership. 
Furthermore, the expectations, the reputational risks and the implied even if not exercised authority in 
respect of the part-ownership of government in the governance of such PSBs should be recognized. In 
brief, the issue of corporate governance in PSBs is important and also complex. 
The most important challenge faced in enhancing corporate governance and in respect of which there 
has  been  significant  though  partial  success  relates  to  redefining  the  interrelationships  between 
institutions within the broadly defined public sector i.e., government, RBI and PSBs to move away from 
(cid:147)joint family(cid:148) approach originally designed for a model of planned development. As part of reform the 
government had to differentiate, conceptually and at the policy level, its role as sovereign, owner of 
banks  and  overarching  supervisor  of  regulators  including  RBI.  The  central  bank  also  had  to  move 
away  from  sharing  the  nitty  gritty  of  developmental  schemes  with  government  involving  micro 
regulation, to a more equitable treatment of all banks as regulator and supervisor. Furthermore, the 
bureaucracy  of  RBI  is  accountable  to  the  RBI(cid:146)s  Board  for  Financial  Supervision.  The  large  publicly 
owned  non-financial  enterprise  had  to  recognize  the  need  for  a  more  commercial  and  competitive 
approach with banks including PSBs in raising of and deployment of funds. Similarly, the PSBs had to 
reorient  their  approach  to  each  other  also  with  intensified  competition  engineered  by  policy  while 
guarding  against  excessive  risk  taking  as  dictated  by  a  supervisor  seeking  to  meet  international 
standards. 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 9
 Another noteworthy aspect of enhancing corporate governance is the narrowing of gap between PSBs 
and  other  banks  in  terms  of  the  policy,  regulatory  and  operating  environment,  apart  from  some 
changes in ownership structures with attendant consequences. The PSBs as hundred per cent owned 
entities with no share value quoted in stock exchanges accounted for over three quarters of banking 
business seven years ago, while they now account for less than a quarter.  
A  third  area  where  a  few  changes  to  enhance  quality  of  governance  have  been  made  or  are 
contemplated relates to the manner in which chief executives are selected, the board is composed in 
view  of  induction  of  some  elected  directors,  and  the  constitution  of  committees,  including  the  Audit 
Committee. In this regard, it is noteworthy that recently, the functioning of bank boards in the private 
sector seems to have attracted significant adverse notice, both from market and supervisor. That the 
representation of RBI on the Boards is not desirable has been conceded just as RBI has expressed 
interest in divesting all its ownership functions. 
The processes by which these changes have been and are being brought about may also be of some 
interest.  First,  RBI  has  taken  initiative  in  bringing  about  changes  rather  than  (cid:147)keep  aloof(cid:148)  from  the 
regulated entities as pure theory may suggest. The developmental role of RBI, which was in the nature 
of promoting and funding of institutions or channeling credit to schemes under government approved 
plans has yielded place to the role of developer of a more robust financial system, especially banking 
structure and system. Sometimes, closer involvement of RBI in some transitional arrangements, such 
as in advising government on appointment of Chief Executives of PSBs was needed to bring about 
changes.  The  professional  inputs  as  well  as  sensitising  and  creating  opinion  to  enhance  corporate 
governance was ensured by RBI through the Advisory Groups and Consultative Group mentioned.  
Second, as Governor Jalan in his National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM) Annual Day Lecture 
articulated, markets are more free and more complex now; what happens in banks is a concern for all 
since there is fear of contagion and above all we live in a more volatile and interlinked world where 
effects are instantaneous. (Jalan 2002). Hence, in the process of making markets more free as part of 
the reform, RBI had to discharge its responsibility of equipping the participants, especially the most 
dominant segment viz., PSBs, to manage the complexities or simply to cope. Hence, RBI had taken 
initiatives  in  improving  the  competitive  strengths  as  well  as  governance  systems  of  PSBs  while 
pursuing  its  objective  of  distancing,  as  a  regulator,  from  the  operational  closeness  with  both 
government which is an owner of PSB, and PSBs which are the regulated. 
Thirdly,  the  path  of  reform  of  which  corporate  governance  is  one  element  had  to  be  considered 
carefully and evolved through a consultation and participation process at every step. Thus, the basic 
framework  was  provided  by  Narasimham  Committees  1  and  2  in  which  all  stakeholders  were 
represented followed by a series of Committees and Consultation Papers to refine and redefine and 
apply  the  basic  framework.  The  collaborative  and  consensual  approach  in  the  path  of  reform  was 
adopted while the goals of reforms were to the extent possible well defined. The most recent example 
of  this  approach  has  been  described  in  the  Report  of  the  Advisory  Groups  on  various  International 
Standards and Codes.  
Fourthly, there was need to resist the temptation of demoralising the PSBs on presumed inefficiency, 
and make every effort to enable and  empower them to meet the challenges. There has been clear 
recognition that governance is not merely one of structures, but also one of culture and this requires 
careful nurture. This  has been made possible by  a  variety  of mechanisms and  through a  variety  of 
fora.  One  illustration  would  suffice  to  reflect  the  changing  attitude  of  the  RBI  in  this  regard.  The 
Governor, RBI who was the Chairman of National Institute of Bank Management yielded the position 
to a former Chairman of a public sector bank and the RBI distanced itself from the day to day running 
of the Institute without withdrawing its interest and support.  
Fifthly, the importance of SROs in bringing about change has been recognised and the orientation of 
pre-existing institutions, in particular, Indian Banks(cid:146) Association, has changed to meet new challenges. 
Various  mechanisms  have  been  found  to  ensure  an  environment  supportive  of  sound  corporate 
governance mentioned in BIS Document (BIS September 1999) by not only pursuing legal and policy 
changes  with  the  Government,  but  also  close  interaction  with  auditors  and  banking  industry 
associations. 
Random thoughts 
The Indian experience provokes some thoughts on a few fundamental issues in regard to PSBs and 
corporate  governance.  First,  is  public  ownership  compatible  with  sound  corporate  governance  as 
10 
 BIS Review 25/2002
  generally understood? Since various corporate governance structures exist in different countries, there 
are  no  universally  correct  parameters  of  sound  corporate  governance.  Government  ownership  of  a 
bank, unless government happens to have such a stake purely as a financial investment for return, 
necessarily  has  to  have  the  effect  of  altering  the  strategies  and  objectives  as  well  as  structure  of 
governance. Government as an owner is accountable to political institutions which may not necessarily 
be  compatible  with  purely  economic  incentives.  The  mixed  ownership  brings  into  sharper  focus  the 
divergent objectives of shareholding and the issues of reconciling them, especially when one of the 
owners is government. In such a situation, one can argue that as long as the private shareholder is 
aware of the special nature of shareholding, there should be no conflict. In other words, the idea of 
maintaining public sector character of a bank while government holds a minority shareholding is an 
intensified and modified version of (cid:147)golden share(cid:148) experiment of U.K. The question could still be as to 
whether such a mixed ownership is the most efficient form of organization, particularly for banks which 
are in any case generally under intense regulation and supervision. 
Second, is corporate governance generally better in private sector, in particular, private sector banks? 
In regard to old private sector banks (i.e. founded in pre-reform era, almost all of them continue to be 
closely held and many of them resist broadening their shareholder base and thus avoid deepening of 
corporate structures. More often than not, takeover bids have been by equally closely held groups. As 
regards new private sector banks, which have been licensed after close scrutiny in the reform period, 
the promotees were expected to dilute their stakes to below 40 per cent within three years. In two of 
the cases, this is yet to happen, while in most cases, the banks continue to be identified with effective 
controlled by promoter institutions. Governor Jalan, made an interesting observation on this in a recent 
lecture. (cid:147)By and large, the structure is very weak in Co-operatives and NBFCs for historical reasons, 
local practices, and multiplicity of regulators and laws. Old private sector banks also have very poor 
auditing  and  accounting  systems.  New  private  banks  (cid:150)  generally  good  on  accounting,  but  poor  on 
accountability. More modern and computerized, but less risk conscious. One thing which is common to 
all  is  that  corporate  governance  is  highly  centralized  with  very  little  real  check on  the  CEO,  who  is 
generally  also  closely  linked  to  the  largest  owner  groups.  Boards  or  auditing  systems  are  not  very 
effective.(cid:148) (Jalan 2002)  
Third, how do the dynamics of insider and outsider models in terms of separation between ownership 
and management  work in  public  vis-(cid:224)-vis  private sector banks? One  view  is that there  is not much 
difference between public and private sectors in India. (cid:147)The literature on the governance deals mostly 
with the financial disclosures and restrictions on the managements that remain within the corporation 
and the influence that the external stakeholder or shareholders can hold. But in developing countries, 
the problem is slightly the other way round. In developing countries and more particularly in India, the 
major corporate issue is not how outside financiers can control the actions of the managers but also 
how  outside  stakeholders  including  the  minority  shareholders  can  exert  control  over  the  big  inside 
shareholders;  and  this  does  not  apply  only  to  the  public  sector,  but  it  applies  equally  strongly  or 
probably more strongly to the private sector as well.(cid:148) (Bhide 2002). 
There are, however, significant elements of subjectivity. Governor Jalan feels that private sector has 
greater  elements  of  insider  model.  (cid:147)Public  sector  banks/FIs,  for  example,  are  more  akin  to  the 
(cid:145)outsider(cid:146) model with separation of (cid:147)Ownership(cid:148) and (cid:147)Management(cid:148). Private sector banks/NBFCs/Co-
ops  -  much  more  (cid:147)insider(cid:148)  models  with  families,  inter-connected  entities  or  promoters  running  the 
management.(cid:148) (Jalan 2002) 
The dominant view, backed by more recent research is that the issue in India often relates to minority 
shareholder. (cid:147)Rather than conflict between owners and managers of firms, it is the conflict between 
the interests of minority shareholders and promoters (say business groups) that is more relevant for 
India and that needs to be addressed. (cid:147) (NSE 2001). In other words, if the governance structures are 
weak, the risks of private ownership of banks need to be assessed before embarking on large scale 
privatizations.  
Fourth, is the performance of PSBs vis-(cid:224)-vis private sector demonstrably better? The evidence here is 
not conclusive, because comparison is beset with several difficulties. Clearly, old private sector banks 
as a group do not perform well, while new private sector banks show good performance as a group 
better than the PSBs as a group. Given the size and variety of PSBs, it is possible to find banks that 
could equal the good private sector banks as well as bad ones. In addition, PSBs have to reckon the 
(cid:147)legacy(cid:148) problems, such as the non performing assets that they are saddled with. Some PSBs operate 
in relatively backward areas with limited discretion for management to pull out from such areas. The 
question still remains: whether there is a better pay off in enabling PSBs to improve their performance 
while  promoting  private  sector  banks  compared  to  transfer  of  ownership  and  control  from  public  to 
BIS Review 25/2002 
 11
 private sector? Will greater scope for mergers and acquisitions within and between public and private 
sector add to greater efficiency than treating public and private in a watertight manner?  
Finally, what should be the most operationally relevant approach for enhancing governance in PSBs 
recognizing  that  the  extent  of  public  ownership  is  determined  predominantly  by  considerations  of 
political economy while the functioning of institutions could possibly be influenced by techno-economic 
factors. The Indian experience so far, including identified agenda for debtate, seems to indicate that, 
clear cut  demarcation of responsibilities of various institutions and participants is critical since (cid:147)joint 
family  approach(cid:148)  needs  to  be  ended  with  friendly  but  amicable  (cid:147)partition(cid:148)  of  assets,  liabilities  and 
activities.  This  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  transparency  in  dealing  with  each  other  and  proper 
accounting  of  transactions  which  would  be  significantly  in  the  areas  of  managerial  reporting  and 
financial  accounting.  Simultaneously,  checks  and  balances  should  be  consciously  put  in  place  to 
replace the tradition of all pervading bureaucratic coordination.  
In brief, central bank has a developmental role even in the period of reform but it is a different type of 
role, namely not directly financing development but help develop systems, institutions and procedures 
to enable a paradigm shift in public policy and in the process enhance corporate governance also in 
PSBs, in particular. While legislative changes are necessary for an enduring improvement in corporate 
governance  and  such  legislative  changes  are  not  easy  to  effect  in  a  democratic  multi-party 
Parliamentary  system,  it  is  reassuring  to  observe  that  significant  improvements  in  corporate 
governance  in  the  Indian  financial  sector  are  being  effected  even  within  the  existing  legislative 
framework. 
12 
 BIS Review 25/2002
