 Willem F Duisenberg: International Charlemagne Prize of Aachen for 2002 
Acceptance  speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Aachen, 
9 May 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
For  the  first  time,  the  Charlemagne  Prize  Association  has  decided  to  honour  not  an  individual  or  a 
group of persons, but an object. You have chosen to pay tribute to "the euro – our money".  
For more than a decade now, monetary union has been a focus of public attention and a major issue 
of  public  debate.  The  depth  of  feeling  generated  by  the  euro,  whether  enthusiasm  or  hostility,  has 
been far greater than what we are used to in this typically unglamorous field of economic management 
that is monetary policy.  
In fact, a lot of the attention gained by the euro was and is directed not so much at the currency itself, 
but more at the underlying political vision, of which it has become the symbol. By accepting today the 
Charlemagne Prize on behalf of the euro, I would like to pass on the credit for it to those who forged 
that vision of Europe and turned it into reality. Among them were Helmut Kohl and François Mitterand, 
who jointly won this prize in 1988. 
The vision of a united Europe was born, let us not forget, from a desire for peace and prosperity in a 
continent which was so often divided by internecine conflict, and which embroiled the rest of the world 
in two wars within two generations.  
It would be inaccurate to say that the vision of a united Europe was born solely out of the horrors of 
the First and Second World Wars. It existed long beforehand. But significantly, it was from these two 
conflicts that the founding fathers of the current process of European integration found the strength to 
succeed  where  earlier  visionaries  had 
the  1920s,  an  Austrian  diplomat,  Count 
Coudenhove-Kalergi,  emerged  as  the  founder  of  the European  movement.  He  remarked  that  "even 
more than a common history, it is a common destiny that makes the union of the people of Europe a 
necessity".  Incidentally,  and  unsurprisingly,  he  went  on  to  become  the  first  person  to  receive  the 
Charlemagne Prize. And as Aristide Briand, the French statesman, later pointed out, it is the mutual 
vulnerability  of  the  people  of  Europe  –  if  only  because  of  the  geography  of  our  continent  –  which 
creates the conditions for solidarity, and the pressing need for mutual confidence.  
This, in essence, was the message conveyed by Robert Schuman exactly 52 years ago today, in his 
famous  declaration  that  led  to  the  creation  of  the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community  and  that 
historians generally recognise as the starting point of the process of European integration. L'Europe – 
these are the words of Schuman – ne se fera pas d'un coup, ni dans une construction d'ensemble. 
Elle se fera par  des réalisations concrètes, créant  d'abord  une solidarité de fait. Europe  will not be 
made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements, which 
create a de facto solidarity.  
How the euro contributes to this solidarity – perhaps more than any other achievement so far – is what 
I'd like to reflect on first of all.  
failed. 
In 
A social contract 
What is money? Economists know that money is defined by the functions it performs, as a means of 
exchange, a unit of account and a store of value. But, just as importantly, money is also defined by the 
community for whom it performs these functions. Because it is an economic instrument for each of its 
users, it is also a political and cultural bond between them. Consider this simple fact: we engage in an 
exchange of goods and services everyday by using money as the means of exchange; and we offer 
our labour in exchange for money, which, in itself, has no value. We only do this because we believe 
that  we  will, in turn, be able to exchange that money for more goods or services. This fact tells us 
much  about  the  confidence  that  we  place  in  money  itself.  And  it  tells  us  much  more  about  the 
confidence that we place in each other. Hence, money is, in essence, a social contract. 
The euro, probably more than any other currency, represents the mutual confidence at the heart of our 
community.  It  is  the  first  currency  that  has  not  only  severed  its  link  to  gold,  but  also  its  link  to  the 
BIS Review 30/2002 
 1
 nation-state. It is not backed by the durability of the metal or by the authority of the state. Indeed, what 
Sir Thomas More said of gold five hundred years ago – that it was made for men and that it had its 
value by them – applies very well to the euro. 
Every currency is a symbol of the community it serves. It is a symbol of the society as a whole, but 
also  represents  the  political  and  cultural  bonds  between  the  members  of  that  society.  Surely  this 
uniting  power  must  have  been  felt  –  I  am  even  tempted  to  say,  physically  –  by  those  who  have 
travelled from one euro area country to another this year.  
From single market to single currency 
It is not enough to say that the euro is the symbol of a large European community. As a matter of fact, 
the introduction of the euro also goes back to the economic interests that it materialises. In line with 
the  functionalist  approach  to  European  integration  taken  by  Schuman  and  Monnet,  the  broader 
European vision was to be achieved by embarking upon economic integration first. 
In 1957, when the European Economic Community was established, its objective was to establish the 
free circulation of goods, services, capital and labour. This was achieved, after the ratification of the 
European Single Act in 1986, with the creation of the Single Market in 1993.  
The four markets for goods and services, capital and labour are exactly those that money serves. It is 
their boundaries that define the area within which money serves the public as a means of exchange, a 
unit  of  account  and  a  store  of  value.  Seen  from  this  perspective,  the  conclusion  seems  natural:  if 
money  is a  public  good at the  level of the Single  Market, then  it is  at that same level that a single 
currency  should  be  established.  In  the  context  of  the  Single  Market,  the  establishment  of  a  single 
currency was the way to ensure that citizens would benefit in full from all the functions of money. Far 
from removing money from people, monetary union has given it back to them. 
A second contract 
That the euro has economic origins does not reduce its significance as a social contract. However, its 
success as a social contract is only possible because it is rooted in a second accord, a constitutional 
contract, between the citizens who own it and the institution to which they have assigned the task of 
protecting it. 
The recognition that the management of the currency, being a policy function, requires a constitutional 
backing is not exactly new. In 1360, the French bishop and philosopher Nicolas Oresme was among 
the first to successfully argue that money did not belong to the state, but to "the community and [to] 
each of its members". 
One can only give credit to the architects of the Maastricht Treaty. They recognised the need for the 
functions  of money  to  be  provided  at  EU  level.  The  architects  of  the  Treaty  also  understood  that  a 
single currency can only fulfil its monetary functions and its role as an integrating force so long as it 
retains its value. Therefore, they drew up a solid monetary constitution to protect those functions and 
its stability.  
The chapter of the Treaty referring to money, in essence, is a contract binding the people of Europe to 
their monetary authority. Like any contract, it contains five elements. 
Firstly,  the  definition  of  the  interest  at  stake,  which  is  to  provide  the  economy  and  society  with  a 
medium that performs in a reliable and sustainable fashion the three functions of money. In one word, 
the purpose of the contract is to preserve the integrity of the currency. 
Secondly, the contract establishes the institution entrusted with that mission, which is, of course, the 
European Central Bank and the central banks of the countries of the euro area, jointly referred to as 
the Eurosystem.  
Thirdly, the contract specifies that the primary objective of the central bank is the maintenance of price 
stability  –  which  is  also  the  benchmark  of  its  success.  The  central  bank  is  accountable  for  this 
objective  above  all  others.  The  consensus  on  this  fundamental  point  is  derived  from  academic 
research and empirical experience over many decades. It is generally accepted that unless the central 
bank succeeds in maintaining price stability, there is little else it can contribute  to economic growth 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2002
 and prosperity. In this respect, the euro has contributed both to the solidarity, and to the stability, of the 
community it serves. 
The Maastricht Treaty likewise defines the tools with which the central bank carries out its mission – 
notably, its independence – as well as the constraints within which it operates. 
But no contract would be complete without a specification of the responsibilities of its signatories, and 
procedures  for monitoring  the  fulfilment  of  the  contract.  The Treaty  also  meets these  concerns.  My 
colleagues on the Executive Board of the ECB and myself regularly report to the European Parliament 
– and through it to the general public – on our policy. Via this channel and via the regular reports we 
issue on our activities, people can judge for themselves if we are fulfilling the contractual obligations 
and preserving the integrity of their money.  
The  legitimacy  and  credibility  of  the  constitutional  contract  that  underpins  the  euro  also  rely  on  the 
contract's durability. No contract could inspire confidence if its terms were to change constantly.  
Since I mentioned Nicolas Oresme as an early theorist of the constitutional nature of money, I will also 
quote his words on this matter, to which, 640 years later, I can entirely subscribe: "Moneta debet esse 
quasi quaedam lex et quaedam ordinatio firma". Money must be as solid as a law. This applies to the 
constitutional value of money as well as to its economic value. It was wise, therefore, that the drafters 
of the Treaty chose to make the monetary constitution of Europe not only solid, but the most solid in 
the world, in the sense that it is possibly the most difficult to alter. 
Towards a third contract 
We know that such a bold step as the single currency was conceived as part of a wider process of 
uniting  Europe  not  only  economically  but  also  politically.  Today,  a  new  path  is  being  explored:  the 
Convention on the Future of Europe has been established. Its task is to make proposals on furthering 
the construction of a united Europe as well as on streamlining and democratising the structure of the 
Union.  
If it succeeds in this task, the Convention will help to complement the existing economic constitution 
with effective and transparent political structures and processes. In the same way that the economic 
constitution,  because  it  is  based  on  sound  principles,  is  capable  of  meeting  the  challenges  of  the 
future, so will Europe as a whole be better equipped to meet its citizens' expectations. So will Europe 
as a whole be better able to meet the challenges it faces, be they from within or from without, and to 
assume the international responsibilities commensurate with its size and its importance. We may ask 
what we can expect from the Convention in our main field of interest and responsibility, safeguarding 
the value of our currency. When quoting Nicolas Oresme, I already implicitly gave my view. I consider 
the  existing  economic  constitution,  as  set  down  in  the  present  Treaties,  to  be,  on  the  whole, 
satisfactory,  based  on  sound  principles  and  capable  of  meeting  the  challenges  of  the  future.  In 
particular, this applies to the fundamental features of monetary union and the ESCB, the elements of 
the monetary contract I just referred to.  
Conclusion 
Since the monetary chapter of the constitution, at least, has been completed, let me also bring my 
remarks to a conclusion: 
For more than ten years, the euro – as a goal – has crystallised hopes and fears, and has attracted 
praise and criticism, not only in relation to the prospect of a single currency but also in relation to the 
entire  process  of  European  integration.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  was  a  momentous  event  for 
Europe, made possible because of the two contracts I have been talking about.  
The first, money itself, is the contract that creates ties between the people of the euro area – and also 
forges links with all other users of the euro, wherever they may be. Even though the euro has formally 
existed for more than three years, the reality of this contract has only been fully understood with the 
arrival of euro banknotes and coins. The banknotes, in their own way, are a physical manifestation of 
the social contract that is money. Thus, the euro is the symbol of the European Union, understood as 
a community of people. 
BIS Review 30/2002 
 3
 The second contract is the constitutional contract that binds the central bank – the European Central 
Bank – to the people of Europe. The banknotes are a physical manifestation of that contract too, and 
my signature on them bears witness to that fact.  
My final words, dear President Ciampi, are addressed to you and are of a more personal nature.  
Some 50 years ago, one of your predecessors as Governor of the Banca d'Italia and as President of 
the Italian Republic was Luigi Einaudi. He had already foreseen, back in the 1920s, the threats posed 
to peace, and even to civilisation, by a divided and mutually hostile group of countries. He advocated a 
united Europe. And during the Second World War, while in exile in Switzerland, he wrote with great 
prescience that a single market and a single currency were the way to rebuild Europe.  
You, President Ciampi, have built on his legacy. In word and deed you have clearly demonstrated your 
belief in monetary union, your European credentials and your commitment to a united continent.  
Let us hope that Europe continues along this path of unity, and will follow it to the end. 
I thank you for your attention – and, of course, on behalf of our single currency, the euro – I thank the 
Charlemagne Prize Association for this prize.  
4 
 BIS Review 30/2002
