 John Hurley: The development and outlook for the financial services industry 
in Ireland 
Speech  by  Mr  John  Hurley,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Third  Annual  Finance 
Dublin Conference, Dublin, 9 April 2002.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 Introduction 
It is a great privilege for me to come before you for the first time as Governor of the Central Bank. 
Having already attended two meetings of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank after 
only  four  weeks  in  office,  I  think  I  can  safely  say  that  the  job  is  certainly  a  very  interesting  and 
challenging one. During the course of this talk I will discuss the contribution of the financial services 
industry to the domestic economy, its competitive position and the regulatory structure within which it 
operates. I will also comment briefly on the forthcoming Single Regulator Bill.  
Contribution of financial services to the economy 
As you know, the financial services industry plays a vital role in the Irish economy, directly employing 
about  50,000  people  with  thousands  more  being  employed  in  related  areas  such  as  legal, 
accountancy  and  other  services.  The  industry  accounts  for  around  8½%  of  GDP  and  directly 
contributes about €3.6 billion to the economy in wages paid to employees and in spending on goods 
and services. The development of the International Financial Services Centre led to a huge increase in 
financial activity and ensured Ireland’s place on the map as a premier league financial services centre. 
It also added to the range of financial services activities carried out in Ireland and provided a basis for 
the phenomenal growth of the collective investment scheme industry. Direct employment in the IFSC 
now stands at around 11,000.  
Spring Bulletin 
I am glad to say that Ireland’s financial system continues to be robust. Indeed, the health of the overall 
economy  is itself one  of the most important leading indicators of the health of the financial system. 
Throughout  the  1990’s  the  competitive  position  of  the  Irish  economy  improved  steadily  with  strong 
growth in productivity accompanied by moderate wage increases and generally favourable exchange 
rate developments. However, during the second quarter of 2001, there was a significant downturn in 
manufacturing output per person which continued throughout the remainder of the year. As the Bank 
has pointed out in its most recent Bulletin, this slowdown in output growth coupled with a continued 
acceleration of wages and other costs began to erode Ireland’s competitive position. Our Bulletin also 
warned of a further loss in competitiveness which seems in prospect for 2002. This will have knock-on 
effects  throughout  the  various  sectors  of  the  economy  and  would  be  exacerbated  if  there  were  a 
substantial appreciation of the euro. So far as those financial entities operating out of the IFSC are 
concerned, while they are not generally dependent on the domestic economy, but on the international 
economy  as  their  source  of  business,  they  must remain  internationally  competitive. While  there  are 
signs of a global recovery, a clear focus on competitiveness is critical to ensure that financial services 
continue to contribute significantly to the overall economy.  
Objectives of prudential supervision 
We are often reminded that one of the advantages of doing financial business out of Ireland is that it is 
a  well  regulated  environment.  Indeed,  specific  legislation  was  introduced  in  1989  to  ensure  that  all 
entities located in the IFSC could be supervised.  
Supervision plays a significant role in ensuring the safety of depositors’ funds. Accordingly, in line with 
international practice, the Bank’s supervisory approach is to set parameters within which risk should 
BIS Review 24/2002 
 1
 be contained. It is, of course, impossible to entirely eliminate risk without stifling competition, unduly 
damaging innovation and efficiency and incurring prohibitive costs.  
However, to contain risks as much as possible, the Bank’s prudential supervision system includes a 
comprehensive  and  rigorous  authorisation  process  and  a  system  of  ongoing  supervision  which 
includes both quantitative and qualitative measures. The principle quantitative measures for banks are 
requirements relating to minimum capital and liquidity levels, large exposures to individual borrowers 
or to an associated group of borrowers, lending to connected parties (e.g. directors) and to individual 
economic sectors, concentration of deposits and acquisitions by banks of other entities, or by other 
entities of banks. The calculation of minimum capital takes account of the risks arising from exposures 
to foreign exchange rate and interest rate movements. Many of these measures are also relevant for 
larger non-bank firms. For other firms, the emphasis is more specifically tailored to the nature of their 
business  and,  where  appropriate,  requirements  in  relation  to  client  money  are  included  in  the 
quantitative  techniques.  Qualitative  assessment  is  by  its  nature  more  subjective.  However,  an 
informed  basis 
its 
implementation, is provided by having access to an institution’s books, records and key personnel at 
regular review meetings and in the course of on-site inspections. Access on a regular basis to detailed 
financial  data  on  each  supervised  institution  also  represents  a  powerful  tool  to  support  qualitative 
assessments.  
judgements,  particularly  as  regards  corporate  policy  and 
for  qualitative 
Development of the supervisory area 
The Bank is continuously reassessing and adjusting its supervisory model to ensure that it remains 
efficient and effective and it has obviously been an area which has received a lot of my attention in my 
first weeks: you could say that I have had a somewhat concentrated learning experience.  
The Bank’s supervisory function has been expanding at a very rapid rate in recent years. In 1995, the 
supervision function comprised two departments with a total staff of 64. Today the staff complement is 
approaching  220  and  is  organised  in  five  departments.  A  Financial  Services  Policy  Committee  has 
been established to ensure co-ordination amongst the various Supervision Departments. The Bank is 
now  responsible  for  the  regulation  of  banks,  stockbrokers,  collective  investment  schemes,  larger 
investment  firms  and  investment  and  insurance  intermediaries.  The  Bank  has  also  reorganised  its 
supervisory  functions  because  of  our  increased  involvement  with  the  retail  sector  and  is  putting 
increasing  emphasis  on  consumer  protection  and  education.  Most  recently,  the  Bank  assumed 
responsibility  for  the  supervision  of  around  2,500  insurance  intermediaries,  which  represented  an 
almost  fivefold  increase  in  the  number  of  investment  firms  regulated  by  the  Bank.  The  cost  of  the 
supervisory  function  now  comprises  nearly  half  the  total  costs  of  the  non-currency  activities  of  the 
Bank.  This  exponential  rate  of  growth  of  functions  has  resulted  in  a  steep  learning  curve  for  all 
concerned.  
In recent years, the Bank has also been attempting to increase the skills mix of professional regulators 
and  staff  have  been  recruited  from  various  backgrounds  including  the  Garda  fraud  squad,  the 
insurance  and  collective  investment  scheme  sectors  and  the  market  risk  area.  These  skills 
complemented  those  of  our  existing  professional  regulators  who  had  backgrounds  in  accountancy, 
economics and law.  
Other  areas  where  there  have  been  recent  innovations  include:  the  introduction  of  new  codes  of 
conduct and practice both for the banking industry and for retail intermediaries which provide for the 
disclosure of relevant information to customers; the refinement of the application form for directors and 
managers which assists the Bank in assessing the competence and probity of persons proposed for 
those  positions;  refinement  of  detailed  rules  relating  to  the  handling  of  client  assets;  the  increase 
(insofar  as  the  law  permits)  of  communication  channels  with  various  relevant  bodies  including  the 
Revenue  Commissioners,  the  Director  of  Consumer  Affairs,  the  Competition  Authority,  and  the 
Director of Corporate Enforcement; the continuation of stress-testing for credit institutions to explore 
their  ability  to  withstand  economic  shocks;  increased  communication  with  auditors  of  regulated 
entities; and, the improvement of the authorisation  process for collective investment schemes. I will 
elaborate a little on the last three points.  
2 
 BIS Review 24/2002
 Stress tests  
The potential risks to the global and domestic economies raise the question of the degree to which the 
Irish  financial  system  could  weather  a  sharp  decline  in  economic  activity.  The  Bank’s  most  recent 
stress  test  postulated  a  scenario  where  there  was  a  major  drop  in  growth,  a  significant  increase  in 
unemployment  and  a  sharp  fall  in  house  prices.  I  hasten  to  add  that  the  Bank  was  in  no  way 
forecasting such events but was merely testing the robustness of the banking system at the extreme. 
Of  course,  a  collapse  on  this  scale  would  cause  a  significant  decline  in  asset  value,  resulting  in  a 
sharp  rise  in  estimates  of  non-performing  loans.  Nevertheless,  the  exercise  suggested  that  the 
solvency and liquidity of the banking system could be maintained in the face of a significant adverse 
shock. This reflects the strong solvency and liquidity position of the Irish banking system, which would 
allow a decline in solvency ratios without a breach of regulatory limits.  
I have to add a word of caution in relation to stress tests. They are mechanical in nature and are likely 
to  miss  some  of  the  important  dynamics  involved  in  episodes  of  financial  fragility.  Notwithstanding 
these limitations, stress test are a vitally important supervisory tool.  
Communication with auditors 
The Bank is continuing to develop its relationship with external auditors and a Liaison Group has now 
been established to ensure effective communication between the Bank and the relevant accountancy 
bodies.  There  was  advanced  consultation  with  the  Bank  in  relation  to  the  development  of  auditing 
guidance for auditors of banks and the same process will take place in relation to auditing guidance for 
other firms regulated by the Bank. The Bank is represented on the interim board of the Irish Auditing 
and  Accountancy  Supervisory  Authority  (IAASA),  which  will  supervise  the  self  regulation  of  the 
accountancy  profession.  The  Bank  is  also  represented  on  the  Accountancy  Foundation  in  the  UK 
which is responsible for the regulation of the accountancy profession. Finally, as part of its regulatory 
process the Bank is engaging in a series of trilateral meetings with auditors and credit institutions in 
order to discuss matters of mutual interest.  
Authorisation of collective investment schemes 
The Bank has been working closely with the funds industry with a view to increasing the efficiency with 
which funds are authorised, without compromising regulatory standards. The intention is to streamline 
the authorisation process by eliminating duplication, standardising industry documentation, identifying 
applications,  which  can  be  fast  tracked  and  ultimately  reducing  the  timescale  from  concept  to  final 
authorisation. We hope to finalise a position paper on this matter in the coming weeks.  
Allfirst 
The  system  of  regulation  continues  to  be  refined  and  honed  in  the  light  of  experience.  From  a 
regulatory  perspective,  the  events  at  Allfirst  were  a  sharp  and  timely  reminder  of  how  international 
prudential  issues  and  globalisation  have  the  potential  for  contagion  back  to  this  country  and  of  the 
importance of prudential supervision in safeguarding the interests of depositors, which is at the heart 
of the Central Bank’s regulatory structure.  
The Bank has already expressed its serious concern at the failure of controls which allowed events at 
Allfirst  to  unfold.  I  have  written  to  the  Chairpersons  of  all  credit  institutions  reminding  them  of  their 
obligation to ensure that risks are controlled and managed to best international standards. I have also 
asked  them  to  arrange  for  an  independent  verification  of  their  institution’s  risk  management  and 
control  systems  with  particular  emphasis  on  the  management  of  the  relationship  between  parent 
institutions  and  foreign  subsidiaries.  We  are  working  with  the  accountancy  firms  and  the  banking 
industry to define more clearly the terms and scope of these examinations.  
The Bank is continuing to work closely with the US Federal Reserve to finalise the investigation of the 
events at Allfirst. Of course, there are lessons to be learnt from this matter but at this point it is too 
early  to  draw  any  final  conclusions.  The  Bank  will  make  whatever  further  adjustments  it  considers 
appropriate to its regulatory regime to reduce the likelihood of a similar incident recurring.  
In addition, the Bank is reviewing its relationship with the regulators of parents and subsidiaries of Irish 
authorised institutions to identify any areas which need to be strengthened in light of the Allfirst affair.  
BIS Review 24/2002 
 3
 Single regulatory authority 
I welcome the Minister’s indication earlier today that the new Regulatory Bill will be published shortly. 
The  Bill  will  give  flesh  to  the  Government’s  decision  last  year,  that  the  Single  Regulatory  Authority 
would  be  situated  within  a  restructured  Central  Bank.  In  my  previous  role  in  the  Department  of 
Finance, I was only too well aware of what a difficult and complex piece of legislation this proved to be 
in  the  drafting.  On  behalf  of  myself  and  my  new  colleagues  in  the  Bank,  I  must  say  that  we  look 
forward  to  seeing  the  Bill  published  and  progressed  through  the  legislative  process  and  also  to 
beginning the work of implementation. This will be no small task but we will do our utmost to ensure a 
smooth transition, with as little disruption as possible.  
However,  since  the  key  concern  of  any  customer  of  a  financial  entity  must  be  to  ensure  that  their 
assets  are  safe,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  new  legislation  will  ensure  that  the  system  of  prudential 
regulation and co-ordination of financial stability matters, should further enhance the regulatory system 
which already is highly regarded internationally.  
If we look back only to 1990, the Central Bank’s regulatory responsibility extended to some 50 credit 
institutions. Over a dozen years, this responsibility has grown to cover almost 3000 diverse financial 
entities  and  a  further  3000  collective  investment  schemes.  The  new  Bill  will  add  further  to  these 
numbers. This will pose additional challenges for the Bank and indeed for me personally. I am looking 
forward  to  overseeing  the  successful  implementation  of  the  new  legislation  and  to  working  with  all 
interested parties to ensure that we achieve the best possible outcome. If my first four weeks in office 
are  anything  to  go  by,  I  can  expect  a  very  interesting  and  challenging  period  as  Governor  of  the 
Central Bank. During my time as Governor, I also hope to get to know a lot of you better than I do 
today.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2002
