 Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F. Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
23 January 2002 
 Before starting my presentation, allow me, Mrs. Randzio-Plath, to congratulate you on your re-election 
as chairwoman of this committee. I am looking forward indeed to continuing the co-operation with you 
and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in the same open and constructive spirit that 
has always marked our regular exchanges of views. 
Just over three weeks ago, we witnessed a historic moment: the euro, first introduced on 1 January 
1999  and  successfully  used  for  non-cash  operations  both  within  the  euro  area  and  on  international 
financial  markets  for  the  past  three  years,  became  tangible  reality.  On  1  January  2002,  the  euro 
banknotes and coins became legal tender in the euro area and are now a visible symbol of Europe's 
identity. Indeed, paying with a single currency in daily transactions throughout the euro area can be 
regarded as an achievement of historic proportions as well as a major step forward in the process of 
European integration. 
Review of the euro cash changeover 
1.  
Today,  some  three  weeks  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  I  am  pleased  to 
report to you that the cash changeover has so far progressed very smoothly, better than we expected. 
Some minor mishaps have occurred here and there, and some may yet occur, but this is quite normal 
for such a massive operation, involving - in the 12 euro area countries alone - more than 300 million 
people. 
The completion of the changeover has been a complex, ambitious and unprecedented undertaking. In 
addition  to  the  EU  institutions,  the  Eurosystem  and  national  authorities,  it  was  essential  to  closely 
involve the banking sector and security carriers, as well as retailers and the cash-operated machine 
industry,  in  the  preparations  at  an  early  stage,  as  a  smooth  changeover,  in  a  short  period  of  time, 
could  only  be  achieved  through  a  systematic  and  co-ordinated  interaction  on  the  part  of  all  leading 
actors. It required organisational, logistical, technical and economic efforts by all parties involved in the 
use and handling of banknotes and coins. At the end of the day, however, the success of the euro 
cash changeover also depended on a favourable attitude of and swift acceptance by all citizens. And, 
indeed, the European citizens have accepted their new currency rapidly and with enthusiasm, which 
can be considered as a clear signal in favour of a more integrated Europe. 
I  should  like  to  take  the  opportunity  here  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  European  citizens  and  all 
parties involved in the changeover for their efforts and their fruitful collaboration with the Eurosystem 
over the years. 
Just to flag some of the efforts made: by the end of 2001, more than 6.5 billion euro banknotes worth 
some  EUR  133  billion  and  amounting  to  almost  50%  of  national  banknote  circulation  had  been 
frontloaded. With regard to the euro coins, more than 37.5 billion coins with a total value of around 
EUR 12.4 billion had been frontloaded. Overall, citizens acquired more than 150 million coin starter 
kits. At the beginning of this week, around 8.1 billion euro banknotes were in circulation, which is more 
than 90% of the number of euro banknotes that had initially been estimated for the end of February 
2002. In terms of value, this corresponds to approximately EUR 209 billion, which is equivalent to 77% 
of national banknotes circulation at the end of 2001. 
In  total,  the  legacy  currency  banknotes  in  circulation  declined  in  2001  by  EUR  110  billion  to  EUR 
270 billion at the end of the year. Since the beginning of 2002, this figure has come down by 51% to 
EUR 133 billion last Monday. The euro progress ratio, which calculates the value of euro banknotes in 
circulation  divided  by  the  total  value  of  euro  and  national  banknotes  in  circulation,  was  61%  on 
21 January 2002, up from 33% on 1 January 2002.  
Given that, in terms of transactions, around 70% of all banknotes are put into circulation via automated 
teller  machines  (ATMs),  the  quick  adaptation  of  these  machines  was  one  of  the  key  factors  for  a 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 1
 smooth changeover. In total, more than 200,000 ATMs had to be converted. In virtually all euro area 
countries, 100% of the ATMs were converted within less than one week. 
As  a  result,  on  average,  75%  of  all  cash  transactions  were  already  effected  in  euro  after  only  one 
week. Naturally, this figure varied from country to country and from sector to sector. On the whole, the 
euro  banknotes  and  coins  were  introduced  considerably  faster  than  originally  foreseen,  not  least 
because of the favourable attitude of and quick acceptance by European citizens. Today, even though 
the technical adaptation of the vending machines has not yet been completed, the cash changeover 
can  be  considered  to  have  been  completed  from  the  consumers'  point  of  view,  since  practically  all 
face-to-face cash transactions are being conducted in euro. 
More  than  80%  of  the  10  million  vending  machines  have  been  adapted,  which  indicates  that  this 
process is taking place at a slightly slower pace than the changeover in general. This may cause some 
local problems whenever national coins are no longer in active circulation. 
With regard to counterfeiting, all euro counterfeits reported so far have been of very poor quality. Thus 
far, no counterfeits have been found in central bank sorting operations. 
Finally, I should like to inform you that the changeover has also been smooth and is progressing well 
outside  the  euro  area.  The  euro  banknotes  were  received  positively,  especially  in  the  accession 
countries, and euro banknotes are now available in banks and "bureaux de change" outside the euro 
area.  With  regard  to  the  frontloading  of  central  banks  outside  the  euro  area,  I  should  mention  that 
26 central  banks,  mainly  in  central  and  eastern  Europe,  the  Mediterranean  area  and  in  Africa, 
requested to be frontloaded with euro cash. The total value of the euro banknotes provided to these 
central banks and to wholesale banks outside the euro area amounted to some EUR 4 billion. 
Economic and monetary developments 
2.  
Let me now turn to economic and monetary developments and our assessment of the outlook for price 
stability in the euro area in the medium term. Overall, there has been little change in our assessment 
since my last testimony to this Committee on 18 December 2001. 
Starting with the analysis under the first pillar of the ECB's monetary policy strategy, we have seen 
continued strong growth in M3 in the period up to November. The strong short-term dynamics of M3 
over  the  autumn  of  2001  seem  mainly  to  be  related  to  a  particularly  marked  preference  for  liquid 
holdings  by  euro  area  investors  in  the  context  of  the  worldwide  economic  uncertainty  following  the 
terrorist attacks of 11 September. To the extent that these developments are of a temporary nature, 
monetary  developments  can  be  considered  not  to  indicate  future  inflationary  pressures  at  present. 
However, if not reversed, the recent building up of liquidity could call for a re-assessment of monetary 
developments in the coming months, especially at a time when the euro area economy recovers. 
Regarding the analysis under the second pillar of our strategy, recent information has confirmed our 
earlier assessment that economic activity in the euro area was weak in the second half of 2001 and 
will probably remain so in early 2002. At the same time, there has been some evidence in late 2001 
that supports the likelihood of a gradual economic recovery materialising in the course of 2002. 
Starting  with  external  developments,  there  have  been  some  incipient  signs  of  stabilisation  in  the 
outlook for growth at the global level. However, uncertainty remains high and some recently released 
data still provide mixed signals and do not yet point firmly to an imminent acceleration in economic 
activity. 
In the euro area itself, recent survey data suggest that the decline in confidence may have bottomed 
out and that, notwithstanding the uncertainty about a turning point, economic activity may be firming. 
Developments in financial markets could be seen as supporting this view. 
One of the main reasons for expecting a recovery in economic activity in the course of 2002 is the lack 
of fundamental economic imbalances in the euro area which would require a long correction process. 
Furthermore,  financial  conditions  are  favourable  at  present,  and  higher  growth  in  real  disposable 
incomes  as  a  consequence  of  the  expected  decline  in  consumer  price  inflation  should  support 
domestic demand. Yet, while recent data have confirmed the expectation of a gradual recovery of the 
euro  area  economy  this  year,  the  timing  and  strength  of  this  upturn  remain  uncertain.  Therefore, 
continued close monitoring of further incoming information is warranted. 
In  the  current  economic  environment,  medium-term  upward  pressures  on  inflation  are  not  likely  to 
materialise.  Annual  consumer  price  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 Prices (HICP), has declined steadily over the past few months and stood at close to 2% in December 
2001. This reflects the unwinding of past increases in energy prices and, albeit to a lesser extent, in 
food  prices.  Recent  information  on  producer  prices  supports  the  view  that  the  decline  in  consumer 
price inflation will continue in the course of 2002. In the months to come, however, the path of HICP 
inflation might turn to be somewhat erratic on account of base effects related to developments in the 
HICP  in  early  2001.  For  this  reason,  the  possibility  of  some  short-lived  upward  movements  in  the 
annual  rate  of  inflation  cannot  be  ruled  out.  This  should  not,  however,  be  a  cause  for  concern. 
Likewise,  downward  shifts  resulting  from  such  base  effects  later  in  the  spring  should  not  signal  a 
change in the longer-term outlook for price stability. 
There has been much talk in the media and the public about whether the cash changeover will lead to 
higher  prices  in  the  euro  area.  Obviously,  many  prices  have  been  rounded  to  new  psychologically 
attractive prices in recent weeks. But, according to all the evidence we have so far, rounding has been 
in both directions, up and down. However, some uncertainty still surrounds this assessment. Although 
a definitive picture will only materialise in the period ahead, there are good reasons to expect that the 
cash changeover will not have any significant effect on the general price level in the short term, as 
there  is  strong  competition  in  the  euro  area  retail  sector.  In  addition,  consumers  and  consumer 
associations have been  very vigilant  in  pointing  out  attempts to increase  prices  in the phase  of the 
cash changeover. Furthermore, the current economic environment limits the scope for price increases 
at the retail level. Moreover, the governments have committed themselves not to increase the average 
level  of  administered  prices  in  the  context  of  the  cash  changeover.  Finally,  we  should  also  bear  in 
mind that the cash changeover enhances price transparency across the euro area countries, thereby 
strengthening  price  competition  in  the  euro  area.  This  could,  over  the  longer  term,  even  lead  to 
downward price movements. 
Overall, on the basis of current information, annual inflation rates should fall safely below 2% this year 
and remain at levels consistent with price stability in the foreseeable future. Against this background, 
the Governing Council concluded at its meeting on 3 January that the economic situation is developing 
in line with the forward-looking interest rate decisions taken last year and that it considers the current 
level of ECB interest rates to be appropriate for the maintenance of price stability over the medium 
term. 
I should like to stress, however, that the expectation of a favourable outlook for inflation in the medium 
term  is  dependent  on  the  continuation  of  wage  moderation  in  the  euro  area.  Excessive  wage 
increases in the forthcoming wage negotiations would represent a source of concern. It is therefore of 
utmost  importance  to  recall  the  key  role  played  by  wage  moderation  in  fostering  employment  and 
maintaining a favourable outlook for price stability. 
Turning to fiscal policies, it is important that Member States maintain a medium-term perspective in 
compliance  with  the  framework  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  While  the  current  weakness  in 
economic  growth  presents  a  particular  challenge  for  those  countries  which  have  not  yet  attained 
budgetary  positions  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  or  which  have  high  public  debt-to-GDP  ratios, 
adherence  to  their  medium-term  objectives  will  strengthen  consumer  and  investor  confidence. 
Countries without fiscal imbalances can, of course, allow automatic stabilisers to operate in full. That 
said, however, there is no case for fiscal activism. There is considerable evidence showing that fiscal 
policy  can  only  contribute  little,  if  anything,  to  stabilising  economic  activity,  given  the  lags  in  the 
decision-making process and the time needed to fully affect economic activity. Furthermore, it should 
be borne in mind that the possible short-term benefits resulting form the conduct of an activist fiscal 
policy may be outweighed by developments in long-term interest rates which might react adversely to 
the risks of a worsening in fiscal prospects. 
At  this  stage,  and  in  view  of  the  still  high  level  of  structural  unemployment  in  the  euro  area,  it  is 
important to recall that the key challenge for the euro area remains the improvement of the conditions 
for further expanding the production potential. Substantial progress in the field of structural reforms is 
essential  to  strengthen  the  productive  forces  in  the  economy.  This  requires  an  acceleration  and 
deepening of structural reforms in the labour and product markets in order to provide economic agents 
with  the  proper  incentives,  as  well  as  fostering  technological  innovation.  Furthermore,  governments 
should  pursue  determined  reforms  with  regard  to  the  size  and  structure  of  public  expenditure  and 
revenue, also in order to create room for further tax cuts and to absorb the fiscal costs of population 
ageing. 
With the introduction of euro banknotes and coins, the process of monetary integration, which started 
ten years ago in Maastricht, has been successfully completed. Now, the main task ahead of us is to 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 3
 continue with resolve the implementation of the structural reforms that are necessary to enhance the 
growth potential of the economy and economic welfare in the euro area. 
I stand now ready to answer your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2002
