 Glenn Stevens: Economic performance and issues in 2002 
Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Industry Group "Economy 2002 - Forecasting Industry Prospects", Sydney, 6 March 2002. 
 Thank you to the Australian Industry Group for an invitation to return to your annual conference. It is a 
pleasure to be here.  
Since this is my third appearance here, I thought it might be useful to give a brief history of the past 
couple of years as a prelude to making some observations about the current state of things, and about 
some of the issues for the year ahead. 
The world economy 
As we all know, the year 2000 was a strong year for global growth. In that year, world GDP rose by 
almost 5 per cent, and growth in the major countries (the G7) ran at about 3½ per cent. This was led 
by the US, which enjoyed a very strong performance through the second half of the 1990s, though the 
growth was not confined to the US, and a number of countries did quite well, including, in particular, 
Australia.  The  Asian  region  generally  recovered  from  the  crisis  of  1997  and  1998,  with  several 
countries riding the global boom in spending on information technology. Japan was perhaps the most 
conspicuous exception, with a very weak performance overall through most of the 1990s – which held 
down the G7 aggregate mentioned above quite noticeably. 
But towards the end of 2000, it began to become clear that a slowing in the US economy, which had 
been  talked  about,  but  not  seen,  for  several  years,  was  finally  beginning  to  occur.  At  that  time, 
expectations were for lower growth in the major economies in 2001 than in the preceding year, but still 
for growth at about average rates. Then, in the early months of 2001, assessments of the health of the 
US economy, and by extension much of the rest of the world, were revised dramatically. For those 
who closely watch the US economy, the bell was rung in early January last year, with a reduction in 
interest rates by the Federal Reserve, undertaken in between their normally scheduled meetings. That 
was  to  be  followed  by  a  sequence  of  policy  changes  which  were  aggressive  compared  with  the 
experience of the preceding decade. 
When we met here about a year ago, then, we were in a period in which expectations were moving 
quickly, both about the international scene and about the Australian economy. Perceptions about the 
world  economy  were  to  worsen  noticeably  in  the  subsequent  months.  Those  about  the  Australian 
economy worsened as well, though not as far, or for as long, as those abroad. It is reasonable to claim 
that sentiment about the Australian economy reached a low point around March-April last year. Since 
then, perceptions have improved, reflecting the actual course of the economy, which has held up well 
given the global downturn. 
Talk of recession in America began to grow, though there was vigorous debate about that for some 
time. By June 2001, the manufacturing sector of the US economy had been contracting for about a 
year.  The  exceptionally  strong  growth  in  demand  for  ITC  products  initially  disguised  the  weakness 
more broadly in manufacturing, but that strength itself faded during 2001. Employment began to fall. 
There was active debate about whether all of this constituted a "recession" in the normal sense of that 
word.  Then  the  events  of  11  September  2001  occurred,  and  ended  that  debate  pretty  quickly. 
Pessimists  and  optimists  alike  revised  down  their  assessments  of  growth  and  worried  about  the 
possibility of a much more pronounced and long-lasting contraction in the US economy. 
To  date,  however,  such  fears  have  not  been  borne  out.  It  is  true  that  there  was  an  initial  shock  to 
confidence in the US. It is also true that the long-term responses to the terrorist events could well be of 
considerable importance for economic performance. Higher costs of security and insurance will have 
to be borne. Ways in which businesses organise themselves, in both the goods and service producing 
sectors in the US, may well change. On top of this, no-one can foretell the way in which the military 
response to terrorism may change the world, either strategically or economically. 
But so far, the path of the US economy we have observed since the attacks has shown remarkably 
little lasting direct impact beyond the initial disruption lasting a few weeks. The financial system was 
quickly  back  in  operation.  Patterns  of  consumer  behaviour  were  apparently  only  affected  briefly. 
BIS Review 15/2002 
 1
 Industrial output, which fell for a year prior to the attacks, looks as though it may have stopped falling 
not long thereafter, a picture corroborated by some important surveys of that sector. There has been a 
recession, according to the US National Bureau of Economic Research, but it was not caused by the 
attacks. That much is clear from the fact that the NBER had the evidence to declare a recession with 
very little post-attack data: it was the data from earlier in the year on which they mostly relied. 
Moreover, if a recession began about March 2001, as the NBER suggests – that is, almost a year ago 
– we would normally expect to see some signs of a turning point getting close by now. The behaviour 
of manufacturing production and orders, inventories, some labour market data, and financial market 
prices are all consistent with that idea. To cap that off, there was of course the news last week that 
real GDP in the final quarter of 2001 rose a little more than had earlier been estimated. 
So it is not surprising that people have recently begun to talk increasingly about the shape of a pick-up 
in US growth. The forecasters polled by Consensus Economics collectively increased their forecasts 
for  US  growth  in  2002  quite  substantially  when  asked  in  February  –  even  prior  to  the  latest  GDP 
revision.  If  what  we  are  seeing  is  indeed  the  first  stage  of  a  recovery,  and  if  it  continues,  then  the 
recession of 2001 will have been very mild indeed by historical standards. 
That itself may well mean that the recovery will be a pretty moderate affair compared with previous 
upswings. There are also one or two apparent imbalances which might slow down a business cycle 
upswing during the coming few quarters. Exceptionally high  levels of business investment in recent 
years raise the question of whether there might be excess capacity in some areas. US equity prices 
remain high by historical standards, and so may be subject to correction. Certainly profitability of US 
corporations appears to be particularly poor at present, which ordinarily is not conducive to expanding 
investment. Some argue that households are financially stretched. How all this will play out remains to 
be seen. Nonetheless, the weight of opinion has recently become more optimistic than it was a few 
months ago, and not without reason. 
An improved US outlook, if it comes to fruition, will be good for other regions of the world. In Asia, we 
can  already  see  signs  of  a  stabilisation  in  industrial  output  after  a  pronounced  contraction  through 
most  of  2001.  This  was  the  effect  back  through  the  supply  chain  of  the  slump  in  the  demand  for 
computer and information technology products last year. While the shape of any pick-up in this area 
remains far from clear, the contraction at least appears to have abated. European growth slowed more 
than anticipated in 2001 – indeed the economies of the Euro zone recorded no more growth than the 
US. Signs of a cyclical turning point are emerging there as well, though again it is early days. Japan, 
as is well known, is another story altogether. Contractionary and deflationary forces have continued, 
and arguably become stronger, in the past year. Restoring Japan to economic health will be a long 
process. 
Were Japan to continue its recent performance, but not be materially worse than that – which seems 
to  be  the  consensus  view  –  growth  in  the  world  economy  in  total  should  start  to  look  up  as  2002 
progresses. Measured on a year average basis, Consensus forecasters suggest that the G7 countries 
will record growth of about 1 per cent in 2002. This number is about the same as for 2001, but as the 
chart below shows, this conceals a more pronounced pick-up in the profile of growth through the year 
– from zero through 2001 to 2½ per cent through 2002. 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2002
 The Australian economy 
Let me turn now to the Australian economy. As I am sure you are well aware, we have been affected 
by  the  global  recession,  through  a  few  channels.  The  most  obvious  one  is  a  reduction  in  export 
growth. Eighteen months ago, export values were growing at 25–30 per cent, with growth in prices and 
underlying  quantities  each  contributing  about  half  of  the  overall  increase.  That  growth  has  stopped 
completely over the most recent year. Parts of the tourism sector have been affected quite badly by 
the decline in international travel and the collapse of Ansett. Australian businesses, especially large 
businesses, look abroad quite actively, and their confidence cannot help but have been affected by the 
unfolding global story. My impression is that, across a wide range of firms, managers have responded 
to  the  threat  of  difficult  times  by  curtailing  discretionary  spending  on  things  like  travel,  advertising, 
consultants  and  the  like.  They  have  also,  one  must  presume,  looked  carefully  at  planned  capital 
expenditure. In addition, the general populace has had a daily diet of reading about the difficulties in 
the US and other countries. 
In light of all this, it is perhaps all the more remarkable that, on the available evidence, the economy 
seems to have recorded  quite reasonable growth through 2001 and,  based on the very  preliminary 
data available, into the early part of 2002. The responses of businesses to surveys suggest that they 
are beginning to increase investment spending again. Consumer confidence is also holding up very 
well. Hence, as best we can judge, the economy is not only continuing to expand, but has reasonable 
prospects of continuing to do so in the near term. 
Nor is this all due to the current strength in the housing sector. This is a point I have made in more 
detail elsewhere, but even stripping out the contribution from housing – which has operated in both 
directions in recent years – we find moderate growth in the economy over the past couple of years, of 
the order of 2½ per cent. In the past twelve months at least, this compares well with outcomes in the 
US, Europe, Japan and much of Asia. It is slower, of course, than the 4–5 per cent growth of 1998 and 
1999. But some slowing was always going to occur from such levels, and in the context of widespread 
recession around the world, Australia's performance is good, and much better than would have been 
anticipated had our performance in previous global downturns been extrapolated. 
To what do we attribute this favourable outcome? As was pointed out in our most recent Statement on 
Monetary Policy, it is rare for an external event, on its own, to precipitate recession in Australia. To be 
sure, the impact effect of such events in the past has been quite substantial and, no doubt, there is a 
"multiplier" effect of such shocks through the economy. But for an economy which typically grows at 
3-4 per cent, a shock which affects production by 1 or even 2 per cent needs something else at work 
to precipitate a contraction in the economy overall. There  usually needs to be  a slump in domestic 
demand to precipitate an outright contraction in overall GDP. That can occur because, say, an excess 
of capital spending by businesses, or excessive leverage, leads to a sharp correction in investment 
(and employment), which exacerbates a slowdown which was already under way because of external 
events.  It  might  occur  because  some  shock  comes  along  which  fundamentally  erodes  business 
profitability  and  hence  reduces  prospects  for  investment.  It  might  occur  because  domestic 
macroeconomic policies, responding belatedly to serious inflation pressure, are faced with a need to 
tighten abruptly late in the business cycle. 
As has been pointed out on several occasions by the Governor, the extent of such problems on this 
occasion has, we judge, been small. True, a rise in inflation has occurred, but the Bank believes that 
the tightening phase of 1999–2000 addressed any longer-term problems which might have threatened 
on this front. We therefore felt we could ease policy in 2001, and did so some considerable time ahead 
of the likely peak in inflation. That inflation expectations remained well anchored through the past year 
or more helped in this. Investment has not been excessive overall (though this does not rule out some 
individual "mistakes") and, on the whole, businesses do not appear to be over-leveraged. This means 
that the likelihood is rising, rather than falling, investment during the coming year. The recent survey 
on  capital  expenditure  intentions  confirms  that  this  is  occurring;  indeed,  it  suggests  the  pace  will 
strengthen  considerably  in  the  second  half  of  the  year  –  although  of  course  this  is  a  very  early 
estimate of such expenditure. 
Profits and productivity 
It  is  probably  worth  spending  a  little  more  time  on  profits.  Businesses  were  affected  by  the  rise  in 
prices for inputs over the past couple of years, which resulted from the decline in the exchange rate. In 
addition,  the  moderate  slowdown  in  the  economy  itself  presumably  affected  earnings.  As  a  result, 
BIS Review 15/2002 
 3
 corporate sector gross operating earnings tended to weaken, though the most recent data suggest this 
decline may have ended. 
There has been a much larger decline in profits in the US. The chart below, prepared by staff in our 
Economic  area,  undertakes  a  comparison  of  corporate  sector  profits  in  the  national  accounts  as  a 
share  of  GDP,  for  the  US  and  Australia.  The  Australian  data  here  have  been  adjusted  to  remove 
interest  costs  and  depreciation  so  as  to  make  them  more  comparable  with  the  way  US  data  are 
usually published. The Australian profits share is higher than in the US, but we should not make too 
much of the difference in levels – there are possible differences in the relative sizes of incorporated 
and non-incorporated sectors, the extent of public versus private sector ownership of the capital stock, 
and so on.  
 
But the trends, and levels relative to longer-term averages, can be more meaningfully compared. The 
differences in the extent of the falls in profits since 1998 are quite striking. US profits are back to 1990 
levels; Australian profits are similar to the post-recession average, and look nothing like a recession 
scenario. This is obviously partly because the downturn in the economy itself has been milder. But it 
also makes for better prospects for growth in the short term, because it greatly lessens the likelihood 
of abrupt adjustments in investment, or employment. 
Longer  term,  prospects  for  profits  rely  heavily  on  productivity  performance,  an  issue  in  which  the 
business  and  policymaking  community  both  have  a  vital  interest.  Productivity  is  key  both  for 
businesses  in  sustaining  profitable  performance  and  for  the  community  as  a  whole  since  it  is 
productivity  growth  which  is  ultimately  the  source  of  higher  living  standards.  It  is  well  known  that 
Australian productivity growth accelerated during the 1990s, to a rate about one percentage point per 
year  higher  than  what  had  been  observed  during  the  preceding  ten  to  fifteen  years.  (This  was, 
incidentally, both a higher average rate of productivity growth and a greater degree of acceleration in 
productivity than seen in the US over the same period.) It is no coincidence that profits did relatively 
well through most of that period, and that this was able to co-exist with rising real wages. 
During the past couple of years, the rate of expansion in productivity first slowed markedly, then sped 
up again. This is a standard cyclical pattern,  in  which employment moves in response to  economic 
activity,  but  with  a  lag.  Hence  employment  lags  the  slowing  in  activity,  and  measured  productivity 
slows or even  declines. The reverse happens  when growth  picks up, as it did during the first three 
quarters of 2001. 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2002
   
The extensive program of liberalisation of the economy during the past couple of decades was a major 
driving force behind the improvement in trend productivity growth. As a side note, we in Australia have 
not tended to allow much role for "new economy" developments, such as the adoption of information 
technology,  though  some  research  does  suggest  that  this  may  have  played  a  greater  role  than 
conventional wisdom has allowed. 
But the bigger question is the future. Leaving aside recent cyclical ups and downs, will the strong trend 
productivity  growth  of  the  1990s  continue  into  the  next  ten  years?  On  this  there  are,  I  suppose, 
optimists and pessimists. Optimists would argue that the faster productivity growth we have seen in 
the  past  decade  represents  an  accelerated  process  of  "catch  up"  to  the  leading  edge  levels  of 
productivity we see globally, usually in the US economy. Moreover, they accept that there is still some 
gap between productivity levels in Australia and those of the world frontier in at least some sectors. 
Hence the catch up is not complete, and a process of good productivity growth can continue for some 
time  yet.  Pessimists tend to point out that this depends on the right policies. They  worry  that if the 
process of liberalising markets does not continue, or is even reversed, productivity performance will 
suffer. They voice the concern that it is getting harder to build support for liberalising ideas. Both of 
these views have some merit, and it is possible to have an optimistic outlook, but equally to see the 
importance of sustaining the liberal market arrangements which already exist, and of being disposed 
towards further sensible reforms that may be possible over time. 
Good policies will be important, of course – that goes without saying. But policies can only establish 
pre-conditions conducive  to enhanced  productivity. The outcomes will depend  quite heavily  on  you, 
the  business  community.  It  is  you,  after  all,  who,  in  the  pursuit  of  profit,  have  to  seek  out  the 
opportunities  for  new  products  and  markets,  better  ways  of  organising  business  activity,  and  better 
ways  of  motivating  your  employees  and  tapping  and  developing  their  human  capital.  In  the  simple 
growth accounting exercises used to measure productivity, the source of the genuine improvements in 
productive techniques is not considered (though there is a considerable separate literature aimed at 
establishing that). But productivity does not get handed down from somewhere – it is the outcome of 
the efforts of people across the economy to find better ways of doing things. 
What macroeconomic policy can contribute to this endeavour is a measure of stability. We will never 
be rid of the business cycle, nor of the tendency for businesses, households and especially financial 
markets, to alternate between moods of optimism and pessimism. But through the past decade or so, 
the Australian economy has been somewhat less volatile from year to year than it used to be. That 
may be explained partly by smaller shocks hitting us from abroad for much of the 1990s (though both 
the Asian crisis and the global recession of 2001 were big shocks). The economy's capacity to handle 
shocks has also improved, a factor due in some degree to the liberalising reforms themselves. I would 
argue  that  macroeconomic  policies  have  played  a  role  too,  and  in  particular  that  a monetary  policy 
BIS Review 15/2002 
 5
 regime which seeks to respond to the likelihood of significant build-ups of inflationary or disinflationary 
pressure, has made its contribution. It is, of course, our intention to continue in that vein.  
Conclusion 
In most respects, the global situation, while not without uncertainty, is better than it was a year ago. A 
renewed expansion in the world economy may well be beginning, though it will probably be moderate, 
rather than strong. Even though we do not want to throw our hats too far in the air just yet, it is very 
encouraging to see such signs. 
Australia has come through the international difficulties well to date. In an underlying sense, we have 
slower growth than we experienced in the late 1990s, and slower growth than we would ideally like to 
sustain  in  the  medium  term.  But  we  have  not  had  the  deep  slump  characteristic  of  earlier  world 
downturns, and the probability of experiencing one soon seems recently to have diminished. This is 
good  news,  and  perhaps  should  have  us  all  casting  our  minds  past  the  short  term,  towards  the 
question of how to sustain good, stable growth, and good productivity performance, into the medium 
term. I am sure you will all be doing just that. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2002
