 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: A broad brush picture of the UK economy 
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Asian Business 
Association Dinner, London, 19 March 2002. 
 Thank you, Mr President, for that kind introduction. I'm delighted to be here.  
In fact it's the second time this  year that I've had the pleasure of dining  with representatives of the 
Asian Business Community in the UK.  
Just a couple of months ago, in Glasgow, I joined the Association of Business Community in paying 
tribute to Mr Yaqub Ali for the remarkable contribution that he has made to Scottish commercial and 
community life since he arrived here from Pakistan some 50 years ago. 
It was a very poignant occasion, coming as it did when the terrorist attacks of 11th September in New 
York  and  Washington  were  still  fresh  in  our  minds.  Those  events  sadly  have  been  sometimes 
represented - or misrepresented - as having something to do with ethnic or religious differences.  
But, as the universal condemnation of terrorism which followed the events of 11th September showed, 
they had nothing to do with ethnic or religious differences; they were a reflection of a fanaticism which 
has  no  place  in  any  civilised  society.  Nevertheless  they  clearly  had  the  capacity  to  accentuate 
perceived differences, and to provoke unwanted tensions within our international, national and local 
communities.  
The contrast between this concern and the example and experience of Mr Ali, which we celebrated 
that evening in Glasgow, could not have been more pronounced. Whatever the difficulties he faced - 
of  social  disadvantage,  and  no  doubt,  too,  of  some  degree  of  ethnic  prejudice  in  the  UK  -  Mr  Ali 
overcame  them.  From  modest  beginnings,  he  moved  on  to  build  a  whole  series  of  substantial 
businesses  not  simply  to  his  own  benefit  but  to  the  great  benefit,  in  terms  of  both  the  goods  and 
services, and the income and employment which he provided to the community which adopted him. 
But,  beyond  this  impressive  business  achievement,  he  also  made  a  great  contribution  in  terms  of 
community service and charitable involvement both here in the UK and in relation to Pakistan. 
Now this example of the contribution that ethnic minority business - given the proper opportunity and 
encouragement - can make to our economy is certainly not unique. 
The  Bank  of  England's  investigation  some  18  months  ago  into  the  availability  of  finance  to  ethnic 
minority firms suggested that while the ethnic minorities represent some 5% of the UK population, they 
controlled some 7% of UK businesses and accounted for around 9% of new business start-ups. Those 
national figures relate to 1997, so they are a little out of date. But more recent figures from the London 
Chamber's  report,  published  last  December,  on  the  contribution  of  Asian  business  to  London's 
economy, suggest that the ethnic minority population manages or owns some 20% of London's private 
sector businesses, with the Asian community alone accounting for half that - or some 10% of the total. 
These figures make a powerful point, which is underlined by the presence of so many Asian and non-
Asian business and professional people here this evening.  
They illustrate very vividly the great benefit that can accrue to our society, as a whole, from providing 
the opportunity to all the people in the UK, whatever their background, to realise their full potential and 
achieve all that they can in their different fields. It underscores the importance of non-discrimination, 
whether ethnic or religious, sexual or social, to the material as well as the moral progress of our whole 
community. It is a real pleasure to be with you. 
In his letter of invitation to me, your Chairman - Subhash Thakrar - suggested that I could talk about 
anything I wanted to this evening, provided it was the state of the economy, and provided I tell you 
what precisely will happen to interest rates. Let me begin by trying to explain to you what we at the 
Bank - through the MPC - are tasked to do, and why. 
The task sounds straightforward. It is to set short-term interest rates with the consistent aim of hitting 
the  Government's  symmetrical  2½%  inflation  target  (on  a  precisely  defined  measure  of  retail  price 
inflation - RPIX). Now the reason we've been set that task is not - as some people imagine - because 
either we or the Government think that consistently low inflation is the be all and end all of economic 
life.  It  is  because  we've  learned  from  long  experience  that  consistently  low  inflation  is  a  necessary 
BIS Review 19/2002 
 1
 (though not in itself sufficient) condition for the sustained growth of output of the economy as a whole, 
for  high  levels  of  employment,  and  for  rising  living  standards,  which  are,  of  course,  more 
fundamentally the things that we are all seeking to achieve. 
Carrying  out  our  task  is  not  as  straightforward  as  it  sounds  because  there  is  no  simple,  direct,  link 
between short-term interest rates - the only instrument we have - and the rate of inflation.  
Interest  rates  essentially  affect  the  demand  side  of  the  economy.  They  don't  directly  influence  the 
supply side, which depends upon a whole host of structural characteristics which are largely beyond 
the direct reach of monetary policy. What we have to do in managing short-term interest rates is to 
keep overall demand growing broadly in line with the underlying - sustainable - supply-side capacity of 
the economy as a whole to meet that demand. In other words we are trying to maintain overall, macro-
economic, stability in a much broader sense, in the medium- and longer- term and not just the short-
term; and the Government's inflation target is the criterion against which our success, or otherwise, in 
achieving that broader macro-economic stability is to be measured.  
Our problem is that we don't know with any great precision or confidence exactly what is happening on 
the supply-side:- we don't know that's to say precisely what rate of growth we can hope to sustain. We 
don't know precisely  either  what is currently  happening,  or  what  is likely  to happen looking forward 
over  the  next  couple  of  years  or  so,  to  overall,  aggregate,  demand.  And  nor  do  we  know  precisely 
what the full impact of a change in interest rates will be on aggregate demand, or how long it will take 
before the full impact is felt. 
Ours is not a precise science. In fact it's more of an art than a science. And, although we bring as 
much economic and statistical science to bear as we can, we know that our forecasts, and indeed our 
policy judgements, are subject to a range of error. They can't be accurate to every last digit. So, we 
can't expect to hit the inflation target all the time, but by consistently aiming to do so we can hope to 
get reasonably close to the target on average over time. 
The uncertainties are well illustrated by the sudden jump in the RPIX inflation rate in January to 2.6% 
announced a month ago, only to fall back to 2.2% in February - published this morning. And, given 
these uncertainties, the overall results over the past decade since the recession of the early 1990's 
have been encouraging. Whether that's a result of good luck or good judgement I leave to others to 
decide - I'm more interested in the outcome. 
Since the Summer of 1992, inflation, on the target measure has averaged just 2.6% - and has been 
more stable than at any time in our history. And it has been consistently remarkably close to target 
over the past 5 years. 
But the even better news is that stable,  low, inflation has been accompanied by steadily  increasing 
overall  output  and  employment,  and  by  a  progressive  fall,  until  very  recently  at  least,  in  the  rate  of 
unemployment. 
Over the same period, to the fourth quarter of last year, GDP growth averaged just under 3% a year - 
which  is  well  above  most  estimates  of  our  trend  rate  of  2¼%-2½%.  GDP  has  in  fact  grown  for  38 
successive  quarters  which  is  the  longest  period  of  sustained  quarter-by-quarter  growth  we  have 
enjoyed since quarterly records began in the UK in 1955 - though I have to admit it was a close run 
thing in the fourth quarter of last year! 
Employment has increased steadily from a low point of 25 ½ mn people - and we are taking people 
here, not just statistics - in the Spring of 1993 to its current level of around 28 mn. And the rate of 
unemployment  fell  from  a  peak  of  over  10½%  on  the  internationally  comparable  LFS  measure  to 
around 5% last summer; while on the claimant count measure it fell from some 10% to just over 3%, 
which meant  that the number of people claiming  unemployment benefit, at under 950,000,  was the 
lowest for 26 years. 
Now some of you - given what's happening in your own businesses - are probably thinking that I must 
live  on  a  different  planet.  And  yes,  we  do  have  a  problem.  Once  you  look  beneath  this  apparently 
benign  surface  of  the  economy  as  a  whole,  you  find  very  substantial  differences  between  many 
internationally-exposed  sectors  of 
including  particularly  many  manufacturing 
businesses  -  which  have  recently  been  having  a  really  tough  time,  and  other  businesses  largely 
serving our domestic market which have generally been doing very much better. 
There  are  two  main  reasons  for  the  pressures  affecting  the  internationally-exposed  sectors:  the 
synchronised economic slowdown over the past year or so in all major industrial countries, on the one 
the  economy  - 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2002
 hand;  and  the  puzzling  and  persistent  weakness  of  the  euro  in  foreign  exchange  markets  not  just 
against sterling but even more against the dollar, on the other. 
The frustrating thing is that, with the best will in the world, there was not much that either we at the 
Bank or the UK Government could have done to ward off the pressures on UK manufacturing, which 
had their origins abroad.  
It's fairly obvious where we are talking about the global slowdown - with negative growth last year of 
about ½ % in Japan and very slow growth of just 1¼ % in the US and 1½% in the Eurozone. We can 
go  to  international  meetings  and  encourage  the  respective  authorities  there  to  stimulate  their 
economies, but there is nothing that we can do about it directly ourselves. 
It's perhaps less obvious that we cannot influence the exchange rate. Many people think that we could 
weaken sterling against the euro quite simply by cutting our interest rate relative to the interest rate in 
the eurozone. But it's not as simple as that. The US has reduced its interest rate far more aggressively 
than the ECB over the past year or so, but the dollar is actually stronger against the euro than it was to 
begin with; and the same is true, to a lesser degree, of ourselves, here in the UK, with sterling also 
stronger against the euro (though weaker against the dollar) than it was a year ago. 
So there was nothing much - as I say - that we could have done directly to affect these depressing 
effects coming from the global economy and the resulting weakness of external demand on the UK. 
But  what  we  were  able  to  do  -  given  that  inflation  was  marginally  below  target  -  was  to  try  to 
compensate for that  external  weakness by stimulating domestic demand here in the UK. The  Bank 
sought to do this by cutting interest rates to buoy up consumer spending. And the Government has 
stepped  up  its  own  spending,  which  was  certainly  helpful  in  the  recent  international  environment. 
Although we couldn't avoid an overall slowdown altogether we did manage to keep the UK economy 
as  a  whole  moving  forward  despite  the  recession  in  the  internationally-exposed  sectors  of 
manufacturing. 
In  fact  overall  GDP  growth  in  2001,  at  2.4%,  was  by  some  margin,  the  highest  among  the  G7 
countries, and the rate of UK unemployment is currently the lowest, on a comparable basis, in the G7. 
And interest rates are, as I said, the lowest they've been in this country in a generation. 
Of  course  we'd  all  have  been  much  happier  with  better  balanced  growth.  Stimulating  domestic 
demand to offset the external weakness - the only option available to us - was very much a second 
best option, and not without its own risks, but it was better than doing nothing at all. That would have 
meant a much sharper slowdown, and probably recession, in the economy as a whole. And, given the 
fact  that  inflationary  pressure  remained  subdued,  it  would  have  meant  a  quite  unnecessary  loss  of 
overall output - and income and employment. In effect we took the view that unbalanced growth was 
better than no growth. 
The question now, of course, is where do we go from here. 
There have recently been encouraging, but still tentative, signs that the worst of the global slowdown 
may now be behind us, and that the US and Eurozone economies are now beginning to bottom out 
and will pick up, perhaps to around trend, as we go through this year. Some Asian countries actively 
involved in the ICT sector are showing a strong recovery, and even in Japan financial markets have 
recently strengthened. As for the exchange rate, the euro, which has, as I say, been puzzlingly weak 
since soon after its introduction 3 years ago, still seems likely to strengthen eventually. As it becomes 
clearer  that  the  international  environment  really  is  improving,  and  that  external  demand  really  is 
picking  up,  then  we  can  look  forward  to  better  balanced  and  generally  stronger  growth  in  our  own 
economy. 
That  will  in  due  course  mean  that  domestic  demand  growth  -  and  consumer  demand  growth  in 
particular - will need to moderate if we are to avoid a build up of inflationary pressure. But let me be 
quite clear - that's not a warning, still less is it a threat. It is essentially just a matter of arithmetic! It's 
quite  possible,  even  quite  likely,  that  the  necessary  moderation  of  consumer  demand  -  and  I 
emphasise  the  word  moderation  -  will  come  about  of  its  own  accord,  given  the  gradual  increase  in 
unemployment we are currently seeing, and the build up of household debt. And provided it does not 
happen too abruptly, that would be the best possible outcome. But if consumer spending were not to 
moderate of its own accord, we would, in the context of strengthening external demand, clearly need 
at some point to consider raising interest rates to bring that moderation about. I don't suggest that the 
timing of any such move is imminent - that will obviously depend upon the timing and the strength of 
the recovery abroad and on the strength of domestic demand as we move forward. 
BIS Review 19/2002 
 3
 And that, Subhash, is of course my answer to your second question - "what precisely will happen to 
interest rates?" In case any of you are confused, I think that what I said was that interest rates will rise 
- unless they fall or stay the same! 
Mr President, there is no doubt that the past year or so has been a difficult time for the world economy 
which made life increasingly difficult for the internationally-exposed sectors of our own economy. We 
are not yet altogether out of the wood, but there is increasing light between the trees. I am "cautiously 
optimistic" that the overseas environment will improve as we move through 2002, and that by this time 
next year we here in the UK will have seen a return to somewhat stronger and better balanced growth, 
with unemployment not far above its recent lows,  and with continuing  low inflation. If that  is indeed 
how  things  turn  out,  we  will  have  weathered  the  international  storm  as  well  as  anyone  could 
reasonably have expected. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2002
