 M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Commercial Banking and Financial Services - our 
Vision for Thailand 
Speech  by  M  R  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Conference  on 
“Modernizing our Financial System: Challenges for the New Millennium”, Bangkok, 23 January 2002. 
 Your Excellencies Distinguished Guests Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  our  conference  on  "Modernizing  our 
Financial  System:  Challenges  for  the  new  Millennium".  I  would  also  like  to  express  our  deep 
appreciation for the distinguished speakers who came all the way from Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, 
and South Africa to share with us their expertise and knowledge on this very important topic. And, of 
course, to the World Bank, our co-host, for help organizing the conference. 
Our financial crisis in 1997 and  its subsequent impacts highlighted the  lesson of critical importance 
that dynamic and strong domestic financial institutions are vital to sustainability of development and 
growth. Over the past 20  years, financial sector has been one  of the major forces that support our 
progress  and  financial  services  share  in  our  GDP  has  grown  from  a  mere  3  percent  to  roughly  8 
percent. It is the fifth largest industry in term of value added to our GDP, and currently employing more 
than  300,000  of  our  workforce.  Nevertheless,  despite  such  favorable  development,  there  are  some 
concerns:  
- 
 First, in term of competitiveness of our financial institutions, there is room for improvement. 
The  International  Institute  for  Management  Development  in  its  well-known  Wor  l  d 
Competitiveness  Report  ranked  our  competitiveness  position  in  finance  for  the  year  2001, 
44th from the top 49 countries in the world. 
Second,  in  term  of  financial  service  availabilities,  there  are  still  some  people  lacking 
adequate access to the mainstream banking activities, particularly those in the rural area and 
those with low-income in the urban area. Recent statistic reveals that 54 districts in Thailand 
have neither branches of commercial banks nor those of specialized financial institutions. 
Third,  there  are  inherent  weaknesses  within  our  system.  We  are  overly  dependent  on 
commercial  banks  as  the  main  channel  of  financial  intermediaries  with  bank  loans 
accounting for 70 percent of external funding in Thailand, comparing to 20 percent in the US. 
Although  large  corporate  and  the  Royal  Thai  government  have  recently  turned  to  capital 
market as their alternative sources of financing, bank loans remains dominant, making the 
economy particularly vulnerable to changes in commercial banking sector.  
    These are the  issues that  we  will  be focusing on  today.  And following this conference, the  Bank of 
Thailand will embark on the process to articulate our medium-term plan to increase competitiveness of 
financial 
financial  system 
sustainability, and take this opportunity to systematically correct problems which remain unresolved by 
financial reform implemented thus far.  
financial  services,  ensure 
improve  people  access 
institutions, 
to 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Our  financial  institutions  must  be  the  sources  of  our  national  strength  and  should  be  the  main 
instrument  in  our  development.  In  the  past  five  years,  significant  and  comprehensive  reform  of  our 
commercial  banking  system  has  been  achieved,  with  financial  stability  being  restored;  corporate 
governance, strengthened; competition within domestic banking system enhanced with the entrance of 
new  competitors.  At  the  same  time,  new  financial  services  such  as  E-banking  and  other  innovative 
instruments such as smart cards are on the offer to customers giving them more choices of financial 
services with greater qualities.  
We are therefore at this point ready to move forward to the next step – to articulate our vision for the 
future  of  commercial  banking  and  financial  services  in  Thailand,  taking  into  consideration  powerful 
forces  from  the  rapidly  globalized  international  financial  markets  and  the  emerging  financial 
landscapes within the region. 
BIS Review 8/2002 
 1
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
The new financial sector master plan must be realistic and address the fundamental problems that we 
have. I see no role for the plan to strive to be a financial center or to develop the financial sector for its 
own sake. Thailand has a dual economic structure, with the modern industrial sector overlaying with 
the more traditional sectors outside Bangkok which employed more than half of our population. Thus, 
we should concentrate on improving the efficiency and stability of our domestic financial institutions to 
best serve our real sector. And our vision for Thai commercial banking and financial services – if it is to 
be useful – must consist of two parts within a single integrated framework: one for our main banking 
activities and the other for those in rural areas. 
As  we  look at cross-country  experiences on commercial  banking  and financial  system inquiries,  we 
were  drawn  toward  the  experiences  of  Australia,  Canada,  and  South  African.  The  South  African’s 
Standard  Bank  has  been  quite  innovative  in  using  new  technologies  to  reduce  cost  of  providing 
banking  services  to  the  urban  poor  who  were  formerly  thought  of  as  un-bankable.  Similarly,  the 
Canadian Financial Services Taskforce put much emphasis on “ensuring highest standard of quality 
and services to consumers, regardless of their income, and regardless of where they  live; urban or 
rural, and also to individual businesses, whether they are large or small”. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  emphasis  of  the  Australian  Financial  System  Inquiry  on  “the  facilitation  of 
financial  conglomerates  to  realize  economies  of  scale  and  scope  as  well  as  streamlined  regulatory 
structure  base  on  functional  not  institutional  distinction”  will  become more  and more  relevant  in  the 
future as consolidation and diversification within our financial system lead to similar types of business 
model. 
Coming up with a broad vision is comparatively a simple task; the real challenge is to work out the 
details of how we plan to modernize of our financial system. Here, we have to articulate our vision and 
implementation strategies together from both practitioners’ and regulators‘ point of view. We have to:  
− 
identify  potential  unfulfilled  need  for  financial  services  in  the  medium  term  so  that  we  can 
adequately accommodate needs of our consumers and corporate in the real sector. These 
include financing of small and medium-sized enterprises as well as long-term financing.  
determine problems, obstacles, and bottlenecks within our financial infrastructures as well as 
tax issues that will constraint us from achieving our full potential;  
revisit the existing specified scopes of businesses for each types of financial institutions and 
determine  appropriate  structures  for  our  financial  conglomerates,  taking  into  consideration 
the  increasingly  blurring  of  traditional  lines  that  have  previously  separated  commercial 
banking, investment banking, and insurance businesses from one another;  
prioritize our aims and construct appropriate benchmarks to set clear targets of development 
and measure our performance; 
and, of course, re-examine the current regulatory structure once the market reform is already 
underway.  
    Ladies and Gentlemen  
You may ask how you can be involved?  
In  the  next  nine  months,  our  staff  will  conduct  background  studies,  commission  additional  research 
papers, and take inputs from relevant stakeholders through market interviews and focus groups. We 
invite  you  to  actively  participate  in  our  public  consultation  process  and  encourage  you  to  take 
initiatives by making public submission on topics which you feel are critical for the development of our 
desired financial system.  
Though  most  of  our  work  and  recommendations  will  focus  on  financial  institutions  under  the 
supervision of the Bank of Thailand, we expect that the outcome of this process will provide a common 
framework  for  policy-making  among  the  supervisory  authorities  in  Thailand  and  serve  as  a  shared 
foundation  for  coordinating  our  efforts  between  the  private  and  public  sectors  in  transforming  our 
financial infrastructures towards a deeper, more efficient, balanced and sound system.  
As  we  move  forward,  this  plan  together  with  the  new  Financial  Institutions  Act  currently  under 
consideration by the Joint Committee of the Senate and the Lower House, the Deposit Insurance Act, 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2002
 and  the  supervisory  standard  as  will  be  specified  in  the  New  Basel  Accord,  will  provide  a  future 
framework within which our financial institutions will operate.  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I would like to close by saying that our future is in our hand. We ask for your cooperation in positioning 
our financial system for the future. I am fully confident that together we can contribute to the benefits of 
our nation.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 8/2002 
 3
