 Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Iceland in a global setting 
Keynote speech by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central 
Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the  Euromoney  conference  on  the  Nordic  Financial  Markets  and  Investment 
Opportunities, Stockholm, 13 September 2002. 
 Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  ambitious  conference  on  the  Nordic  Financial  Markets  and 
Investment Opportunities. I will in my remarks today mainly focus on aspects relating to Iceland. 
Size  separates  Iceland  from  the  other  Nordic  Countries,  Denmark,  Finland,  Norway  and  Sweden. 
Other factors separate the Nordic Countries as well. Finland is a member of the European Union and 
the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  EMU,  as  well.  Denmark  and  Sweden  are  members  of  the 
European Union but are outside the EMU. Norway and Iceland are outside the European Union but 
maintain  very  close  ties  to  it,  particularly  through  the  European  Economic  Area  Agreement.  That 
agreement  makes  Norway  and  Iceland  a  part  of  the  single  market  of  the  European  Union,  which 
entails  among  other  things  that  they  are  obliged  to  maintain  financial  market  legislation,  which  fully 
conforms to that of the European Union.  
The Nordic Countries have different monetary regimes. Finland is a member of the EMU, Denmark is 
linked to the EMU through an ERM II agreement entailing that the Danish krona is very closely tied to 
the euro. Sweden, Norway and Iceland have chosen an inflation-targeting regime as their monetary 
framework (Iceland in March 2001). Thus, price stability is the main objective of monetary policy in all 
of  these  countries  and  has  in  fact  become  the  recognized  single  target  for  monetary  policy  in 
numerous  countries.  The  reason  for  this  emphasis  on  price  stability  is  that  it  creates  the  best 
conditions for balanced growth and increased welfare.  
The Icelandic financial market has developed very rapidly over the last ten to fifteen years. It is a small 
market by definition, but has nevertheless the same institutional set-up as larger industrial countries. 
Aside from the Central Bank, these include commercial banks, savings banks, securities companies, 
various investment funds, insurance companies, large and important pension funds and last but not 
least  a  stock  exchange  -  linked  with  the  other  Nordic  exchanges  -  where  the  shares  of  60  to 
70 Icelandic companies are listed and traded on regular basis. Supervision of the activities of all of 
these institutions is in the hands of a unified financial supervisory authority that has broadly the same 
legal powers and follows the same methods and standards as supervisory agencies in other European 
countries. 
Important rationalisation has taken place in the Icelandic financial system. Until a few years ago, two 
of  the  main  commercial  banks  were  fully  government  owned  and  so  were  a  host  of  so-called 
investment  credit  funds.  The  funds  were  unified  in  a  single  institution,  which  was  subsequently 
privatised. The Government has also reduced its stake in the commercial banks over the most recent 
years and intends to have them largely or fully privatised by the end of the current electoral term next 
year.  The  privatisation  process  creates  opportunities  for  continued  rationalisation  in  the  financial 
system  creating  ample  opportunities  in  the  period  ahead,  including  closer  ties  with  foreign  financial 
institutions. 
It  is  tempting  to  put  recent  economic  developments  in  Iceland  into  the  context  of  developments  in 
some  of  the  other  Nordic  Countries  about  a  decade  ago.  Liberalisation  of  the  Icelandic  financial 
markets was more or less completed in the mid-1990s when the last restrictions on the movement of 
capital between Iceland and other countries were removed. Our liberalisation came a few years later 
than  in  the  other  Nordic  Countries.  You  will  recall  that  in  some  of  the  other  Nordic  Countries, 
liberalisation was followed by a boom period in the economy, partly or largely fuelled by a rapid growth 
of credit and in some cases large fiscal deficits. At the same time, these countries were pursuing a 
fixed  exchange  rate  policy  vis-a-vis  the  ECU.  Developments  in  the  domestic  economies  were  such 
that  the  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  was  gradually  undermined,  the  rapid  credit  growth  of  banks 
resulted  in  weakening  loan  portfolios  when  asset  prices  fell,  the  exchange  rate  fixety  gave  way  to 
floating, the currencies depreciated and inflation rose. The current account of the balance of payments 
also deteriorated. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 1
 Developments in Iceland from the latter half of 1990s until the present time resemble in many ways the 
experience of some of the other Nordic Countries a decade earlier but differ also in important respects. 
Soon after liberalisation, domestic demand picked up, fuelled by rapidly rising  credit  in the  wake of 
intensified competition in the financial sector and a sharp increase in credit availability. At that time, 
Iceland was pursuing a fixed exchange rate policy but not as rigidly fixed as the other Nordic Countries 
had done a decade earlier. The expansion in the economy at the end of last decade led to a very rapid 
rise in the current account deficit, climaxing in year 2000. Through the effects of a tightening monetary 
policy,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  gradually  appreciated.  In  the  spring  of  the  year  2000, 
expectations  in  the  market  shifted  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  one  of  them  being  concerns  about  the 
current account deficit. Subsequently the króna began to depreciate and continued to do so more or 
less uninterrupted but on the whole in an orderly fashion over a period of a year and a half until the 
end of November last year. By that time, it had fallen by about a third against other currencies. This 
large depreciation is not without precedent in other countries. In that respect, I might mention, since 
we are in Stockholm and since I have drawn some parallel with the other Nordic Countries, that the 
Swedish krona fell  in broadly similar  proportions over a period  of time after the exchange rate  was 
floated  in  late  1992.  The  depreciation  of  the  Icelandic  króna  fed  into  domestic  prices  and  inflation 
picked up significantly. 
Late last  year, the exchange rate had clearly overshot sharply on the downside. Then expectations 
turned around again. It was clear, among other things, that the economy was cooling down and that 
the current account deficit was shrinking fast. Optimism also arose once prospects improved that the 
inflation spike, which followed the exchange rate depreciation, would subside quickly again. The króna 
began to appreciate and has by now regained an important part of its earlier value. 
Inflation  has  subsided  sharply  again  this  year  and  expectations  are  that  the  inflation  target  of 
2½ percent will be achieved before the end of the year. The large current account deficit recorded in 
the year 2000 also began to shrink rapidly, it fell by more than half in the year 2001 and the outlook is 
for approximate balance this year. 
These  developments  demonstrate  the  resilience  and  adaptability  of  the  Icelandic  economy;  moving 
from a very large current  account deficit to  virtual balance in the course of two  years and reducing 
inflation from bordering on a two-digit rate to 2½ percent within one year. 
Although developments in Iceland showed many of the same characteristics as those in some of the 
other Nordic Countries during the post-liberalisation rapid expansion, such as credit expansion, current 
account  deficit,  exchange  rate  depreciation  and  so  on,  Iceland  escaped  the  difficulties  suffered  by 
banking systems in some of the other countries.  
Icelandic bank credit grew very rapidly in the late 1990’s and into the year 2000 and a sizable portion 
of the credit expansion was financed with credit from abroad. The capital adequacy ratios of banks fell 
for  a  while  but  nevertheless  remained  comfortably  above  the  minimum  required  and  internationally 
recognised levels. The year 2001 also turned out to be quite favourable for the banks, a development 
which continued by and large into the current year. Consequently, the capital position of the banks has 
improved  and  all  the  major  banking  institutions  have  relatively  strong  capital  adequacy  ratios  at 
present. Loan losses have increased, as was to be expected in the wake of the credit expansion, but 
nowhere on the scale experienced in some of the other Nordic Countries a decade ago and very much 
less  than  they  did  during  the  downturn  in  the  Icelandic  economy  around  and  after  1990.  The 
conclusion  to  be  drawn  is,  therefore,  that  the  Icelandic  banking  system  weathered  the  relatively 
turbulent post-liberalization boom period of 2000 and 2001 pretty well and is well poised to meet new 
challenges,  including  continued  rationalisation  and  intensified  competition  from  foreign  banking 
institutions. 
In the most recent decades, the Icelandic economy has also seen structural shifts. The importance of 
fisheries as a generator of foreign exchange revenue has diminished in relative terms - to less than a 
half  of  the  total  -  while  the  importance  of  other  sectors  has  risen,  such  as  manufacturing  industry, 
information  technology  and  tourism.  In  these  developments,  Iceland  is  among  other  things  drawing 
benefits from globalisation to strengthen  the foundations of the economy. Foreign direct  investment 
regulations are liberal with the exception that such investment is not permitted in the fishing sector. 
Foreign  direct  investment  is  most  noticeable  in  power  intensive  industry,  such  as  the  production  of 
aluminium, which is based on Iceland’s abundance of untapped renewable energy resources. Recent 
changes in corporate taxation in Iceland, lowering corporate taxes to among the lowest to be found, 
serve  to  attract  foreign  business  to  Iceland  and  encourage  Icelandic  companies  with  international 
operations to favour Iceland as the base of their operations. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2002
 Direct investment by Icelandic companies abroad has risen rapidly in recent years and in a variety of 
areas, such as fisheries and fish processing, pharmaceuticals, retail commerce and financial services. 
These  developments  also  benefit  the  Icelandic  economy  in  the  long  run  as  they  integrate  Iceland 
further into the global economy, allow Iceland to draw more easily on the experience of others and 
bring in dividends. Reflective of this development is the fact that Icelandic banks have begun to grant 
credit to borrowers in other countries on a measurable scale, particularly in areas where they have a 
competitive advantage in analysing the soundness of the prospective borrowers. 
The title of my presentation is Iceland in a Global Setting. What I have briefly described is a country 
that  has  followed  the  path  of  many  countries,  including  the  Nordic  Countries,  in  liberalising  its 
economy,  both  internally  and  externally.  This  has  exposed  the  economy  to  market  forces  and 
competition from abroad and a monetary regime bent on securing a low rate of inflation was chosen. 
Iceland is, as mentioned, not a member of the European Union and membership is not on the agenda 
of the present Government. Iceland operates its own small currency on the margins of the US dollar 
and the euro. These facts place firm requirements on economic policy while at the same time offering 
Iceland to reap important benefits from globalisation. This is indeed born out by developments over the 
last few years that were years of rapid growth of GDP and years which tested the ability of economic 
policy makers to steer the economy in an environment of liberalised markets and capital movements. 
More generally, the lesson to be drawn from our experience is that countries only stand to gain from 
full participation in the global economy. Aside from subjecting the domestic economy to competition 
from abroad, it  disciplines  economic policymaking. The market is a strict master and serves painful 
punishment for mistakes or ill-thought initiatives. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 3
