 Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Recent economic developments in Denmark 
Speech  by  Mrs  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 11 April 2002. 
 In its Annual Accounts for the year 1886-87 Danmarks Nationalbank for the first time presented not 
only financial data, but also a brief report on the past year. The report commenced as follows:  
“Danmarks Nationalbank’s activities during the past banking year have been affected to a significant 
degree  by  the  prevailing  slackness  of  business  in  important  areas  of  commerce.  Throughout  the 
banking  year  money  has  been  in  ample  supply  both  at  home  and  abroad,  and  the  interest  rate 
extremely  low.  In  Denmark,  both  the  discount  rate  for  bills  of  exchange  and  the  lending  rate  were 
lower than in any previous year, and the demand for money was in both cases unusually low.”  
This was all that Danmarks Nationalbank wrote about the economy’s development in this first report.  
However, a noteworthy statement in this paragraph  is that “the demand for money ... (is) unusually 
low”.  In  the  terminology  of  our  day  this  means  that  there  was  no  demand  for  credit,  and  it  was  no 
consolation that “the lending rate ... (was) lower than in any previous year”.  
This could be construed to mean that Danmarks Nationalbank wanted to say that nothing more could 
be achieved by relaxing monetary policy.  
This discussion has appeared time and time again in the history of monetary policy. Best known  is 
Keynes’  demonstration  of  situations  where  the  liquidity  trap  prevents  any  stimulation  by  means  of 
monetary policy. His response was that fiscal policy had to be used instead. In our day we see this 
monetary-policy dilemma in the case of Japan, but here fiscal policy apparently has no effect either.  
On the other hand, the USA has used both monetary and fiscal policy to stimulate economic activity in 
recent years, apparently with success.  
The Federal Reserve has a rather broad objective for its monetary policy, and interest-rate decisions 
are based on arguments related to an overall assessment of the cyclical position. This has led to a 
very  expansionary  monetary  policy  in  the  USA  in  2001.  However,  the  USA’s  experience  cannot  be 
applied  directly  to  Europe,  since  the  USA’s  economic  structure  is  radically  different,  e.g.  its  labour 
market.  
During the last 10-15 years Europe’s division of work between monetary and fiscal policy has become 
clearer. European experience shows that the best contribution monetary policy can make to balanced 
growth  and  development  in  the  longer  term  is  to  safeguard  price  stability.  Price  stability  provides  a 
fixed framework for the long-term strategies of both business enterprises and consumers. In practice, 
price stability means very low inflation in the range of 2 per cent.  
For this reason, the Maastricht Treaty makes price stability a direct objective of the European Central 
Bank. The same applies to a number of central banks in non-European countries as well as the UK, 
Sweden and Norway.  
The fact that the central bank’s objective is price stability does not prevent short-term aspects of the 
significance  of the interest rate to employment from being taken into account,  but only in situations 
where this does not conflict with the objective of price stability.  
As will be known, Danish monetary policy is related closely to that of the euro area. In a more indirect 
way, our objective is also price stability, since in order to maintain a stable exchange rate our inflation 
must not deviate significantly from inflation in the euro area.  
Since World War II, Denmark has pursued a fixed-exchange-rate policy in various guises, with varying 
degrees of firmness.  
Denmark  reaped  favourable  experience  from  its  consistent  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  in  the  1980s 
and 1990s. In fact, Denmark is a good example of how for a number of years it has been possible to 
reconcile high employment, rising real wages, low inflation and a favourable balance of payments with 
the  help  of  an  economic  policy  based  predominantly  on  structural  changes,  and  not  on  short-term 
cyclical policies .  
BIS Review 24/2002 
 1
 As a consequence, when the euro was introduced, Denmark decided to continue its fixed-exchange-
rate policy with a narrow linking of the krone to the euro. The official Danish interest rate is therefore 
earmarked to influence the exchange-rate development. 
Fortunately, Denmark’s economy has proved to be so robust in recent  years that confidence in  the 
krone’s stability has increased significantly. The foreign-exchange market is thus currently extremely 
stable.  
Formerly, the mortgage-credit market was dominated completely by fixed-rate loans. Once a loan had 
been  raised,  private  home  owners  were  not  affected  by  increasing  interest  rates.  So  when  a  home 
changed hands, the focus was on the mortgage payments for the first year.  
An alternative from the end of the 1990s has been adjustable-rate mortgage loans. Since then, this 
area has been subject to extensive product development and marketing. It is very positive to note the 
trend to offer borrowers a selection of different financing models, including the opportunity to combine 
fixed- and adjustable-rate loans.  
Adjustable-rate mortgage loans are popular with good reason, since the mortgage payment for the first 
year is currently considerably lower than for a traditional fixed-rate mortgage loan. On the other hand, 
the interest rate can fluctuate. This is an important part of the explanation for the normally lower level 
of short-term interest rates than long-term rates.  
The risk scenario is therefore entirely different to that for traditional mortgage financing.  
It is sometimes emphasised that the borrower can convert to a fixed-rate loan at a later time, if the 
short-term interest rate increases. However, this does not cover the risk at all, since one cannot count 
on the long-term interest rate remaining constant if short-term rates have increased substantially.  
Together with his or her advisers the borrower must therefore evaluate closely which risks he or she is 
exposed to. The borrower needs answers to a number of questions such as: “What will happen to my 
mortgage  costs  if  ...?”.  This  “if”  can  be  related  to  family  matters  and  external  economic  events, 
including  interest-rate  increases.  It  is  like  the  way  many  investors  set  up  various  "stress scenarios" 
before an investment decision is taken in order to assess the potential effect of the investment on their 
economic position.  
It  is  vital  that  borrowers  do  not  just  focus  on  the  mortgage  payment  for  the  first  year  and  see 
adjustable-rate loans as a less expensive version of the traditional fixed-rate mortgage-credit loans.  
In  1997,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  found  it  appropriate  to  point  out  that  the  ongoing  adjustments  to 
mortgage  financing  arrangements  would  not  lead  to  any  changes  in  monetary  policy.  The  fixed-
exchange rate policy implies that Danmarks Nationalbank raises the lending rate if the Danish krone 
comes  under  significant  pressure  due  to  speculation.  This  remark  was  intended  to  be  an  item  of 
"consumer information" to mortgage-credit customers. It was naturally also influenced by the fact that 
on  several  occasions  during  the  1990s  we  had  to  counter  speculative  attacks  on  the  krone  by 
significantly raising the monetary-policy interest rates.  
This statement has been considered and debated in the media on numerous occasions during the last 
five years. So this risk is hardly likely to be overlooked by many home buyers. Some have perhaps 
even misunderstood and believe that this is the only risk presented by adjustable-rate mortgage loans 
denominated in kroner. However, it is first and foremost the case that these loans will become more 
expensive if the interest rate is generally rising.  
The market perception is that interest rates have bottomed out. Only time can tell whether this is true, 
and  nobody  can  say  anything  definite  about  the  level  of  interest  rates  in  five  or  ten  years’  time. 
However,  if  the  international  upswing  really  gets  under  way,  inflation  prospects  can  be  affected, 
making interest-rate increases like those already seen in Sweden necessary.  
If the European Central Bank sees this development as a threat to price stability and raises interest 
rates, Denmark will follow suit. As a result, adjustable-rate loans in both euro and krone will become 
more expensive.  
What is the explanation for the growing popularity of loans at variable rather than fixed interest rates at 
the end of the 1990s? Why did this take place at a time when the level of interest rates was historically 
low?  
In  retrospect,  one  can  see  that  borrowers  should  have  taken  loans  at  variable  rates  when  interest 
rates were very high, e.g. in the early 1980s. At that time mortgages were financed predominantly with 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2002
 fixed-rate loans because  the economic situation  was perceived as far more uncertain. Inflation  was 
high and fluctuating, and interest rates had risen significantly.  
In an uncertain economic world borrowers’ primary need was to be certain of the level of their future 
mortgage costs. If the first few years were manageable, experience showed that there was no reason 
to be concerned for the long term.  
The situation today is entirely different. The economy has been stable since the end of the 1980s and 
there is a general faith that reasonably low inflation and equivalently low interest rates will dominate for 
years to come. Many borrowers therefore now opt to benefit from the fact that the short-term interest 
rate is normally lower than the long-term rate. The risk of rising interest rates must be assessed on a 
par with the risk of other events that can affect private finances.  
Foreign exchange has flowed into Denmark during the last 15 months. This inflow is partly due to the 
current-account  surplus  of  kr.  34  billion  in  2001.  The  foreign-exchange  reserve  rose  by  almost  as 
much, implying that other capital flows were close to zero in net terms in that year.  
Cross-border trading of bonds and shares, corporate acquisitions and other direct investments lead to 
major  capital  movements  and  thereby  to  the  demand  for  and  supply  of  foreign  exchange.  In  some 
periods the demand for foreign exchange will exceed supply – and in other periods the opposite will 
apply.  
If our exchange rate were allowed to float, the result would be exchange-rate fluctuations. Denmark’s 
fixed-exchange-rate policy entails that such imbalances must not be allowed to affect the krone more 
than  marginally.  This  is  why  Danmarks  Nationalbank  intervenes  in  these  situations.  It  does  this  by 
buying  or  selling  currency,  which  is  the  purpose  of  having  foreign-exchange  reserves.  Danmarks 
Nationalbank can also intervene by adjusting its lending rate, thereby affecting capital flows. In recent 
years there have been a number of minor interest-rate reductions in response to capital inflows.  
The current interest rate spread to the euro is approximately 25-30 basis points, depending on which 
short-term interest rates are considered. There are many opinions on what a “normal spread” should 
be,  but  it  cannot  be  pinpointed.  If  there  is  a  strong  outflow  of  foreign  exchange,  or  fears  thereof, 
Danish interest rates must be raised in order to widen this spread.  
On  a  substantial  inflow  of  foreign  exchange,  as  in  2001,  the  spread  narrows.  In  recent  years  such 
adjustments have typically been by 0.05 or 0.10 per cent at a time.  
There  is  therefore  no  such  thing  as  a  “normal  interest  rate  spread”,  since  its  size  depends  on  the 
situation in the foreign-exchange market. 
BIS Review 24/2002 
 3
