 Bruno Gehrig: Global economic trends and their implications for financial 
market infrastructures 
Speech by Prof Bruno Gehrig, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the  11th  International  Securities  Services  Association  (ISSA)  at  the  UBS  Executive  Development 
Center, Wolfsberg, 12 June 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is an honour and a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to give the opening speech at the 11th 
ISSA Symposium. I am delighted that you have chosen Switzerland as a venue for your conference 
and  hope  that  you  feel  comfortable  and  relaxed  in  this  beautiful  spot  on  the  Lake  of  Constance.  I 
gladly accepted your invitation although I am not an expert in your professional field. But I was, and 
still am, using your services rather intensively: in the 1980s as Head of Securities Sales and Trading at 
UBS, later on as CEO of an asset management bank, and now as investor of the currency reserves of 
the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB).  I  would  like  to  use  the  time  allocated  to  me  to  reflect  on  global 
economic trends and their implications for financial market infrastructures. Afterwards, I will outline the 
consequences these changes have on oversight authorities, which face similar challenges as you in 
your capacity as commercial service providers. 
Global economic trends 
What are the global economic trends that we all perceive in our daily business? Let me focus on some 
of  the  most  prominent  ones:  the  alleviation  of  barriers  to  trade  in  goods  and  financial  assets,  and 
factors affecting the overall demand and supply of securities. 
Alleviation of barriers to trade in goods and financial assets 
Barriers to trade in goods, services and financial assets have been progressively lifted during the last 
few  decades,  leading  to  a  growing  interaction  among  national  economic  systems.  This  growing 
interaction  and  connectedness  is  what  people  commonly  refer  to  as  globalisation.  Countries 
participating in this process have seen their domestic financial markets become more integrated with 
markets abroad. 
Two factors shape and characterise this process. First, technological innovation has sharply reduced 
transportation  and  telecommunication  costs.  Some  figures  taken  from  an  IMF  study  illustrate  this 
impressive change1. 
Communication and computer costs, 1960-2000 
Table 1 
 1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
2000 
Source: IMF. 
 Cost of a 3-minute phone call, 
New York to London 
(in 2000, USD) 
60.42 
41.61 
6.32 
4.37 
0.40 
Price of computers and peripheral 
equipment relative to GDP deflator 
(year 2000=1000) 
 1,869,004 
199,983 
27,938 
7,275 
1,000 
                                                      
1  P.  Masson  (2001):  “Globalization:  Facts  and  Figures”,  IMF Policy Discussion  Paper  01/04,  International  Monetary  Fund, 
Washington D.C. 
BIS Review 37/2002 
 1
 In  only  40  years,  telecommunication  costs  shrank  by  a  factor  of  about  150,  while  computer  costs 
became around 1900 times cheaper. As a consequence, information is now disseminated almost in 
real-time and at low cost. 
Second, financial crises have become more frequent. Most of the time, they are driven by rapid inflows 
and outflows of capital. We still  vividly remember the crises in Mexico, Asia,  Russia and  Argentina. 
Obviously,  these  crises  have  not  been  restricted  to  the  financial  sector,  but  have  had  a  profound 
impact on the real economy as well. 
The lifting of restrictions to cross-border holding and trading of financial assets has unleashed massive 
capital flows. According to World Bank figures, global debt and equity flows (excluding foreign direct 
investment) expanded by more than five times since 1991, from USD 794 billion to USD 4.3 trillion2. 
Without doubt, this development reflects a long-term trend. More and more investors decide globally 
and on the basis of risk-adjusted expected returns. Taking place in a system of increasingly integrated 
capital markets, capital allocation has become more efficient. 
The other side of the coin, however, is the increased volatility on financial markets. Indeed, portfolio 
investments, in particular those in markets with relatively high liquidity, have become more erratic, as 
fund injections and withdrawals respond very quickly to new information. According to the IMF, assets 
managed by institutional investors on mature markets are estimated at about USD 30 trillion in 1998. 
Thus, any shift in such a huge portfolio is very likely to exacerbate economic cycles and will possibly 
lead to contagion among financial markets. The impact of portfolio re-balancing will be all the more 
powerful  as  macroeconomic  policies  seem  to  be  unsustainable  and  as  financial  institutions  show 
fundamental weaknesses, often with regard to financial strength, supervision and transparency. 
Experience has shown that enhanced financial integration has, on the whole, resulted in higher growth 
and greater convergence among economies. Admittedly, not all sectors have gained in this process; 
there  have  also  been  losers  in  practically  all  countries  involved.  Nevertheless,  the  benefits  of 
liberalisation  have exceeded its costs. The call for a return raised by some voices therefore seems 
inappropriate.  On  looking  ahead,  the  path  and  success  of  the  liberalisation  process  will  depend  on 
how the effects of inequality gaps within and between countries, and the effects of increasing volatility 
on financial markets, are dealt with. 
Securities: demand and supply 
Integrated capital markets operate primarily on the basis of supply of, and demand for, securities. This 
has not always been the case. Bank deposits and loans used to play a much more significant role. Yet 
with  deregulation  and  the  rise  of  institutional  investors,  securities  have  become  the  central  tool  of 
capital allocation. 
The United States’ strong net import of capital illustrates this fact. Let’s have a look at some figures 
taken from an IMF report3. 
The net foreign purchase of US long-term securities almost doubled between 1995 and 2000, rising 
from USD 232 billion to USD 456 billion. Taking a closer look reveals some interesting facts. During 
the same period, the net foreign purchase of corporate bonds and stocks increased by 3 and 15 times, 
reaching  USD  182  and  175  billion  respectively.  The  net  foreign  purchase  of  corporate  securities 
amounted to 30% of the entire net purchase of US long-term securities in 1995. In 2000, it accounted 
for about 80%. During the same five-year period, the net foreign purchase of agency bonds increased 
by 5 times, while the net foreign purchase of US government bonds shrank massively due to a strong 
supply reduction as well as the investors’ move towards higher-yielding financial assets. 
One  major  consequence  is  that  demand  for  securities  issued  by  the  corporate  sector  has  been 
increasing impressively over the last few years. This strong demand reflects diversification needs and 
the enhanced capacity of investors to apply sophisticated portfolio management strategies. In addition, 
there has been a clear trend towards collateralisation of financial claims as a risk mitigation technique. 
Indeed, collateral is widely used today in the underlying and derivative markets for financial assets, 
including gold. Collateralised transactions have also gained momentum in payment systems with the 
                                                      
2  World Bank (2001): “Trends in private capital flows” (Table 2.3), Global Development Finance, Chapter 2. 
3  D.  Mathieson  and  G.  Schinasi  (2001):  “International  Capital  Markets:  Developments,  Prospects  and  Key  Policy  Issues”, 
World Economic and Financial Surveys, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2002
 purpose of not only reducing credit risk, but also facilitating access to liquidity through readily available 
collateral. 
Net foreign purchase of US long-term securities 
Table 2 
 Government 
bonds 
Government-
sponsored 
agency bonds1 
Corporate 
bonds 
Corporate 
stocks 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
 134,115 
232,241 
184,171 
49,039 
–9,953 
–53,790 
 28,729 
41,723 
49,853 
56,802 
92,200 
152,841 
 57,853 
83,743 
84,358 
121,930 
160,392 
182,403 
 11,240 
12,511 
69,597 
50,020 
107,522 
174,890 
1  Includes bonds issued by U.S. government corporations and federal agencies. 
Source: IMF. 
Total 
231,937 
370,218 
387,979 
277,791 
350,161 
456,344 
Central banks around the world have been a driving force behind the trend toward collateralisation. 
First, they have been relying increasingly on repo transactions to implement their monetary policy. Like 
many of its peers, the Swiss National Bank, which traditionally operated exclusively on the basis of 
foreign exchange swaps, now steers the liquidity supply primarily through repo transactions. Second, 
central banks typically grant intraday credits, which are relevant for smoothing settlement in payment 
systems, against collateral. Intraday repos have been available from the Swiss National Bank since 
1999, on demand and at zero interest. 
The trend toward collateralisation creates additional business opportunities for providers of financial 
market infrastructure, but it also increases their systemic relevance. Indeed, since the linkages among 
cash, securities, and derivatives markets have become so close, a failure - either by a provider itself or 
by  a  major  participant  -  is  very  likely  to  cause  disturbances  affecting  different  markets  at  the  same 
time. 
In  addition  to  collateralisation,  the  appetite  for  securities  has  been  forcefully  stimulated  by  the 
changing  needs  of  private  and  public  wealth  owners:  the  ongoing  institutionalisation  of  the  savings 
process, the facilitation of direct market access through internet technology, the disintermediation of 
the banking system due to credit risk considerations and the relative decline in attractiveness of bank 
deposits. 
On the supply side, the corporate sector has been increasingly relying on bond financing rather than 
on traditional bank borrowing. In the US, private debt securities amount to about USD 7 trillion. The 
ratio of bank credits to GDP has remained more or less stable at around 10% for the last 50 years, 
while the ratio of bond financing to GDP has risen sharply from 15% in 1985 to 25% in 2000. Bond 
financing  within  the  European  corporate  sector  has  also  caught  up,  strongly  supported  by  the 
inception of the euro at the beginning of 1999. 
In short, the supply of securities is bound to grow further; cyclical ups and downs are likely, but the 
trend will point upwards. Notwithstanding obvious differences between economies, it is generally true 
that the corporate sector will make further progress in exploiting the potential advantages offered by 
open  capital  markets.  The  European  corporate  bond  market  seems  an  especially  interesting  case. 
Since the inception of the euro, it has staged an impressive take-off, even though its institutional, legal 
and accounting environment is still far from optimal. 
Central bankers have good reason to welcome such developments. Not only because they probably 
make  the  saving-investment  process  more  efficient,  but  also  because  they  allow  for  a  better 
distribution of credit and market risk which should - if anything - enhance the stability and robustness 
of financial systems. 
BIS Review 37/2002 
 3
 Financial  processes  and  markets  will  continue  to  become  more  and  more  internationalised  with 
obvious impacts on securities operations, liquidity and collateral management procedures. What kinds 
of challenges will this create for market infrastructures on the one hand, and for oversight authorities 
on the other hand? Let me address these two questions in the following. 
Implications for financial market infrastructures 
A first requirement for financial market infrastructures is that they must be capable of coping not only 
with  an  increase  in  cross-border  securities  operations,  but  also  with  their  time-critical  nature. 
Therefore, particular efforts should be made to ensure intraday finality, to shorten settlement cycles, to 
co-ordinate  operating  hours  among  the  individual  systems  and  to  standardize  communication 
procedures as well as message formats. As you know better than I, this is easier said than done, since 
we still rely heavily on technologies and systems that are tailored to domestic needs and peculiarities. 
The current coexistence of several non-interoperable platforms implies an extensive amount of costly 
manual intervention. 
A second requirement - which is linked to the first one - relates to the objective of reducing clearing 
and settlement costs, especially the costs of cross-border securities operations. As discussed in the 
Giovannini  report4  mandated  by  the  EU,  domestic  clearing  and  settlement  arrangements  within 
member  countries  seem  to  have  reached  a  level  of  cost  efficiency,  which  is  -  by  and  large  - 
comparable  to  what  DTCC  (Depository  Trust  &  Clearing  Corporation)  in  the  US  has  achieved.  By 
contrast, the whole cross-border domain is far from being cost-efficient, mainly due to fragmentation in 
terms  of  market  infrastructures  and  practices,  as  well  as  differing  legal,  tax  and  accounting 
frameworks. 
The obvious question  is, therefore, how to realise efficiency  gains in the cross-border context. One 
way  -  and  probably  the  most  appealing  one  -  is  to  consolidate  market  infrastructures.  Within  the 
European  Union,  there  are  currently  more  than  20  Central  Securities  Depositories.  Although 
consolidation  seems  unavoidable,  it  is  less  clear  how  to  achieve  it  and  which  model  best  suits 
integrated financial markets. Should  priority  be given to  vertical or to  horizontal integration? On the 
one hand, vertical integration presents some advantages. Since trading, clearing and settlement occur 
within  the  same  organisation,  this  reduces  legal  and  operational  risks.  On  the  other  hand,  vertical 
integration  may  entail  cross-subsidies,  which  disguise  the  effective  costs  of  trading,  clearing  and 
settlement. In addition, this model may also tend to rely on rents, as it is impossible for users to switch 
between  providers.  Horizontal  integration,  however,  allows  users  to  select  between  interlinked 
providers, exposing them to ongoing competition. Yet the feasibility of this model depends on whether 
there is a cost-efficient way for users to route transactions to their preferred provider. In any case, the 
emergence of poles around Euronext and Deutsche Börse shows that the consolidation process has 
begun. From a Swiss perspective, both SWX and SIS are engaged in the race - not really as hunters, 
given their relative size, but as partners with proven technology and know-how. 
Financial market infrastructures are also subject to higher competitive pressures. The driving forces 
behind these pressures are, without doubt, technological innovation and the expected profits resulting 
from  the  achievement  of  economies  of  scale  and,  possibly,  economies  of  scope.  Three  kinds  of 
competitors  can  be  distinguished.  First,  competition  among  exchanges,  clearing  and  settlement 
organisations within and across countries has increased. Indeed, for trading, clearing and settlement, 
physical location has become less and less relevant. As you are confronted with these pressures in 
your daily business, you certainly know better than any central banker what I am referring to. Second, 
non-financial  institutions  may  provide  trading,  clearing  and  settlement  services  to  financial  markets. 
More precisely, I think here not only of alternative trading systems, but also of outsourcing partners 
such  as  payment  and  securities  processing  centres.  Third,  and  maybe  less  visible,  but  of  growing 
significance, are competitive pressures exerted by large custodians, especially by global custodians. 
Indeed, global custodians not only rely on a worldwide network of sub-custodians offering easy access 
to  all  markets,  but  they  also  develop  in-house  clearing  and  settlement  procedures  with  very 
competitive costs. 
Without  any  doubt,  financial  market  infrastructures  are  facing  great  challenges  in  terms  of  higher 
technical  requirements,  the  necessity  to  achieve  efficiency  gains,  and  higher  competitive  stakes.  I 
believe that market forces - rather than political pressure - should drive the consolidation process. The 
                                                      
4  The Giovannini Group (2001): Cross-Border Clearing and Settlement Arrangements in the European Union, Brussels. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2002
 many changes taking place also challenge oversight authorities. It is their task to analyse the systemic 
implications  of  what  goes  on  particularly  at  the  cross-border  level,  and  to  make  sure  that  these 
changes  will  enhance,  and  not  endanger,  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  Let  me  address 
these issues in the concluding part. 
Implications for oversight authorities 
I begin by quoting Alexandre Lamfalussy, Chairman of the Committee of the Wise Men, which, more 
than a year ago, published the famous report on securities regulation within the EU5. Lamfalussy was 
very clear when he asserted that “the current [securities] regulatory system is not working”6. Indeed, 
unclear and sometimes even contradictory regulations or inconsistent implementation  of regulations 
among countries impair the creation of a single capital market within the European Union. 
Starting from this premise, I would like to specify  what kind of challenges oversight authorities face 
and share with you some ideas on what the role of an institution like the Swiss National Bank should 
be. But first of all, I  would like to clarify a fundamental point. Some people claim that the  oversight 
authorities’ objective of promoting the stability of the financial system hides an undue interventionist 
activism.  Well,  these  claims  are  beside  the  mark.  Let  me  quote  Andrew  Crockett,  BIS  General 
Manager and Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum7: “[…] systemic stability is critically determined 
by  the  collective  behaviour  of  individual  market  players.  […].  And  supervisors  need  to  analyse  the 
interaction  between  individual  incentives  and  systemic  outcomes.”  In  other  words,  systemic  stability 
depends on how negative externalities, which are not priced or internalised by the market, are dealt 
with. Thus, we should not waste our time discussing whether regulatory intervention is necessary or 
not, but rather how oversight authorities, focusing on systemic risk, should shape the process. 
Keeping  this  in  mind,  the  challenges  oversight  authorities  face  are  numerous  and  well-known.  The 
Giovannini  Group  lists  no  less  than  15  barriers  to  efficient  cross-border  and  settlement  procedures 
within the European Union. These barriers are categorised according to their technical nature, their 
fiscal implications and their legal aspects. A remarkable feature of this report is the distinction between 
what  market  forces  can  achieve  and  what  regulatory  authorities  should  do.  In  particular,  there  are 
several  issues  that  cannot  be  tackled  by  the  private  sector,  e.g.  the  harmonisation  of  the  legal, 
regulatory, taxation and accounting frameworks. 
A first challenge is the need for global oversight. This need arises from several factors. In terms of the 
so-called horizontal approach, trading, clearing and settlement of securities operations already occur 
in  different  institutions  located  in  several  different  jurisdictions;  virt-x  and  SIS-clear  are  just  two 
examples.  For  the  time  being,  cross-border  infrastructures  deploy  their  activities  in  complement  to 
domestic systems, but it is very likely that they will play a significantly more powerful role in the future. 
Oversight authorities tend to prefer a pragmatic approach, where one regulatory authority takes on the 
role of a lead overseer and consults with other relevant authorities. Such a model has already been 
put in place among central bankers in the context of the Continuous Linked Settlement system. 
A second challenge that oversight authorities face lies in the risk dimension of cross-border securities 
operations. Indeed, whereas the nature of the risks remains basically the same, both the probability of 
occurrence of an adverse event and the risk exposures themselves have clearly increased. The added 
dimension  of  cross-border  activities  lies  in  spill-over  effects  due  to  direct  links  between  systems. 
Credit, liquidity and operational risk events occurring in one jurisdiction may indeed trigger a systemic 
crisis by spilling over to foreign financial markets. These kinds of linkages among different systems 
explain why oversight authorities have recently focussed not only on payment systems, but also on 
securities clearing and settlement systems. 
A problem that is potentially relevant in systemic terms is the availability of intraday liquidity in foreign 
currencies,  which  is  typically  restricted,  if  not  non-existent.  This  restriction  hampers  liquidity 
management  in  an  integrated  multi-currency  environment.  Nowadays,  there  is  a  much more  urgent 
need for market participants to make time-critical payments than previously. Moreover, they must be 
                                                      
5  The  Committee  of  Wise  Men  (2001):  Final  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Wise  Men  on  the  Regulation  of  European 
Securities Markets, Brussels. 
6  A. Lamfalussy (2001): “Reflections on the Regulation of European Securities Markets”, Société Universitaire Européenne de 
Recherches Financières, SUERF Study N° 14, Vienna. 
7  A. Crockett (2002): Introductory speech at the Third Joint Central Bank Research Conference on Risk Measurement and 
Systemic Risk, Basel. 
BIS Review 37/2002 
 5
 able  to  react  simultaneously  in  several  currencies  even  in  troubled  circumstances.  Their  liquidity 
management could be facilitated and strengthened significantly if they were able to obtain short-term 
liquidity in the required currency through a cross-border collateral pool. Such a collateral pool would 
boost the ability of the large market participants to react, thereby reducing the system’s vulnerability to 
disturbances.  In  addition,  this  would  result  in  efficiency  gains,  as  maintaining  a  pooled  collateral 
portfolio would certainly be less costly than keeping several currency-specific portfolios. In view of the 
manifold  legal  and  technical  obstacles,  one  is  tempted  to  deem  such  a  collateral  pool  a  vision. 
However,  visions can come true: take CLS, the Continued Linked Settlement system, which  will go 
into operation in the near future. Central banks and the private sector must direct their joint efforts at 
researching the feasibility of a collateral pool, as does the Payments Risk Committee in New York8. 
A third challenge relates to in-house clearing and settlement mechanisms at global custodians. This 
commercial  function  has  undergone  a  remarkable  process  of  concentration  in  the  last  few  years. 
Some of these service providers have become very  significant for the stability  of the system as we 
have seen after September 11 of last year. Independent of specific events the question arises whether 
regulatory  control  has  kept  up  with  this  development  everywhere.  From  an  organisational  point  of 
view,  it  is  problematic  that  custody  activities  lie  in  a  grey  area  between  banking  supervision  and 
system oversight. In some countries - such as Switzerland - where the tasks deriving from banking 
supervision  and  system  oversight  are  performed  by  separate  authorities,  the  regulatory  framework 
risks  being  incomplete  or  at  least  suboptimal  unless  the  two  authorities  succeed  in  establishing  a 
strong  cooperation  link.  This  aspect  seems  all  the  more  important  as  global  custodians  tend  to 
become direct competitors to traditional financial market infrastructures. 
In view of these challenges, there is good reason to critically reassess rules and regulations related to 
securities clearing and settlement as well as to the way oversight responsibilities are implemented in 
practice.  A  predominantly  national  approach  does  not  serve  market  needs  any  longer.  And  an 
essentially  sectoral  solution,  where  payment  system  regulators  and  securities  regulators  do  not 
cooperate in an integrated way, is inappropriate. Indeed, all official and private sector initiatives that 
can  give  an  impetus  to  this  debate  are  highly  welcome.  The  CPSS-IOSCO  Recommendations  for 
Securities Settlement Systems, the ISSA Recommendations 2000, and the Group of Thirty’s ongoing 
work  all  contribute  to  improving  our  understanding  of  the  challenges  we  face.  And  it  is  only  when 
issues are really understood that appropriate responses can be formulated and implemented. 
In  Switzerland,  as  in  several  other  countries,  supervision  of  the  securities  clearing  and  settlement 
system is still work in progress. A draft of the revised National Bank Law has been submitted and will 
be discussed by Parliament in the near future. The revised law will presumably enter into force around 
2004.  It  is  intended  to  explicitly  vest  the  responsibility  of  overseeing  payment  systems  as  well  as 
securities  clearing  and  settlement  systems  in  the  Swiss  National  Bank.  The  revised  law  will  thus 
formally  express  that  an  efficient  and  secure  financial  market  infrastructure  is  imperative  for  the 
implementation of monetary policy and for the stability of the financial system. The inclusion of clearing 
and settlement systems follows from the obvious fact that, given their linkages, these infrastructural 
functions are of considerable systemic importance. This is all the more true since the SNB has, for a 
few years now, implemented its monetary policy exclusively through repo transactions. 
The  SNB  can  fulfil  this  expanded  mandate  only  by  closely  cooperating  with  other  authorities. 
Domestically, the SNB will work hand in hand with the Federal Banking Commission (FBC). The SNB 
will focus on systemic issues, while the FBC - our bank supervisor - will deal with institutional aspects. 
This  job-sharing  is  based  on  the  premise  that  each  authority  will  be  able  to  make  use  of  its 
comparative  advantage. 
Internationally,  market  developments  foster  cross-border  cooperation 
between oversight authorities. For instance, institutions such as Sega Intersettle (SIS) through “The 
Settlement  Network”  are  heavily  involved  in  the  current  reshaping  of  Europe’s  financial  market 
infrastructure. 
However, as the legal reform is not yet in place, there are many open questions as to what exactly the 
modus  vivendi  of  the  oversight  function  should  look  like.  We  will  address  them  step  by  step  in  a 
pragmatic way. Many issues such as the set-up of mechanisms for information sharing, the need for 
on-site  examinations,  or  the  disclosure  of  oversight  proceedings  have  still  to  be  discussed  and 
clarified. We are in the process of defining basic principles and implementation tools pertaining to our 
new oversight responsibilities. 
                                                      
8  The Payments Risk Committee was established by the Fed New York in 1993 as a means to integrate the input of leading 
US commercial banks in discussing and implementing recommendations for improving the quality of risk management in 
payment and securities settlement systems. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2002
 Conclusion 
I  would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  with  a  fundamental  remark.  In  the  field  of  financial  market 
infrastructure,  there  is  no  alternative  to  close  cooperation  between  private  market  players  and 
oversight authorities. On the one hand, it makes sense in this field as well to rely on market forces to 
stimulate, as energetically as possible, an eagerness for progress and innovation. On the other hand, 
we have to take into consideration that there are economic forces working in this area that limit the 
free  play  of  market  forces  and  require  oversight  authorities  to  take  on  a  more  active  role.  First, 
clearing,  settlement  and  payment  systems  entail  network  characteristics  with  potentially  negative 
externalities not internalised by individually optimising market players. It is thus the aim of oversight 
authorities to take into account the financial infrastructure as a whole, thereby focussing on the links 
between all components. In other terms, some of these systems are “too interlinked to fail” and must 
therefore be overseen with special care. Second, since clearing, settlement and payment services are 
based on production processes with very high fixed costs, there is a risk that consolidation may lead to 
a monopolistic market result. Oversight authorities must therefore also make it their goal to prevent 
potential abuses of market power. 
Against this background, a trust-based cooperation between financial service providers and oversight 
authorities remains the key to a continued successful development of an efficient and secure financial 
market infrastructure that meets the fast-changing needs of the future. 
BIS Review 37/2002 
 7
