 I J Macfarlane: The Australian economy - past, present and future 
Talk by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the  Reserve  Bank of Australia,  to 2002 Melbourne Institute 
Economic and Social Outlook Conference Dinner, Melbourne, 4 April 2002. 
 It  is  an  honour  to  be  invited  here  this  evening  to  give  this  address,  although  I  must  confess  I  am 
somewhat daunted by the task. We have heard so much in this conference on such a broad range of 
economic  subjects  by  such  a  distinguished  group  of  speakers  that  I  have  been  presented  with  a 
difficult  act  to  follow.  I  have  also  been  given  a  very  broad  topic,  so  I  will  have  to  confine myself  to 
making only a few comments on each part of it. 
I would like to start with the proposition that Australians, on the whole, tend to be pessimists about the 
country’s economic situation and about its future. This is not always the case as there are occasions, 
such as the present, where a degree of optimism breaks out, but these are the exceptions rather than 
the  rule.  While  Australians  are  often  optimistic  about  their  personal  economic  prospects,  they  are 
seldom  so  about  the  economy’s  prospects.  I  have  spoken  about  this  before  and  produced  various 
pieces of anecdotal evidence to support my view. More objective evidence is available in the form of 
answers  to  surveys1,  which  show  a  clear  propensity  for  respondents  to  judge  the  economy  more 
harshly than their own economic prospects (about which they presumably know more). 
Why  is  there  such  low  confidence  in  our  economic  situation,  even  by  people  who  are  reasonably 
confident about their own economic circumstances and prospects? The usual answer is to blame the 
press, but I think this is a bit superficial. The allegation is true in only one sense: there are a lot more 
economic  stories  on  the  front  pages  of  newspapers  in  Australia  than  in  other  countries.  And  since 
there is a natural tendency for the press to give more prominence to bad news than good – just as we 
hear more about war-torn countries than peaceful ones – this tends to increase people’s exposure to 
bad economic news. 
The Past 
I think a deeper answer to why we tend to be pessimistic is to be found in our attitude to our economic 
past,  which  tends  to  be  dominated  by  a  strong  element  of  nostalgia.  While  in  other  areas  of  our 
political  and  social  history  we  may  be  revising  downwards  our  assessment  of  our  forebears’ 
achievements, this is not so in the economic sphere. There is still a tendency to look back favourably 
on the economic peace and certainty of the past and contrast it with the perception of insecurity and 
instability that surrounds the present economy. Why is this so? 
(a) 
Those  who  know  a  little  bit  of  history  are  aware  of  the  fact  that  in  about  1900  we  were 
probably the richest country  in  the  world  in terms of income per head. Now  we  are in the 
middle of the pack of developed OECD economies. So this gives the impression of a country 
in  long  run  decline,  but  from  a  somewhat  artificial  starting  point.  We  were  the  ‘Kuwait  of 
1900’:  a  country  with  a  very  small  population  and  a  large  resource  endowment  producing 
commodities  which  were  very  highly  priced  at  the  time.  But  like  any  prosperity  based  on 
scarcity  prices  it  could  not  last2,  as  the  decline  in  our  terms  of  trade  during  the  century 
showed. I will return to this theme when I discuss the future.  
                                                      
1   There are three surveys which ask respondents to report their confidence in (a) their own personal economic situation and 
(b) the state of the economy; these are the Westpac-Melbourne Institute Consumer Sentiment Index, the ACCI Survey of 
Investor  Confidence,  and  the  Yellow  Pages  Business  Index.  All  three  surveys  show  that  nearly  always  the  majority  of 
respondents show less confidence in the economy than in their own personal economic position. In 97 per cent of occasions 
this is true for the Westpac-Melbourne Institute and Yellow Pages surveys, and on 94 per cent of occasions it is true for the 
ACCI Survey. 
2  An extreme example of changing economic fortunes as a result of changing terms of trade comes from 18th century French 
history, and the contrasting attitude of France to defending its two main American colonial possessions – Canada and Haiti. 
Canada  was given up with relatively little resistance, but two costly wars were fought in a vain effort to retain Haiti. The 
ranking of Haiti as more valuable than Canada was purely an economic one based on the high price of sugar two hundred 
years ago. A similar story involves the English and the Dutch in the 17th century. Under the Treaty of Breda of 1667, the 
Dutch gave up their claims on Manhattan to the English in order to retain the island of Run (in what is now Indonesia). The 
superior value they placed on Run was due to it being the principal source of nutmeg. 
BIS Review 22/2002 
 1
 (b) 
For others, the nostalgia is directed at the 1950s and 60s. There is no doubt that around the 
world this period of post-war reconstruction was a ‘golden era’ for economic growth that had 
not been seen before or been equalled since. But we should remember that the Australian 
economy did not keep up with the rest of the world during this period: the growth in GDP per 
capita  was  lower  than  the  OECD  average  in  the  1950s  and  60s.  We  also  tend  to 
underestimate just how poor we were compared with what we take for granted now. Much of 
the post-war housing expansion into the newer suburbs involved building two-bedroom-one-
bathroom houses with external toilets: sealed roads, sewerage and telephones came years 
later. There are many other examples of the difference in living standards I could quote.  
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
The Present 
By  the  present  I  mean  the  economic  expansion  over  the  past  decade  which  we  are  currently  still 
experiencing. Fortunately we do not view the 1970s and 1980s with much nostalgia, so most people 
are  willing  to  accept  that  the  current  expansion  represents  an  improvement  compared  with  those 
earlier decades. This can be seen in that: 
(a) 
The current expansion is longer. So far it has lasted for 41 quarters compared with 31 and 
28 respectively for the expansions in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Our rate of growth of productivity has picked up compared with earlier decades. We are one 
of a very small group (about 5) of OECD countries to have achieved this. 
We  have  weathered  two  quite  large  contractionary  external  shocks  without  significant 
adverse  effects.  I  am  referring  here  to  the  Asian  crisis  of  1997/98  and  the  world 
slowdown/recession of 2001. 
There is evidence to suggest that some economic distortions that seemed to be entrenched 
have  been  removed  or  at  least  improved.  The  most  obvious  of  these  is  the  reduction  in 
inflation from the very high rates of the 1970s and the quite high rates of the 1980s. Indeed, 
if we had not succeeded in regaining low inflation in the 1990s, we would have had no hope 
of achieving the long economic expansion we have had. There has also been some success 
on the balance of payments. It is now clear that the pronounced deterioration in the external 
accounts occurred during the 1970s, reached a plateau from the early 1980s to the present, 
and  may  have  shown  its  first,  although  tentative  sign  of  improvement  over  the  past  few 
years.  There  is  also  evidence  that  progress  is  finally  being  made  on  unemployment,  a 
subject I would like to cover in a little more detail. 
There  were  international  recessions  in  the  early  1970s,  1980s  and  1990s. We  have  also  just  been 
through one in the early 2000s, although economists are still debating whether it was deep enough to 
be added to the list of its three predecessors. In the 1970s, 80s and 90s, Australia also experienced 
recessions roughly co-incident with the international ones. On each occasion our unemployment rate 
rose sharply – to 6.5 per cent in the 1970s, to 10.3 per cent in the 1980s and to 10.8 per cent in the 
1990s. While we were able to reduce the unemployment rate during the later expansionary phases, 
each recession  pushed it  up again to a  new peak (see Table 1). The real story  behind the upward 
trend in unemployment was the shakeouts that occurred during the recessions, not the insufficiency of 
the growth rate during the expansions. 
 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2002
  1970s 
1980s 
1990s 
Table 1 
Unemployment rate in recessions 
Rise in unemployment 
(percentage points) 
4.9 
4.8 
4.8 
Peak level 
(per cent) 
6.5 
10.3 
10.8 
 
During the international downturn/recession of 2001, Australia was able to avoid a recession so our 
expansion is still proceeding. Nevertheless, there was some slowing in the pace of economic growth 
and the unemployment rate rose by about 1 percentage point. Although I am always wary of counting 
chickens before they hatch, it now appears that over the past six months the unemployment rate may 
have peaked at, or a little above, 7 per cent. If this is the outcome, it will be the first time for three 
decades  that  we  have  been  through  an  international  downturn  that  has  resulted  in  the  peak 
unemployment rate in Australia being lower than its predecessor.  
I hope that I am not premature in making this assessment, and am aware that it could all be unwound 
if we encountered a recession in the near future. But that is not likely in my view, at least not in the 
forecasting horizon. If my assessment is correct it will reinforce the view that the principal contribution 
that  macroeconomic  policy  can  make  to  reducing  unemployment  is  to  have  the  longest  expansion 
possible (but not the fastest), and to have the mildest slowdown. It also suggests that the reduction in 
unemployment to an acceptable rate is a task that was always going to take longer than the timeframe 
encompassed by a typical economic expansion. 
The Future 
As you can see from the foregoing, I think Australians have tended to be quite hard on themselves 
when making judgements about the economy. This has its good side of course, because it has meant 
we  have  been  more  prepared  to  take  tough  decisions  than  many  other  countries,  particularly 
European  ones,  when  it  comes  to  reducing  government  debt,  opening  up  the  economy,  privatising, 
deregulating the labour market and imposing stricter competition standards. 
When we look to the future, I see no need for us to retain our long held pessimism about our country’s 
economic future. For a start, we should gain some comfort from the fact that in economic terms, there 
was a clear improvement from the 1970s to the 1980s and an even bigger one to the 1990s. This is 
true  in  absolute  terms  and  even  more  so  in  relative  terms:  the  1990s  was  the  first  decade  that  we 
clearly grew faster in income per head terms than the OECD average. We should not be looking at 
ourselves  as  one  of  the  laggards,  but  as  one  of  the  few  pacesetters  among  developed  OECD 
countries.  
What about the longer-run trends? There is still a feeling in many quarters that "we were dealt a good 
hand to play in the world economy of 1900, but a bad hand for the world economy a century later". 
This is tied up with the view that we are mainly good at exporting resource-based goods (in which I 
include  mining,  metals  and  agriculture),  and  hence  our  terms  of  trade  are  bound  to  continue  the 
deterioration that started a century ago. I think this fatalism is misplaced for two main reasons. 
The first and conventional response to this charge is to point out how the economy is changing, and in 
particular,  how  we  are diversifying our  export mix. Over the  past sixteen  years, the fastest  growing 
categories  of  exports  in  real  terms  have  been  manufactured  exports  and  exports  of  services.  The 
annual growth rates of each category of exports is shown in Table 2. We all know of some success 
stories, but each one is relatively small in itself. What we don’t tend to realise, is just how many there 
are, and how widespread they are. 
BIS Review 22/2002 
 3
 Manufactures 
Services 
Resource-based of which: 
– minerals and metals 
– rural 
Table 2 
Growth rates of export volumes  
1985 to 2001 – % pa 
12.4 
7.5 
 6.4 
3.4 
 
There is a second and more interesting response, however, than the conventional one, and it is one I 
would like to spend a bit of time on. It concedes that even with export diversification occurring, we are 
still going to be a country with a high proportion of our exports coming from the resource sector. In 
twenty  years  of  diversification,  the  proportion  of  exports,  which  is  resource-based,  has  fallen  from 
nearly  80  per  cent  of  the  total  to  60  per  cent  of  the  total  at  present.  This  is  still  very  high  by  the 
standards of an OECD country, and even if it goes down to 50 per cent in another fifteen years, it will 
still be high by the standards of developed countries. Is this something we should worry about? 
A  lot  of  people  would  say  yes,  because  resource-based  goods  are  "commodities",  and  this  means 
their prices will fluctuate widely in a cyclical sense, but more disturbingly, their trend will continue to 
show  a  long-run  decline.  This  is  the  same  assumption  I  have  referred  to  a  few  times  in  my  talk, 
namely, our terms of trade will continue to decline. 
But I think we have to doubt this assumption. The products whose prices will show long-run declines 
are likely to be those whose production can be expanded most easily. And nothing fits this description 
better  than  large  areas  of  manufacturing.  Governments  around  the  world,  particularly  in  Asia,  are 
competing  to  build  larger  and  larger  plants,  and  companies  from  developed  countries  are  assisting 
them through private direct investment. We all know how far the price of computer chips has fallen, but 
this is only one example of many. Large areas of manufacturing, such as textiles, clothing, footwear, 
electrical  equipment  and  even  automobiles  have  shown  downward  trends  in  prices.  These  are 
precisely the sorts of things that  we  in  Australia import, and increasingly  what  developing countries 
export. In a recent study, the World Bank pointed out that manufactures now make up 80 per cent of 
developing country exports, compared with only 25 per cent as recently as 1980.  
Over  the  past  three  years  the  prices  of  26  out  of  29  categories  of  our  imports  have  fallen  (when 
adjusted for exchange rate effects). In other words the stigma of the word ‘commodity’ could now be 
more appropriately applied to our imports than to our exports. This may be the reason that for the first 
time  in  memory,  our  terms  of  trade  actually  rose  during  a  world  recession  (i.e.  over  the  past  three 
years). It is also consistent with the fact that the low point in our terms of trade was in 1986: there have 
been cyclical lows since, but they have been at successively higher levels. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2002
  Now  I  don’t  want  to  get  into  an  argument  about  whether  it  is  better  to  put  our  scarce  investment 
resources into the resource sector or into the manufacturing sector. In fact, I would strongly resist the 
government  setting  out  to  decide  the  answer  to  this  question.  All  I  am  saying  is  that  we  shouldn’t 
assume that our future is unfavourable just because we happen to have started with the industry mix 
we  have.  A  corollary  of  my  view,  of  course,  is  that  it  would  be  very  unwise  for  the  government  to 
provide incentives for the private sector to move out of one activity into the other. It could easily end up 
being  seen  the  same  way  as  the  decision  of  the  South  Australian  authorities  in  1986  to  pay  grape 
growers to pull up their red wine vines (some of which were the now highly-prized old growth shiraz) 
and get into something more promising. 
We  have  had  a  history  of  being  told  that  we  have  the  wrong  model  for  our  economy,  and  that  we 
should  change  it  to  the  one  currently  in  vogue.  I  can  remember  in  the  1970s  when  the  continental 
European (including Swedish) model was seen as the way forward. In the 1980s there were numerous 
books and articles predicting that Japan would soon overtake the US as the world’s largest economy, 
and by implication that its corporatist approach was superior to more market-based approaches. In the 
first half of the 1990s Australia was regularly criticised for lacking the vigour of the emerging-market 
Asian economies (the Tigers) with their activist government-led development approach. 
In  the  past  few  years,  it  has  been  American  triumphalism.  The  extreme  expression  of  this  was  the 
recent  infatuation  with  the  ‘New  Economy’  and  denigration  of  activities  regarded  as  ‘Old  Economy’. 
Two  years  ago  at  the  World  Economic  Forum  meeting  in  Melbourne,  Australia  was  being  heavily 
criticised for not making enough of the IT and telecommunications investments that are currently being 
written  off  by  the  former  stars  of  the  NASDAQ.  As  you  can  gather  from  the  above,  I  am  extremely 
sceptical that we can identify a ‘new economic model’ and have the government move us to it. But, on 
the other hand, I recognise that as a country we have to be continually adapting in order to exploit 
emerging economic opportunities, including at the more sophisticated and high-value added end of the 
spectrum. 
This is a job not just for the private sector, but a challenge for public policymaking. Among the purely 
economic  policies  with  which  I  am  familiar,  such  as  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and  financial 
supervision, I think there has been enormous improvement over the past decade or two, and we can 
claim  membership  of  the  relatively  small  group  of  countries  that  represent  world  best  practice.  But 
good economic performance as we move into the future will depend on more than purely economic 
policies; it will depend on the incentives provided by our whole political, legal, social and educational 
environment.  It  is  somewhat  disturbing  therefore  to  read  the  recent  assessment  by  the  Vice-
Chancellor of Melbourne University that Australia no longer has a university that could be ranked in 
the top one hundred in the world. I have no reason to dispute his opinion as I have heard similar views 
from other academics. What it suggests is that, although we have made great progress in the breadth 
of  our  education  system,  we  cannot  make  the  same  claim  about  the  depth.  At  the  highest  level  of 
higher education we are not keeping up. 
I am usually reluctant to stray into areas of public policy outside my immediate area of expertise, but I 
am prepared to do so tonight in keeping with the broad range of issues discussed at this conference. I 
do not have a shopping list of suggestions, but I am happy to conclude my address tonight with a plea 
to  all  those  involved  in  higher  education  –  governments,  bureaucrats,  academics  and  their 
spokespersons,  taxpayers  and  businesses  to  do  something  about  this  situation.  The  remedy  will 
almost  certainly  involve  the  overthrow  of  some  long-held  conventions  that  attempt  to  impose 
uniformity.  It  will  probably  also  elicit  the  old  catchcry  of  ‘elitism’,  but  far  better  that,  than  the 
complacency which accepts that our higher education can slip further behind world best standard. 
BIS Review 22/2002 
 5
