 Bimal Jalan: India and Globalisation 
Speech by  Dr Bimal Jalan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Thirty  Sixth Convocation 
Address of the Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, 15 January 2002. 
 This is a truly momentous occasion in the life of this Institute, its students, its teachers, and its friends. 
Let  me  begin  by  conveying  my  heartiest  congratulations  to  the  students  who  are  receiving  their 
degrees today. For all of them, it is a culmination of years of hard work, and a recognition of their high 
academic merit.  
All  the  teachers  of  this  great  Institute,  who  have  put  in  so  much  time  and  effort  to  make  this  day 
possible, also deserve our gratitude.  
I would like to specially  welcome the parents of the students,  who are  present at this Convocation. 
Without some sacrifice and a good deal of support, successful completion of higher studies by young 
men and women, who are here today, would not have been possible. 
I  am  personally  grateful  to  the  President  of  the  Indian  Statistical  Institute,  Prof.  M.G.K.Menon  and 
Director,  Prof.  K.B.Sinha,  for  inviting  me  to  be  a  part  of  this  occasion.  A  scientist,  a  scholar  and  a 
public  figure,  Prof.  Menon  has  led  this  Institute  with  great  distinction.  He  has  been  a  source  of 
inspiration for all those connected with ISI and its teachers and students. It is a particular privilege and 
honour to deliver this address in his esteemed presence. 
On  this  important  occasion,  I  would  also  like  to  pay  homage  to  the  memory  of  Professor 
P.C.Mahalanobis,  founder  of  the  ISI  and  the  builder  of  the  modern  statistical  system  in  India.  His 
technical contribution to the development of statistics as a science are fundamental and well known all 
over the world. What was even more remarkable, in a developing country context, was his desire to 
use  statistical  methods  including  sample  surveys  to  understand  and  solve  the  problems  of  an 
underdeveloped economy, including low productivity agriculture.  
The  high  quality,  the  depth,  and  the  breadth  of  research  and  teaching  in  statistics  and  other  inter-
related subjects at this Institute are tributes to the vision of Prof. Mahalanobis and his confidence in 
our country’s future. 
While I am thankful for being here on this occasion, I am also a little daunted by the task of having to 
say something useful which may be of interest to this varied audience from so many different walks of 
life. After some reflection, I have chosen to speak to you on “India and Globalisation”, or how we in 
India should look at the process of so-called “globalisation” that the world has been passing through in 
recent years. I had an occasion to speak on this subject at Mumbai University Convocation a couple of 
weeks ago. This is a matter of considerable contemporary debate, and I thought some reflection on 
this may also be of interest here in Kolkata.  
There is a debate not only in India but all over the globe about the pros and cons of “globalisation”. 
There  is  hardly  any  important  global  meeting  which  does  not  witness  vigorous  protest  marches  or 
picketing by the opponents of the globalisation process.  
Equally, on the opposite side, there are those who regard it as panacea for all the world’s problems 
and key to unmixed prosperity and well being for all the countries and all the people. If you take a poll 
in  any  assembly,  including  I  am  sure  this  one,  you  will  find  some  are  strongly  for  and  some  are 
strongly against globalisation.  
To my  mind,  neither  view  –  for  or  against  –  is  correct.  The  only  rational  view  is  to  accept  it  as  an 
emerging and powerful global reality which has a momentum of its own. Our job as an independent 
nation / state is to ensure that we maximise the advantage for our country and minimise the risks. It 
has  both  pluses  and  minuses  like  any  other  major  global  economic  change  –  say,  the  industrial 
revolution  of  the  18th  century.  Some  countries  gained,  some  lost  –  partly  because  of  the  then 
prevailing  political  circumstances.  India,  for  example,  lost  because  of  colonialism  and  fragmented 
nature  of  our  polity.  U.K.,  Europe,  U.S.  –  and  later  Japan  prospered.  Same  is  the  case  with 
globalisation. One big difference, however, is that unlike the olden days, today our destiny is in our 
own hands. 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 1
 Before we look at our opportunities and challenges from globalisation, it is good to be certain of facts – 
where exactly India is in terms of globalisation. If we look at some of our own debate, it would seem as 
if  we  were  already  well  on  the  way  to  globalisation,  which  was  shaking  up  our  economy.  A  most 
common measure of globalisation is openness to trade and a country’s participation in trade. By this 
measure, the extent of India’s globalisation is insignificant – it is one of the lowest in the world. India’s 
share in world trade is a meagre 0.7 per cent or so. If a map of the world were drawn on the scale of a 
country’s participation in trade, India with a population of more than 1,000 million will occupy a smaller 
area than Singapore with a population of only 3 million. You would need a magnifying glass to locate 
India on that map!  
A second commonly used measure of globalisation is a country’s participation in international capital 
flows, particularly Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). As you know, annual flow of FDI across the globe 
is more than $ 1 trillion, i.e., $ 1,000 billion. Annual FDI inflows into India is $ 3 – 4 billion only or 0.3 – 
0.4 per cent of the total – that is all. Same is true of Foreign Institutional Investment (FII).  
Therefore, the first point that I would like to emphasise is that despite all the talk, we are nowhere even 
close to being globalised in terms of any commonly used indicator of globalisation. In fact, we are still 
one of the least globalised among major countries – however we look at it.  
An equally important point is that whether the so-called globalisation is considered to be good or bad 
for a country depends crucially on the sense in which the word is used. The word may be used in a 
purely  descriptive  sense  to  describe  a  “shrinkage”  of  distance  among  nation  states  due  to 
technological changes in transport and communication and closer integration of product and financial 
markets across the world. 
Another sense in which the word may be used is the effect of such changes on different countries or 
groups  of  countries,  such  as,  developed  and  developing.  In  yet  another  sense,  the  word  may  also 
represent  a  “globalisation  of  ideas  or  ideology”  and  may  be  used  as  a  synonym  for  triumph  of 
capitalism or dominance of unfettered markets.  
In discussing the issue of globalisation in the Indian context, I propose to confine myself largely to the 
factual  and  descriptive  sense  in  which  the  word  is  used,  i.e.  the  technological  changes,  and 
associated  policy  changes,  that  have  brought  the  world  economies  closer  and  made  them  more 
integrated with each other.  
In  this  particular  sense,  I  believe  that  the  changes  that  have  occurred  in  the  patterns  of  trade  and 
capital flows  in recent  years are to India’s advantage – although, unfortunately, so far we have  not 
made  much  use  of  it.  Today,  in  terms  of  the  potential  benefits  of  globalisation,  India  is  in  a  very 
different position than would have been the case 50 or even 20 years ago.  
This  is  because  the  sources  of  what  economists  call  “comparative  advantage”  have  changed 
dramatically  in  India’s  favour  in  the  1990s  because  of  the  technological  revolution.  In  the  old  days, 
comparative advantage was largely determined by “factor endowments”, i.e. land, labour and capital. 
Geographical location and early starts in industry also conferred greater advantages. 
Thus,  at  one  time,  a  country’s  trade  pattern,  was  determined  by  its  natural  resources  and  the 
productivity of its land. Leaving aside political and institutional factors, a country’s level of income was 
also  largely  determined  by  the  global  demand  for  its  natural  resources  and  its  relative  efficiency  in 
exploiting  them.  The  importance  of  land  as  a  source  of  comparative  advantage,  however,  changed 
dramatically after the industrial revolution. Today, it is almost insignificant. Thus, except for the United 
States, countries accounting for a predominant share of the world GDP have a relatively small share of 
global land area. 
After  the  industrial  revolution,  the  availability  of  “capital”  or  investible  resources  became  the  most 
dominant  source  of  comparative  advantage.  At  this  Institute,  established  by  the  great  Prof. 
P.C.Mahalonobis, I hardly need to elaborate on the importance that was attached to domestic capital 
accumulation  in  early  development economics. In fact, scarcity  of capital and  low  domestic savings 
were considered to be, and rightly so, as principal causes of a country’s underdevelopment.  
Today,  availability  of  capital  and  productivity  are  still  crucial  in  determining  a  country’s  growth  rate. 
However, there has been a dramatic change in the global mobility of capital, and national boundaries 
are no longer important determinants of sources and uses of capital. A dramatic illustration of this is 
the fact that the most developed country in the world, which enjoyed unprecedented growth during the 
1990s,  is  actually  a  capital-importing  country,  i.e.  the  United  States.  Similarly,  the  fastest  growing 
developing country, i.e. China, is one of the largest recipients of capital from outside.  
2 
 BIS Review 3/2002
 Similary, labour is no longer an important element in cost of production and in determining a country’s 
comparative advantage. In most manufacturing industries in the world, it is no higher than 1/8th of total 
costs. In India, it may  be  somewhat higher because of our domestic laws, but the important fact to 
note  is that India no longer needs to specialise only  in the production of labour-intensive plantation 
crops or primary commodities.  
A related development which is linked to the above changes, is the “Services Revolution”. The focus of 
attention  in  conventional  economics,  was  on  production  of  goods  –  manufactured  products  and 
agricultural  commodities.  It  was,  of  course,  recognised  that  the  services  sector  (which  includes 
transport,  communication,  trade,  banking,  construction  and  public  administration,  etc.)  was  an 
important  source  of  income  and  employment  in  most  economies.  However,  overall,  the  growth  of 
services was perceived at best as a by-product of developments in the primary and secondary sectors, 
and at worst as a drag on the prospects for long-term economic growth.  
In the last few years, there has been a phenomenal change in the conventional view of services and 
their  role  in  the  economy.  This  change  has  been  facilitated  by  unprecedented  and  unforeseen 
advances  in  computer  and  communication  technology.  As  a  result,  the  development  of  certain 
services  is  now  regarded  as  one  of  the  preconditions  of  economic  growth,  and  not  as  one  of  its 
consequences.  
The boundary between goods and services is also disappearing. Many industrial products are not only 
manufactured, but they are also researched, designed, marketed, advertised, distributed, leased and 
serviced.  
An important aspect of the “services revolution” is that geography and levels of industrialisation are no 
longer the primary determinants of the location of facilities for production of services. As a result, the 
traditional role of developing countries is also changing – from mere recipients to important providers 
of long-distance and high value services. 
From  India’s  point  of  view,  these  developments  provide  opportunities  for  substantial  growth.  For 
example: 
• 
The  fastest  growing  segment  of  services  is  the  rapid  expansion  of  knowledge-based 
services, such as, professional and technical services. India has a tremendous advantage in 
the  supply  of  such  services  because  of  a  developed  structure  of  technological  and 
educational institutions, such as this one, and lower labour costs. 
Unlike most other prices, world prices of transport and communication services have fallen 
dramatically. By 1960, sea transport costs were less than a third of their 1920 level, and they 
have continued to fall. The cost of a telephone call fell more than ten-fold between 1970 and 
2000. Moreover, the cost of communication is also becoming independent of distance. The 
most  dramatic  example  in  this  area  is,  of  course,  provided  by  the  “Internet”.  India’s 
geographical  distance  from  several  important  industrial  markets  (for  instance,  North 
America) is no longer an important element in the cost structure of skill-based services. 
It  is  now  feasible  to  “unbundle”  production  of  different  types  of  goods  and  services.  India 
does  not  necessarily  have  to  be  a  low-cost  producer  of  certain  types  of  goods  (e.g., 
computers or discs) before it can become an efficient supplier of services embodied in them 
(e.g., software or music).  
  At the same time, it must be recognised that the “death of distance” and the growing integration of 
global product, services and financial markets in recent years have also presented new challenges for 
management  of  the  national  economy  –  not  only  in  India  but  all  over  the  world.  The  trend  towards 
integration of markets, particularly financial markets, is by no means an unmixed blessing. Unlike the 
old  days,  a  heavy  price  may  have  to  be  paid  by  national  economies  for  somnolence,  sloth  and 
non-conformity  to  generally  accepted  international  norms  and  standards  of  macro-economic 
management, disclosure, transparency and financial accountability.  
Another  consequence  of  recent  global  trends  is  the  greater  vulnerability  of  national  economies  to 
developments  outside  their  own  borders.  A  crisis  in  any  one  or  a  group  of  countries,  can  be 
transmitted to other countries – including countries which may not have any strong economic linkages 
with  crisis-affected  countries.  Thus,  the  ’nineties  have  been  marked  by  a  large  number  of  currency 
crises (for example, in Mexico, Russia, East Asia and Brazil – and currently Argentina and Turkey); 
substantial swings in exchange rates (including the exchange rate of three leading currencies – the 
dollar, the Euro and the Yen); and run ups in asset prices followed by sharp collapse (for example in 
BIS Review 3/2002 
 3
 Japan and East Asia earlier and the United States last year). While the crises initially occur in one or 
two specific countries, their adverse effects are felt across the world. 
While we must be careful, on the whole, in my view, – the death of distance, the services revolution, 
and the mobility of capital – which characterise globalisation – present unprecedented opportunities 
for  India.  The  primary  source  of comparative  advantages  today  are  :  skills  and  ability  to  adapt  and 
change. And, India has the advantage – of skills, of entrepreneurship and of managerial competence 
in taking advantage of these changes. 
If what I have said is correct, then, why are we not jumping with joy and optimism? Why are we so 
“unglobalised” in terms of our share in trade, investment or communication? 
Transition from a closed to a vibrant, open and a more globally dominant economy will certainly take 
time and will not be painless.  
As of now, we also have much greater tolerance for waste, non-work and survival of the inefficient, 
and the self-seeking than other fast growing countries. Somehow to make this transition – from a less 
productive and less challenging economy to a more work-oriented and competitive economy – is the 
real challenge of globalisation. 
If we continue in our old ways, I see real social problems and inequalities emerging in our society. We 
will have islands of prosperity and excellence – IT, beauty parades and media entertainment amidst 
growing disparity, rising unemployment and immiserisation. And as has happened in several countries 
in the 1990s, including Turkey and Argentina - just now, those who are with us today will be the first to 
leave.  
The principal lesson of recent economic and technological developments, and growing tensions and 
inequalities within and across countries, is that our fate is in our hands. Our public policies have to 
respond  to  our  own  requirements  rather  than  to  any  fixed  global  ideology  or  a  pre-determined  and 
internationally prescribed model of economic progress. In my view, this is the real lesson of the 1990s. 
My  fervent  hope  is  that  as  you  –  the  best  and  the  brightest  of  our  country  –  go  out  and  face  a 
“globalising”  world,  you  will  keep  India’s  interest,  its  integrity,  its  indivisibility  and  its  future  potential 
close to your hearts and your minds. I have no doubt that, with your help, India of 2025 will be a very 
different place, and a much more dominant force in the world economy, than was the case twenty five 
years ago or at the beginning of the new millennium. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2002
