 Willem F Duisenberg: Assessment of the euro cash changeover and the ECB 
view on recent monetary and economic developments 
Keynote  address  by  Dr Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  New 
Year's reception of the International Club of Economic Journalists, Frankfurt, 14 January 2002. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to participate in today's New Year reception. In my speech today, 
I will address two issues, neither of which is likely to come as a surprise to you. First, I should like to 
assess the euro cash changeover, which started a fortnight ago. Second, I should like to share with 
you the view of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) on recent monetary and 
economic developments.  
A first assessment of the euro cash changeover 
On 1 January 1999 the euro was established as a new currency. Two weeks ago, the euro banknotes 
and coins were issued and became legal tender in the countries participating in the euro area. With 
their arrival, the process of introducing a single European currency, as agreed in Maastricht in 1991, is 
complete.  Paying  with  a  single  currency  in  daily  transactions  throughout  the  euro  area  can  be 
regarded as an achievement of historic proportions and as a major step in the process of European 
integration.  
The Eurosystem, the ECB and the 12 national central banks (NCBs) of the euro area as well as all 
other parties involved were quite confident – although of course not 100% certain – that the euro cash 
changeover  would  be  a  success,  given  the  enormous  efforts  and  preparations  which  went  into  this 
unprecedented operation. Now, two weeks after the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, I 
can  even  say  that,  given  the  scale  of  the  task,  the  operation  has  so  far  progressed  very  smoothly, 
even beyond our own expectations.  
Here and there some minor mishaps have occurred and may continue to occur, but this is quite normal 
for such a massive operation, involving more than 300 million people in 12 countries. 
The introduction of euro banknotes and coins has been a complex and ambitious undertaking which 
requires  –  in  addition  to  understanding  and  co-operation  on  the  part  of  the  public  –  organisational, 
logistical, technical and economic efforts on the part of those sectors directly involved in the use of 
banknotes and coins. I should like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to all these parties, 
such as retailers, the vending machine industry, cash-in-transit companies and, of course, the banking 
sector. But the media has also been accompanying the changeover in a very positive, informative and 
supportive manner, thus helping us to convey certain messages to the citizens of the euro area as to 
how they can contribute to a successful operation. At the end of the day, the success of the euro cash 
changeover depends not only on the co-operation of all professional parties directly involved, but also 
on a favourable attitude and quick acceptance by the citizens. Therefore, I should also like to express 
my gratitude to the media for their efforts.  
Let me now mention some of the other factors which have contributed to the success of the euro cash 
changeover. 
First,  in  March  last  year  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  established  the  Cash  Changeover 
Co-ordination  Committee  (CashCo)  comprising  representatives  from  the  ECB,  the  12  NCBs  of  the 
euro area, the European Commission and Europol. The Committee has overall responsibility for the 
co-ordination of the changeover to euro banknotes and coins from the period before 1 January 2002 
until the end of February 2002.  
Second, measures were taken to ensure an early return of national banknotes and coins. As regards 
the return of legacy currency coins, most national authorities reduced the work for banks during the 
dual circulation period either by encouraging the public to deposit hoarded coins at banks' counters 
early on, or through a range of charity schemes introduced in some countries. With regard to national 
banknotes,  there  was  also  a  return  of  hoarded  banknotes,  particularly  high  denominations.  In  total, 
legacy  currency  banknotes  in  circulation  fell  during  the  course  of  the  year  by  EUR  110  billion  to 
EUR 270 billion at the end of 2001.  
BIS Review 4/2002 
 1
 Third,  a  crucial  factor  for  the  success  of  the  euro  cash  changeover  was  the  decision  to  allow  the 
frontloading  and  sub-frontloading  of  banknotes  and  coins  to  the  banking  sector  and  to  other  target 
groups  from  1  September  2001.  This  four-month  lead  time  was  required  in  order  to  ensure  that 
sufficient euro banknotes and coins were available for widespread circulation from 1 January 2002. In 
fact, the scale and timing of frontloading and sub-frontloading varied considerably between different 
countries, depending on the national changeover scenario chosen, the national infrastructure (e.g. the 
extent  of  the  central  bank  branch  network  and  its  role  in  the  money  supply,  the  storage  facilities 
available in bank branches) as well as the size and geography of the country. 
In almost all euro area countries the national authorities provided euro coins to credit institutions from 
September 2001 because their bulk made them more difficult to transport and their lower value meant 
that the risk to credit institutions was lower than for banknotes. Five countries (i.e. Austria, Finland, 
Germany,  Luxembourg  and  Spain)  started  frontloading  banknotes  at  the  same  time;  the  remaining 
seven countries postponed the distribution of banknotes until November and December 2001 in most 
cases. 
All countries supplied credit institutions and the retail sector with both euro banknotes and coins prior 
to  1  January  2002.  The  participation  of  retailers  in  sub-frontloading  operations  varied  by  country, 
sector and region. As regards the cash-operated machine industry, and in view of the need to load 
machines with coins prior to €-Day, most all euro countries sub-frontloaded euro coins to this sector. 
By the end of 2001, more than 6.5 billion euro banknotes worth some EUR 134 billion and more than 
37.5 billion euro coins with a total value of around EUR 12.4 billion had been frontloaded. This meant 
that  around  70%  of  the  banknotes  and  80%  of  the  coins  were  already  distributed  to  banks  before 
1 January,  which  was  decisive  for  a  smooth  start  to  the  changeover.  Broadly  speaking,  sub-
frontloading was also in line with the initial forecasts and represented an overall amount of between 
10% and 20% of the frontloaded amount.  
According to the ECOFIN Council statement made in November 1999, euro coins were allowed to be 
provided to the general public from mid-December 2001 in order to ensure the citizens' familiarity with 
euro coins and to reduce the stocks needed by retailers to provide change at the beginning of 2002. 
The citizens of the euro area were very quick to buy one or more coin sets. Overall, the general public 
acquired more than 150 million coin starter kits comprising over 4.2 billion coins worth EUR 1.6 billion. 
This means that on average each individual was in possession of 14 coins at the beginning of 2002. In 
a  number  of  countries  (i.e.  Germany,  Portugal,  Finland  and  Luxembourg),  demand  was  such  that 
banks were authorised to make up their own kits and even to sell some of their bulk stocks.  
Fourth,  given  that  in  terms  of  transactions  around  70%  of  banknotes  are  put  into  circulation  via 
automated teller machines (ATMs), the quick adaptation of these machines was one of the key factors 
for a smooth changeover. In total, more than 200,000 ATMs, either on site in bank branches or off site, 
for example in shopping centres, had to be converted. This was already achieved within less than one 
week.  
As a result, in all participating Member States the bulk of cash transactions could already be made in 
euro after 10 days. This means that the euro banknotes and coins have been introduced considerably 
faster than originally foreseen by the ECOFIN Council, which had set a goal of two weeks.  
A fifth factor contributing to a smooth changeover was the commitment of the banking sector in almost 
all euro area countries to put, in particular, the low denomination euro banknotes (i.e. EUR 5 and EUR 
10) into circulation on a large scale at the beginning of 2002. This considerably reduced the need for 
retailers to hold large amounts of cash during the first few days of 2002. In those euro area countries 
one  or  both  of  the  low  denomination  euro  banknotes  were  dispensed  via  at  least  part  of  the  ATM 
network  at  the  start  of  2002.  In  countries  where  welfare  payments  are  paid  largely  in  cash  (i.e. 
Belgium,  France  and  Ireland),  this  was  also  done  in  low  denominations.  Moreover,  banks  paid  out 
predominantly low denomination euro banknotes over the counter. All this resulted at the beginning of 
the year in a circulation of low denomination banknotes (i.e. EUR 5, EUR 10 and EUR 20) of 82.4% in 
terms of actual banknotes and 43% in value. This far exceeded the proportion of national banknotes of 
similar value previously in circulation in the individual euro area countries. 
In conclusion, the Eurosystem is proud of and grateful to all those involved for their contributions to 
this historic moment. The enthusiasm of the citizens of the euro area to get hold of euro cash from 
mid-December  can  be  seen  as  a  clear  vote  for  a  united  Europe.  I  am  very  confident  that  the 
changeover will proceed to its completion as smoothly and successfully as it has started.  
2 
 BIS Review 4/2002
 Recent monetary and macroeconomic developments 
Let me now turn to the macroeconomic situation in the euro area and the  outlook for price stability 
over the medium term.  
Recent information has confirmed the Governing Council's earlier assessment that economic activity 
in the euro area was weak in the second half of 2001 and will probably remain subdued in early 2002. 
However, although the outlook is still surrounded by a high degree of uncertainty, there are indications 
pointing to a gradual economic recovery in the euro area in the course of this year. This is signalled, 
inter alia, by financial market developments and by recent survey data, which indicate that the decline 
in confidence in the euro area may have bottomed out.  
Indeed, the conditions exist for economic growth in the euro area to recover in the course of this year. 
There  are  no  fundamental  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  that  would  require  a  prolonged  correction 
process.  In  addition,  financing  conditions  in  the  euro  area  are  favourable,  as  real  and  nominal 
short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates  are  currently  at  very  low  levels.  Furthermore,  the  expected 
further decline in consumer price inflation in 2002 will lead to higher growth in real disposable income 
that should support domestic demand.  
Inflation rates have been falling significantly over recent months, from a peak of 3.4% in March 2001 to 
a level, according to the Eurostat flash estimate, of 2% in December. This downward path in annual 
inflation  rates,  which  stems mainly  from  the  unwinding  of  past  increases  in  energy  prices  and  from 
base effects related to past increases in food prices, is likely to continue for some months. However, 
mainly on account of base effects, the pattern of annual inflation rates may be somewhat erratic in the 
coming months. In this regard, the  possibility of some short-lived upward movements in the annual 
rate of inflation cannot be ruled out, but this should not be a cause for concern. Likewise, downward 
shifts resulting from such base effects later in the spring should not signal a change in the longer-term 
outlook for price stability.  
Concerning  the  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  which  I  have  just  talked  about  at  length, 
there is a lot of talk by the public and the media about the potential inflation effects stemming from 
rounding towards psychologically attractive prices. But we should expect such rounding to be in both 
directions,  up  and  down.  In  fact,  although  many  had  feared  anticipatory  effects  on  inflation  rates 
already in 2001, there has been little evidence so far of the changeover affecting the average level of 
prices, and  we  do not expect any  noticeable effect on the  average price level in the future. This is 
largely due to strong competition in the retail sector, continued awareness on the part of consumers 
and  the  commitment  of  governments  not  to  increase  the  average  level  of  administered  prices. 
However, we will of course remain vigilant with regard to the possibility, albeit remote, of an impact on 
inflation rates in the first months of this year as a consequence of the introduction of euro banknotes 
and coins. 
Looking  beyond  short-term  developments,  we  assume  that  wage  moderation  in  the  euro  area  will 
continue and that the pressure of demand on prices will remain limited, although there is some cause 
for concern about forthcoming wage negotiations. It is therefore particularly important to point to the 
indispensable  role  of  continued  wage  moderation  in  fostering  employment  and  maintaining  a 
favourable outlook for price stability.  
Finally, I should also emphasise that we do not regard recent monetary developments as posing a risk 
to price stability. Although the annual growth rates of M3 have picked up significantly in recent months, 
we need to keep in mind that this happened in an economic and financial environment characterised 
by exceptionally high uncertainty throughout the world. It can therefore be assumed that this growth to 
a large extent reflects the risk aversion of investors who wish to "wait and see" – and therefore hold 
liquid and safe assets included in M3 – before again undertaking long-term investments. In this sense, 
this increase in M3 should remain temporary and should not indicate future inflationary pressures. This 
notwithstanding, the continued acceleration of M3 and the ongoing build-up of liquidity calls for close 
attention and will require a thorough analysis of monetary developments in the months to come. 
Overall, we do not currently see any major risks to price stability in the euro area. In fact, following a 
series of unexpected sectoral price shocks, the outlook for price stability significantly improved in the 
course of 2001. The Governing Council reacted to this in a forward-looking manner by reducing the 
key ECB interest rates by a total of 150 basis points in 2001. On the basis of current information, our 
assessment is that annual inflation rates should fall safely below 2% this year and thereafter remain at 
levels  consistent  with  price  stability  over  the  foreseeable  future.  Against  this  background,  the 
BIS Review 4/2002 
 3
 Governing Council of the ECB concluded at its last meeting that it considers the current level of key 
ECB interest rates to be consistent with the maintenance of price stability over the medium term. 
The best contribution monetary policy can make to sustainable and non-inflationary economic growth 
is to maintain price stability. In this respect, I would also like to reiterate how important it is for fiscal 
policies to maintain a medium-term orientation within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
We are well aware that the current weakness in economic growth presents a particular challenge for 
those countries which have not yet attained budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus or which 
have  high  public  debt-to-GDP  ratios.  Nonetheless,  it  is  important  to  realise  that,  rather  than  being 
detrimental  to  a  return  to  sustainable  economic  growth,  the  adherence  of  these  countries  to  their 
medium-term  consolidation  programmes  will  strengthen  consumer  and  investor  confidence.  Any 
deviation from the medium-term orientation could thus only prove counterproductive. Countries without 
fiscal imbalances can, of course, allow automatic stabilisers to operate fully. However, there is no case 
for fiscal activism in any country. 
The  only  way  to  continue  to  expand  the  rate  of  non-inflationary  output  growth  of  the  economy  in  a 
decisive  and  long-lasting  manner  is  to  deepen  structural  reform  in  the  labour  and  goods  markets. 
Efforts have been made in this direction in many euro area countries over recent years, but there is 
still some way to go. In the same vein, governments should pursue determined reforms with regard to 
the size and structure of public expenditure and revenue, also in order to create room for further tax 
cuts and to absorb  the fiscal costs of population  ageing. Together  with continued  wage moderation 
aimed at sustaining recent labour market gains, these reforms will foster employment and investment, 
and  ultimately  contribute  in  a  decisive  manner  to  making  the  euro  a  resounding  and  long-lasting 
success, underpinned by a stable and dynamic economy. I am confident that the importance of this 
moment and the need to act resolutely is well understood by policy-makers all over Europe. 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2002
