 Guy Quaden: The Euro - a milestone on the path of European integration and a 
contribution to world economy stability 
Keynote address by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the OECD Forum, 
Paris, 14 May 2002. 
 It is a great honour and pleasure for me to address this important Forum of the OCDE on the theme of 
the euro. 
On 1 January 2002, the euro was physically introduced in the form of banknotes and coins. This event 
marked the conclusion of the changeover to the single currency, which had been initiated three years 
earlier, on 1 January 1999, when the non cash euro was successfully introduced in the money and 
financial markets. With effect from 1 March 2002, the euro has become the sole legal tender in the 
12 countries of the euro area. 
The success of the euro cash changeover has surpassed all expectations. That such an unparalleled 
logistical  operation  took  place  almost  without  a  hitch  bears  witness  to  Euroland’s  operational 
capability. Such a massive and complex project could in fact only be successfully completed thanks to 
meticulous  preparation  and  the  all-out  efforts  of  innumerable  people,  authorities,  enterprises  and 
associations working together in a constructive and co-operative spirit, in the public and private sector 
alike. European citizens have accepted their new money rapidly and enthusiastically and have chosen 
to be actors and not merely spectators in the changeover. They have helped to write a decisive page 
in the history of modern Europe whose significance far transcends the purely monetary field. 
In my presentation today I first would like to analyse the implications of the introduction of the euro, 
both as a completion of the single market and for the creation of a new framework for economic policy. 
Thereafter, I would like to explore three important challenges for the euro area: firstly to increase the 
growth  potential  and  growth  performance  of  Europe’s  economies,  secondly  to  reinforce  policy 
co-ordination and political cohesion between the countries of the zone, and thirdly to prepare for and 
to  succeed  its  enlargement  and  the  accession  of  new  members.  I  would  conclude  with  some 
comments on the international aspects of the euro. 
 European  monetary  union  pursues  two,  interrelated  economic  objectives:  more  efficiency  and  more 
stability. 
Let  me  start  off  with  more  efficiency.  The  euro  is,  in  the  first  instance,  a  completion  of  the  single 
market. The introduction of the euro has created one of the world’s major economic areas. The young 
euro area is an important economic power, with a population of around 300 million people, having a 
considerable  purchasing  power,  which  is  only  exceeded  by  the  United  States.  Thus,  the  Member 
States of the euro area together represent some 15% of world GDP,  which  is less than  the United 
States - with about 20% - but twice as much as Japan. By way of comparison, the biggest country of 
the euro area by itself is estimated to represent only 4.5% of world GDP. 
Monetary union also implies that some exchange rates do no longer exist, as for instance the rate of 
the  Belgian  franc  against  the  German  mark  or  the  Italian  lira.  In  the  past,  the  volatility  of  these 
exchange  rates  has  been  most  harmful  to  the  closely  interdependent  national  economies  of  the 
European common market. Let’s think back for instance to the ERM-crises in 1992 and 1993. 
The single currency has completely removed exchange rate risks for exporters and importers, debtors 
and creditors across the 12 countries of the euro area and has thus eliminated the costs of hedging 
exchange rate risks vis-à-vis other euro area countries. 
I  notice  in  passing  that  this  “internal  exchange  rate”  stability  has  often  been  overshadowed  by  a 
disproportional interest in the floating of the US dollar-euro exchange rate. The dollar/euro exchange 
rate  movements  have,  in  fact,  been  comparable  with  the  dollar’s  historical  fluctuations  vis-à-vis  the 
European currencies (in particular the German mark) prior to the introduction of the euro. 
The euro is leading to an increased transparency of prices and greater competition and a thorough 
integration  process  has  taken  place  in  the  area.  The  integration  of  the  money  market  and  the 
BIS Review 33/2002 
 1
    2. 
    2 
 disappearance  of  the  exchange  rate  risk  have  provided  a  boost  to  the  integration  of  other  financial 
markets, such as the bond market and the equity markets, be it to a lesser extent. 
The  stability  effects  which  the  euro’s  arrival  has  brought  about  and  which  have  improved  growth 
potential in the zone, cover other types of stability: price stability and fiscal stability. 
1. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  both  deflation  and  inflation  are  harmful  for  both  output  and 
welfare  in  the  medium  term:  they  distort  the  information  contained  in  the  price  system, 
imperceptibly change the real value of contracts and savings and heighten uncertainty. They 
consequently  disturb  the  allocation  of  resources,  the  investment  process  and  the  income 
distribution.  In  the  case  of  Europe,  this  consensus  on  the  contribution  of  price  stability  to 
promoting long-term growth is explicitly enshrined in the Treaty of Maastricht  which states 
unambiguously that the primary objective of monetary policy is to maintain price stability. The 
Eurosystem, which associates the European Central Bank and the national central banks of 
the 12 euro countries, is convinced that by fulfilling this mandate, monetary policy is making 
its  most  effective  contribution  to  the  realisation  of  strong  output  growth  as  well  as  to 
sustainable employment prospects. 
As  part  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  European  Central  Bank  has  published  a 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability.  It  aims  to  create  a  stable  anchoring  point  for  price 
expectations, making it also easier for the public to judge its actions. Price stability is defined 
as an annual rise in the harmonised index of consumer prices for the euro area of less than 
2%. It must be maintained in the medium term. 
Central bankers cannot avoid that external shocks, such as a rise of commodity prices on 
the international markets, lead to a temporary increase in inflation. However they do have to 
prevent second-round effects and must ensure that the internal value of the currency will be 
maintained in the medium term. 
That the policy of the Eurosystem has been convincing in this respect can be seen from the 
moderate inflation expectations as evidenced, among other things, by the level of long-term 
interest rates. Together with the present easy monetary conditions, the continuance of low 
risk premiums in euro long-term interest rates is one of the factors from which the economic 
recovery in 2002 can draw strength. 
Another  stability-related  aspect  in  the  new  European  economic  policy  framework  is  the 
discipline of fiscal policies. 
The convergence criteria leading to the last stage of Economic and Monetary  Union have 
played an important part to ensure a stable environment. In addition, the institutional set-up 
and different permanent procedures within the European Union aim to promote the stability-
oriented  policies  further.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  multilateral  surveillance  and  peer 
pressure are important tools to this end. 
Monetary policy decisions are centralised but fiscal policy is still conducted at the level of the 
Member  States,  in  accordance  with  the  subsidiarity  principle.  This  leaves  room  for 
manoeuvre regarding the composition of public spending and revenues, in line with national 
preferences  and  with  possible  differences  in  the  cyclical  positions.  However  decentralised 
fiscal policies had, within the eurozone, to take into account the potential for spillover effects. 
The present framework has been designed to minimise the risk of negative spillovers (across 
countries  and  across  policies)  from  inappropriate  fiscal  policies.  Crucially,  the  Treaty 
contains an obligation to avoid “excessive deficits”. This constraint, together with procedures 
for a multilateral review of national fiscal policies, has been further specified by the Stability 
and Growth Pact. The Pact stipulates quantifiable deficit rules, which provide a clear policy 
orientation for the budgetary authorities in the Member States. 
It  is  not  correct  to  describe  the  Pact  as  a  fiscal  straitjacket.  In  a  monetary  union  a  more 
prominent  role  is  generally  assigned  to  fiscal  policy  in  dealing  with  cyclical  movements.  If 
correctly applied, the Stability and Growth Pact certainly offers the necessary scope for this. 
Indeed,  the  obligation  for  the  EU  Member  States  to  aim  for  a  budget  which  is  “close  to 
balance or in surplus” “over the medium term” does make it possible to allow the nominal 
budget balances to fluctuate according to the changing cyclical circumstances. The so-called 
economic stabilisers can operate freely in a period of economic slowdown in the countries 
having structurally balanced their budget at the top of the cycle. 
BIS Review 33/2002
  The  changeover  to  the  physical  euro  has  concluded  a  chapter  in  the  history  of  the  European 
integration but not the book. After the introduction of the new currency, the countries of the euro-zone 
are facing three main challenges. 
1. 
The economic outlook remains subject to uncertainties but after a disappointing year 2001 
globally  business  confidence  has  markedly  improved  in  the  euro  area  over  the  last  few 
months  and  the  conditions  for  a  sustained  upswing  are  in  place,  including  favourable 
financing conditions. While the recovery is expected to initially proceed at a gradual pace, 
real GDP growth rates should gravitate towards potential growth later this year. 
The  growth  problem  has  however  two  dimensions:  short  term  and  long  term.  Potential 
growth in the euro-area is estimated at between 2¼ and 2½%, still noticeably less than in the 
US. This growth potential needs to be increased. Yet the solution is not necessarily, I think, 
to  duplicate  the  American  “model”.  The  experience  of  some  countries  in  Northern  Europe 
(Scandinavia) indicates that it is possible to combine a level of social protection conform to 
the  European  preferences  with  high  rates  of  participation  to  the  workforce,  technological 
innovation and economic growth comparable to those of the US. 
Monetary unification is in itself a major structural reform, which has already stimulated other 
reforms.  Yet  further  strides  are  necessary  in  order  to  increase  overall  productivity  and  to 
include in working life those who are still unemployed. 
The  euro  area  countries  must  raise  the  “speed  limit”  of  their  economies  by  continuing  to 
improve the efficiency  of labour  and products markets, to encourage the  entrepreneurship 
and to foster a knowledge-based economy. 
A question often asked is whether it was appropriate to introduce monetary union between 
different European countries before political union. It is true that in the case of the US for 
instance, political unification preceded monetary unification. There is however no precedent 
or pre-set scheme for the construction of Europe. 
The  single  currency  was  the  desirable  complement  to  the  single  market  and  European 
leaders took advantage of an exceptional political momentum in the late 1980s to proceed 
with monetary union. 
This monetary union can operate - and it has been proven for more than three years - in the 
current institutional framework with monetary  policy determined centrally by the Governing 
Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  with  a  high  degree  of  independence  and  a  clear 
mandate, and national fiscal policies which, though autonomous, are bounded by the rules of 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  The  soundness  of  the  euro  is  essentially  based  on  the 
strength of the area’s economy (the largest trading bloc in the world) and on price stability 
which safeguards the euro’s internal value, given that its external value inevitably fluctuates 
on account of differentials in growth and interest rates, particularly vis-à-vis the US. 
Having said that, I add, speaking in a personal capacity that new progress in the economic 
policies  co-ordination  among  the  Member  States  of  the  euro-area  and  more  political 
cohesion among them inside and outside Europe would be welcome to consolidate monetary 
union and deepen European integration. 
The  prospect  of  enlargement  is  another  reason  to  adapt  the  EU’s  institutions  and 
procedures. The EU is indeed facing another major challenge: many countries in the rest of 
Europe are knocking on its door. 
The  accession  criteria  to  the  European  Union  were  defined  at  the  European  Summit  in 
Copenhagen  in  1993.  The  political  criteria  concern  the  existence  of  stable  institutions 
guaranteeing  democracy,  the  rule  of  law,  respect  for  human  rights  and  protection  of 
minorities.  According  to  the  economic  criteria  these  countries  must  be  viable  market 
economies. In this connection it is necessary to verify whether prices and trade have been 
liberalised and whether a binding legal system, including property rights, is in place. These 
countries  must  also  be  competitive,  i.e.  capable  of  withstanding  competitive  pressure  and 
market forces within the Union. Finally, an institutional criterion concerns the adoption of the 
“acquis communautaire”. 
   2. 
   3. 
 BIS Review 33/2002 
 3
 Moreover the accession criteria to the monetary union are well known: there are the famous 
Maastricht criteria relative to the moderation of inflation, the avoidance of excessive public 
finance deficits and the stability of the exchange rate. 
In  many  accession  countries  substantial  progress  has  already  been  achieved  in  different 
fields and one can expect the participation of over ten new Member States to the European 
Union in the coming years and later on to the monetary union. However a lot remains to be 
done. 
 I shall now move on to the last topic of my speech: the international role of the euro. 
In the past, for economic and political reasons, some countries have adopted an active stance with 
regard to the internationalisation of their own currency, by either fostering or hindering its external use. 
For  its  part,  the  Eurosystem  has  adopted  a  neutral  stance.  This  means  that  it  neither  pursues  the 
internationalisation of the euro as a policy goal, nor does it attempt to hamper its use by non residents. 
The international role of the euro is and will be determined by the choices of market participants in the 
context of increasing market liberalisation and integration. There is place for at least two international 
currencies: in that field too competition is beneficial. 
Given  the  weight  of  the  euro  area  in  the  world  economy  and  the  legacy  of  the  former  national 
currencies of the area in financial markets, the euro has already become the second most widely used 
international currency behind the US dollar. 
As an anchor currency, the euro has largely inherited the role played by some of its legacy currencies 
(e.g. the German mark and the French franc). The euro plays a role as a peg in 55 countries outside 
the euro area, mainly in countries in the rest of Europe, Africa and the Middle East having close trade 
and historical links with the euro area countries. Arrangements adopted range from very close links to 
the euro to looser forms of anchoring. 
With regard to other functions, the euro’s international role has remained more limited. The US dollar 
remains  the  main  reserve  currency  and  the  dominant  pricing  and  quotation  currency.  The 
predominance of the dollar is attributable mainly to the combined and reinforcing effects of network 
externalities and economies of scale in the use of the leading international currency. 
Future developments in the international use of the euro are likely to be influenced by two main factors 
- size and risk. With regard to the size factor, a broad and liquid euro area capital market may lead to 
greater use of the euro through lower transaction costs. This may, in turn, facilitate the development of 
the euro as a vehicle currency for trade and commodity pricing. In addition, if international investors 
and  issuers consider the  euro to be a stable currency, they  will  hold more euro assets to minimise 
risks in their internationally diversified portfolios. 
Two processes of great significance for the world economic and political order have unfolded in the 
last  decades:  economic  globalisation  and  European  integration.  They  are  partially  linked.  Yet  they 
have different roots. One is the fruit of technological process and the free forces of the markets. The 
other has been motivated by political will and vision. 
Regional  integration  and  international  co-operation  are  surely  appropriate  means  to  promote  more 
stability  and  economic  growth  in  the  different  parts  of  the  world  and  to  contribute  to  humanise  the 
process of globalisation. 
The  euro  banknotes  show  windows,  gateways  and  bridges.  These  symbols  of  openness  and 
communication  will  help  both  to  promote  a  feeling  of  shared  identity  and  to  further  strengthen 
exchanges  among  the  nations  of  Europe.  At  the  same  time,  these  symbols  are  a  reflection  of  the 
European attitude towards the rest of the world. 
 4 
 BIS Review 33/2002
