 Masaru Hayami: Exchange rate regimes in the 21st century 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Masaru  Hayami,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Tenth  International 
Conference held by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 1 July 2002. 
 It is my great pleasure today to address the 10th international conference hosted by the Institute for 
Monetary and Economic Studies. On behalf of all my colleagues here at the Bank of Japan, I welcome 
all the participants. And my special thanks to the Institute’s two advisors, Professor Allan Meltzer and 
Professor Maurice Obstfeld. You have done a wonderful job helping us organize the conference. 
This  is  the  first  conference  in  the  21st  century,  and  for  such  an  occasion  my  colleagues  chose 
‘Exchange  Rate  Regimes  in  the  21st  Century’  as  the  theme.  Exchange  rate  regimes  among  major 
countries  experienced  several  changes  after  World  War  II  while  fulfilling  their  expected  role  of 
enhancing  cross-border  trade  and  investment  as  well  as  encouraging  world  economic  growth  and 
preserving price stability. 
Being  a  central  banker,  I  was  also  involved  in  changes  in  exchange  rate  regimes.  On  Sunday, 
August 15,  1971,  when  U.S.  President  Nixon  announced  that  the  US  would  no  longer  convert  the 
dollar into gold, I was stationed in the London office of the Bank of Japan. And I still vividly remember 
that  on  the  following  day,  Monday,  with  Bundesbank  Vice-President  Emminger,  I  took  part  in  a 
confidential  meeting  with  US  Treasury  Undersecretary  Volcker.  He  had  flown  over  to  London  to 
explain to the European monetary authorities the President’s announcement. 
Most  of  the  major  countries,  except  Japan,  closed  their  foreign  exchange  markets  after  the 
announcement.  European  participants,  who  broke  the  ice  at  the  meeting,  said  that  they  could  not 
re-open their markets until the US decided the new parity of the dollar. For monetary authorities at that 
time, the adoption of floating exchange rates was not like the dawn of a new era with full confidence. 
The  then  BIS  President  Zijlstra  termed  the  trial  and  error  among  authorities  under  the  floating 
exchange  rate  regime  “a  voyage  through  uncharted  waters,”  and  that  was  how  all  the  monetary 
authorities felt. 
Some  30  years  have  passed  under  the  floating  regime  and  now  we  have  two  challenges  for  the 
regime to meet. 
First, we have to work out how to preserve foreign exchange rate stability between major currencies. 
The dollar has functioned as a key currency under the floating exchange rate regime. Its exchange 
rate on other major currencies, however, has by no means been stable. 
I  have  had  a  hard  time,  sometimes  as  a  central  banker,  and  sometimes  as  the  head  of  a  trading 
company, dealing with fluctuations in foreign exchange rates. 
In  the  meantime,  EU  countries  made  efforts  to  stabilize  foreign  exchange  rates  between  member 
countries and such efforts paid off at the end of the 20th century. They gave birth to a single currency, 
the euro. 
The euro will no doubt contribute to enhancing trade and investment within the region and will be a 
model for other regions in the world. And it will take some time to get clues to what extent the euro will 
play  the  role  of  a  key  currency  and  lead  to  the  stability  of  foreign  exchange  rates  between  major 
currencies. 
I  should  also  add  that  we  might  need  to  review  the  background  history  and  rationale  behind  the 
special drawing rights (SDR) of the IMF which were created in 1969. 
The other important challenge in the 21st century is how we can devise the exchange rate regime in 
order to stave off currency and financial crises in the emerging economies and also how to contain 
resultant contagion to the minimum. 
We  understand  that  the  past  currency  crises  in  Latin  American  and  Asian  countries  were  brought 
about by  individual and  unique factors. Still,  we have no choice but to make steady  efforts to learn 
from the past crises in various countries in order to ward off currency crises and contain contagion. I 
am told that this conference will take up such issues related to currency crises and I am convinced that 
your discussions will provide a good opportunity to enhance our understanding. 
BIS Review 41/2002 
 1
 A better understanding of an ideal exchange rate regime may not lead to a universal currency system 
all  the  countries  around  the  globe  accept.  I  have  several  times  witnessed  a  currency  system,  once 
optimal  for  a  certain  country  at  a  certain  time,  gradually  become  fraught  with  inconsistencies  and 
unstable in time. 
Yet, pessimism is not what I want to spread. A series of inconsistencies in the international currency 
have, in my judgement, deepened our understanding of the functions and roles of an exchange rate 
regime and have encouraged the evolution of such a system. To rack our brains and map out ways to 
achieve a better exchange rate regime is one of the most important challenges for central bankers. 
I am convinced that with the experts from all over the world exchanging their experiences and views, 
this  conference  will  contribute  to  meeting  such  a  challenge.  And  I  believe  this  conference  will  also 
provide clues to how to map out charts through troubled waters. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2002
