 Christian Noyer: Presentation of the European Central Bank(cid:146)s Annual Report 
for 2001 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 23 April 2002.  
 It is my pleasure to present today the fourth Annual Report of the ECB, covering the year 2001, which, 
for  the  Eurosystem,  was  notably  marked  by  the  finalisation  of  the  preparations  for  the  euro  cash 
changeover.  
The introduction of the euro banknotes and coins 
The  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  on  1  January  2002  concluded  the  process  of 
establishing a Monetary Union in Europe, which had been launched some ten years ago. This event 
can  undeniably  be  regarded  as  a  milestone  in  European  monetary  integration  and,  indeed,  in 
European integration as a whole, as the single currency, which had already been used successfully for 
non-cash operations since 1999, became a tangible  reality for more than 300  million citizens in the 
euro area.  
The  preparations  for  the  cash  changeover  were  complex  and  required  from  the  outset  close 
cooperation between the Eurosystem and EU institutions, national authorities as well as a broad range 
of economic and financial agents, in particular the banking sector, security carriers, the cash-operated 
machine industry and, of course, retailers. The ultimate testament to the euro’s success, however, was 
the response of the European citizens, who accepted their new currency rapidly and with enthusiasm, 
as  shown  by  the  swift  withdrawal  of  legacy  currencies  in  the  first  weeks  following  the  cash 
changeover.  
Indeed, the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins proceeded far more smoothly than we had 
dared to expect, and I should like to take the opportunity today, on behalf of the ECB, to express once 
again my gratitude to the citizens of Europe and all the other parties involved for their contribution to 
making the cash changeover a success and for their fruitful collaboration with the Eurosystem over the 
past years.  
Review of economic and monetary developments 
Let me now turn to the review of economic and monetary developments. In the light of the central role 
of maintaining price stability that the Treaty assigns to monetary policy, I shall start by reporting that 
annual average HICP inflation in the euro area was 2.5% in 2001. The lagged effects of the increase 
in import prices in 2000, together with the impact of livestock diseases on unprocessed food prices in 
2001, contributed to the increase in annual HICP inflation rates, which peaked at 3.4% in May 2001. 
Since then, the effects of these factors on the annual inflation rates have gradually disappeared. 
We are obviously not satisfied with HICP developments in the course of last year. However, monetary 
policy only affects the level of prices with a lag and cannot aim to control it in the short term. Rather, 
monetary policy needs to be geared to the maintenance of price stability over the medium term, also in 
order to avoid introducing undue volatility in economic activity. In this respect, the level of long-term 
interest  rates  in  the  euro  area,  as  well  as  various  other  indicators  of  the  inflation  expectations  of 
economic  agents,  point  to  continued  confidence  throughout  2001  in  the  ECB’s  determination  to 
maintain price stability in the medium term. 
Indeed, there were already some signs in 2001 that medium-term inflation pressures were gradually 
starting to decline. At the start of the year, M3 growth moderated. This, together with a decline in the 
growth rates of loans to the private sector, indicated that the risks to price stability from the monetary 
side were becoming more balanced than they had been in 2000. In addition to this, the quantification 
of the upward distortions to the official monetary growth figures provided evidence in early 2001 that 
the growth of M3 appeared to be less pronounced than originally thought. 
At  the  same  time,  the  global  economy  showed  some  indications  of  weakness  in  early  2001,  which 
gradually affected economic activity in the euro area through declining investment and export growth. 
BIS Review 26/2002 
 1
 As a consequence, real GDP growth in the euro area was expected to moderate. In this environment, 
the concern over second-round effects via wages arising from the high annual rates of increase in the 
HICP dissipated gradually. As information stemming from both pillars of the monetary policy strategy 
indicated  lower  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term,  the  Governing  Council  decided  on 
10 May and 30 August 2001 respectively to lower the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. 
The  terrorist  attacks  in  the  United  States  on  11  September  2001  were  a  major  shock  to  the  world 
economy.  Immediately  after  the  attacks,  the  Eurosystem  took  measures  to  ensure  the  normal 
functioning of the financial markets. At the same time, the attacks created an exceptional degree of 
economic uncertainty, undermining confidence. This weakened economic growth further, thereby also 
lowering inflationary pressures.  
This general assessment of lower upward pressure on inflation was not contradicted by the analysis 
based on monetary data. Although M3 growth increased significantly in the second half of 2001, this 
rise was not interpreted as implying risks to inflation. In fact, it was related to portfolio shifts from long-
term to liquid short-term assets included in M3, which were initially linked to a relatively flat yield curve 
and  a  continued  decline  in  stock  prices  and  subsequently  reinforced  by  the  high  financial  market 
uncertainty  caused  by  the  terrorist  attacks  of  11  September.  The  continuous  decline  in  the  annual 
credit growth to the private sector also supported this assessment.  
In  the  light  of  this  information  from  the  two  pillars  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  Governing 
Council reduced the key  ECB  interest rates  twice by 50  basis  points, first on 17 September, in the 
immediate aftermath of the events of 11 September, and then again on 8 November 2001. After these 
decisions, the minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations stood at 3.25% and the rates on 
the deposit facility and the marginal lending facility stood at 2.25% and 4.25% respectively, 150 basis 
points lower than a year earlier. 
Let  me  also  report  that  at  its  meeting  of  8  November  2001,  the  Governing  Council  decided  that  it 
would henceforth (cid:150) as a rule (cid:150) assess the stance of the ECB’s monetary policy only at its first meeting 
of the month. Accordingly, since November 2001 interest rate decisions have only been taken at such 
meetings. In addition, I should mention that in the context of its regular review of the reference value 
for M3, the Governing Council confirmed in December 2001 the value of 4‰% for the annual growth of 
the broad monetary aggregate M3.  
I would now like to turn briefly to the analysis of the current economic situation. Over recent weeks we 
have seen  a slight  weakening of monetary  dynamics, which might be  a first indication of a gradual 
unwinding of the factors that led to the increase of M3 growth in the second half of last year, and a 
continuation of the decline in credit growth. However, owing to the strong M3 growth in 2001, there is 
still a lot of liquidity in the economy. We therefore have to monitor monetary dynamics closely in the 
coming months. The persistence of excess liquidity in the economy could become a concern once the 
economic recovery in the euro area gathers pace. 
Turning  to  economic  developments,  the  latest  information  has  reinforced  our  expectation  that  real 
GDP growth in the euro area will recover in 2002 and that, later in the year, it should again be back in 
line with potential growth. The recovery should be supported by both domestic and external factors, in 
an environment in which financial conditions are favourable and where there are no major imbalances 
in  the  euro  area.  However,  at  the  current  juncture,  some  uncertainty  still  remains  regarding  the 
strength of the recovery. 
As regards price developments, there is no evidence thus far of a significant upward impact on the 
overall price level from the euro cash changeover. While some shorter-term effects cannot be ruled 
out, there is reason to believe that the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins will strengthen 
competition,  thereby  supporting  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  This 
notwithstanding, HICP  inflation  is currently somewhat higher than  was expected a few months ago, 
owing partly to a significant rise in oil prices. If the increase in oil prices is sustained, the expected 
decline in annual HICP inflation rates to below 2% later in the spring could be less pronounced (cid:150) and 
inflation  rates  during  2002  could  turn  out  to  be  somewhat  higher  (cid:150)  than  we  expected  in  late  2001. 
Beyond the shorter term, in the  light  of current  expectations of a  gradual economic recovery  in the 
euro area, upward pressure on prices from aggregate demand should remain contained. However, this 
outlook for inflation is fundamentally dependent on continued wage moderation. In this respect, there 
is some cause for concern with regard to ongoing wage negotiations. 
The  economic  downturn  in  the  euro  area  in  2001  also  presented  challenges  for  fiscal  policy.  Since 
some countries came close to the 3% limit for the deficit to GDP ratio, the experience of 2001 clearly 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2002
 demonstrated the need for all countries to undertake consolidation efforts in good time to ensure a 
fiscal  position  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  before  the  start  of  a  downturn.  In  order  to  prevent 
problems like those experienced last year from recurring in the future, it is vital that the commitments 
made  to  achieving  balanced  budgets  by  2003-04  be  firmly  followed  up  in  the  Member  States 
concerned. 
Finally, I would like to highlight the need for structural reforms aimed at improving the functioning of 
product  and  financial  markets.  If  implemented  vigorously,  these  reforms  can  increase  euro  area 
growth  potential  and  employment  on  a  sustainable  basis.  The  improvements  in  the  functioning  of 
markets,  together  with  wage  moderation,  have  contributed  to  strong  employment  growth  and  a 
considerable  reduction  in  unemployment  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  This  is  clear  proof  of  the 
benefits of committing to a rigorous implementation of the agenda agreed in Lisbon and confirmed in 
Barcelona.  However,  while  a  number  of  initiatives  were  taken  in  this  direction  in  the  course  of  last 
year, it is of the utmost importance that further progress in these areas be achieved. 
To conclude my statement, I should like to express my confidence that the euro will prove a stimulus 
for further economic and financial integration. The introduction of the euro banknotes and coins has 
not only enhanced price transparency, it will also highlight the fact that the European Single Market is 
not  yet  complete  and  that  a  number  of  regulatory,  administrative  or  legal  impediments  to  the  free 
circulation of goods, the cross-border provision of services and to labour mobility still exist. It is my 
belief that the euro, as a visible symbol of European identity in everyday life, will increasingly  bring 
these obstacles to light and stimulate efforts to eliminate them. In this way, the euro will accomplish 
one  of  the  pre-eminent  functions  of  the  single  currency,  namely  to  "crown"  the  establishment  of  a 
single market in Europe.  
Finally, I should like to mention that this is my last appearance in this forum as Vice-President of the 
ECB. I should like to thank the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the 
very fruitful exchange of views, both in the context of my presentation of the ECB’s Annual Report and 
on other occasions. This Committee has indeed played an important role in bringing the euro closer to 
the citizens of Europe.  
BIS Review 26/2002 
 3
