 Pakorn Malakul na Ayudhya: Central bank independence - what does it mean? 
The Bank of Thailand’s experience 
Remarks  by  Mr  Pakorn  Malakul  na  Ayudhya,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  on  the 
occasion  of  The  Inauguration  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  Bank  of  Ghana,  Accra, 
10 September 2002. 
 Mr. Chairman, Governors, Members of the MPC, Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I consider it a great honour to be invited by the Bank of Ghana to take part in this very important event, 
the inauguration of the MPC. I would also like to thank Governor Paul Acquah and the Bank of Ghana 
for the warm hospitality extended to me and my staffs. It has certainly made our first visit to Ghana a 
very memorable one.  
Before I begin my talk on the assigned topic of Central Bank Independence: What Does It Mean? 
The  Bank  of  Thailand's  Experience,  I  would  like  to  offer  my  congratulations.  The  first  one  is  for 
Governor  Paul  Acquah  and  the  Bank  of  Ghana  for  the  successful  launching  of  the  MPC.  The 
ceremony which took place yesterday was very impressive. The message came across very clearly 
that the Government places great importance upon the Bank of Ghana's independence and that much 
reliance is placed on the MPC for its successful conduct of monetary policy so that price stability and 
consequently  sustainable  growth  can  be  achieved.  The  exact  words  used  by  your  Finance  Minister 
were essential pillar for macroeconomic stability. My second congratulation is also for Governor Paul 
Acquah for having achieved the Central Bank independence. I have noted that the Bank of Ghana was 
established in 1957. The Bank of Thailand was established in 1942 and we have not managed to gain 
independence through legal means yet. So, you are one up on us.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the issue of “Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policy” is very much 
closed to the heart of all central bankers, and I am very happy to be able to share some thoughts on it. 
In Thailand's case this issue has been much discussed among all concerned throughout the 60 years 
period since the Bank of Thailand's establishment in 1942.  
One of the most famous governors of the Bank of Thailand and certainly the longest serving Governor 
(more than 10 years) had this to say about central bank independence and I quote  
“…If the policy in question is so profound that it might undermine principles or lead to catastrophe, the 
Central  Bank  Governor  may  not  only  voice  his  disapproval  against  it,  but  he  also  has  the  ultimate 
prerogative of resigning from the governorship”.  
Dr.  Puey  Ungphakorn  was  an  outstanding  Governor  who  gave  great  importance  to  the  Bank  of 
Thailand to carry out its functions as an independent institution free from political and governmental 
domination,  undaunted  by  any  influential  powers-that-be.  For  the  sake  of  his  country-and  using  the 
delicate art of being a central banker, Dr. Puey protested against the government whenever it did not 
act righteously.  
Dr. Puey believed that the government must have faith in the central bank in providing benefits for the 
country as a whole. The Governor and senior management should have enough courage to voice their 
critical, even dissenting opinion  when such an action is necessary. His view  was that the Governor 
and his senior management cannot be saints, but must carry out their work adhering to the principles 
of honesty and integrity. Neither can they act indifferently, because when it is necessary to reprimand 
the government, they must do so.  
Dr.  Puey  was  determined  to  protect  its  officials  from  political  interference.  He  issued  regulations 
prohibiting Bank of Thailand officials to stand for political office or write articles on politics, which are 
still in force today.  
I totally agree with what Dr. Puey had thus said and practiced without fail. However, since Governor 
Puey left the office at his own will to concentrate on another job which he loved dearly, that is, rector of 
Thammasart  University,  we  have  had  nine  governors  over  a  period  of  almost  30  years.  Out  of  this 
nine, only two retired from the office, the other seven were either fired or pressured to leave the post 
by the Government for some reason or another and in most cases the causes of removal had nothing 
to do with their performance in conducting monetary policy.  
BIS Review 53/2002 
 1
 How could this have happened? The answer lies in the current Bank of Thailand Act which does not 
spell  out  or  lay  down  mechanism  for  the  central  bank  to  achieve  its  independence.  Governor  and 
Deputy  Governor  are  political  appointees.  They  are  appointed  by  His  Majesty  the  King  upon  the 
recommendation of the Minister of Finance and approved by the Cabinet. There is no definite term of 
office. There are no protective clauses in the Act which clearly spell out causes for removal. The most 
popular reason given by the government when firing governors was one of “suitability”. None of the 
nine  governors  had  the  chance  to  resign  from  the  office  in  protest  of  the  Government  policies  as 
advocated by Dr. Puey. In the past 7 years, we have 5 Governors including the present one who has 
been  in  office  for  just  over  1  year.  However,  it  is  important  to  note  as  well  that  sometimes  the 
relationship between Minister of Finance and Governor of a Central Bank turned sour not because of 
policy  conflict  but  because  of  personality  mismatch  that  led  to  eventual  conflict.  For  instance,  the 
current Minister of Finance and the present Governor work well together and have great respect for 
each other.  
What  then  is  the  solution?  I  think  the  best  solution  is  to  legalize  Central  Bank  independence  by 
spelling out clearly in the Central Bank legislation the power, duties, responsibility and accountability of 
a  Central  Bank.  According  to  the  draft  amendment  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand  Act  which  is  to  be 
considered by the Parliament in the near future, some such important features are:  
1. 
a  Selection  Committee,  comprising  some  outstanding  Thai  senior  statesmen,  to  nominate 
appropriate candidates for governorship.  
a definite term of office for governorship (4-5 years is the norm and this can be extended for 
another term).  
clauses which spell out clearly causes for removal of governor.  
a Court of Directors which comprises of the Governor and Deputy Governors and at least five 
other  members  to  oversee/manage/entrust  the  overall  affairs  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand. 
Question  remains  whether  Governor  should  be  chairman  and  CEO  as  well.  There  are  pros 
and cons on this issue. 
a  Monetary  Policy  Board  chaired  by  the  Governor  and  consists  of  internal  and  external 
directors.  External  directors  will  be  appointed  by  the  Government.  Responsibility  and 
accountability of the board will be spelled out clearly. It is important to have qualified external 
directors to provide wider perspective and perhaps a counter balance views.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Since the draft Amendment of the Bank of Thailand Act will take time to be enacted because of a long 
legal and parliamentary processes (we expect it to be enacted in the middle of next year), we have 
decided  to  go  ahead  with  the  establishment  of  a  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC).  The  MPC 
consists of seven members with the Governor chairing the committee. There are two external advisors 
who serve on the committee, providing independent thoughts and perspectives. The committee meets 
every six weeks on a pre-announced schedule. The main responsibilities of MPC comprises of:  
• 
• 
• 
setting the direction of the monetary policy with the objective of maintaining price stability,  
examining and approving the monetary conditions and policy stance report, and,  
overseeing the quarterly Inflation Report.  
Why did we adopt and implement inflation targeting as our new policy anchor?  
As  the  fixed  exchange  rate  was  abandoned  after  the  crisis,  it  was  then  necessary  to  have  a  new 
nominal anchor. At first the Bank of Thailand used monetary aggregates as its policy target under the 
IMF  program.  The  Bank  targeted  domestic  money  supply  in  order  to  ensure  macroeconomic 
consistency  in  order  to  obtain  price  stability.  However,  as  in  many  countries  in  recent  years,  using 
money  supply  as  a  target  did  not  work  well  with  the  Thai  economy  as  the  relationship  between 
monetary aggregates and output became increasingly unstable. This was due to changes in people's 
spending  behavior  and  the  popularity  of  new  money-related  innovations,  such  as  credit  cards  and 
electronic cash cards.  
After  studies  and  experimental  implementation,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  formally  adopted  the 
inflation-targeting  regime  starting  from  May  2000.  The  new  nominal  anchor  allows  the  Bank  of 
Thailand to set an explicit target of core inflation in order to stabilize price condition. Since its adoption, 
a target of core inflation had been set at a range of 0-3.5 percent and remains so. In addition, we have 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2002
 adopted  14-day  repurchase  rate  as  the  policy  instrument  as  well  as  employed  macro  econometric 
model to conduct the forecast.  
Permit me to elaborate on some of the above mentioned issues with regard to the implementation of 
inflation targeting framework. The appropriate price index used was consumer price index (CPI) which 
should be excluding some items that cannot be influenced by monetary policy while still able to retain 
sufficient price information. Hence we used the core inflation which excludes volatile items of raw food 
and oil prices. This core inflation has less variation but from historical data, on average, it had been 
close to the headline inflation in the long run. We can say that targeting the core inflation is effectively 
the  control  of  long-run  inflation  such  that  monetary  policy  does  not  have  to  accommodate  supply 
shocks. In light of this, the target range of 0-3.5 percent  was set based on Thailand and our major 
trading partners' history of inflation.  
As for the choice of policy rate, the 14-day repurchase rate was selected as the key instrument. With 
this instrument, the Bank of Thailand is able to manage the appropriate level of liquidity in the market. 
The  advantage  of  14-day  repurchase  rate  over  other  rates  of  longer  maturities  is  that  the  trading 
volume  is  much  higher  and  thus  provides  effective  policy  signaling  to  the  market.  It  also  has 
advantage over the rate of shorter maturities, such as 1-day  or 7-day, in that  it will  not  impose too 
much burden on the Bank of Thailand in taking care of the liquidity and maintaining the policy rate. 
Therefore, other repurchase rates such as 1-day or 7-day will be freely determined by market forces. 
In sum, the 14-day RP rate will leave room for the short-term rate with flexibility to adjust and move in 
line with money market liquidity conditions.  
The policy rate was initially set at 1.5 percent per annum and it was raised to 2.5 percent in June 2001 
to realign the money market interest rates. Following the global economic slowdown, the policy rate 
had been cut twice in December 2001 and January 2002 to help stimulate the economy. The rate now 
stands at 2 percent per annum.  
Having  the  policy  rate  clearly  announced,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  able  to  provide  a  transparent 
monetary policy signal to the market. This helps provide a framework for a more effective transmission 
mechanism. After the adjustment in the policy rate, other rates in the repurchase market will adjust in 
line with the policy rate. Banks will thereafter adjust their portfolio and change their rates for loans and 
deposits.  The  transmission  mechanism  will  work  itself  out  such  that  this  will  eventually  lead  to  the 
desirable result in the real sector. The policy impact usually takes up to 8 quarters in the transmission 
process. Nevertheless, in the case of Thailand after the crisis, the banking system has not yet been 
fully functioned and this, to a certain extent, undermined the effectiveness of the monetary policy.  
The macro-model gives a range of core inflations with probability distribution being described into a 
fanchart. This fanchart takes into account the related uncertainties and gives some flexibility in a range 
of forecasts. Based on the most likely outcome, the MPC will announce the expected rate of inflation 
for  this  year  and  next  year.  According  to  the  most  recent  assessment,  the  core  inflation  will  be 
0.5-1 percent in 2002 and 0.5-1.5 percent in 2003, providing growth of between 3-4 percent in 2002 
and 2003.  
Finally to enhance transparency  of the  process, Inflation Report  is published on the quarterly  basis 
providing forecasts of inflation and economic growth for the next eight quarters along with the quarterly 
press release.  
For the final part of my talk, I would like to dwell on the issues of Central Bank Independence. The 
first issue is  whether  a Central Bank can have too  much independence  in the sense that it can be 
harmful.  To  this,  I  incline  to  say  yes,  but  only  in  a  rare  circumstance.  Bad  decisions  relating  to 
monetary or financial institutions operations can be damaging with wide impact. To prevent this from 
happening,  a  mechanism  should  be  installed  such  as  a  Monetary  Policy  Committee  or  a  Financial 
Institutions  Policy  Committee  comprising  of  qualified  external  directors  so  that  important  policy 
measures are made through group decisions.  
The  second  issue  is  how  independence  should  a  Central  Bank  be?  I  believe  that  a  Central  Bank 
should  be  independent  within  the  government  because  it  is  the  Minister  of  Finance  who  has  to  be 
accountable  to  the  parliament  on  issues  relating  to  macro  economic,  fiscal,  monetary  and  financial 
system matters. I agree absolutely with Governor Paul Acquah that monetary and fiscal policies must 
be harmonized in order to achieve macro stability, meaning that a Minister of Finance and a Governor 
of  a  Central  Bank  must  work  hand  in  hand  to  achieve  a  proper  policy  mix  of  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies so that sustainable growth can be achieved.  
BIS Review 53/2002 
 3
 Ladies and gentlemen, I feel that I have taken enough of your time already. Therefore, I would like to 
conclude that a Central Bank can be considered as having its independence when it can perform its 
duty of achieving and maintaining price stability without any political or governmental interference, and 
with  honesty  and  integrity  while  working  hand  in  hand  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  achieve  a 
balanced fiscal and monetary policies mix that lead to macro stability and sustainable growth. Inflation 
targeting  approach  is  an  effective  mean  to  achieve  Central  Bank  independence  because  it 
encompasses  4  very  important  ingredients:  operational  independence,  responsibility,  transparency 
and accountability. Other means can be just as effective if they have these 4 required ingredients.  
I  hope  that  what  I  have  just  shared  with  you  on  the  topic  of  Central  Bank  Independence  and  our 
experiences  in  adopting  inflation  targeting  as  a  nominal  anchor  will  be  of  some  uses  as  food  for 
thoughts.  Finally,  I  truly  wish  to  congratulate  the  Bank  of  Ghana  for  the  successful  launching  of 
Monetary Policy Committee.  
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 53/2002
