 Eva Srejber: Monetary policy and inflation expectations in Sweden 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, Second Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, to Föreningssparbanken 
in Karlstad, 25 February 2002. 
 I should like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here. Today I intend to talk about what 
guides the Executive Board when we make decisions on monetary policy and what role predictability 
in the central bank’s actions plays for maintaining price stability. Then I shall take a brief look back at 
the economic situation immediately following the tragic events of 11 September and summarise the 
economic  situation  today.  Finally,  I  should  like  to  explain  my  views  on  monetary  policy  and  why  I 
entered  a  reservation  against  the  decision  to  leave  the  repo  rate  unchanged  at  the  last  Executive 
Board monetary policy meeting. 
Monetary policy strategy 
I shall begin with a reminder of what guides us when we make decisions on monetary policy; i.e. how 
monetary policy strategy has been formulated. 
The Riksbank has been assigned by law the task of maintaining price stability. We also have the task 
of promoting a safe and efficient payment system. The banks play a central role in both of these tasks. 
The monetary policy objective has been defined by the Riksbank as a target for CPI inflation of 2 per 
cent  with  a  tolerated  deviation  interval  of  +/-  1  percentage  point.  The  steering  interest  rate  is  the 
instrument  at  the  Riksbank’s  disposal  for  maintaining  price  stability.  It  is  also  possible  to  use  other 
methods, e.g. foreign exchange interventions, as we did in the summer, as a means of achieving our 
objective. However, the repo rate is the monetary policy instrument normally used.  
Our monetary policy strategy can be described, somewhat simplified, with the rule of thumb that when 
inflation one to two years ahead is estimated, taking into account the risk scenario, to deviate from the 
inflation target, the steering interest rate is adjusted. The Riksbank’s assessment of the future inflation 
rate is communicated, for instance, in the Inflation Reports presented four times a year. 
The  Riksbank  has  chosen  to  set  its  inflation  target  in  a  medium-term  perspective.  This  is  because 
monetary policy influences inflation with some time lag. An ambition to try to ensure that inflation also 
developed in line with the target in the short term would probably require significant changes in the 
steering interest rates and thereby contribute to unnecessarily large fluctuations in demand. The fact 
that  the  inflation  target  is  expressed  in  terms  of  a  medium-term  perspective  also  plays  down  the 
importance  of  temporary  price  changes.  Consumer  prices  are  sometimes  affected  by  various 
disturbances that  have temporary effects on inflation. Political decisions, for instance, on tariffs and 
indirect taxes, can also have a temporary effect on the rate of price increase. 
It may also be useful here to describe briefly how monetary policy affects inflation. A change in the 
interest rate has effects on the rate of price increase via a number of different channels. For instance, 
the interest rate influences the general public’s decisions regarding  investment and consumption. A 
higher interest rate normally means that growth in demand is slightly subdued, which is assumed to 
entail that the amount of free resources in the economy increases slightly in the long term. The effects 
on demand often come after a few quarters  and thus also subdue price increases at an even later 
stage. 
A change  in the interest rate also affects the exchange rate.  An increase means that the return on 
assets in the home country’s currency is slightly higher. This also means that expectations of growth 
and inflation are subdued somewhat relative to developments in the rest of the world, which according 
to the textbook can contribute to a slightly stronger exchange rate. If the krona appreciates, it becomes 
slightly  cheaper  to  import  to  Sweden,  which  can  be  assumed  to  lead  to  import  prices  on  input  and 
consumer  goods  increasing  at  a  slower  rate.  A  stronger  krona  also  subdues  global  demand  for 
Swedish  export  goods,  which  helps  subdue  growth  in  demand.  On  the  other  hand,  if  there  is  little 
confidence in the country’s economic policy, an increase in the interest rate risks resulting in a weaker 
exchange rate rather than the reverse, because confidence in growth is low. 
Monetary policy can also affect price developments via households’ and companies’ expectations of 
future inflation. In this context it is important to point out that there are a number of different measures 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 1
 of  inflation  expectations.  The  Inflation  Reports  contain  different  measures  of  how  households  and 
companies  expect  the  rate  of  price  increase  to  develop.  Pricing  on  the  financial  markets  can  also 
provide  some  information  here.  A  further  type  of  inflation  expectation  is  reflected  in  the  various 
forecasters’ assessments of developments. The Riksbank bases its estimations on a total assessment 
of these different measures of inflation expectations. 
Stable and low inflation expectations affect both companies’ pricing behaviour and wage formation, as 
well as having a beneficial effect, as far as monetary policy is concerned, on how consumers react to 
price changes. 
Companies’ pricing behaviour is based partly on the development of marginal costs, the competitive 
situation, demand and inflation expectations. If a company has confidence in the Riksbank’s monetary 
policy, its prices will not be affected as much by temporary changes in, for instance, supply, demand 
or the exchange rate. In this situation, the company can assume that inflation will return to the long-
term trend once the effects of the disturbance subside. A credible inflation target can thus contribute to 
maintaining the monetary  policy target at lower cost in terms of fluctuations in demand and interest 
rates. 
One means of inspiring confidence is to show a high degree of openness and clarity with regard to 
how monetary policy is conducted. The fact that the Riksbank describes the considerations regarding 
economic  prospects  that  form  the  basis  for  the  interest  rate  decisions  makes  it  easier  for  external 
analysts  to  understand  and  predict  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  the  fact  that  the  considerations  are 
reported openly may help increase confidence in the assessments and conclusions. 
Consistency in monetary policy actions also increases confidence in the price stability target, which in 
turn should have a stabilising effect on inflation expectations. 
The role of predictability in monetary policy 
It is important the Riksbank is clear and explains the bases on which the interest rate decisions are 
made.  As  the  effect  of  monetary  policy  on  price  developments  has  a  time  lag,  the  interest  rate  is 
changed  on  the  basis  of  forecasts  of  future  price  developments.  However,  it  is  not  always  easy  to 
interpret correctly what is happening in the economy. In recent years it has been difficult to find a clear 
relationship between the demand situation and inflation in Sweden. GDP growth was high from 1997 
to the middle of 2000. Since then the growth in demand has been subdued. During 1997 and 1998 
inflation  fell,  but  the  rate  of  price  increase  has  tended  to  accelerate  thereafter.  At  the  same  time, 
inflation expectations have remained at a relatively stable level. 
There are many explanations for this development and the Riksbank’s view has been described, for 
instance, in various Inflation Reports. Let me here expound some personal reflections on this issue. 
If the Riksbank’s monetary policy inspires confidence, inflation expectations will be established around 
the  inflation  target.  This  means  that  resource  utilisation  in  the  economy  could  vary  slightly  more, 
without  having  an  immediate  impact  on  inflation.  Stable,  low  inflation  expectations  based  on  the 
assumption that the central bank shall act to control the inflation rate can mean that inflation will not 
become  too  high,  even  if  resource  utilisation  increases  above  its  potential.  Conversely,  if  the 
confidence  is  lower,  high  inflation  expectations  can  mean  that  prices  do  not  fall,  even  if  resource 
utilisation  declines.  There  are  also  a  number  of  studies  indicating  the  relationship  between  inflation 
and growth is not stable, but is due to the degree of resource utilisation and to what the general public 
thinks of the central bank’s actions. A central bank that has a high level of credibility as safeguarder of 
price stability can allow demand to be higher in relation to potential growth than a central bank with the 
opposite reputation. 
The  fact  that  both  wage  setting  and  price  setting  behaviour  are  affected  by  inflation  expectations 
means  that  it  takes  some  time  before  a  reduction  in  resource  utilisation  has  an  impact  in  terms  of 
falling prices and lower wage hikes. In the same way as it takes time to change inflation expectations 
and pricing behaviour downwards, it is difficult to change them upwards. As I mentioned above, this is 
partly because the general public expects certain behaviour from central banks, and partly because 
raising prices involves costs for the companies. These are both purely administrative costs and also 
reputation costs. Reputation costs in the sense that it is more damaging to good will to be among the 
first to raise prices, than to be one of many during a wave of price increases. This means that once 
some companies have started raising prices, many others soon follow. For this reason, if the central 
bank misunderstands the situation and allows a positive inflationary pressure to prevail as long as the 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2002
 inflation rate remains low, the general public’s image of the central bank’s behaviour will change. This 
in turn will affect pricing behaviour and once the increases have started, more will follow in the shadow 
of  the  first.  This  is  why  inflation  often  comes  at  a  late  stage  during  an  economic  upturn  and  it  can 
mean that inflation remains too high during a period when economic activity is declining, despite falling 
demand and production. It is something of a paradox that a credible central bank can have greater 
difficulty seeing the signs of price pressure in time. 
In  my  opinion,  there  is  a  risk  that  Swedish  inflation  has  been  held  down  through  deregulation  and 
increased  competition  in  such  a  way  that  we  have  been  lulled  into  thinking  that  the  inflationary 
tendencies in the economy are lower than they actually are. When companies’ scope to reduce their 
prices as a result of, for instance, deregulation and increased competition, begins to be exhausted and 
demand pressure is finally expressed in rising prices, there is a risk that the price increases will be 
both greater and introduced more rapidly than expected by us analysts. 
Monetary policy must be based on forecasts of inflation and resource utilisation. If monetary policy is 
based on an overly optimistic assessment of the interplay between growth and inflation, it can lead to 
monetary policy becoming overly expansive. If inflation expectations have become more slow moving, 
it could mean that there is time for considerable imbalances to build up before policy has an impact in 
the form of higher inflation. Examples of this are Japan in the 1980s, the USA in 1927-29 and again in 
the 1990s. 
The example from Japan indicates that even if inflation does not rise during the forecast period with 
which monetary works, it is important to take a broader outlook both throughout the entire economy 
and further forward in time, and to envisage the risks that could exist with regard to financial stability. 
In Japan the cost of borrowing was very low during a long period of time to borrow money to invest in 
shares and property. As the productivity of the economy increased, confidence in the future grew and 
this made both investors and credit institutions more willing to take risks. The result  was that asset 
prices were pushed up. A raise in the interest rate in this type of situation, where over-optimism was 
rife and both inflation and interest rates were low, could have meant that investors, property buyers 
and credit institutions would have acted rather more cautiously than if the interest rate had remained 
unchanged at a low rate and thus at least subdued the price bubble somewhat. The costs to society of 
waiting too long to change the direction for monetary policy can be high if imbalances are allowed to 
grow and the fall in production can be drastic when the imbalances are corrected. 
It  is  therefore  important  that  monetary  policy  should  act  in  a  preventive  manner  and  that  great 
vigilance  is  exercised  with  regard  to  the  temperature  of  the  entire  economy,  both  the  real  and  the 
financial parts. 
Let us return, after this outlook, to our own, calmer circumstances. Low, stable inflation expectations 
cannot be used in all situations as an argument in favour of retaining monetary policy unchanged. It 
could be possible that the expectations are based on the general public assuming that the Riksbank 
will  act  if  and  when  required.  The  fact  that  inflation  expectations  remain  stable  could  then  reflect 
expectations  of  future  monetary  policy.  If  these  expectations  are  not  fulfilled,  then  inflation 
expectations, and later on the rate of price increase, will rise. The example from Japan also shows that 
it is not certain that inflationary pressure will be visible in CPI inflation; sometimes price pressure is 
first  seen  in  other  prices  than  consumer  prices.  If  the  Riksbank  waits  to  adjust  the  repo  rate  until 
inflation  expectations  and  inflation  have  already  increased,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  delay  will  be  too 
great. In this type of situation larger interest rate adjustments may be required than if the Riksbank had 
acted at an earlier stage. 
This brings me to the current economic situation. However, first I would like to take a brief look back at 
the events that occurred in connection with the acts of terrorism in September. 
The Riksbank’s actions following the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 
After  the  terrorist  attacks  in  the  USA,  the  entire  world  was  shocked  to  realise  that  something  so 
dreadful could happen. The Executive Board made an assessment that the uncertainty caused by the 
acts  of  terrorism  risked  further  subduing  demand  internationally,  mainly  through  the  effects  on 
companies’  and  households’  confidence  in  the  future,  which  could  result  in  a  more  profound  and 
prolonged economic downturn. This was why the Riksbank lowered its interest rate, together with the 
central banks in the USA, the rest of Europe and several other countries. 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 3
 Prior  to  the  terrorist  attacks  in  the  USA  on  11  September,  new  statistics  indicated  that  the  global 
economic downturn could reach its lowest level at the end of 2001. However the picture was not clear-
cut. As a result of the terrorist attacks, uncertainty increased even further regarding the time scale for 
a recovery. If the consumers’ confidence with regard to the future were to decline, together with rising 
unemployment and a weak development in the stock markets, there was a great risk that activity in the 
US economy would be subdued. Companies often react to uncertainty with a “wait and see” policy, 
which  means  that  they  postpone  investments.  In  addition,  there  was  uncertainty  as  to  whether  the 
financial system could cope with the problems arising as a result of the devastation in New York. On 
top  of  this,  certain  sectors  in  the  global  economy  would  be  hit  directly,  for  instance,  insurance 
companies, airlines, tourism, etc. All of this risked worsening the economic downturn both in the USA 
and in other countries. 
The role of a central bank in this type of situation is to contribute to creating confidence and promoting 
financial  stability.  It  is  then  important  to  act  quickly  and  resolutely.  This  may  be  considered  to 
contradict the claim that it is  important for the Riksbank to act  predictably. However, for those  who 
have observed the central banks’ actions on other occasions when problems in the financial system 
have  arisen  and  confidence  in  the  future  has  declined,  such  as  in  1987  and  1998,  it  should  be  no 
surprise that central banks act to support the economy with a lower interest rate and greater supply of 
liquidity. This is to counteract a downward spiral in the global economy as the result of a decrease in 
the willingness to take risks. Interest rate reductions around the world can be seen to be an insurance 
against a really poor outcome. 
It  is  important  to  remember  that  Sweden  already  had  a  very  expansive  economic  policy  on 
11 September, with a low interest rate, weak krona and expansive fiscal policy. Given this, it is natural 
to withdraw the ‘insurance’ interest rate reduction when confidence and expectations have stabilised 
and the risks of a severe negative spiral have declined. 
The current economic situation 
So, can we say that confidence has returned or stabilised? To answer that question, I would like to 
describe  how  we  see  the  current  economic  situation.  The  fact  that  willingness  to  take  risks  has 
increased can be seen in Standard & Poor’s credit spreads, which have returned to the same levels as 
prior to the terrorist attacks. In the USA, swap spreads had fallen since mid-September as no financial 
crisis occurred, however they have increased slightly since the start of the year, probably because of 
the Enron scandal. In Europe and Sweden, on the other hand, swap spreads have continued to fall to 
lower levels than prior to 11 September. 
Much of the statistics received since the beginning of December support the picture of international 
developments  painted  in  the  December  Inflation  Report.  The  signals  that  the  subduing  effect  on 
demand  is  declining  and  that  the  level  of  activity  is  stabilising  in  the  US  economy  have  become 
clearer.  Restraining  factors,  such  as  destocking  and  an  adjustment  in  investments,  appear  to  be 
gradually  abating  in  strength.  On  the  other  hand,  the  uncertainty  over  developments  in  the  labour 
market, lasting imbalances in savings and volatile stock market developments comprise a continued 
risk factor in the forecast. 
There are also signs that the industrial sectors in many other OECD countries are entering a phase of 
recovery. 
One particular risk factor in the developments is, in my opinion, that equity prices have been pushed 
up  in  the  USA,  given  the  economic  situation.  At  the  same  time,  the  degree  of  indebtedness  in  the 
private sector remains relatively low. The low real interest rate entails risks for future developments in 
asset  prices,  particularly  for  the  stock  market.  These  risks  need  not  be  impending  in  the  current 
situation, but the problems could become tangible in a couple of years’ time. This means that there is 
a risk that economic policy, which is very expansive in order to avoid a strong downward spiral, would 
postpone the adjustment of imbalances in the economy. Some parallels can be drawn with the events 
that took place after the crisis in 1987, when a financial bubble recurred. A further example of an asset 
bubble  way  back  in  time  is  what  happened  in  the  USA  in  1927.  At  that  time,  the  US  central  bank 
pursued an expansive monetary policy in order to stabilise the gold standard. This contributed to an 
over-valuation of assets and later to the crash in 1929. If the financial imbalances in the USA are not 
corrected slowly in the near future, there is a risk that the economic upturn will be more short-lived and 
the downturn more powerful when the correction is finally made. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2002
 On the other hand, the continued developments in the USA will depend on whether domestic demand 
picks up and is maintained. If the growth in productivity has really reached a bottom level at around 1.5 
per cent in an economic downturn, this could be a sign that the long-term sustainable growth rate in 
the USA has moved upwards and that a recovery will not merely be temporary. 
Looking at Sweden, it was assessed in the December Inflation Report that the GDP had shown weak 
growth during 2001 and that it would then rise during 2002 and 2003. The main features of the picture 
we pained in the Inflation Report still stand. However, according to the National Accounts for the first 
three  quarters  of  last  year,  the  development  in  private  consumption  was  weaker  than  had  been 
assumed. There are other statistics that indicate that the GDP may have been stronger during 2001 
than  shown  in  the  National  Accounts,  for  instance,  credit  growth,  money  supply,  tax  payments  and 
developments  in  employment.  Regardless  of  what  is  correct,  we  appear  to  have  had  a  relatively 
moderate slowdown during 2001. Industrial activity has been very weak, but this has been balanced 
by the expansive economic policy contributing to other sectors in the Swedish economy developing 
well. The question is how much of the slowdown in the industrial activity will have time to spread to 
other parts of the economy before there is an upturn in industrial activity. For the future we see a very 
good development in disposable income, some recovery in household wealth and continuing low oil 
prices, which should provide a stronger growth in consumption both this year and next year. 
The situation on the labour market gives mixed signals. Open unemployment rose somewhat between 
December 2001 and January this year. Employment levelled off during the second half of last year, but 
the increase was still 80,000 persons, between 2000 and 2001. Wage rises were slightly higher than 
expected last year, despite weaker economic activity. However, developments on the labour market 
are divided in two parts. Employment in the manufacturing industry has fallen since the beginning of 
last  year,  while  it  is  only  now  possible  to  detect  a  slowdown  in  the  services  sectors.  Similarly,  the 
number of redundancy notices has been highest in the manufacturing industry. In the public sector, 
healthcare and welfare, there have been no notices of redundancy and the number of new vacancies 
registered has increased. The fact that the weak growth in the manufacturing industry has not spread 
to the private and public services sectors is probably due to the expansive economic policy. 
Forward-looking economic indicators, such as confidence indicators for households and companies, 
imply that the downturn in activity is abating and that developments are beginning to stabilise. 
With  regard  to  prices,  inflation  increased  slightly  more  than  expected  in  2001.  This  can  be  partly 
explained  by  unexpected  price  increases  on,  for  instance,  fruit  and  vegetables;  the  price  of  these 
product  groups  will  probably  continue  to  increase  slightly  more  than  expected  in  the  short  term. 
Imported inflation has increased more than expected in both the producer and consumer areas, which 
could be  due to the exchange rate’s  effect on prices being slightly  higher  than assumed. However, 
price increases have also been broader and higher than expected for other goods and services. 
My view of the current situation 
So how do I assess the situation in which we find ourselves today? Firstly, I feel that confidence in the 
future and willingness to take risks appear to have recovered from the shock of 11 September. But 
what will happen to inflation? There are three reasons why inflation should fall this year. The first is 
that  growth  in  demand  and  utilisation  of  resources  were  both  lower  than  expected  last  year,  which 
subdues  price  pressure  for  the  near  future.  The  second  is  that  inflation  expectations  are  disposed 
towards  a  decline  in  inflation,  according  to  recent  surveys.  And  the  third  is  that  the  krona  has 
appreciated slightly, which means a lower risk of imported inflation. On top of this, the effects of last 
year’s price rises on certain goods and services, including food and energy, will gradually abate. 
However, there is also a risk that the price rises will not abate on their own. I can see, unfortunately, a 
couple of reasons why inflation may remain higher than we have hoped and why the price increases 
might continue to spread. 
Firstly, only  half of the  increase in the inflation rate  could be explained by  temporary  effects. Many 
prices  have  risen  more  than  expected.  This  is  probably  due  to  resource  utilisation  in  the  economy 
being relatively high as demand was sufficiently high to enable implementation of price increases. The 
fact that competition is weak in certain sectors probably reinforces this, which facilitates passing on the 
costs to the consumers. A further sign is that the increase in employment has been good. There has 
been an adjustment downwards in working hours rather than in the number of jobs. The division on the 
labour market, with increases in employment in sectors less exposed to competition has meant that 
wages  have  risen  more  than  expected.  Thanks  to  expansive  fiscal  and  monetary  policy, 
BIS Review 13/2002 
 5
 unemployment  is  expected  to  rise  only  marginally.  As  economic  activity  appears  to  be  increasing 
during 2002, it is difficult to imagine that the pressure on the labour market will decline significantly. 
Secondly,  my  personal  opinion  is  that  it  is  possible  that  inflation  expectations,  reflected  as  an 
acceptance  of  price  rises,  may  have  increased.  I  believe  that  the  temporary  price  rises  that  have 
occurred have clouded our view and it has been possible to undertake more price rises under cover of 
these. There have been reports in the media, for instance, on importers who can no longer withstand 
the cost increases caused by the weak exchange rate. Mad cow disease and foot and mouth disease 
have made us get used to the idea of higher meat prices. Poor harvests, worm-eaten apples, etc. have 
meant that the resistance to higher fruit and vegetable prices is weak. The fact that certain trade union 
representatives are also saying in the media that they may have to break wage agreements if inflation 
remains  high,  indicates  that  they  do  not  fully  rely  on  price  stability  being  maintained.  The  implicit 
inflation  expectations,  which  can  be  seen  in  the  pricing  in  the  interest  rate  market,  also  show  that 
inflation expectations two years ahead are rather high. 
It  is,  of  course,  worrying  that  inflation  is  higher  than  expected.  The  lowering  of  the  repo  rate  by 
0.5 percentage  points  in  September  was  partly  to  contribute  to  reducing  uncertainty  and  raising 
confidence  in  the  future  in  an  unusually  uncertain  situation.  However,  the  future  prospects  are  no 
longer as uncertain and the economic slowdown appears to be in its final stages. There is therefore no 
longer a need for a large insurance against a severe decline. 
It is important to react quickly with interest rate policy when there are downside risks, but it is equally 
important  to  react  quickly  to  upside  risks.  As  can  be  seen  in  the  minutes  of  the  Executive  Board 
meeting on  7 February  2002, I  entered a reservation against the decision to leave the interest rate 
unchanged. I would rather have seen an increase in the interest rate of 0.25 percentage points, which 
is not any severe tightening of policy, but should rather be seen as not stepping so hard on the gas. 
6 
 BIS Review 13/2002
