 Villy Bergström: Forecasts and business cycles 
Speech  by  Mr  Villy  Bergström;  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the  Elmateriel 
Leverantörernas  förening  (Association  of  Swedish  Electrical  Installation  Material),  Stockholm, 
15 May 2002. 
 Monetary policy no exact science 
During the 1990s many central  banks formulated explicit targets for their monetary policy.  Sveriges 
Riksbank  formulated  its  target  in  1993  as  an  annual  inflation  rate,  measured  according  to  the 
consumer  price  index  (CPI)  of  two  per  cent  with  a  tolerated  deviation  interval  of  +/-  1  percentage 
points. Deviations from the target level are the rule rather than the exception. Monetary policy is not an 
exact science and society is not a machine; it would be neither possible nor desirable to keep inflation 
at a precise level, particularly not in the short term. 
In  recent  years  the  Swedish  economy  has  been  subjected  to  relatively  large  disturbances.  On  the 
international  front,  both  the  Asia  crisis  and  the  Russia  crisis,  as  well  as  severe  fluctuations  on  the 
stock markets and in oil prices, have had an effect on us. In Sweden, the rise and fall of the IT sector, 
as well as deregulation of the electricity and telecommunications markets with ensuing price falls, have 
affected both prices and production. Such crises and changes of policy can rarely be predicted. This 
means that the Riksbank will always make “mistakes”, with the benefit of hindsight. However, this is 
self-evident  and  not  particularly  valid  when  assessing  monetary  policy.  What  really  counts  is  the 
direction for monetary policy on the basis of the information available at the time the decision is taken, 
not what should have been done if it had been possible to predict the future with perfect accuracy. 
When we experience major disturbances or changes in the economy, we cannot merely concentrate 
on the effects on prices. Let me illustrate this with reference to oil prices. If we assume that oil prices 
rise.  Inflation  rises,  which  means  that  real  wages  fall,  partly  as  a  result  of  petrol  and  heating  oil 
becoming  more  expensive,  which  means  that  consumers  have  less  money  over  to  spend  on  other 
goods. This leads to a decline in demand and thereby in prices on other goods. Higher oil prices can 
thus  lead  to  both  rising  prices  and  lower  demand,  which  in  the  long  term  will  once  again  subdue 
inflation.  It  is  difficult  to  predict  oil  prices  as  they  do  not  always  reflect  the  demand  and  supply 
situation, but are also connected to politics. 
The current situation can illustrate this difficulty. Are oil prices rising because the increase in global 
demand and growth is higher than was assumed, or is the political uncertainty in the Middle East the 
most  important  factor? What  is  the  resource  situation  within  the  economy?  A  price  rise  that  occurs 
when resource utilisation is on its way down can lead to a rapid and profound decline. Rising oil prices 
in a situation with strained resources can lead to a spread effect, with a general rise in prices within 
the economy. We can thus have a higher inflation rate at the same time as this can have a subduing 
effect on production and employment. If monetary policy were to be aimed in every situation at using 
interest rate hikes to eliminate the effects of oil price rises on inflation, it could lead to a deterioration in 
production and employment. If transitory effects on inflation are expected to abate without spreading 
to  other  prices  or  affecting  inflation  expectations,  there may  be  good  reason  to  leave  the  repo  rate 
unchanged. A gradual adaptation of monetary policy directed at achieving the inflation target a couple 
of  years ahead allows  us to take into account employment and growth. That is why the Riksbank’s 
policy is based on achieving its inflation target of 2 per cent one to two years ahead. 
Acts of terrorism, wars and natural disasters increase uncertainty 
It  is  important  to  observe  that  knowledge  of  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  is  not  complete.  The 
purpose of the deviation interval is to make clear that deviations are probable, while our ambition is to 
try to limit them. In practice, monetary policy is governed in such a way that we make forecasts for 
inflation  one  to  two  years  ahead.  If  the  forecasts  for  this  time  horizon  are  higher  than  the  inflation 
target we raise the repo rate, and if they are lower, we cut the rate. 
So  what do  we think we can affect through monetary  policy? To put it simply, the repo rate affects 
other Swedish market rates (the interest rate channel), the banks’ lending to the general public (the 
bank  channel)  as  well  as  other  asset  prices,  such  as  share  prices,  and  the  exchange  rate  (the 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 1
 exchange rate channel). The size of the impact made by a change in the interest rate on households’ 
mortgages  or  on  share  prices  varies  over  time.  Monetary  policy  can  also  have  an  effect  via 
households’ and companies’ expectations of the future. An inflation target of 2 per cent shall act as a 
kind  of  nominal  anchor  for  expectations  regarding  the  future  development  of  inflation  and  thereby 
affect  pricing,  rates  and  wage-setting.  When  it  comes  to  setting  prices  and  wages,  a  major  role  is 
played by the expectations of the parties on the labour market or companies and households as to 
how  the  Riksbank  will  react.  That  is  to  say,  they  trust  that  the  Riksbank  will  on  average  deliver  an 
inflation rate of around 2 per cent. 
We know that forecasts are uncertain. We not only have a tolerated deviation interval and a medium-
term target horizon (normally 1-2 years), we also try to assess the uncertainty of the forecast for each 
forecast we make. Is there a normal level of uncertainty, higher than normal or lower than normal? 
This is illustrated in the Inflation Report by means of an uncertainty interval with different outcomes for 
inflation. This interval is then taken into account in the total assessment. Acts of terrorism, wars and 
natural disasters lead to greater uncertainty. This makes it even more difficult to make assessments. 
Good target-fulfilment in historical terms, but last year raises some questions 
During the period 1970-1992 inflation in Sweden amounted to an average of 8 per cent a year, while 
real  wages  scarcely  increased  at  all.  Since  the  inflation  target  was  first  applied  in  1995,  inflation 
measured as UND1X (the underlying inflation rate) has been an average of 1.8 per cent a year and 
real wages have increased by an average of 2.8 per cent. On the whole, this must be regarded as a 
good level of target fulfilment. Last year, however, inflation was 2.8 per cent, when measured in the 
same way. And if we look at recent years, underlying inflation has risen for the past two years. Let me 
therefore give you a brief outline of our forecasts and considerations in recent years. 
During the period 1998-2000, the average growth rate was 4 per cent a year. At the beginning of 1999 
inflation began to rise,  which was initially  explained  by rising oil prices. It then became increasingly 
clear  that  shortages  had  arisen  on  the  labour  market  and  that  these  risked  leading  to  high  wage 
increases and thereby high inflation. We estimated that the Swedish economy was in a broad upturn 
phase, with rising resource utilisation and the risk of an inflation rate higher than the target level. In 
November  1999  we  raised  the  repo  rate  and  during  early  2000  a  similar  assessment  was  made. 
During  autumn  2000  we  saw  ahead  of  us  a  situation  with  a  stable  and  strong  upturn  in  economic 
activity that would gradually lead to a high level of resource utilisation and rising inflation. 
At the beginning of 2001 we received a number of statistics that indicated a slowdown, particularly in 
the USA. The Federal Reserve surprised everyone with an interest rate cut in January, in between two 
ordinary  monetary  policy  meetings.  The  slowdown  then  spread.  The  Riksbank  and  most  other 
forecasters began to revise down their growth forecasts for Sweden and internationally. The share and 
IT bubble burst and this together with rising oil prices and higher real interest rates during 1999 and 
2000,  led  to  a  synchronous  downturn  in  economic  activity  around  the  world.  During  the  course  of 
2001,  we  made  several  major  downward  revisions  to  our  forecasts  for  international  growth.  The 
economic downturn is assumed to have had a subduing effect on Swedish inflation via both direct and 
indirect channels. In mid-2001 the decline in the real economy had on the whole become more marked 
than expected. 
However, the development in prices deviated sharply from the forecasts made by the Riksbank and 
other analysts. When inflation surprisingly rose considerably during spring 2001, the assessment was 
made that this was largely due to factors of a transitory nature, partly caused by disturbances on the 
supply  side.  Meat  prices  rose  sharply  as  a  result  of  livestock  diseases,  electricity  prices  rose 
considerably, partly the result of a normalisation following on from the extreme price falls during the 
previous year when the electricity market was deregulated, but also because of an unusually low level 
of snow during the winter season 1999-2000, which led to a shortage of water in the power station 
dams.  There  were  also  production  problems  at  the  oil  refineries,  which  led  to  sharp  rises  in  petrol 
prices. We noted as early as spring 2001 that even when an adjustment was made for these transitory 
factors, inflation had risen more than expected and we estimated that there was a risk that resource 
utilisation,  which  affects  inflationary  pressure  primarily  during  the  following  year,  could  have  been 
higher in 2000 than we had earlier believed. 
The krona weakened considerably during spring 2001, which added to the concern over inflation. A 
majority  of  the  Executive  Board  decided  to  raise  the  repo  rate  in  summer  2001.  However,  the 
downward  revisions  to  the  growth  forecasts  continued  during  the  autumn  and  following  the  acts  of 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2002
 terrorism  in  September,  there  was  considerable  insecurity.  The  terrorist  attacks  came  during  a 
sensitive  time for the US  economy,  which  was already  in  a downturn phase,  albeit  with  a relatively 
good  growth  in  consumption.  It  was  estimated  that  the  attacks  would  entail  a  deeper  and  more 
prolonged  economic  downturn  with  repercussions  for  the  entire  global  economy.  Steering  interest 
rates were cut all around the world, including in Sweden. 
Nevertheless, inflation continued to rise.  A cold  winter in  Europe, problems with the Swedish apple 
harvest and poor fishing catches led to rising prices on fruit, vegetables and fish during the autumn. It 
is obviously easy to get caught up with details and fail to see the underlying changes. However, we 
could  see  even  more  clearly  that  the  rise  in  inflation  was  not  merely  due  to  transitory  factors,  but 
entailed a broad rise primarily in domestic prices. This could be connected with the fact that secondary 
effects from the higher energy and food prices had made a greater impact in the consumer channel. 
Another important factor was that wage growth, despite the weaker development in demand, became 
even more problematic. Within many  industries, for instance, construction, retail trade,  banking and 
insurance, as well as the public sector, wages rose considerably during 2001. 
At the end of 2001/beginning of 2002, there  were signals from confidence indicators that  economic 
activity might have reached its lowest level in the USA and also Sweden and some optimism regarding 
the future began to spread. The effects of the terrorist attacks appear to have been limited, although 
some sectors were hit very hard. To sum up, we can conclude with the aid of this slide (OH 1 The 
Riksbank’s forecasts for GDP 1999-2003) that the year 2001 entailed constant downward adjustments 
in the growth forecasts. At the same time, we can conclude the opposite with regard to the inflation 
forecasts (OH 2 inflation forecasts 1998-2002), which we have been forced to revise upwards again 
and again. 
If we are right that a recovery is now beginning both in Sweden and abroad, we can conclude that the 
economic  downturn  was  one  of  the  mildest  of  the  post-war  period,  partly  as  a  result  of  resolute 
stabilisation  policy.  However,  the  slowdown  in  Sweden  and  the  rest  of  the  world  during  2001  was 
unexpectedly severe in relation to the forecasts made in 2000. The fact that forecasters miss turning 
points  in  the  economic  cycle  is  not  unique  to  this  particular  downturn,  but  quite  a  common 
phenomenon. I will return to the current situation, but first a look back in time. 
Historical patterns are repeated 
Is it possible to learn lessons from history? Both yes and no. If one studies economic slowdowns over 
the  past  three  decades,  one  can  see  that  they  differ  considerably  both  with  regard  to  causes, 
sequence of events and recovery. There is no simple, cyclical pattern that is automatically repeated. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  clear  that  what  we  have  experienced  now  has  elements  in  common  with 
previous cycles.1 In some industrial nations, including the USA, the economic downturns during the 
1990s  have  become milder  compared  with  the  downturns  during  the  1970s  and  early  1980s.  Deep 
recessions have been unusual and arisen in combination with major structural problems, such as bank 
crises. The fact that industrial nations enter an  economic downturn together has been a rule rather 
than  an  exception.  The  decline  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  was  different,  because  it  was  due  to 
different types of disturbance. The German reunification meant that Germany and Europe went their 
own way to some extent. Bank crises hit different countries at different points in time. In Sweden there 
was  also  a  very  large  increase  in  real  interest  rates  following  in  the  footsteps  of  the  change  in  the 
inflation rate and the  defence of the fixed exchange rate,  which contributed to the crisis in  Sweden 
becoming  deeper  than  those  in  most  other  industrial  nations  and,  in  addition,  the  worst  recession 
Sweden had experienced since the 1930s. 
The downturn we have just experienced has been unusual in that the decline in production in the USA 
and Germany  was  lower than  usual  and in many  European countries there has been no decline in 
growth at all. In Sweden, too, the slowdown appears to have been one of the mildest during the post-
war period. Growth is not expected to decline for a single quarter. During all of the previous downturns 
in economic activity there has been at least one quarter with a negative result for growth and since 
1970 economic downturns have always led to a decline in production over an average of four quarters. 
Households’ consumption has been relatively strong in many countries during the downturn and this is 
also  the  explanation  why  countries  have  avoided  a  decline  in  production  altogether.  However,  the 
                                                      
1  See, for instance, the box on earlier economic downturns in the Riksbank’s March Inflation Report or the box in the IMF’s 
most recent economic outlook. 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 3
 strong household consumption, primarily  in the USA,  does raise some questions with regard to the 
sustainability and strength of the recovery, given the initial low level of savings among US households 
and the relatively high indebtedness. 
The  fact  that  large  mistakes  in  forecasting  can  be  made  at  turning  points  for  economic  activity  is 
nothing unusual and the pattern we have been able to distinguish during the 1990s, with short-lived 
downturns and longer upturns, appears to be holding true. 
Economic policy has contributed to stability 
A number of different factors may have contributed to upturns in economic activity becoming longer, 
and  the  downturns  shorter,  while  variations  in  production  have  declined.  Various  studies  bring  up 
different explanations, so I would like to point out that this is more a question of speculation than fact. 
One explanation could be that economic policy has contributed to increased stability. Fiscal policy in a 
large  number  of  countries  has  been  changed  towards  a  balanced  budget  and  avoiding  an 
unsustainable build-up of debt, while monetary policy has been given a clearer focus on maintaining 
price stability. A greater emphasis on combating inflation and on institutional changes to make central 
banks  more  independent,  has  gone  hand  in  hand  with  stabilisation  policy  appearing  to  have  been 
more successful in counteracting fluctuations in economic activity in many countries. 
Changes in production methods, including an altered pattern for adapting stocks and new technology, 
may  have  enabled  the  demand  and  supply  for  both  goods  and  capital  to  be  matched  more  quickly 
than before, which contributes to the milder downturns and longer upswings. A further factor that could 
have  contributed  is  that  the  percentage  of  services  in  GDP  has  increased  and  the  production  of 
services has shorter lead times. 
the  slowdown 
in  economic  activity,  employment 
Expansive economic policy - good years for the Swedish economy 
A  low  inflation  rate  and  tidy  public  finances  have  provided  room  for  manoeuvre  when  facing  a 
downturn in economic activity. A changeover towards a more expansionary economic policy in a large 
number of industrial nations has laid the foundation for the recovery this year. In the USA there was a 
substantial  change  in  monetary  policy  at  the  beginning  of  2001.  On  top  of  this  came  considerable 
fiscal  policy  stimulation.  Monetary  policy  in  Europe  and  Sweden  has  also  been  expansionary. 
However,  many  large  countries  in  Europe  are  still  struggling  with  large  budget  deficits,  which  have 
limited their fiscal policy scope for action. 
Last year Sweden had one of the largest surpluses on public savings in the EU. This has enabled an 
expansionary  fiscal  policy.  This  year  households’  disposable  incomes  are  expected  to  increase  by 
almost 5 per cent, almost 80 per cent of which comes from increased transfers and lower taxes and 
charges.  Such  a  large  increase  in  income  has  only  happened  on  a  few  occasions  over  the  past 
decades.  Despite 
increased  strongly  and 
unemployment  continued  to  fall.  However,  the  labour  market  is  split  into  two  parts,  with  falling 
employment in manufacturing and an increase in the services industry. 
At  the  same  time,  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime  has  contributed  to  a  significant  change  in  the 
pattern. Historically, a devaluation of the krona has been necessary at the climax of a crisis and on 
several  occasions  during  the  1970s  and  1980s  crises  were  caused  by  the  fixed  exchange  rate  in 
combination with cost developments leading to a cost crisis. 
The slowdown in 2001 was different to the extent that industry’s competitiveness was very strong. The 
weakening  of  the  krona  began,  fortunately,  a  year  before  industrial  activity  slowed  down.  This 
contributed to  a  very strong development in  net  exports during 2001. This is probably an important 
factor behind the slowdown being a slowdown rather than a recession in Sweden. Although there are 
otherwise major differences, it can be noted that the decline in GDP and exports in Finland was much 
greater than that in Sweden. While industrial production in Sweden decreased at most by 5 per cent, it 
fell by over 10 per cent in Finland. Whether this is due more to other factors than to the exchange rate 
is an open question, but it is reasonable to assume that the development of the krona subdued the 
decline in the Swedish economy. Certainly, it may have at the same time have aggravated the inflation 
problems. If the krona continues to develop along the path estimated by the Riksbank and many other 
analysts, and continues to strengthen in 2002 and 2003, it will help ensure that the economic upturn 
does not grow into overheating. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2002
 in  Ericsson  and 
The economic situation and monetary policy 
It is clear from the minutes of the most recent monetary policy meeting that the Riksbank is painting a 
fairly  bright  picture of the  Swedish  economy  in future. The international recovery, particularly  in the 
USA,  may  become  slightly  stronger  than  we  believed  earlier,  and  this,  combined  with  a  continued 
weak  krona,  will  benefit  Swedish  exports.  However,  developments 
the 
telecommunications  industry  constitute  cause  for  concern  and  uncertainty.  At  the  same  time,  the 
significance of one single sector should not be exaggerated. Industrial activity in Sweden is continuing 
to strengthen. Both order intake and industrial production indicate a recovery is on its way. This is also 
reflected  in  various  confidence  indicators.  With  regard  to  consumption,  there  are  also  signs  that  a 
turnaround is on its way; households’ confidence indicators and the demand for banknotes and coins 
all point in this direction. Retail trade sales have stabilised and there has possibly been a slight upturn 
at  the  beginning  of  the  year.  This  applies  particularly  to  consumption  of  durable  goods.  Low  real 
interest rates and the expansionary fiscal policy indicate that consumption will pick up. 
Developments in prices and wages leave a lot to be desired, as I mentioned in the beginning. It is not 
mumbo jumbo that a productivity level of around 1.5 per cent and an inflation target of 2 per cent are 
incompatible with wage rises of 4 per cent. The scope for wage rises is a maximum of 3.5 per cent at 
normal profit levels. Our assessment of wage developments in the coming two years is around 4 per 
cent, i.e. a level that is not compatible with the inflation target, unless productivity develops better than 
expected. Higher wage increases than expected were one of the causes behind the Riksbank’s two 
interest rate hikes in March and April. However, wage increases differ between the different sectors 
and  different  professional  categories.  Particularly  high  wage  rises  can  be  noted  in  the  service 
industries. In some parts of these industries the wages for white-collar workers have increased more 
rapidly  than  those  for  blue-collar  workers.  This,  together  with  considerable  problems  in  attracting 
qualified  personnel  to  certain  parts  of  the  public  sector,  entails  a  risk  of  a  greater  wage  drift, 
particularly in a situation where economic activity has improved. Relative wage changes are a normal 
element  in  a  dynamic  economy,  but  the  Swedish  labour  market  has  previously  shown  that  large 
relative changes often lead to a compensatory wage drift. Some large groups have had wage rises of 
around  5  per  cent  -  this  applies  to  the  service  industries,  the  construction  sector  and  white-collar 
workers  in  industry  -  but  no  large  group  has  received  less  than  the  3.5  per  cent  that  would  be 
necessary to achieve the inflation target. 
Construction activities over the next few years 
In line with other economic activity, construction activity declined slightly last year, although this was 
estimated  to  be  a  temporary  phenomenon.  Large  resources  have  been  allocated  for  infrastructure 
measures and for the development of the third generation of mobile telephony, which is estimated to 
lead  to  increased  activity  in  future.  There  are  numerous  indications  that  residential  construction  will 
continue  to  increase,  albeit  from  a  low  starting  level.  The  continuing  positive  development  of 
households’ disposable incomes should lead to an increase in new building and renovation of housing. 
Subsidies  for  building  rental  apartment  blocks,  support  for  student  accommodation  and  ecological 
construction  are  also  expected  to  stimulate  investment  in  housing.  Seen  in  a  slightly  longer  term 
perspective, the low rate of new building is insufficient to meet the demand. A shift in the age structure 
will probably lead to an increase in housing investment as a percentage of GDP. 
However, even here prices and wages comprise a problem for the industry. The preliminary results 
show  that  construction  workers  received  wage  increases  in  excess  of  5  per  cent  last  year,  while 
productivity  only  amounted  to  1.4  per  cent  and  unemployment  among  construction  workers  was 
almost 10 per cent. Unemployment in the construction industry varies geographically, however, with a 
rate  of  under  3  per  cent  in  Stockholm  and  over  19  per  cent  in,  for  instance,  the  Gävleborg  and 
Norrbotten regions. 
Relative  productivity  in  the  construction  sector  appears  to  be  declining.  The  gap  between  the 
percentage  employed  and  the  percentage  of  GDP  is  increasing.  This  means  that  every  person 
employed in the construction industry is providing a declining contribution to GDP, in relative terms. 
During most of the 1990s this difference increased, but it has recovered somewhat in recent years. 
This can perhaps be  partly  explained  by the fact that there is still  a large manual element that  it is 
neither desirable nor possible to eliminate. At the same time, it is probable that the entire industry has 
a lower degree of rationalisation than other industries. This is also visible in the development of prices 
for  both  construction  services  and  building  materials,  which  is  far  above  other  industrial  products, 
despite  a  relatively  weak  demand  (OH  3  development  of  prices  for  building  materials).  There  is 
BIS Review 32/2002 
 5
 something unhealthy  in an industry  where  wages  and prices rise  despite  a relatively  weak demand 
and lingering unemployment in the industry as a whole. 
Let me conclude by saying that a recover in the Swedish economy is under way and that the Swedish 
economy has a good foundation on which to build, with a surplus in both our public finances and in 
Sweden’s international trade. Inflation is hopefully on the way down. At the same time, wage formation 
and pricing behaviour in general comprise an element of uncertainty as economic activity begins to 
pick  up.  Personally,  I  consider  that  this  indicates  a  possibility  that  further  interest  rate  hikes  will  be 
necessary in future. However, the next monetary policy step depends, as always, on what happens 
and  the  analyses  we  make.  There  is  always  uncertainty  and  we  have  now  tightened  up  monetary 
policy by 0.5 percentage points. 
 
Outcome and forecasts of UND1X 
made at different points in time
IR 02:1
IR 01:4
IR 01:3
IR 01:2
IR 01:1
IR 00:4
IR 00:3
IR 00:2
IR 00:1
Utfall
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
jan-98
jul-98
jan-99
jul-99
jan-00
jul-00
jan-01
jul-01
jan-02
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
 Building materials in CPI versus
total CPI
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
Byggvaror i KPI
KPI, totalt
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
jan-
95
jul-
95
jan-
96
jul-
96
jan-
97
jul-
97
jan-
98
jul-
98
jan-
99
jul-
99
jan-
00
jul-
00
jan-
01
jul-
01
jan-
02
Source: Statistics Sweden
   6 
 BIS Review 32/2002
 GDP forecasts
Percentage annual change
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
IR99:1
IR99:2
IR99:3
IR99:4
IR00:1
IR00:2
IR00:3
IR00:4
IR01:1
IR01:2
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
IR01:3
IR01:4
IR02:1
Source: The Riksbank
 BIS Review 32/2002 
 7
