 Jean-Pierre Roth: The long path to restoring faith in financial markets 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
CEO Luncheon of the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, Zurich, 4 September 2002. 
 At  the  outset  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  long-standing  ties  between  the  Swiss-American 
Chamber of Commerce and the Swiss National Bank. In the past, members of the Governing Board 
have  been  invited  to  speak  before  this  select  audience.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  honor  for  me  to 
continue this tradition. 
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  present  challenges  faced  by  the  global  economy:  a  crisis  in 
confidence which has pushed equity prices to unexpected lows and an economic recovery which does 
not seem to take the desired path. Nevertheless, I am convinced that the fundamentals are in place for 
a  return  to  sustained  growth.  Inflation  is  low  in  almost  all  industrial  countries,  monetary  policy  is 
supporting  the  recovery,  household  consumption  still  plays  a  stabilizing  role  and  public  finances  - 
despite short-term difficulties - are not far from equilibrium. 
While numerous factors are responsible for the present economic uncertainty, the prolonged volatility 
witnessed in equity markets has hit investors particularly hard. In hindsight the stock market correction 
fits  partially  the  classic  story  of  fundamentals;  one  that  is  driven  by  a  bubbles  collapse  in  dotcom 
companies  and  the  anticipated  slowdown  in  economic  activity.  However,  the  increased  volatility  in 
equity  markets  has  also  been  pronounced  because  of  peculiar  events:  the  integrity  of  financial 
analysts’ recommendations and the increased spread of fraudulent accounting practices. It is the latter 
that  has  struck  the  financial  markets  particularly  hard  in  recent  months.  U.S.  firms,  such  as  Enron, 
WorldCom, Global Crossing and Xerox, have become household names not because of their services 
and products but for their alleged accounting abuses. Investors in these firms undertook investment 
decisions based on apparently false information. The fear is that only the top of the iceberg has been 
revealed and more unpleasant news is expected to fill the front pages of the daily newspapers. 
The fallout from the financial scandals has unearthed several dormant issues that twitch the nerves of 
financial  markets.  In  turn,  this  has  generated  considerable  discussion  in  the  financial  press,  on  the 
airwaves,  and  in  the  corridors  of  government  buildings.  While  the  issues  are  complex,  the  list  of 
proposed solutions is long. This all suggests that consensus and reform will not be achieved overnight. 
Trust as an asset 
As  in  all  walks  of  life,  trust  is  a  valuable  attribute.  Central  banks,  as  well,  value  the  importance  of 
credibility  and  trust.  Allow  me  a  few  minutes  to  explain  why  these  qualities  are  important  to  the 
National Bank. At the same time, they can provide a good illustration as to why these same qualities 
are equally important for the private sector. 
Let  me  begin  with  what  I  mean  by  trust.  Trust  is  a  term  that  is  closely  related  to  confidence  and 
credibility. Trust is understood to mean when individuals share a mutual understanding that the rules 
of conduct governing their network work well and make things better for everyone. Trust can therefore 
be thought of as a kind of social capital - a shared asset that benefits everyone. Just as we speak 
about trust between individuals and public institutions, the same is true for publicly traded firms that 
interact with markets. With trust, economic systems and networks are more efficient for less effort is 
spent  on  monitoring  and  checking.  With  the  establishment  of  trust,  confidence  is  developed.  Over 
time, as trust is built up, confidence and credibility are developed. 
Maintaining price stability is a key trust-building responsibility of the Swiss National Bank. Protracted 
changes in the price level, as a rule, stem from a malfunctioning of the monetary system. Price stability 
is  important  particularly  because  relative  prices  in  our  market  economy  govern  the  production  and 
consumption of individual goods. Changes in the price level are liable to give misleading signals and 
lead to expensive mistakes in planning and investment. 
Inflation  has  other  dire  consequences.  For  the  less  fortunate  -  those  unable  to  protect  themselves 
against price increases - inflation means an erosion in purchasing power. This is especially true for 
fixed income investments. In contrast, for those that can protect themselves against inflation, it means 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 1
 that considerable resources are squandered in trying to hedge against inflation. These efforts should 
be put to more productive use. 
With  price  stability  and  trust  in  place,  the  list  of  economic  benefits  is  long.  In  particular,  the  price 
development becomes more stable and predictable. This allows financial markets and businesses to 
operate  more  efficiently.  As  for  the  National  Bank,  it  can  conduct  monetary  policy  more  easily  with 
expectations strongly anchored. 
A key feature of trust is that it must be underpinned by transparency. We too have learned from past 
experience that Swiss monetary policy gains from increased transparency. Earlier than most central 
banks, we have embraced the notion that it is better for the conduct of monetary policy if people can 
understand  what  their  central  bank  is  thinking,  doing  and  why.  Transparency  also  eliminates  the 
doubts  that  the  central  bank  is  working  with  an  informational  advantage.  Information  asymmetries 
breed mistrust and skepticism. It is much easier to instill trust in an institution if it is open about  its 
goals and strategies. All this enhances the National Bank’s accountability and reinforces the trust we 
have fostered. 
What steps has the National Bank taken to improve the transparency of monetary policy? We have a 
long tradition of setting monetary targets, but since the announcement of our new monetary strategy 
more than two years ago, the discussion of monetary policy is even more clearly defined by norms, 
rules  and  procedures  than  before.  The  explicit  definition  of  price  stability  gives  Swiss  citizens  a 
yardstick  for  measuring  how  the  central  bank  has  performed.  Changes  to  the  target  range  for  the 
policy instrument - the 3-month Libor - are commented by a press release. They are also discussed 
after each Quarterly Board Meeting, which are fixed in advance. At our biannual press conferences, 
we provide our assessment of the economic situation. At these occasions, we inform the public how 
we judge the risks facing the economy and present our inflation forecasts for the next three years. The 
forecast should guide the public in monitoring inflationary risks. Given all this, we have taken the extra 
step to publish the forecasting models that are used to generate our inflation forecasts. 
The meaning of faith in financial markets 
Trust is relevant not just for central banks but also for the entire business and financial community. 
Trustworthy  business  standards  are  one  of  the  most  important  forms  of  social  capital.  Trust  is 
paramount to the efficient operation of financial markets, which is a key ingredient of a well-functioning 
economy.  This  trust  includes  confidence  in  the  people  who  run  the  companies,  and  in  those  who 
watch  them.  It  also  means  that  the  information  required  to  make  sound  investment  decisions  is 
disclosed fully and accurately. The disclosure moreover must be fair. There must be confidence that 
insiders are not trading on information unavailable to everyone. Only when all these components of 
trust are in place do we have healthy, efficient financial markets where everyone benefits. 
What is lost when accounting fraud and the abuse of management power occur? Skepticism sets in 
about the truthfulness of routine financial disclosures. Companies find it more expensive to raise funds 
because once trust is broken, fewer investors are willing to participate, and those who remain demand 
a premium for the increased risk of being misled. A lack of reliable information also leads investors to 
make  poor  investment  decisions,  so  capital  is  misallocated.  In  short,  financial  markets  operate  less 
efficiently, with fewer rewards for everybody. 
Avoiding a widespread loss of trust requires a systematic and co-ordinated effort to fix the flaws and 
weaknesses that can undermine investor confidence. It is important that there is a set of reasonable 
rules - so that chief executives, boards, and their auditors truly and fairly disclose the financial position 
of their companies and that investing public can rely on the truth, fairness, and completeness of that 
disclosure.  Now,  in  spite  of  the  specific  flaws  that  several  well-known  firms  have  revealed,  it  has 
become  clear  that  much  of  the  public’s  confidence  in  the  efficient  operation  of  financial  markets 
remains intact. 
The  recent  events  involving  accounting  fraud  and  abuse  of  management  power  remind  us  that  we 
cannot be complacent even once it is felt that the current problems are behind us. Memories can fade 
quickly. Even if the worst is behind us, the responsibility lies in the market participants to apply the 
lessons of this particular period to stop its recurrence in the future. We must continue to be vigilant. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2002
 The market’s response 
The market participants have already reacted by themselves. We have seen much self-evaluation in 
recent  months.  I  am  encouraged  by  how  seriously  these  issues  are  being  taken.  The  market  is 
enforcing its own discipline. Corporate boards are re-examining their roles and taking a closer look at 
what  is being done  in  their companies. Investors are demanding greater reconciliation between  pro 
forma financial statements and generally accepted accounting principles. 
But  this  is  not  enough.  The  apparent  breakdown  of  the  checks  and  balances  that  served  us 
reasonably well in the past has prompted debate about the need for tougher financial market rules. 
Potentially new rules need to be written. And when unscrupulous market participants or practices are 
revealed,  authorities  must  come  down  on  them  with  full  force.  To  do  otherwise  is  to  do  markets  a 
disservice.  Only  strict  reprobation  will  restore  and  maintain  confidence  that  the  rules  are  being 
enforced. 
Regulatory  and  supervisory  bodies  around  the  globe  have  begun  to  deal  with  the  high-profile 
bankruptcies. In the United States, the Financial Accounting Standards Board is looking at proposals 
to  determine  when  so-called  special  purpose  entities  should  be  consolidated  on  company  balance 
sheets.  The  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  has  proposed  new  rules  for  more  detailed  and 
timely corporate disclosure. 
Major firms, in response to those demands, are changing their corporate reporting methods. There is 
the clear recognition of the need to eliminate potential conflicts of interest - where auditors are able to 
offer  additional  services.  This  has  raised  other  issues  of  rotation  of  auditors  to  prevent  cozy 
relationships undermining the integrity of the audit. A periodic change of the firm might have  led to 
more serious questioning of the accounts. Further, some US firms have announced plans to include, 
as an expense, the cost of executive stock options. The changes aim to more accurately describe the 
revenues  and  costs  associated  with  companies’  primary  business.  And  Standard  and  Poor’s  has 
introduced new benchmarks for reporting corporate earnings. 
These are all positive examples of participants working together to enforce the spirit of the rules under 
which financial markets operate. 
What has been done recently in Switzerland to improve the transparency of Swiss financial markets? 
Some efforts have already started some time ago. Most notably, the Swiss Exchange and the Swiss 
Business  Federation  “economiesuisse”  co-ordinated  their  efforts  to  develop  two  sets  of  rules  which 
became effective on July 1, 2002: The “Swiss Code of Best Practice” and the “Directive Concerning 
Information on Corporate Governance”. This will hopefully lift the standards for corporate governance 
and improve the level of transparency for the publicly traded firms in Switzerland. We have also seen 
political initiatives aiming at more transparency in remunerations. 
Business uncertainty 
It would be shortsighted to believe that the recent stock market reaction has only been the result of 
misconduct  and  the  lack  of  corporate  governance.  The  world  economy  is  still  digesting  the 
consequences from the deep retrenchment in capital spending, which started in 2000 in the high-tech 
and the telecommunications sectors. The investment climate was further muted by the terrorist attacks 
of last September, hitting hard other sectors such as air travel, tourism, and insurance. In short, there 
is considerable uncertainty surrounding the adjustment of investment spending and the dim prospects 
of corporate earnings. 
While the worldwide weakness in business investment lies at the very heart of our present problems, 
at the same time the most recent signals from abroad reveal that new potential risks have emerged. 
The most recent economic indicators from the United States show that domestic demand is growing 
less strongly than anticipated. The confidence indices registered a decline for the months June and 
July. The labor market has recently shown increasing signs of weakness; both in terms of employment 
and hours worked. 
These recent developments weigh heavily against household spending, which has been considered 
the lifeline of the U.S. economy. The fear is that many households are stretched, adding fears to the 
strength  of  household  consumption  and  the  resilience  of  the  U.S.  economy  to  withstand  further 
shocks. U.S. households on average have low levels of savings and have begun to dip into housing 
wealth to maintain their consumption habits. While such savings imbalances do not support the crisis 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 3
 in  investment,  the  recent  signals  from  the  labor  market,  should  they  deepen,  bring  new  risks  to 
consumption and the robustness of the U.S. economy. 
Here  in  Europe,  although  the  economic  picture  is  slightly  different,  the  economic  prospects  are  not 
brighter. Economic hopes pinned on exports and consumption, do not appear to be resilient across 
Europe. The potential for further stimulus on the fiscal and the monetary front appears to be limited. 
On the one hand, the stability pact does not allow for further fiscal stimulus. On the other hand, the 
European  Central  Bank  is  unwilling  to  provide  the  same  amount  of  monetary  stimulus  as  its  U.S. 
counterpart. The reason is simple. Inflationary pressures in the Eurozone continue to be a stumbling 
block for lower interest rates. 
The  recent  deterioration  of  the  international  business  sentiment  and  the  prolonged  uncertainty 
witnessed in the financial markets has also influenced negatively the growth prospects in Switzerland. 
Our view at the beginning of 2002 was that economic growth for the current year would be moderate. 
Our GDP forecast was 1% growth for 2002. Other institutions were more optimistic. All in all, however, 
there  was  considerable  agreement  among  forecasters  that  Swiss  household  consumption  would 
register moderate but stable growth and that the economy would experience a recovery in the second 
half of this year. The recovery was to be underpinned by strong growth in exports. 
The  economic  information  that  stemmed  from  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  was  consistent  with  the 
scenario just described. First quarter real GDP came in slightly stronger than expected. Although real 
GDP growth was only 0.6% in the first quarter, an important consideration was the upward dynamics 
after gloom had set in the second half of 2002. As anticipated, real growth was supported by private 
consumption. Confidence indices and leading indicators were all pointing up, reinforcing the view that 
the economy was on track. 
As is the case abroad, the most recent economic figures question whether the recovery scenario for 
2002 remains valid. Information from various economic indicators is painting a consensus picture of 
weak growth. The negative numbers cover the broad contours of the Swiss economy. These sectors 
include construction, investment, tourism, financial services, and export-oriented industries. 
None of this means that the Swiss economy is not able to stay afloat. But those that have steered a 
ship know: it is not enough to have water under the rudder, one needs to plot continuously a course 
that will safeguard the vessel. The first rule of caution in seamanship and in monetary policy - is to 
keep away from situations in which adverse shocks will lead to trouble. With the recent interest rate 
reductions in the target range, we have tried to steer a prudent course that seeks to offset potential 
adverse shocks that would jeopardize economic recovery in Switzerland. 
On May the 2nd, we lowered the target range for the three-month Libor by 0.5 percentage points to 
0.75% to 1.75%. With this step, we reacted to the rapid appreciation of the Swiss franc against the 
major  currencies,  which  led  to  an  undesirable  tightening  of  monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland, 
thereby threatening the economic recovery. 
We reduced the interest rate range by a further 50 basis points on July 26th. The current target range 
lies between 0.25% and 1.25%. We reacted to the increasing signs from Switzerland and abroad that 
point to a delay in the economic recovery and slower-than-anticipated economic growth in 2002. We 
now forecast the average growth rate for real GDP to fall clearly short of 1% in 2002. In addition, the 
further appreciation of the Swiss franc tightened the monetary conditions, which were regarded to be 
undesirable under the current environment. 
Concluding remarks 
It is more than one year that we are in this difficult economic situation. The loss in business confidence 
began with the downturn in economic activity lead by a sharp correction in capital spending. The path 
to economic recovery has been recently overshadowed by the loss in investor confidence, which found 
its  origins  in  the  highly  publicized  scandals  involving  fraudulent  balance  sheets.  This  setback  in 
investor confidence undermined the required trust in financial markets that the right rules are in place 
and that those rules are being enforced. 
Although I am confident that stronger rules will merge to restore trust in financial markets, consensus 
will  not  be  achieved  overnight.  Corporations  must  continue  to  build  on  the  social  capital  that  is 
entrusted in them by investors. They should promote the efficient operation of financial matters, and 
optimize the benefits that markets can bring to everyone in society. However, as long as the rules of 
the  game  prize  short-term  gain  over  long-term  earnings  stability,  the  temptation  to  cheat  by 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2002
 manipulating  the  market  will  remain  strong.  Reforms cannot  remove  risk from  investment,  but  firms 
can do more to promote transparency and ensure that their risks are properly disclosed. It is thus vital 
for firms - not just politicians and the public - to determine if there are weaknesses in legislation or 
regulation  so  that  they  too  can  correct  and  begin  their  part  of  the  process  of  rebuilding  investor 
confidence. 
But the present challenges are not only those of better regulation. The global economy is also facing a 
crisis  of  confidence,  which  interferes  with  investment  decisions  and  dampens  activity.  Against  this 
international  backdrop,  we  have  reacted  swiftly  to  the  changing  winds  that  bring  new  risks  to  the 
domestic economy. The latest reductions in the target range are aimed at injecting further monetary 
stimulus in our economy. These actions are undertaken with an eye on keeping price stability in check. 
This is the best contribution the Swiss National Bank can make to restore confidence in the economy 
and promote a strong and sustainable recovery. 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 5
