 Christian Noyer: Success factors of the euro and the ECB 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  symposium 
"World  Economic  Climate  after  the  Introduction  of  the  Euro",  organised  by  Japan  Center  for 
International Financeand Sumitomo-Life Research Institute, Tokyo, 13 February 2002. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I should like to begin by expressing what a pleasure and great honour it is for me to have been invited 
to  speak  to  you  here  today.  I  already  participated  in  this  symposium  in  1999,  and  I  very  much 
appreciate this opportunity to discuss with you the factors driving the success of the euro by looking 
back  with  you  at  the  first  three  years  of  Stage  Three  of  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
(EMU). 
In  my  brief  remarks,  I  should  like,  first,  to  talk  about  the  very  recent  event  that  was  of  particular 
significance, namely the euro cash changeover, i.e. the introduction of the new euro notes and coins, 
and discuss the international role of the euro.  Second, I should like to elaborate on the institutional 
set-up of the European Central Bank (ECB) and its objectives. Finally, I will share with you some views 
on the experience we have gained with the single monetary policy so far and on the challenges ahead. 
The euro cash changeover and the role of the euro 
Since 1 January this  year, more than 300 million citizens in Europe have shared the same tangible 
currency.  Now  that  the  new  euro  banknotes  and  coins  have  become  the  legal  tender  in  12  of  the 
15 Member States of the European Union (EU) – Denmark, the United Kingdom and Sweden have not 
yet adopted the euro – the process of monetary integration laid down in the Maastricht Treaty in 1991 
has found its visible expression in the daily life of the residents of the euro area. It should be noted 
that the euro has already been in existence since 1 January 1999, when the exchange rates of the 
currencies of the euro area countries were irrevocably fixed. Until 1 January 2002, however, the euro 
was the currency of the financial and foreign exchange markets. For cash payments, the old national 
banknotes and coins had to be used  in  the last three  years.  Although the national currencies  were 
officially regarded as mere expressions of the single currency, the euro – in the eyes of many people – 
only arrived with the introduction of the new euro banknotes and coins. 
The exchange of the old national banknotes and coins of the 12 countries of the euro area for the euro 
has been a massive operation requiring enormous organisational, logistical, technical and economic 
efforts. Its success has far exceeded our own expectations. In almost all its aspects, the euro cash 
changeover has progressed well and rapidly, without any major hitches. This was a crucial factor for 
acceptance of the new currency by the European public. The completion of the changeover has been 
a challenge of unprecedented dimensions that involved the banking sector, security carriers, retailers 
and the cash-operated machine industry. In order to guarantee a gradual and smooth supply of euro 
to the economy, euro banknotes and coins started to be distributed to the banking and retail sectors 
as  from  1  September  last  year.  6.4  billion  banknotes  worth  some  EUR  133  billion,  and  more  than 
37.5 billion coins with a total value of around EUR 12.4 billion, had already been frontloaded to the 
banking sector by the end of 2001. The adaptation of more than 200,000 automated teller machines 
(ATMs), which supplied around 70% of the  new banknotes utilised for transactions  within  less than 
one week, was another key factor in the euro cash changeover. 
From the outset,  European citizens showed a  great  deal of enthusiasm and have been  very fast in 
adopting  their  new  money.  Two  weeks  after  the  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  the 
value  of  euro  banknotes  in  circulation  was  higher  than  that  of  national  banknotes,  and  the  vast 
majority of cash transactions in the euro area were being conducted in euro. 
In the  last few months, the Eurosystem, i.e. the ECB and the national central banks (NCBs) of the 
12 EU Member States participating in the euro area, and a number of other parties, such as retailers, 
educational institutions, the tourism industry and the media, were heavily involved in the information 
campaign which acquainted the general public with the new money. The euro banknotes are endowed 
BIS Review 10/2002 
 1
 with distinctive characteristics and state-of-the-art security features which not only enable the public 
and professional cash handlers to recognise and check them quickly, but also make them some of the 
world's safest. 
The transition to the new  banknotes and coins  was  facilitated  by  the fact that the financial markets 
were already fully accustomed to the euro. The introduction of the single currency three years ago was 
another exceptional success that opened the way to fundamental changes in the conditions in which 
governments, financial institutions and the private sector operate in financial markets of the euro area 
and in the rest of the world. 
Within  the  euro  area,  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risks  and  the  lower  transaction  costs  which 
followed, together with the far more transparent markets the euro brought with it, have created new 
opportunities for businesses and forced firms to attain higher levels of efficiency and competitiveness. 
A  further  success  factor  for  the  euro  has  been  and  still  is  its  role  as  a  catalyst  in  the  process  of 
financial  integration,  thereby  enhancing  the  widening  and  deepening  of  the  euro  area  financial 
markets. A large, liquid and integrated money market was rapidly created after 1 January 1999. This, 
in  turn,  triggered  a  significant  growth  of  interest-bearing  instruments  denominated  in  euro.  On  the 
unsecured  money  market,  the  EONIA  (euro  overnight  index  average)  reference  rate,  an  interbank 
overnight interest rate index compiled by the ECB, has established itself as one of the most important, 
perhaps  even  the  most  important,  reference  rate.  The  EONIA  swap  market  is  now  considered  the 
largest overnight swap market in the world. In the bond market, too, the euro played a crucial role in 
fostering the deeper and more liquid euro area bond market that we see today. As early as in 1999, 
the  total  amount  outstanding  of  euro-denominated  debt  securities  made  the  euro  bond  market  the 
second  largest  bond  market  in  the  world,  and  the  international  issuance  of  the  euro-denominated 
bonds has even outpaced that of US dollar-denominated bonds for a few months at a time. 
At the international level, the euro has become the second most widely used currency as a result of 
the  overall  weight  of the  euro area economy  in the  world  and the  legacy  of the national currencies 
which were replaced by the euro. 
Looking at official international uses, the euro is second only to the US dollar among the world's official 
reserve  currencies.  The  gap  between  the  two  currencies,  however,  is  wide.  According  to  the  latest 
available data, the euro accounted for around 13% of the world's official foreign currency holdings at 
the end of 1999, compared with a US dollar share of around 70%. Experience has shown, however, 
that there is a considerable time lag before the importance of a currency, as indicated by the economic 
weight of the country issuing that currency, is reflected in its use as an official reserve currency. 
As an anchor currency, the euro plays a role in the exchange rate regimes of more than 50 countries 
outside the euro area. The solutions adopted by these countries range from very close, or even full, 
links to the euro, such as the unilateral entitlement to use the euro as legal tender – euroisation – to 
looser types of anchoring, such as peg arrangements and crawling fluctuation bands. 
I would like to conclude this brief overview of the international role of the euro by emphasising that 
developments in this field will be the outcome, first and foremost, of a market-driven process. 
At this point, let me move the focus of my presentation from the introduction of the euro and its role in 
financial markets to the institutional factors behind the success of the ECB and its monetary policy. 
The institutional set-up and the objectives of the ECB 
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  assigned  to  the  ECB  the  maintenance  of  price 
stability in the euro area – i.e. the internal stability of the euro – as its primary objective. It is through 
the credible and lasting maintenance of price stability over the medium term that the ECB can best 
contribute to sustained long-run economic growth, employment creation and better standards of living. 
In our view, the uncertainties surrounding the monetary policy transmission mechanism, part of which 
arises  from  the  continuous  evolution  of  economic  behaviour  and  institutional  structures,  make  the 
central bank ill-suited to fine-tune economic developments. 
Without prejudice to its primary objective, the ECB shall also support the general economic policies of 
the European Community, such as the enhancement of output growth and employment. This does not, 
however, mean that the ECB bears responsibility for objectives other than price stability. By giving its 
monetary  policy  a  medium-term  orientation,  the  ECB  does  show  concern  for,  and  contribute  to, 
smoothing output fluctuations. It is clear, however, that the instruments and the mandate to promote 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2002
 potential output and employment  lie  with structural policies,  and thus primarily  at the  national level. 
The allocation of tasks and objectives to different policy-makers in the euro area is thus very clear. 
The budgetary provisions in the Treaty, which limit the level of government deficits and debts, and the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  introduced  the  goal  of  budgetary  positions  close  to  balance  or  in 
surplus as a medium-term objective for Member States, have been key to achieving sounder public 
finances. 
For purposes of supporting and safeguarding the pursuit of price stability, the Treaty has endowed the 
ECB with a high degree of institutional independence. Being protected from potential political pressure 
is a further crucial factor for the success of the ECB in allowing it to guarantee European citizens a 
long-term euro area perspective in pursuing its mandate of maintaining price stability. 
In  order  to  assure  transparency  and  accountability  with  respect  to 
its  policy  design  and 
implementation, the Treaty has imposed extensive reporting requirements on the ECB. The ECB has 
even  exceeded  these  requirements,  thereby  meeting  very  high  standards  in  this  respect.  Monetary 
policy decisions are regularly explained in the press conference the President and I give after the first 
meeting  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  every  month,  in  the  Monthly  Bulletin  of  the  ECB,  in  the 
speeches given by members of the Governing Council and in the testimonies of the President at the 
European Parliament. 
For  purposes  of  setting  out  how  it  goes  about  in  achieving  its  Treaty  mandate,  the  ECB  has 
announced  a  medium  term-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy.  To  enhance  clarity,  to  anchor 
expectations and to offer a yardstick against which the ECB can be held accountable, the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  has,  in  particular,  provided  a  numerical  definition  of  price  stability  which  is  "a 
year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 
2%". 
Recognition  of  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  has  to  contend  with  an  ever  changing  and  imperfectly 
known world has been a key consideration in the design of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. The 
Governing  Council  chose  to  equip  itself  with  an  internally  consistent  and  robust  framework  for 
analysing  economic  developments  and  shocks,  which  we  call  our  two-pillar  strategy  of  monetary 
policy.  Given  the  long-term  monetary  nature  of  inflation,  a  first  pillar  of  our  strategy  assigns  a 
prominent role to money, implying the use of monetary analyses, and of models, in which monetary 
aggregates play an important role. In parallel, a second pillar ensures that other forms of analysis and 
models,  such  as  the  investigation  of  the  interplay  between  supply  and  demand  and  cost-push 
dynamics,  are  also  incorporated  into  the  policy-making  process.  Together,  the  two  pillars  ensure  a 
comprehensive assessment of the economic situation, of the size and nature of the shocks hitting the 
euro area and of the related risks to price stability over the medium term. 
The robust assessment and the cross-checking of information which characterises our strategy has 
proved to provide the Governing Council with the analytical support most suitable for the conduct of 
monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  It  is  widely  acknowledged  that  the  ECB's  monetary  policy  has 
contributed to keeping inflation expectations in line with the ECB's definition of price stability, although 
short-term shocks pushed HICP inflation temporarily above 2% in the course of 2000 and 2001. The 
financial  markets,  well  known  for  their  pitiless  judgement,  have  moreover  been  confirming  the 
credibility of our monetary policy from the very outset. The development of long-term interest rates has 
in  fact  been  in  line  with  our  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability.  This  is  not  an  insignificant 
achievement, and we are committed to not putting it at risk. 
Following the introduction of euro banknotes and coins, there is some concern among the public about 
potential inflationary effects stemming from the rounding upwards of prices. Compared with December 
2001, inflation in the euro area has increased in January 2002 (year-on year). However, this increase 
was largely anticipated by the ECB and is due to a number of factors, including so-called base effects, 
bad weather (impacting prices of unprocessed food) and higher indirect taxes. The contribution of the 
cash  changeover  to  the  increase  in  inflation  in  January  is  probably  limited.  Indeed,  we  have  seen 
rounding  happen  in  both  directions,  up  and  down.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  has  been  very  little 
evidence so far of effects of the cash changeover on the average level of prices in the euro area. This 
is largely due to the stronger competition which the euro is fostering in the retail sector, together with 
continued awareness on the part of consumers and the commitment of governments not to increase 
the average level of administered prices. This said, we will of course remain vigilant with respect to the 
possibility of an impact on inflation rates in the first months of this year. Over the long run, however, 
downward  pressures  on  prices  should  predominate  in  the  euro  area,  thanks  to  the  increased 
transparency and stronger price competition the physical introduction of the euro has been inducing. 
BIS Review 10/2002 
 3
 Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  presentation  by  addressing  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead.  I  am  referring,  in 
particular, to the enlargement of the European Union and, subsequently, of the euro area. Currently, 
12 countries from central, eastern and southern Europe are negotiating the terms and conditions for 
their  becoming  members  of  the  EU.  Integrating  such  a  large  number  of  new  applicants  in  the 
European Union will be an enormous task for all the parties involved, not least in view of the significant 
differences in economic conditions in most of these countries in relation to the current Member States. 
Considerable  efforts  will  be  required.  The  reward,  we  believe,  will  be  the  smoothing  of  the  road 
towards the pursuit of a common European objective in the future.  
4 
 BIS Review 10/2002
