 Alan Bollard: The evolution of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Rotary  Club  of 
Wellington, Wellington, 25 November 2002. 
 As a new central bank governor, what I would like to do first is to give you an overall perspective on 
the role of the Reserve Bank in the New Zealand economy. I will then focus in on the role of monetary 
policy, and the implications of the new Policy Targets Agreement, and conclude by discussing how all 
this relates to achieving strong and sustained economic growth. 
Monetary policy formulation is a key function of the Reserve Bank, and it is often in the news. But the 
public attention obscures the other important tasks that the Reserve Bank undertakes. In the hubbub, 
the fact that monetary policy is part of a larger picture is often lost. The overall purpose of the Bank, as 
I see it, is to maintain the stability and efficiency of the New Zealand financial system. 
By  the  financial  system,  I  mean  the  tools  with  which  New  Zealanders  make  transactions  with  each 
other  and  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  For  very  simple  transactions,  New  Zealanders  use  notes  and 
coins issued by the Reserve Bank. As you may know, nowadays our bank notes are made out of a 
polymer material that lasts much longer than in the days of paper money. This reduces the Reserve 
Bank’s costs. A side effect is that you’ll be seeing Dr Brash’s signature around the place for a while 
yet.  Polymer  notes  are  also  very  difficult  to  forge,  because  of  their  modern  security  features.  That 
relates  to  our  goal  of  an  efficient  financial  system.  A  banknote  that  is  easy  to  forge  would  make 
transactions difficult. Imagine having to check every twenty dollar note that came out of an EFTPOS 
machine. 
Of course, nowadays most significant payments are made using electronic means of transferring funds 
provided by the financial system. These are much cheaper, faster, and more secure than using large 
volumes of cash, particularly over long distances. The financial system also facilitates transactions that 
involve borrowing and lending. For example, individuals accumulate savings in our financial system, 
and invest those savings in assets like shares and term deposits. These funds then often find their 
way to New Zealand corporations and households, and are used to build New Zealand’s infrastructure. 
Typically, the individual investor receives a return on those investments, and is able later on to draw 
on the originally invested funds. 
We often take this system for granted, yet its smooth operation is essential to the wellbeing of the New 
Zealand  economy.  Banks  play  a  key  role  in  directing  funds  from  individuals  who  wish  to  save  to 
individuals  who  wish  to  borrow.  The  system  works  because  people  have  confidence  that  funds 
deposited in banks will be available to them in the future, and that those funds will retain their buying 
power through time. The Reserve Bank has a central role in providing the regulatory framework for 
institutions  that  wish  to  describe  themselves  as  “banks”.  We  register  banks  and  we  monitor  their 
compliance  with  a  comprehensive  financial  disclosure  regime,  required  minimum  capital  adequacy 
ratios, and limits on the loans they can make to related parties. Our framework emphasises the role of 
bank directors in ensuring that banks effectively manage their risks, and on the role of the market in 
strengthening incentives for prudent management. This helps to promote a sound banking system. 
However,  no banking system is without risk. Depositors still need to make their decisions carefully. 
Banks  in  New  Zealand  are  not  guaranteed  by  the  Government  or  the  Reserve  Bank.  There  is  no 
mandatory deposit insurance in New Zealand. 
I  mentioned  that  an  efficient  financial  system  needs  to  have  mechanisms  by  which  money  can  be 
stored.  This  is  so  people  can  access  their  money  when  they  need  it,  without  their  savings  having 
eroded  in  value.  Ensuring  that  money  holds  its  value  is  the  primary  purpose  of  monetary  policy. 
Indeed, by statute the Governor of the Reserve Bank is required to use monetary policy to keep the 
buying power of the New Zealand dollar broadly stable over time. 
Maintaining price stability  does not mean keeping the price of each and every  item the same. I am 
charged to maintain a stable overall level of prices, but individual prices are always changing. Some 
things, like computers, will probably continue to get cheaper, while some other things may continue to 
get more expensive, like Martinborough Pinot Noir. But the overall buying power of people’s savings is 
intended  to  remain  broadly  constant  over  time.  In  the  current  Policy  Targets  Agreement,  I  am 
specifically directed to attempt to achieve trend inflation outcomes between 1 and 3 percent. 
  Why  is  this  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy?  Both  economic  theory  and  hard  experience 
suggests  that  money  holding  its  value  over  time  helps  an  economy  achieving  its  potential.  Stable 
money is not a silver bullet, and on its own it can achieve little. However, stable money is one of the 
building blocks of a successful economy. 
Yes, I could use monetary policy to engineer temporary economic growth. By lowering interest rates I 
could encourage people to borrow and spend for a period. As firms saw increased demand for their 
products, they would seek to expand output to meet that demand. They would invest in new capital 
and hire more workers, and this would create even more demand in the economy. 
At first this would look like a virtuous circle, one which could lead to an extended period of economic 
growth.  The  problem  is  that  lowering  interest  rates  for  a  period  can  not  create  out  of  thin  air  the 
resources  needed  for  growth.  Firms  that  tried  to  employ  more  labour  and  buy  more  capital  goods 
would quickly run into shortages. That would lead to cost increases for them, and also lead them to put 
prices up themselves. Eventually, rising costs would make people realise that their increased activity 
was not profitable. Then the boom would turn into a bust, and firms would be forced to retrench. 
Moreover,  during  the  boom  period,  inflation  would  rise  beyond  the  price  stability  target,  and  the 
perverse incentives that inflation causes in investment and planning decisions would begin to weaken 
the economy. To be sure, if I allowed inflation to climb to just 4 or 5 per cent, the effect would be more 
subtle than the damage done when we had much higher inflation back in the 1970s and 1980s. But 
4 to 5 per cent inflation would add nothing to New Zealand’s enduring growth rate and it might well 
trigger  a  larger  inflation  problem  later  on.  So  I  have  committed  to  deliver  a  trend  rate  of  inflation 
consistent with the 1 to 3 percent range in the new Policy Targets Agreement. In other words, I plan to 
deliver a similar inflation rate to the one New Zealand has seen over the last decade. 
But it is also important to make clear that monetary policy in the 21st century involves more than just 
fighting inflation. I’ve described our over-arching goal as maintaining the stability and efficiency of the 
New Zealand financial system. Thus, the Reserve Bank cannot afford to be, in the words of Bank of 
England Governor Eddie George, “Inflation nutters”. We are not permitted to cure the patient by killing 
it. 
Let  me  explain  how  flexible  monetary  policy  avoids  such  a  result.  By  its  nature,  the  New  Zealand 
economy  is  often  hit  by  economic  disturbances  -  for  example,  changing  conditions  in  the  world 
economy, El Nino and La Nina periods in the weather and fluctuations in the number of people moving 
to  and  from  New  Zealand.  All  these  things  can  have  major  impacts  on  the  New  Zealand  business 
cycle. They frequently also have consequences for the inflation rate, which are sometimes temporary 
in nature. One example likely to have only a temporary effect is a drought,  which in  the short term 
typically  pushes  up  the  prices  of  agricultural  products  like  fruit  and  vegetables,  generating  inflation. 
However, increases in the prices of things like fresh fruit and vegetables generally would not be seen 
by  the  public  as  the  start  of  a  general  inflation  problem.  So  it  is  unlikely  that  the  inflationary 
consequences  of  this  sort  of  disturbance  would  be  long  lasting.  That  is  particularly  true  because 
overall  spending  in  the  economy  would  be  reduced  by  a  drought,  because  farm  incomes  would  be 
down. So if monetary policy is excessively focused on price stability and we attempt to stop inflation 
caused by temporary climatic shocks, we could end up exacerbating a recession. By contrast, a policy 
which looks through short-term inflation fluctuations is much less disruptive to the real economy, and, 
of course, that’s what we do. 
In  addition,  the  challenges  that  central  banks  face  change  over  time.  Look  at  other  developed 
countries  over  the  past  decade  or  so.  Having  successfully  eliminated  the  inflation  problems  of  the 
1970s and 1980s, central banks could be forgiven for expecting the late 1990s and this decade to be 
an easy ride. In reality, many central banks face arguably greater challenges. For example, in Japan, 
despite interest rates falling to very near zero, weakness in private sector demand has persisted for 
the best part of a decade. Monetary policy  in Japan  has been  unable to  prevent deflation - that  is, 
persistent falls in the overall level of prices. 
In the United States, the challenge has been running monetary policy in a period where many people 
believed the economy was moving through a technological revolution that would lead to a prolonged 
inflation-free,  economic  boom.  That  belief  translated  into  very  high  asset  prices,  which  helped  to 
underpin a long period of strong consumption and investment spending. A key question policy makers 
faced was whether the asset prices represented fair value, or were a bubble that reflected a collective 
over-optimism about the future. 
  Finally, many central banks, including New Zealand, have struggled with the consequences of volatile 
nominal exchange rates. For example, both the Norwegian and  British currencies have persisted at 
high levels which have been very tough for their exporters. There has been little scope for monetary 
policy  in  those  countries  to  solve  this  problem  without  generating  inflation  that  would  be  equally 
damaging to their exporters. 
In my view New Zealand is not about to undergo any of these scenarios. But the world that we face 
now  has  moved  on  from  the  world  of  1989,  when  the  Reserve  Bank  Act  was  passed  into  law. 
Maintaining price stability, as I am required to do, is different from firstly having to achieve it, as was 
required  then.  As  you  know,  before  becoming  Governor,  I  signed  a  new  Policy  Targets  Agreement 
with  the  Minister  of  Finance.  This  new  agreement  offers  monetary  policy  a  bit  more  scope  to  take 
evolving circumstances into account. In particular, the new agreement makes clearer that the Reserve 
Bank  should  maintain  price  stability  in  a  flexible  way  that  does  not  unnecessarily  disrupt  the  real 
economy. 
The key  change  in  the  agreement  is  that  the  inflation  target  has  been  explicitly  defined  in  terms  of 
“future  inflation  ...  on  average  over  the  medium  term”.  This  implies  that  monetary  policy  should  be 
forward-looking, and  avoid getting distracted  by  transitory fluctuations in the inflation rate. In typical 
circumstances, we expect to give most attention to the outlook for CPI inflation over the next three or 
so years. If the outlook for trend inflation over that period is inconsistent with the target, we will adjust 
the Official Cash Rate. Our intention will be that projected inflation will be comfortably within the target 
range in the latter half of the three year period. This means we will set policy so that inflation will be 
within the target range in the medium term, unless we are hit by a major surprise event. If a major 
surprise does occur, we will explain what has caused inflation to be higher or lower than we wanted, 
and what steps we will take to ensure that it goes back comfortably within the band. 
I said the new Policy Targets Agreement offers us a little more flexibility, but it’s a flexibility that needs 
to be applied with care. The language of the new agreement makes clear that inflation should not be 
persistently  outside  either  end  of  the  band.  This  is  because  a  sustained  breach  of  the  target  could 
affect people’s perceptions of the trend  inflation rate. That in  itself could create a major inflationary 
problem. Thus, if one of the disturbances I mentioned earlier appeared to be strongly stimulating or 
weakening  activity  in  New  Zealand  -  suppose  there  was  a  sharp  and  persistent  increase  in  tourist 
numbers for example - then the inflationary consequences might not be transitory. So, to keep inflation 
from  rising  and  activity  from  going  through  a  boom-bust  cycle,  monetary  policy  still  needs  to  act  to 
counteract the impact of these disturbances. And monetary policy still needs to respond particularly 
assertively when inflation is expected to be well outside the target range, or persistently outside it. But, 
at other times, if inflation is fairly stable and if we do not see pressures that have the potential to get 
out of control, then we have a mandate to be a little more flexible in our response. 
Is this increased flexibility justified? In other words, can we be a little more flexible than in the past 
without taking risks with price stability? I think we can, because keeping prices stable gets easier when 
prices have already been stable over an extended period. If inflation suddenly rises just after a period, 
like in the 1980s, when it was out of control, then there is a risk it will spark a self-fulfilling belief that it 
is out of control once again. In other words, if people believe that inflation is out of the bag, they may 
translate  that  into  higher  prices  for  the  goods  and  services  that  they  sell  and  higher  demands  for 
increased salaries and wages. 
By contrast, after inflation has been low and stable for a long time, people are much less likely to see 
price fluctuations as the start of something serious. Then a self-fulfilling prophecy is much less likely. 
Our freedom to be more flexible without compromising our price stability goal is thus a consequence of 
the  hard-won  achievement,  during  my  predecessor’s  tenure,  of  an  environment  where  prices  are 
expected  to  be  broadly  stable  over  time.  In  operating  monetary  policy,  we  will  continue  to  carefully 
monitor people’s perceptions of the inflation outlook, to confirm that their confidence in price stability 
remains strong. 
What then of New Zealand’s current economic situation? As you know, the New Zealand economy has 
been going through a strong period, stimulated by international conditions favourable for us. We have 
had  record  tourist  numbers,  and  excellent  returns  on  dairy  products  and  many  other  agricultural 
commodities. We’ve also had a very quick turnaround from a net outflow of migrants a year or so ago 
to  a  very  strong  net  inflow,  which  has  more  than  doubled  New  Zealand’s  population  growth.  In 
combination,  these  factors  have  led  to  pressure  on  New  Zealand’s  resources.  For  example,  many 
firms  have  seen  strong  demand  for  their  products.  This  particularly  applies  to  firms  in  sectors  like 
  retailing and construction that supply New Zealand households. When they’ve tried to expand to meet 
that demand, employers have reported difficulty finding additional staff. 
This  tends  to  create  pressure  on  prices,  and  indeed,  at  present,  inflation  is  near  our  price  stability 
ceiling.  But  we  run  policy  looking  forward,  and  it  has  not  been  clear  how  long  the  effects  of  that 
offshore stimulus will last. In the United States the long expansion has given way to recession, and the 
recovery from that recession appears to have faltered. The Australian  economy  is  experiencing the 
effects of a drought and, like us, deteriorating trading conditions offshore. 
Moreover, the New Zealand dollar has been rising off the low levels seen a year or so ago. For these 
reasons, over the next couple of years we expect economic growth in New Zealand to slow from its 
present high rate. We expect that this will constrain much of the inflationary pressure that we see now 
in some sectors of the economy. At the same time, the rising dollar means that New Zealand dollar 
prices of imports have fallen. As a result, we expect New Zealand’s overall inflation rate to slow quite 
quickly over the next year. 
In terms of monetary policy,  in  this situation I see  good  grounds for  waiting  and seeing how things 
evolve.  Interest  rates  are  at  a  level  in  New  Zealand  where,  in  our  view,  they  are  not  significantly 
stimulating or restraining the economy. If the world economy picks up and the New Zealand expansion 
continues, we will probably need more contractionary policy settings during 2003. On the other hand, 
further  deterioration  offshore  and  signs  that  it  is  catching  up  with  New  Zealand  could  require 
stimulatory monetary policy settings. So we are keeping our options open. 
Finally, let’s go  back to the broader context for the Reserve  Bank’s task. I have described how the 
Bank is focused on helping deliver a stable and efficient financial system to the New Zealand public, 
and  how  low  and  stable  inflation  is  an  important  part  of  that.  I  have  suggested  that  doing  this 
contributes to sustainable and balanced economic development. I’ve also said that price stability is a 
contribution but not a solution to the economic challenge facing New Zealand. 
How do I see this challenge? Recall that New Zealand’s standard of living, as measured by GDP per 
capita, barely improved at all between 1975 and the early 1990s. It is only in the last decade or so that 
the  New  Zealand  economy  has  managed  to  achieve  a  sustained  lift  in  growth.  The  projections  I 
released last week suggest that this growth will continue, but not at a pace sufficient to close the gap 
that has developed between our GDP per capita and the OECD average. 
To do that, over the next 20 years our rate of growth in GDP per capita would have to rise from 2.2 per 
cent over the last decade to almost 3 per cent over the following twenty years. That’s presuming the 
rest  of  the  OECD  grows  at  the  same  rate  as  in  the  last  decade.  Achieving  this  sort  of  productivity 
improvement is a worthy challenge. It is only by meeting that challenge that we will get more of the 
things  we  need:  greater  after  tax  income,  improving  standards  of  health  care,  education,  and 
environmental protection, and faster and faster boats to keep defending the America’s Cup. 
I  hope  I  have  made  clear  today  that  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  working  to  achieve  continued  price 
stability  without  standing  in  the  way  of  sustainable  economic  growth.  Indeed,  I  think  sound,  flexible 
monetary policy contributes to the strong, balanced economic growth that, we all agree, New Zealand 
needs. 
 