 Urban Bäckström: Financial cycles 
Speech  by  Mr  Urban  Bäckström,  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Philadelphia  Fed  Policy 
Forum  on  Crises,  Contagion  and  Coordination:  Issues  for  Policymakers  in  the  Global  Economy, 
Philadelphia, 22 November 2002. 
 First I want to express my thanks to the organizers for inviting me to this very interesting conference. 
Let  me  especially  thank  Tony  Santomero  for  everything  he  has  done  in  his  previous  capacity  in 
inspiring and assisting us at the Riksbank over the years as an academic adviser. I wish you, Tony, 
every success as president for the Philadelphia Fed and as an important policy maker here in the U.S. 
I think one can say that central bankers around the world have never before had such a central and 
well respected position as they have had during the past decade. Their task seemed to be well defined 
and  the  job  to  deliver  price  stability  has  worked  rather  well.  Much  of  the  mystique  that  typically 
surrounded central banks has gradually disappeared. Openness and transparency have become the 
key words of the day. Moreover, research concerning monetary policy has made good progress during 
the past decade. The world of central banking has indeed undergone positive changes. 
However, it would be most dangerous for us, central bankers, to just sit down and relax in the belief 
that all the important problems in the field of monetary policy have been resolved and need no further 
consideration. One aspect that indeed needs further thinking is the issue of financial cycles and how 
they could be mitigated and whether monetary policy should play a role in doing so. Let me say a few 
words about this. 
Before I became involved in central banking I was state secretary in Sweden’s Ministry of Finance in 
the early 1990s and dealt, among other things, with the management of our nation’s banking crisis. 
Being in the middle of a crisis like that was indeed a frightening experience. 
Financial crises would seem to evolve from excessive optimism. That is, credit expansion (domestic or 
foreign),  which  feeds  into  asset  prices,  lowers  the  cost  of  capital,  stimulates  investment  and 
subsequently leads to an economic boom. Eventually, the investments are found not to be sustainable 
in that they do not generate profits. The whole structure may ultimately collapse, the economy moving 
from boom to bust, often followed by banking or currency crises or a combination of the two. The most 
severe bubbles have historically been those that involve rapid credit expansion in the banking system. 
Economic  history  books  are  full  of  examples  of  this  process.  Also,  the  1990s  provided  many 
illustrations of similar events. The discussion about financial cycles is far from new. One example is 
the major debate of the 1920s and 1930s between the Austrians (Hayek, etc.) on the one hand, and 
Keynes on the other. Keynes was focusing on the demand side and on how to get out of the bust, 
whereas Hayek was focusing on the supply side and on how an economy got into the bust in the first 
place. 
While  a  great  deal  has  been  done  to  understand  the  reasons  behind  financial  instability,  many 
questions remain unsolved. So the discussion continues and when it comes to crises prevention, two 
conventional pieces of policy advice seem to emerge. 
The first line of defense is moral suasion. The central bank could warn market participants in various 
ways that they are becoming overly optimistic in their expectations about future cash flows, if we are 
talking for instance about stocks or real estate. The problem with moral suasion is that it is difficult to 
calm down a market that is rushing to new highs. Talk rather than action is often not enough. Still, if a 
bubble is starting to build up, it may be worth a try. This is one reason why several central banks have 
began to publish financial stability reports. In this way one can perhaps broaden the public discussion 
about what is happening. 
The second line of defense is prudential regulation. However, the way prudential regulation is done 
in practice raises two, interrelated problems. The first has to do with the fact that most financial crises 
stem  not  from  individual  banks  getting  into  difficulties  and  affecting  others  by  contagion.  Rather,  in 
most cases, many  institutions act more or less similarly,  encouraged by overoptimistic expectations 
that macroeconomic conditions can be extrapolated uncritically  into the future. The second problem 
with prudential regulation is that the tools are themselves often based on perceptions of risk which are 
not  independent  of  the  credit  and  asset  price  cycle  itself.  On  the  one  hand,  underlying  actual  risk 
BIS Review 68/2002 
 1
 builds up  as expansion  and leverage continue and the financial cycle  proceeds On the other hand, 
apparent  risk  declines  with  the  rise  in  collateral  values.  This  causes  difficulties  for  supervisors  who 
tend to concentrate on individual institutions and treat risks as exogenous. This is not to deny that by 
improving prudential regulation, setting international standards (for example Basle II) etc, the risk of 
financial instability can be significantly reduced. 
Supervisors are also recognizing the shortcomings I just mentioned and are increasingly focusing on 
developments that generate systemic macroeconomic risks and on constructing built-in mechanisms 
to  dampen  the  financial  amplification  of  the  business  cycle.  For  example,  supervisors  are  trying  to 
encourage stress-testing by private sector risk managers to enable them to better see through asset 
market  misalignments.  Another  way  is  to  make  provisioning  practices  more  forward-looking  than  at 
present  and to  adopt more conservative, less cyclically sensitive measures of value. The idea is to 
build capital cushions in good times that can be used in bad times. Hence financial cycles could be 
milder. 
Whether improved prudential regulations, supervisory practices and risk management techniques will 
suffice to avoid financial cycles in the future remains to be seen. Our experience so far does, however, 
leave some doubts about this. 
This brings us to  a possible third line of defense that could  at  least  in  principle be used to  prevent 
large financial cycles. I am of course thinking about monetary policy The argument is that since we live 
in  a  fiat  money  system,  there  is  no  exogenous  constraint  on  the  supply  of  credit  except  through 
monetary  authorities.  If  those  reactions  are  geared  exclusively  to  controlling  inflation,  then  the 
monetary anchor may not counter a build-up of credit that does not immediately lead to inflation in the 
price of current output. Hence, there is little to prevent the emergence of cycles in the prices of real 
and  financial  assets  that  are  not  included  in  the  measure  of  inflation.  In  addition,  experience  has 
taught us that price stability is not, by itself, sufficient to ensure financial stability. 
So  why  don’t  central  banks  simply  change  the  way  they  conduct  monetary  policy  and  also  try  to 
prevent  financial  cycles?  Well,  the  conventional  view  is  that  they  should  not.  There  are  some  very 
powerful arguments against a central bank trying to respond to credit expansion and “misalignments” 
in asset prices that do not lead to inflation in goods and services. First, how do we know that a bubble 
is  a  bubble  and  not  a  reflection  of  fundamental  values?  Second,  even  if  the  central  bank  does 
recognize the emerging bubble and wants to prevent it from building up, by the time it could form a 
judgement about this, it would be to late. Third, if a central bank is fortunate with both the recognition 
and  the  timing,  there  is  still  a  risk  that  it  will  cause  an  economic  recession.  To  have  any  effect  on 
excessive optimism about future returns on financial assets, the monetary response might have to be. 
Nevertheless, the costs of financial cycles are sufficiently large to  warrant an exploration of several 
avenues for mitigating them and this should, to my mind, not exclude the possibility of monetary policy 
actions.  I’m  not  saying  that  a  central  bank should  target  asset  prices  per  se.  Stock  prices  and  real 
estate  prices  rise  and  fall  for  many  reasons.  In  my  view,  however,  a  central  bank  needs  to  be 
observant when notable increases in asset prices are one of several imbalances that are building up 
even if inflation in goods and services does not show any sign of rising. Such imbalances could be a 
combination of strong credit growth, rapidly rising investment and a marked deterioration in the private 
sector’s financial balance. I do not mean to imply that determining when such a situation is on the way 
is particular easy. My point is that monetary policy should not be excluded a priori in a scenario like 
this. There are many other difficult assessments that central banks have to make. Here I am thinking 
about  variables  like  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate,  the  output  gap  and  the  NAIRU  etc.  Why 
should identifying asset market misalignments, excessive credit growth and a rapid decline in private 
financial balances be more difficult than forming an opinion about variables such as these? 
My view about monetary policy in this respect is of course closely bound up with my experience of the 
Swedish banking crisis, but it is also in line with a central bank’s mandate to achieve long-run price 
stability. If anything, a financial crisis substantially increases the risk of outright deflation after some 
time. The central bank could manage this risk in two ways: by at least trying to prevent the bubble from 
building up by tightening  monetary policy at an early  stage,  and then by  loosening monetary policy 
aggressively if a bubble builds up and bursts anyway. To my mind, both such actions would be in line 
with  focusing  on  long-run  price  stability,  whether  the  central  bank  follows  an  explicit  or  an  implicit 
inflation targeting approach. 
Although I will be leaving my job as governor of the Bank of Sweden towards the end of this year, I 
have  no  qualms  about  forecasting  that  financial  stability  will  remain  on  the  agenda  and  be  a  key 
challenge for financial authorities for many years to come. 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2002
