 Niklaus Blattner: Review of the Swiss economy 
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Dr  Niklaus  Blattner,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2002. 
 In  conducting  monetary  policy,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  must  be  able  to  rely  on  a  healthy 
banking system. We can consider only efficient and solvent banks as counterparties. Monetary policy 
can only be implemented effectively in a system made up of such banks. Furthermore, only efficient 
and  solvent  banks  (including  the  non-bank  Postfinance  and  the  infrastructures  for  the  settlement  of 
payments and securities) can maintain efficient and secure payment transactions. 
The  current  bill  for  a  comprehensive  revision  of  the  National  Bank  Law  took  this  realisation  into 
account.  Overseeing  the  payment  and  securities  settlement  system  is  only  one  of  the  central  bank 
functions spelled out in the Law. What is new, in particular, is the explicit requirement that the National 
Bank shall contribute to the stability  of the financial  system. By taking organisational measures, we 
already  created  better  preconditions  for  fulfilling  the  expanded  mandate  in  2001.  The  Law  and  the 
organisation are moving in the direction taken by other central banks worldwide ever since they have 
increasingly identified the stability of the financial system as a necessary precondition for pursuing an 
effective monetary policy. 
In  accordance  with  the  revised  Law,  our  close  cooperation  with  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking 
Commission  (SFBC)  will  be  further  expanded.  The  responsibilities  will  remain  clearly  delineated, 
however.  The  SFBC  is  mainly  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  banks  and  institutions,  while  the 
National Bank is entrusted with overseeing payment and securities settlement systems and promoting 
the stability of the financial system. 
Our activity in this area focuses on analysing the structures, the behaviour and the results in the Swiss 
banking  system.  Up  until  now,  the  National  Bank  was  known  primarily  for  its  banking  statistics. 
Furthermore, it frequently conducted and published banking surveys. We are now increasingly turning 
our  attention  to  the  analysis  of  topical  issues,  including  a  periodic  analysis  of  the  situation  in  the 
financial  system.  In  so  doing,  we  concentrate  on  those  aspects  which  are  relevant  for  assessing 
system  stability.  For  this  reason,  banks  are  the  main  focus.  Developments  in  the  insurance  world 
jeopardise system stability only indirectly at the most, e.g. in the case of a financial conglomerate. 
The situation in the Swiss banking sector 
The Swiss banking sector found itself in a hostile environment in the past few months. There was a 
slowdown  in  economic  development.  Hope  for  a  prompt  recovery  was  dampened.  The  number  of 
corporate  bankruptcies  increased  substantially  compared  with  the  previous  year.  Uncertainty 
surrounding company  profits hit the stock markets with full force. As elsewhere, Swiss stock prices 
dropped significantly amid high volatility. While the Swiss market as a whole (SPI) lost 22% from the 
beginning  of  the  year,  the  SPI  banking  index  weakened  by  30%  and  the  share  index  of  insurance 
companies plummeted by as much as 47% (as of 9 December 2002). 
What are the repercussions that banks are exposed to? The weak economy results in a deterioration 
in the quality of loan portfolios, and the collapse of stock prices has an adverse effect on profits. Banks 
not only suffer losses on their own securities portfolios. The stock market slump also has an impact on 
earnings from commissions and services. Lucrative services in investment banking, such as those in 
connection with IPOs or mergers, are less and less in demand, and the reluctance on the part of many 
investors – with the resultant lower turnover – cuts into the income from commission business. In the 
wake of falling stock prices, profits in asset management are declining as well. This is because a part 
of the fees and commissions levied on the assets under management is value- or performance-based. 
This year, the big banks recorded profit setbacks in most areas compared with year-earlier quarters, in 
some cases even considerable losses. This was especially due to the poorer results from trading for 
own  account  and  to  a  decrease  in  investment  banking  business  (new  issues,  mergers  and 
acquisitions).  Particularly  insurance  business  accounted  for  these  losses.  In  traditional  banking 
business,  notably  in  retail  banking,  the  big  banks  recorded  satisfactory  results,  however.  The  BIS 
equity ratios disclosed by the big banks clearly exceed the required minimum. 
BIS Review 73/2002 
 1
 Banks which concentrate on asset management are struggling especially with the repercussions of the 
poorer  performance  on  the  capital  markets  and  costs,  which  have  risen  sharply  just  in  the  last  few 
years. 
For banks primarily active in interest-earning business, economic development plays a pivotal role. As 
already mentioned, due to the slowdown in economic activity, a deterioration in loan quality and the 
resultant need for higher provisions is something this business segment must reckon with. 
Of some 250 banks which published their half-yearly results, two-thirds saw their profits decline vis-à-
vis the first six months of the previous year. Thirteen banks even posted a loss; the remaining banks, 
however, recorded a rise in profits. The aggregate profit was down by 21% compared with the year-
earlier period. 
Despite the regrettable case of Banque Cantonale Vaudoise, the overall situation is favourable as far 
as  equity  ratios  are  concerned:  all  banks  continue  to meet  the  capital  adequacy  requirements.  The 
average  capital  ratios  of  all  banks  (excluding  the  big  banks,  September)  exceeded  the  regulatory 
minimum by 79%. 98% of banks reported at least a 20% capital surplus. 
The overall picture can be characterised as follows: the Swiss banking sector suffers from uncertain 
economic prospects and the tense situation on the financial markets. Many financial institutions are 
forced to take corrective action. Measures taken range from cost cuts, streamlining the product line, 
decreasing risk exposure, continued tightening of risk and liquidity management to capital increases 
and mergers. For the most part, these measures are implemented without delay. Plans for cooperation 
on a logistical level and in connection with raising capital have become more attractive as well. It is to 
be hoped, however, that the reluctance to give up an often only presumed autonomy will be overcome 
sooner rather than later. The idea that a bank is only a «real bank» if it is itself involved in the entire 
value chain as much as possible is a thing of the past. 
Moreover, further development will depend heavily on the economic trend and the stabilisation on the 
financial markets. 
Two things merit particular mention: firstly, the capital ratio of Swiss banks is on a comfortable level 
overall, allowing them to act from a position of strength. Secondly, banks in Switzerland have mostly 
used the prosperous years since the end of the nineties to bring their lending business in line with the 
risks  and  to  reform  their  liquidity  and  risk  management.  Under  the  current  difficult  circumstances, 
these efforts are now paying off. 
In other words, the problems facing the Swiss banking system will be solved. The banks in Switzerland 
have  the  necessary  strength.  Structural  changes  are  taking  place  at  a  fast  pace  and  are  likely  to 
progress  even  more  quickly.  The  banking  system  may  be  undergoing  radical  changes,  but  is 
nevertheless stable. 
The role of the euro in payment transactions 
A little less than a year ago, the euro was introduced in the European Monetary Union in its physical 
form. In the summer of 2001, in the run-up to the launch of euro cash, the National Bank held talks 
with over 100 Swiss companies and associations querying them on their expectations in connection 
with euro coins and banknotes as well as their experiences so far with the euro as deposit money. 
Last summer, i.e. well over half a year after the introduction of euro cash, the National Bank conducted 
another  similar  survey.  The  purpose  of  this  second  survey  was  to  gather  information  on  the  first 
experiences made with the new euro cash in  Switzerland. The questions focused on the euro as a 
means of payment in tourism and in retail trade. In addition, export companies were again questioned 
as  to  their  handling  of  the  euro  as  deposit  money.  In  this  connection,  the  National  Bank  was 
particularly interested in the prevalence of the euro as a billing currency as well as the treatment of the 
foreign exchange risk. 
As  had  been  expected,  the  introduction  of  euro  cash  did  not  lead  to  a  sharp  increase  in  payments 
made in foreign currencies. In the majority of the businesses we visited in the tourism sector and in 
retail trade, payments currently made in euros are approximately on a par with the ones formerly made 
in the original European currencies. Guests who stay for a very short period (overnight) pay in euros 
most frequently. The same applies to some tourists from the United States and Asia who make only a 
short visit to Switzerland during a tour of Europe. The traditional European holidaymakers, however, 
continue to change their money into Swiss francs. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2002
 In practice, most businesses apply the current rate plus a margin of 2%-3% when payment is made in 
euros. The majority of businesses only accept euro banknotes and return change in Swiss francs; a 
minority also accept euro coins, giving the change in euros. The management of coins is made more 
difficult because most banks do not buy or sell coins. All businesses queried feel that the simplification 
brought  about  by  the  replacement  of  the  former  European  currencies  with  the  single  currency  is 
positive. 
With  regard  to  the  euro  as  deposit  money,  many  export  companies  switched  to  billing  in  euros 
relatively  soon  after  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency.  Consequently,  this  practice  has  not 
become significantly more prevalent in the most recent past. Invoicing in euros of exports destined for 
the euro zone is widespread. Producers of some niche and luxury products are an exception. They 
continue  to  bill  in  Swiss  francs.  Euro-denominated  receipts  are  hedged  in  exceptional  cases  only; 
companies  still  consider  hedging  on  the  financial  markets  to  be  too  expensive.  What  is  widely 
practised,  however,  is  so-called  “natural  hedging”,  which  means  that  receipts  in  euros  are  used  to 
settle suppliers' invoices: primary products and raw materials from the euro zone are paid for in euros. 
Swiss suppliers have increasingly been requested to provide euro-denominated invoicing. It is unclear 
to  what  extent  inter-company  payments  in  Switzerland  are  effected  in  euros.  There  is  agreement, 
however, that these payments have increased compared with last year's survey and that this trend is 
likely to continue in future. Wage and salary payments in euros are still not an issue. Employees would 
not  accept  wage  and  salary  payments  in  euros.  Furthermore,  such  a  practice  would  result  in 
substantial administrative complications (social security deductions and taxes in Swiss francs). 
The  selective  use  of  euros  in  place  of  the  Swiss  franc  does  not  create  any  difficulty  with  regard  to 
monetary policy. On the one hand, the bulk of payments in Switzerland will probably continue to be 
effected in Swiss francs also in future. On the other hand, under the current monetary policy strategy, 
a  possible  euro-induced  decline  in  the  demand  for  money  will  not  lead  to  any  problems  either. 
Contrary  to  the  previous  policy  of  targeting  the  money  supply,  the  steering  of  the  interest  rate  the 
National Bank pursues today is not dependent on a stable demand for money. 
The  National  Bank  realises,  however,  that,  as  invoicing  in  euros  becomes  more  widespread,  our 
export industry must bear higher exchange rate risks.  
BIS Review 73/2002 
 3
