 Jarle Bergo: Efficiency in the Norwegian payment system 
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Conference on payment systems 2002, Oslo, 14 November 2002. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Thank you for your invitation and for the opportunity to present Norges Bank’s views on developments 
in the payment system at this important conference where payment system experts are gathered. In 
particular, I will discuss issues related to efficiency in the Norwegian payment system today.  
This  is  an  area  in  which  our  political  authorities  have  delegated  a  responsibility  to  Norges  Bank. 
Section  1  of the Norges Bank Act from 1985 states  that “…Norges Bank shall  promote an  efficient 
payment system domestically as well as vis-à-vis other countries…”  
1. An efficient payment system
• Payments should be processed
–Fast
–At reasonable cost
–Safely
• These three features receive different emphasis in the 
retail payment system and the interbank payment 
system
 We have defined an efficient payment system as a system that settles payments quickly, safely and at 
reasonable  cost.  This  definition  applies  to  both  interbank  and  retail  payment  systems.  These  three 
elements receive different emphasis depending on the type of payment involved. In connection with 
interbank systems, we place considerable emphasis on safety, because delays or failure of a payment 
settlement may lead to a liquidity shortage or loss in some banks. These problems may in turn spread 
to a number of banks and at worst threaten financial stability.  
Retail  payments  consist  of  many  transactions  of  limited  size  and  retail  settlement  amounts  are 
normally modest. Normally, problems in the retail payment system will not pose a threat to financial 
stability.  Therefore,  more  emphasis  can  be  placed  on  executing  retail  payments  quickly  and  at 
reasonable cost.   
The purpose of the provisions in Chapter 3 of the Act relating to Payment Systems, etc. from 1999 is 
to contribute to ensuring that systems for payment services are organised and operated in a way that 
promotes safe and efficient payments and effective and coordinated execution of payment services. 
This  responsibility  has  been  delegated  to  the  Norwegian  Banking,  Insurance  and  Securities 
Commission.  The  Norwegian  Banking,  Insurance  and  Securities  Commission  and  Norges  Bank 
cooperate  closely  on  issues  of  relevance  to  the  retail  payment  systems.  In  accordance  with  the 
requirements of the Norges Bank Act, Norges Bank has focused on efficiency in the retail payment 
system as a whole. 
In most western countries, the payment system lays claim to between 1 and 3 per cent of GDP. More 
efficient  structures  can  therefore  result  in  substantial  savings  and  free  up  resources  for  other 
purposes. In Norway, banks use NOK 5.9 billion to produce payment services. Costs to the payer and 
payee in connection with payment transactions come in addition. Norges Bank considers it important, 
therefore,  that  payment  services  are  organised  in  a  way  that  enables  the  market  to  find  efficient 
solutions for production and use of such services. In this presentation, I will focus on retail payment 
systems.  
BIS Review 66/2002 
 1
 Criteria for assessing efficiency 
We place emphasis on four elements when assessing the efficiency of the retail payment system.  
2. Efficiency in retail payments depends on
• Access to appropriate payment instruments
• Direct pricing of all payment services
• Exploitation of economies of scale and network 
externalities 
• Competition in the supply of payment services
 It is important that both corporate and retail customers have access to payment instruments that cover 
their needs in all payment situations. Customers must feel confident that payments reach the correct 
payee  at  the  correct  time.  This  in  turn  requires  a  high  level  of  operating  reliability  in  the  electronic 
payment  systems  and  correct  processing  of  paper-based  payment  instruments.  The  security 
experienced by customers in connection with different payment instruments has an impact on the use 
of the instruments and thus also on the public’s perception of whether the service range is acceptable.  
Prices tell customers something about the value of the product or service and the costs associated 
with procuring the product. This affects customer preferences. Prices which reflect the relative costs of 
producing  different  payments  services  provide  important  incentives  for  selecting  the  services  that 
satisfy their needs at the lowest possible cost. Overall, this will provide solutions that reduce the use of 
resources and increase efficiency in the payment system. Cost coverage through high interest margins 
and float implies hidden costs for customers and makes it difficult to choose correctly on the basis of 
product  costs  and  features.  Therefore,  there  should  be  as  much  direct  pricing  as  possible.  The 
customer who chooses among various payment instruments should bear the cost of this choice.  
The production of payment services is characterised by economies of scale. Development costs are 
high and the requirements as to operating reliability and back-up solutions for the computer systems 
are  stringent,  while  the  cost  of  producing  one  extra  unit  is  low.  This  applies  in  particular  to  the 
electronic  payment  services. We  then  face  a  classic  pricing  problem  that  is  described  in  economic 
theory. If the price is set equivalent to the cost of producing the last unit (marginal cost), which in a 
certain  sense  is  "correct"  pricing  with  regard  to  efficiency,  the  manufacturer  will  not  fully  cover  his 
costs.  The  manufacturer  must  then  cover  the  remaining  costs  with  the  profits  from  other  services. 
 Innovation and development of new products are important driving forces behind increased efficiency 
in the payment system. In order to finance development activities, banks and producers of payment 
services  must  have  a  certain  profit.  Both  direct  pricing  of  payment  services  and  other  income  may 
generate this profit. If the profit is to come from direct pricing, the income must cover more than the 
production costs. 
When new products are introduced, a price that is lower than the direct costs may, however, have a 
positive effect on efficiency. Since price affects demand, a low price can contribute to extensive use of 
the  service  at  an  early  stage.  This  ensures  that  economies  of  scale  and  any  positive  network 
externalities are exploited at an early stage. By positive network externalities, we mean that the utility 
for each individual system user increases when additional users join the system. The system where 
the network externalities are probably strongest is the EFTPOS system (a system for card payments in 
electronic point-of-sale terminals). Here, increased card use leads to growth in the number of payment 
terminals which in turn provides the basis for increased card use. When the price is low, the indirect 
costs  may  be  covered  later  by  not  reducing  prices  correspondingly  when  use  increases  and 
development  costs  have  been  repaid.  As  an  alternative,  the  fixed  costs must  be  covered  by  cross-
subsidisation from other payment services or other types of services offered by banks. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2002
 Both economies of scale and positive network externalities suggest that the number of producers of 
payment  services  will  be  limited  and  that  they  will  use  common  standards.  A  single  producer  will 
ensure full exploitation of economies of scale, but at the same time, this producer would be able to 
charge  monopoly  prices.  A  single  producer  also  implies  a  concentration  of  risk  which  may  be 
undesirable. In addition, a monopolist may have few incentives to engage in product development. In 
most cases, therefore, efficiency will be higher with several competing producers of payment services. 
A genuine possibility that new participants may enter the market may prevent monopolists from taking 
out  a  monopoly  profit.  This may  also  encourage  the  producer  to  maintain  a  high  level  of  operating 
reliability and to further develop the services.  
Strong  customers  may  also  contribute  to  reducing  the  power  of  the  large  producers.  Customers’ 
bargaining power normally depends on their size, and small banks can collaborate and form alliances 
to increase their bargaining power as buyers. However, the majority of the banks’ customers will not 
have  bargaining  power  vis-à-vis  banks,  so  it  is  important  that  there  are  many  banks  competing  to 
supply payment services to customers.  
Efficiency in the Norwegian system 
Overall, the Norwegian system for retail payment services is fast, reasonably priced and safe.  
3. Productivity gains in the 1990s
Per cent
2 0
1 5
1 0
5
0
88
- 5
Financial 
services
Mainland
Norway
Financial 
services, 
average
90
92
94
96
98
'00
2 0
1 5
1 0
5
0
- 5
 Retail  payments  are  settled  in  Norges  Bank  twice  a  day.  Depending  on  the  time  of  day  that  the 
payment is made, the funds will be available in the payee's account on the same day that payment is 
made  or  the  next  working  day.   Direct  pricing  for  payment  services  is  much  more  widespread  in 
Norwegian  banks  than  in  banks  in  most  other  countries.  The  price  of  the  services  is  charged  per 
transaction to the payer and the public may choose the services that cover their needs at the lowest 
possible price. Since the Act relating to Financial Agreements came into force on 1 July 2000, the float 
in the Norwegian payment system has been removed. 
Prices that reflect the relative differences in production costs have had a positive affect on efficiency in 
the payment system. The economic impact is so substantial that it is visible in the national accounts. 
The revised national accounts show that GDP growth and productivity growth in the 1990s have been 
considerably stronger than assumed earlier. The new figures show that annual productivity growth for 
mainland Norway was 2.4 per cent in the 1990s. Financial services, with annual productivity growth of 
6.3  per  cent  in  the  1990s,  is  the  sector  that  contributed  most  to  this  increase.  This  contributed  0.2 
percentage point of the rise in productivity for mainland Norway. This is partly because of a general 
increase in efficiency after the banking crisis, but is also because of sharp productivity growth in the 
payment  system.  The  productivity  growth  is  a  result  of  more  cost-effective  production  of  various 
services as well as increased use of payment services with low production costs. As a result of banks’ 
direct pricing of payment services, the most cost-effective services have shown the strongest growth. 
Norges Bank has recently completed a survey of banks’ costs in connection with providing payment 
services. We have received detailed responses from seven banks, two large and five smaller banks, 
that account for 38 per cent of the volume in the payment system. We have examined banks’ direct 
costs  and  indirect  costs  such  as  those  connected  with  personnel,  operation  of  computer  systems, 
BIS Review 66/2002 
 3
 business premises, machinery, inventory, etc.  Development costs related to new products have been 
included and spread over the economic life of the service. The survey is described in an article that will 
appear  in  the  next  issue  of  Economic  Bulletin  which  will  be  published  in  December.  It  will  also  be 
available on our website in December.  
4. Transaction volume and total costs
1000
800
600
400
200
0
No. of transactions, 
in millions
1988 
1994 
2001
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Total costs, in 
billions of 2001 
NOK
In 2001, banks spent NOK 5.9 billion to produce one billion payment and cash transactions, compared 
with NOK 6.3 billion to produce less than half the number of transactions in 1994.  
 5. Unit costs
1988
1994
2001
2001 NOK
1 5
1 4
1 3
1 2
1 1
1 0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Unit costs excluding
cash withdrawals at 
the counter
Unit costs including
cash withdrawals at 
the counter
 As you probably know, we also investigated the costs related to payment transactions in the largest 
banks and Norway Post in 1988 and 1994. At constant 2001 NOK, the cost per transaction fell from 
NOK 14.10 in 1988 to NOK 10.70 in 1994. In 2001, the average cost per transaction was NOK 5.30. 
Since 1988, the cost of an average transaction, at constant prices, has fallen by a good 60 per cent.  
Banks  have  steadily  increased  the  scope  of  direct  pricing  so  that  the  degree  of  cost  coverage  by 
means of direct pricing has nearly doubled both from 1988 to 1994 and from 1994 to 2001. In 2001, 70 
per cent of costs were covered by means of direct pricing.  
 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2002
 6. Unit costs and list prices
L is t p rice
U nit c o s t
NOK
3 0
30
2 5
25
2 0
20
1 5
15
1 0
10
5
5
0
0
Phone giro
PC/Internet  
Electronic terminal giro
Direct debits
Giro at the counter
Mail giro
Paper-based terminal giro
Giro paid by cash
Cheque
Own bank's ATM
EFTPOS
Withdrawals/deposits
Other bank's ATM
Transfers
 7. Cost coverage in 1988, 1994 and 2001
1988
Other
Prices
Float
1994
2001
Other
Prices
Prices
Other
Float
  Due  to  changes  in  banks’  service  range,  users  participate  more  extensively  in  the  production  of 
payment  services  and  cover  some  of  the  costs  directly.  This  applies  in  particular  to  the  use  of 
terminals,  PCs  and  telephones  for  bill  payment  and  to  cash  withdrawals  in  connection  with  goods 
purchases. The survey does not cover customers’ time and travel expenses and expenses related to 
telephone or PC. These costs would have had to be included in order to provide a complete overview 
of society’s total costs related to the payment system. Users’ participation in the production of payment 
services does not necessarily have a positive impact on society’s overall efficiency in the production of 
payment services. Increased use of e-invoicing will, however, increase the efficiency of electronic bill 
payment. The survey does not cover the payees’ costs related to invoicing.  
BIS Review 66/2002 
 5
 8. Price developments 1993 - 2002
Electronic services
Paper-based services
2001 NOK
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Giro at the 
counter
Giro cash
Cheque
Mail giro
2001 NOK
Telephone giro
EFTPOS
PC/Internet giro
Direct debits
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
94
96
98
2000 '02
94
96
98
2000 '02
 Both developments in the use of payment services and research show that prices affect customers' 
use  of  different  payment  services.  Despite  the  price  increase  for  most  paper-based  services,  the 
weighted average price per transaction, at constant prices, has fallen since 1994.  
 
9. Average prices (weighted by transaction)
2001 NOK
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Weighted average price giro transactions
Weighted average 
price all transactions
94
95
96
97
98
99
00
01
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 For most services, customer prices are lower than banks’ unit costs. The exception is giro services at 
the counter. The unit cost for EFTPOS has declined so that transaction prices nearly covered costs in 
2001.  Prices  have  fallen  because  the  transaction  volume  has  increased  and  costs  related  to 
developing and introducing the system have been repaid. The price for using a card in a POS terminal 
has not risen appreciably in recent years. The unit cost for paying bills over the Internet is still high. 
This is probably because development and introduction costs are still not repaid and because there is 
excess  capacity  in  the  banks'  solutions.  Customer  prices  cover  less  than  one-fourth  of  the  costs 
reported by banks in connection with this service. It appears that banks are pricing this service on the 
basis of a long-term strategy that low prices during the introduction phase will encourage customers to 
use new, more efficient payment instruments earlier. If the pricing strategy actually increases use, it 
may contribute to increasing efficiency in the payment system in the long term because economies of 
scale will be exploited at an early stage.  
In  Norway,  the  Banks'  Standardisation  Office  establishes  the  standards  for  payment  services.  The 
Banks' Payment and Central Clearing House (BBS) and EDB Fellesdata produce most of the payment 
services in Norway. In some areas, the two companies produce different kinds of services, while in 
other  areas,  they  compete  in  the  same  market.  This  solution  exploits  economies  of  scale  in  the 
development and production of payment services.  
 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2002
 Reduction of risk in the payment systems 
Risks  in  payment  systems  have  received  increased  attention  in  the  1990s,  both  internationally  and 
here in Norway. An average of NOK 160-170 billion is settled in Norges Bank’s Settlement System 
every day. In addition, a number of banks settle transactions in Union Bank of Norway and Den norske 
Bank. If a bank is incapable of timely settlement, the settlement systems may be a source of financial 
instability. The settlement systems may also contribute to spreading liquidity and solvency problems.  
The Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) in the Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS) has established 10 core principles with which all systemically important settlement systems must 
comply in order to limit risk in the payment system. Norges Bank's assessments indicate that all the 
important bank-operated settlement systems in Norway that have been authorised, i.e. the systems 
operated by Union Bank of Norway, Den norske Bank, NICS (Norwegian Interbank Clearing System) 
satisfy these 10 core principles.  
10. Risks in the payment system
• Legal risk
- Uncertainty in agreements and division of responsibility
• Settlement risk – credit and liquidity risk
- Credit risk is the risk of loss when the payer is unable to meet his 
obligations
- Liquidity risk is the risk that the counterparty is unable to meet his 
obligations at the agreed time
• Operational risk
- Problems or interruptions in computer systems or communication 
lines or insufficient routines 
 Risk in the payment system is often divided into four categories. Legal risk is related to uncertainty 
about agreements and the distribution of responsibility. The Payment Systems Act shall contribute to 
an  organisation  of  the  systems  that  promotes  financial  stability.  The  act  also  transposes  the  EU 
Directive  on  settlement  finality  into  Norwegian  law.  The  Directive  protects  approved  payment  and 
securities systems against legal risk associated with the insolvency of a participant. Norges Bank has 
notified all important settlement systems to the EFTA Surveillance Authority, ESA, thus providing them 
with  legal  protection.  The  legal  risk  as  defined  above  should  therefore  be  eliminated  for  these 
settlements.  
Settlement risk consists of credit risk and liquidity risk. The banking industry’s transition to crediting 
after  settlement  has  eliminated  most  of  the  credit  risk.  Liquidity  risk  is  also  limited  because  Norges 
Bank offers liquidity through the day which is only limited by the collateral furnished by the banks. In 
gross settlement in Norges Bank, banks have coordinated their transaction exchange and there is a 
built-in  anti-gridlock  function  which  becomes  operative  if  a  transaction  lacks  cover.  So  far,  queues 
have  not  been  a  problem  in  NBO.  Settlement  risk  is  therefore  not  considered  a  threat  to  financial 
stability.  
The fourth type of risk is operational risk. Operational risk arises as a result of failure or downtime in 
computer systems or communication lines between systems or inadequate routines. After one of the 
major operators experienced a system breakdown that lasted several days in the summer of 2001, all 
the key operators in the settlement system have initiated measures to increase operational reliability 
and to have better back-up solutions in the event of any disturbances at the ordinary operations site. 
The  problems  during  the  summer  of  2001  had  no  impact  on  financial  stability,  but  reduced  the 
efficiency of the Norwegian payment system until the operators had restored normal operations.  
The operational reliability of Norges Bank’s Settlement System has been very high the last year. In the 
period from 8 October 2001 to 5 June 2002, Norges Bank has not been responsible for any settlement 
errors, i.e. 239 days without errors. On 5 June 2002, an error that was classified as a small error by 
BBS  gave  us  one  error  point.  Since  5  June,  operations  have  run  smoothly,  i.e.  162  days  without 
errors.  
BIS Review 66/2002 
 7
 Despite these positive results, Norges Bank has decided to modernise the current settlement system 
because the existing system is complicated and tightly interwoven with other systems. This makes the 
settlement system vulnerable. Operation and maintenance of the current system also require relatively 
extensive  resources.  Following  discussions  with  the  banking  industry  about  the  division  of 
responsibility and organisation of the Norwegian clearing and settlement system, it has been decided 
that the current division of responsibility will remain virtually unchanged. Banks will be responsible for 
gathering  transactions  and  for  netting  and  Norges  Bank  will  be  responsible  for  settlement.  Norges 
Bank has decided to outsource the operational activities of settlement. We are currently preparing an 
invitation to tender for prospective partners.  
We will devote considerable attention to these issues in the future. We assume that we will have a 
definite  plan  for  the  site  of  our  settlement  operations  by  summer  2003,  with  implementation  next 
autumn.  
International recommendations and work 
The Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) in the Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS) has established a separate Working Group on Retail Payment Systems. In September this year, 
the working group submitted a report on “Policy issues for central banks in retail payments”.  
11. BIS recommendations
• In the work on retail payments, central banks should 
focus on four important areas:
- Ensure that the legal and regulatory framework is not an obstacle to 
innovation and development
- Monitor market structure, market developments and the market 
performance, and ensure that conditions are conducive to 
competition
- Monitor the development of safety and operational standards and 
evaluate the effect of such standards on competition in the market
- Provide settlement services in a way that contributes to efficient and 
safe solutions in the rest of payment system
 The  report  considers  how  central  banks  should  work  in  order  to  achieve  the  goal  of  efficient  retail 
payment systems and it identifies four areas in which central banks can become involved. 
• 
Ensure  that  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  is  no  obstacle  to  innovation  and 
development. 
Monitor the market structure, market developments and market performance and ensure that 
conditions are conducive to competition. 
Monitor  the  development  of  safety  and  operational  standards  and  evaluate  the  impact  of 
these standards on competition. 
Provide settlement services in a way that contributes to efficient and safe  solutions in the 
rest of the payment system. 
   We will place emphasis on these recommendations in our future work on retail payment systems.  
The ECB has recently reviewed a proposal that key retail payment systems should also comply with 
six of the core principles for systemically important payment systems established by the BIS/CPSS. It 
is  up  to  each  country’s  central  bank  to  determine  which  retail  payment  systems  are  important  and 
must therefore comply with the six recommendations.  
The proposal implies that retail payment systems must have a well-founded legal basis. The individual 
participant should have a clear understanding of the financial risk connected with participation in the 
system. Further, the retail payment systems should ensure a high degree of safety and operational 
reliability  and  should  have  satisfactory  contingency  arrangements.  The  system  should  also  provide 
efficient  and  practical  payment  solutions.  The  system  should  have  objective  and  publicly  disclosed 
8 
 BIS Review 66/2002
 criteria  for  participation,  which  permit  fair  and  open  access,  and  the  system's  governance 
arrangements  should  be  effective,  accountable  and  transparent.  The  ECB  suggests  in  addition  that 
the four remaining core principles may be applied to retail payment systems. Of these, the ECB is of 
the view that the core principle concerning final settlement on the day of value should receive highest 
priority. 
Norges Bank has not made a thorough evaluation of the Norwegian retail payment system in relation 
to the six recommended core principles. Nevertheless, I will present some preliminary assessments of 
where the Norwegian retail payment system stands in relation to these recommendations.  
12. ECB proposal for core principles for retail 
systems
I.
II.
The system should have a well founded legal basis under all 
relevant jurisdictions.
The system’s rules and procedures should enable participants to 
have a clear understanding of the system’s impact on each of the
financial risks they incur though participation in it. 
VII. The system should ensure a high degree of security and operational 
reliability and should have contingency arrangements for timely 
completion of daily processing. 
VIII. The system should provide a means of making payments which is 
practical for its users and efficient for the economy. 
13. ECB proposal for core principles for retail 
systems
IX. The system should have objective and publicly disclosed 
criteria for participation, which permit fair and open 
access. 
X. The system’s governance arrangements should be 
effective, accountable and transaparent. 
In addition, this principle should also be fulfilled:
IV. The system should provide prompt final settlement on the 
day of value, preferably during the day, and at a minimum 
at the end of the day.
 The Act relating to Financial Agreements and the  Payment  Systems Act ensure that  Norway has a 
modern, comprehensive legal framework for payment services. The Payment Systems Act has also 
contributed to removing banks’ legal risk linked to participation in the payment system. Therefore, the 
Norwegian  retail  payment  system  should  satisfy  the  principle  of  a  well-founded  legal  basis.  Earlier 
today, I concluded that settlement risk in the Norwegian payment systems was very limited. I believe 
we can also say that the financial risk has been publicly disclosed and is understood. 
As I have already mentioned, all the key participants in the settlement system have initiated measures 
to  reduce  operational  risk  and  improve  contingency  arrangements.  Safety  in  the  Norwegian  retail 
payment system appears to be high. Therefore, I believe that the Norwegian retail payment system 
largely satisfies the principle of safety and operational reliability. As I have already said, Norway has a 
very efficient retail payment system. Therefore, the system complies with the core principle concerning 
efficient  and  practical  payment  solutions.  Banks  have  clear  rules  about  the  criteria  which  new 
participants must satisfy in order to gain access to the common systems. The terms and conditions are 
publicly disclosed and the Norwegian Competition Authority has had no comments to them. The core 
principle concerning objective and publicly disclosed criteria for participation is therefore regarded as 
satisfied.  The  systems’  organisation  largely  satisfies  the  core  principle  concerning  effective, 
BIS Review 66/2002 
 9
 accountable  and  transparent  governance.  The  additional  recommendation,  i.e.  compliance  with  the 
core principle concerning final settlement on the day of value, is also satisfied in Norway.  
Internationally,  central  banks  have  also  shown  increasing  interest  in  efficiency  in  retail  payment 
systems.  
Norges Bank’s work with retail payment systems 
In the spring of 2002, we published a policy document that provides an account of our responsibilities 
in the payment system area. In this document, we discuss our earlier work in this area and premises 
and plans for future work.  
Norges  Bank  monitors  developments  in  the  market  and  documents  this  in  its  Annual  Report  on 
Payment Systems. The report was the first of its kind and has received international recognition. The 
statistics  in  the  report  are  based  largely  on  voluntary  reporting  from  the  key  participants  in  the 
Norwegian payment system, and we are very grateful for their cooperation.  
It is the  banking  industry  that makes decisions about the  use of standards and about  infrastructure 
development.  Norges  Bank  will  closely  monitor  the  work  and  emphasise  that  standards  and 
infrastructure be designed in a way that does not inhibit competition.  
Which requirements should be satisfied by new payment systems? 
Innovation  and  development  of  new  payment  systems  that  satisfy  new  needs  are  important  to 
maintaining  efficiency  in  the  Norwegian  retail  payment  system  over  time.  This  requires  that  banks 
continue to develop their range of payment services.  
When new payment services are developed, it is desirable to retain the common infrastructure. This 
implies that all systems are based on the same technology or that there is a common interface that 
allows the systems to communicate without any problems. To ensure efficiency in the market, open 
solutions  which  allow  competition  for  production  and  delivery  of  services  will  be  an  advantage. 
Competition  for  production  of  services  may  conflict  with  exploitation  of  economies  of  scale.  Norges 
Bank will place considerable emphasis on the existence of competition for delivery of these services to 
the users. We want new payment services to be priced according to the same principles as today. In 
other words, prices should reflect the expected unit costs in the long term.  
The safety of new payment systems must also be satisfactory. This means that customers must feel 
confident that they will not be exposed to misuse when they use a payment instrument and that they 
can be sure that their payments reach the payees at the agreed time. This places stringent demands 
on the technical design of the services and on operational reliability and back-up solutions provided by 
those responsible for operations. Vis-à -vis customers, it is always the banks that are responsible for 
the payment services' compliance with safety and operational reliability requirements. Regardless of 
whether  the  services  are  purchased  from  a  subcontractor,  it  is  the  banks  that  are  responsible  in 
relation to the customers. In other words, it is not possible to outsource the responsibility even though 
the operation has been outsourced.  
Conclusion 
International fora are interested in the Norwegian payment system. We receive praise for the efficiency 
of the system. The banking industry must be given the credit for this because they have sought out 
efficient solutions and have cooperated on system development both within the industry and with the 
central bank. The cooperation between the central bank and the banks on gathering transaction, price 
and cost data is considered unique and extremely valuable.  
We hope that Norway  will  continue to be  a leader  in developing the range of services and that the 
effective cooperation will continue in the pursuit of our common goal: An efficient payment system.  
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS Review 66/2002
