 Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 
8 October 2002. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  appear  before  your  Committee  today  in  order  to  explain  the  European  Central 
Bank’s assessment of economic and monetary developments and to report on the decisions taken by 
the Governing Council. 
At the time of our last meeting, in May, we were expecting economic growth in the euro area to be in 
line with trend potential again by the end of this year, and we noted that some upward risks to price 
stability existed in the euro area. At the same time, we also noted that there were still uncertainties 
with regard to the strength of the economic recovery, which implied the existence of uncertainties with 
regard to the inflation outlook. Since then, some of the downward risks to our main growth scenario 
have in fact materialised. The recovery, both in the euro area and the world economy, has progressed 
more slowly than expected, and it has been necessary to scale down our expectations for economic 
growth in 2002. At the same time, the exchange rate of the euro has strengthened and we have seen 
some rather turbulent periods in financial markets. All these factors have contributed to balancing the 
risks to price stability over recent months. 
Looking at recent information in more detail, and starting with the most recent data available for the 
first pillar of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, the figures up to August 2002 continue to suggest 
that monetary growth is strong in the euro area and that liquidity is ample. However, we need to be 
cautious in our assessment of recent monetary developments. On the one hand, in an environment 
marked  by  considerable  uncertainty,  especially  in  the  financial  markets,  the  current  high  rate  of 
monetary growth reflects a preference for holding relatively safe assets included in M3. On the other 
hand, the strong monetary growth may also reflect stimulus from the low level of short-term interest 
rates. This can be seen from the fact that the most liquid components of M3, i.e. those included in the 
narrow aggregate M1, have continued to rise at a rapid pace recently. 
The  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  appears  to  be  stabilising  at  levels  above  5%.  While  the 
decline in loan growth which has occurred over the past 18 months is significant, the current rate of 
growth  is  not  low  by  historical  standards.  This  indicates  that  bank  financing  conditions  are  overall 
favourable. 
The  assessment  of  monetary  developments  remains  complex  at  this  stage.  The  existing  excess 
liquidity, if sustained, might signal risks to price stability in the medium term. However, it is unlikely that 
excess liquidity  will translate into  inflationary  pressures in the near future,  given the  environment of 
subdued economic growth. 
Turning  to  the  second  pillar  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  at  this  juncture  the  most  likely 
scenario is modest real GDP growth in the second half of 2002 and an acceleration towards growth 
rates more in line  with potential in the course of 2003. The recent scaling down of expectations for 
economic growth stems partly from a weaker outlook for the global economy, which in turn is closely 
related  to  the  significant  fall  in  stock  prices  which  has  occurred  over  recent  months  in  all  major 
economies. 
As  regards  domestic  demand,  higher  growth  of  private  consumption  should  be  a  key  factor  in 
supporting economic activity in the euro area. There are indications that such a recovery took place in 
the  second  quarter,  but  at  a  moderate  pace.  In  the  period  ahead,  if  oil  prices  do  not  rise  further, 
consumption should be supported by an increase in real disposable income resulting from the decline 
in inflation from the higher levels recorded at the start of this year. The impact of the introduction of the 
euro  banknotes  and  coins  on  consumer  prices  has  been  very  limited  and  we  are  convinced  that 
divergences between factual and perceived inflation are a temporary phenomenon. Furthermore, the 
low  levels  of  interest  rates  across  all  maturities  should  help  to  support  investment  and  economic 
growth in the period ahead. 
In spite of these positive factors, however, the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook remains 
high in the short term. In principle, the increase in direct and indirect holdings of equities by euro area 
households  over  recent  years  has  raised  the  potential  for  recent  financial  market  developments  to 
BIS Review 56/2002 
 1
 have  an  adverse  influence  through  wealth  effects.  Moreover,  recent  financial  market  developments 
may make it more expensive to raise equity capital to finance corporate investment in the euro area. 
While all available evidence suggests that these effects will continue to be relatively limited and indeed 
much smaller than in other major economies, the sharp decline in equity prices is an element which 
has increased the uncertainty surrounding the recovery. In addition, imbalances in the global economy 
and their potential spillover to the euro area economy remain a significant source of risk for growth. 
Finally,  uncertainty  is  also  high  because  it  is  difficult  to  foresee  developments  in  the  oil  markets 
against the background of current political developments. 
Moving to the outlook for prices in the euro area, we have seen HICP inflation rates hovering around 
2%  over  the  past  couple  of  months.  These  developments  are  broadly  in  line  with  previous 
expectations of inflation rates for the remainder of the year, but recent upward tendencies indicate that 
the short-term trend has been affected by oil price developments. However, subdued economic activity 
and the stronger euro should help to dampen inflationary pressures over time. 
At the same time, however, we need to assess other factors which may involve upward risks to price 
stability.  Among  those,  wage  developments  play  a  particular  role.  Wage  growth  remained  on  an 
upward trend until early this year. Although we have indications that this trend may have come to a 
halt in the second quarter of 2002, close monitoring is necessary. 
To sum up, inflationary pressures have declined. Looking forward, recent trends in economic activity 
and the exchange rate of the euro imply downward pressure on inflation rates,  but other factors, in 
particular monetary developments, wage trends and oil prices, need to be monitored for their possible 
upward impact on inflation. Overall, therefore, we are of the opinion that the risks to price stability over 
the medium term are at present balanced. We thus consider the current level of the key ECB interest 
rates to be appropriate. 
At  this  juncture  it  is  of  utmost  importance  that  all  macroeconomic  policies  remain  oriented  to  the 
medium term, with all players fulfilling their responsibilities. Monetary policy will continue to provide a 
reliable anchor for the economy, especially in an environment characterised by high uncertainty and 
fragile confidence. This implies focusing on the maintenance of price stability over the medium term. 
Let me make a remark in this context, linked to comments which arise with a certain regularity in public 
debate  and  which  argue  that  monetary  policy  should  follow  a  different  orientation,  an  orientation  in 
which price stability is not the overriding objective. 
I should like to recall in this connection the fundamental and yet simple principle that monetary policy 
should  not  be  overburdened  with  objectives  that  it  cannot  fulfil.  It  is  well  established  that  monetary 
policy  can  only  control  price  developments  over  the  medium  term  and  cannot  have  an  impact  on 
output  beyond  the  short  term.  Monetary  policy  can  certainly  not  heal  structural  problems  in  the 
economy, such as those underlying the high level of unemployment. 
In line with these principles, the Treaty establishing the European Community has assigned the ECB 
the primary objective of maintaining price stability. In the end, strictly following this mandate, with the 
appropriate  medium-term  orientation,  is  the  best  contribution  the  ECB  can  make  to  supporting 
sustainable non-inflationary growth and a high level of employment in the euro area. 
Taking a broader perspective, I should  like to take this opportunity to further emphasise the overall 
soundness of the institutional framework for monetary and economic policy laid down by the Treaty. In 
fact,  the  Treaty  provides,  in  all  fields,  a  clear  and  consistent  allocation  of  policy  objectives  and 
responsibilities among the various policy-makers. 
In this respect, it is the task of fiscal policy to make its contribution to enhancing the growth potential of 
the euro area by maintaining sound fiscal positions and helping to reinforce the proper framework for 
the functioning of a market economy. It is also important that fiscal policy maintains a medium-term 
orientation throughout the economic cycle. 
The results of fiscal policy in several countries have been very disappointing in the last few years. The 
pace of reform has significantly fallen and there have even been setbacks in the efforts to consolidate 
in some cases. In fact, the main reason why several countries at present are in budgetary difficulties is 
because  they  have  not  used  the  past  phase  of  higher  growth  to  substantially  improve  their  fiscal 
position, i.e. they have shown precisely a lack of medium-term orientation. 
It is crucial that fiscal policy fully respects the basic principles of the Treaty and of the Stability and 
Growth Pact, namely to avoid excessive deficits and to attain budgetary positions close to balance or 
in surplus in the medium term. If the Pact is to work efficiently, all countries with remaining imbalances 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2002
 must  commit  themselves  to  implementing  a  clear  consolidation  strategy.  Such  a  strategy  should 
specify  a  credible  adjustment  path  with  significant  improvements  in  the  cyclically-adjusted  budget 
balance every year. This path should be followed strictly and completed within the shortest possible 
time  frame.  It  must  be  based  on  realistic  assumptions  for  the  economic  environment  and  include 
clearly  specified  measures.  Furthermore,  accounting  rules  must  be  rigorously  applied  and  strict 
procedures established to monitor the implementation of the consolidation strategies. In the end, the 
full adherence of all governments to the Stability and Growth Pact can only be beneficial for the euro 
area. 
Finally, it is important to stress, especially in a phase of uncertainty regarding economic activity, that 
decisive structural reforms will contribute to increasing the euro area’s resilience to economic shocks, 
enhance  price  and  wage  flexibility,  and  thereby  reduce  the  costs  associated  with  an  economic 
downturn  and  increase  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential.  Structural  reforms  in  product,  labour  and 
financial markets are essential in order to foster non-inflationary growth in the euro area and create a 
climate  of  economic  stability  and  dynamism.  Countries  should  therefore  speed  up  their  efforts  to 
implement such structural reforms, without which the benefits of the introduction of the euro can hardly 
be reaped. 
I will be pleased to answer your questions now. 
BIS Review 56/2002 
 3
