European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 5 December 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today's meeting of 
the Governing Council of the ECB.  
We  continued  our  in-depth  assessment  of  monetary,  financial  and  economic  developments  and 
the  discussions  we  had  in  early  November  on  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy,  taking 
account of the new information. Overall, since our last meeting, the arguments in favour of a cut in the 
key ECB  interest rates have strengthened. The evidence that  inflationary  pressures are easing  has 
increased,  owing  in  particular  to  the  sluggish  economic  expansion.  Furthermore,  downside  risks  to 
economic growth have not vanished.  
As a result, the Governing Council has decided to lower the key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points.  
At today's meeting, we also reviewed the reference value for monetary growth, which has an important 
role under the first pillar of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. The Governing Council has decided 
to leave the current value unchanged at an annual growth rate of 4½% for the broad aggregate M3. 
This decision was taken on the grounds that the evidence continues to support the assumptions which 
have formed the basis of the derivation of the reference value since 1999, namely those relating to 
trend potential  output growth of 2-2½%  per annum and to  a trend decline in M3 income velocity of 
½-1% per annum in the euro area. We will issue a separate press release this afternoon explaining in 
greater detail the background to this decision. 
When comparing current developments with the reference value, it is important to remember that the 
reference  value  is  a  medium-term  concept.  Short-term  movements  of  M3  do  not  necessarily  have 
implications for future price developments. Moreover, deviations of M3 from the reference value must 
be  analysed  in  conjunction  with  other  real  and  financial  indicators  in  order  to  understand  their 
implications for price stability. 
Turning to the most recent data, in the period from August to October 2002 the three-month average 
of  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  was  7.1%,  unchanged  from  the  previous  three-month  average. 
M3 growth has been influenced considerably by portfolio re-allocations in an environment of general 
uncertainty and particularly by stress in financial markets. At the same time, it  also reflects the low 
level of interest rates in the euro area which makes the holding of liquid assets relatively attractive.  
There is ample liquidity in the euro area. However, in the light of the sluggish economic growth, it is 
unlikely that this excess liquidity will translate into inflationary pressures in the near future. The recent 
moderation  of  the  growth  in  loans  to  the  private  sector,  particularly  to  non-financial  corporations, 
supports this assessment. 
Turning  to  the  second  pillar,  recent  information  has  strengthened  the  evidence  of  a  decline  in 
inflationary pressure. The sluggishness of real GDP growth in the euro area was confirmed yesterday 
by  Eurostat's  first  estimate,  which  indicates  that  quarter-on-quarter  growth  was  0.3%  in  the  third 
quarter. This was towards the lower end of expectations. Recent euro area-wide survey data suggest 
that  overall  sentiment  in  the  economy  remains  lacklustre,  with  business  confidence  improving 
somewhat but consumer confidence falling further. It is expected, therefore, that economic growth will 
also remain subdued in the coming months.  
This  disappointing  picture  mainly  reflects  the  persistently  high  degree  of  uncertainty.  Geopolitical 
tensions  with  potential consequences for oil prices, developments in financial markets, the sluggish 
growth  of  the  world  economy  and  the  persistence  of  global  imbalances  are  all  factors  that  weigh 
adversely  on  confidence.  These  factors  also  have  negative  effects  on  euro  area  consumption, 
investment and the labour markets. As it is hard to predict when this uncertainty will start to abate, it 
must be taken into account in the more medium-term outlook for growth. 
The subdued economic activity should limit potential upward risks to price stability and help to ease 
inflationary pressure. Let me elaborate on this. 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 1
First, when looking back, we recognise that inflation has been rather persistent despite the economic 
slowdown.  This  persistence  has  partly  reflected  a  series  of  transitory  developments,  such  as  the 
indirect  effect  of  previous  oil  and  food  price  increases  and  a  limited  changeover  effect.  However, 
structural factors in the labour and product markets have also played a role, as mirrored, in particular, 
in  the  upward  trend  in  wage  developments  observed  until  recently.  This  trend  has  only  just  shown 
signs  of  stabilisation.  Services  price  inflation  has  also  remained  stubbornly  high.  Indeed,  structural 
rigidities have impeded an appropriate adjustment of wages and prices. As a result, annual inflation 
rates have remained above 2% during most of 2002, including November, as has been confirmed by 
Eurostat's flash estimate, which indicates an annual HICP inflation rate of 2.2%.  
Second, when looking forward from now until the early part of 2003, although recent developments in 
oil prices have lowered short-term price pressures, there are still some factors that could keep annual 
inflation rates above 2% for several months to come. Yet this short-term outlook is related both to base 
effects and to indirect taxes and administered prices, i.e. to temporary developments.  
Third, when looking beyond the short term, we consider that both the overall economic environment 
and  the  euro  exchange  rate,  which  has  strengthened  since  early  this  year,  will  contribute  further 
towards reducing inflationary pressure. Moreover, we expect the indirect effects of previous increases 
in oil prices and other factors to further unwind. Although wage-related risks remain in place, they are 
judged less likely to materialise as long as the economic environment does not change substantially. 
The  assessment  which  guided  today's monetary  policy  decision  was  that,  overall,  the  prospect  has 
strengthened for inflation to fall below 2% in the course of 2003 and to remain in line with price stability 
thereafter.  Our  decision  should  also  help  to  improve  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area  economy  by 
providing  a  counterweight  to  some  of  the  existing  downside  risks  to  economic  growth,  thereby 
supporting confidence. The most likely scenario is that economic growth will gradually recover in the 
course  of  2003  towards  rates  more  in  line  with  potential.  Falling  inflation  should  support  real 
disposable income and, together with a reduction in the gap between perceived and actual inflation 
rates, should underpin private consumption. Moreover, we expect an improvement in world demand. 
This, and the low level of interest rates, should benefit investment.  
Let me point out that, with today's decision, the key ECB interest rates have reached a very low level 
by  historical  standards.  The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  all  factors  that  may 
affect the prospects for inflation in the euro area.  
The outlook for the euro area economy will also very much depend on visible progress in other policy 
areas. Regarding fiscal policies  in the euro area, I would like to reiterate that budgetary discipline 
strengthens  the  conditions  for sustainable  growth  of  GDP  and  employment.  Therefore,  sound  fiscal 
positions, as enshrined in the Treaty and further developed in the Stability and Growth Pact, are in the 
interest of all the Member States. Given the disappointing fiscal developments in some countries and 
the challenges which have emerged to the EU fiscal framework, we welcome the moves to correct or 
prevent  excessive  deficits,  i.e.  the  implementation  of  excessive  deficit  procedures  in  the  case  of 
Germany and Portugal and the early warning issued to France. Countries with remaining imbalances 
are  urged  to  prepare  sufficiently  ambitious  consolidation  plans  for  their  forthcoming  stability 
programmes. Emphasis should be placed on a growth-oriented consolidation policy that strengthens 
the  productive  forces  of  the  economy.  The  Governing  Council  considers  the  recent  Commission 
communication to be a good starting point for rebuilding confidence in the budgetary framework. As 
already  reflected  in  the  Statement  on  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  of  24  October  2002,  we  fully 
support the Commission's main objective, namely to improve the implementation of the Pact within the 
existing framework of rules.  
Finally,  I  should  like  to  stress  again  that  there  is  still  an  urgent  need  to  implement  decisively  the 
structural  reform  agenda.  We  note  with  some  concern  the  slow  progress  in  many  euro  area 
countries  and  call  on  governments  to  take  determined  action.  The  medium-term  impact  of  these 
reforms  on  the  economic  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  is  likely  to  be  substantial.  A  prompt 
implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  the  labour,  product  and  financial  markets  is  particularly 
important  at  this  juncture  since  it  would  contribute  to  strengthening  confidence  in  the  euro  area, 
thereby also supporting economic activity in the short term. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2002
