 Villy Bergström: Monetary policy and wage formation in Sweden 
Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the HSB Bank’s Finansdag, 
Stockholm, 13 November 2002. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come to HSB and for giving me the opportunity to 
discuss wage formation. 
As you know, the Riksbank's objective is an inflation rate - measured against the annual change in the 
consumer price index (CPI) - limited to 2 per cent, with a tolerance interval of +/- 1 percentage point. 
As interest rate decisions affect price pressure, partly through resource utilisation, with a certain time 
lag, monetary policy needs to be based on the total assessment of the rate of price increase one to 
two years ahead. Payroll expense accounts for approximately 70 per cent of the total value added in 
the  economy  and  is  thus  crucial  to  the  development  of  costs  and  prices. Wage  formation  has  also 
gained  increased  topicality  since  the  Swedish  Municipal  Workers'  Union  decided  to  terminate  its 
collective wage agreement before the third year. The Riksbank's assessment in the October Inflation 
Report also pointed to high wage increases as a potential risk factor for domestic inflation. 
New conditions for wage formation in the 1990s 
New  conditions  for  wage  formation  were  created  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  Monetary  policy 
became more clearly focussed on maintaining low inflation and tighter fiscal policy was necessary to 
consolidate public finances. 
At the end of the 1980s, Sweden found itself in a situation with rapidly rising inflation and a rate of 
wage increase of around 8 per cent, just under half of which comprised wage drift. The high increases 
in payroll expense in Sweden finally became untenable when demand plummeted in connection with 
the international recession in 1991. The Carlsson government succeeded after many vicissitudes in 
parliament in establishing a stabilisation agreement for the period 1991-1992, what was known as the 
Rehnberg  agreement. This included  a ban  on local  bargaining  and thus  wage  drift. The inflationary 
flexibility  clauses  were  abolished.  The  Rehnberg  agreement  contributed,  alongside  lower  inflation, 
falling profit margins and a severe decline in demand, to a reduction in the rate of wage increase from 
approximately 10 per cent in 1990 to around 4 per cent in 1992. The agreement expired in 1992, but 
was in practice extended, after a normative agreement was signed in the trade sector. 
When the 1995 collective wage agreement bargaining began, there was still considerable uncertainty. 
The  krona  had  weakened  significantly  following  the  Mexico  crisis  and  the  budget  consolidation 
process was not yet complete. There was a risk that inflation might accelerate again, partly because of 
a sharp rise in producer prices in the wake of the krona depreciation. 
The Swedish Trade Union Confederation's attempts at coordination in wage bargaining failed, while 
the  employers  were  calling  for  decentralised  wage  formation.  1995  proved  to  be  a  year  filled  with 
conflicts. The agreed wage increases came out at an average of around 3.5 per cent a year during the 
agreement period 1995-1997, while the average rate of wage increase was just over 5 per cent. The 
increase in productivity during the same period was 1.8 per cent a year. Wage development was thus 
scarcely  compatible  with  the  inflation  target  of  2  per  cent.  At  the  same  time,  open  unemployment 
remained high. During the wage agreement period 1995-1997 open employment was over 8 per cent. 
The bargaining rounds in 1995 cannot therefore be considered a success from the economy's point of 
view. 
In 1998 it was time for the next round of central wage agreement bargaining. By then CPI inflation had 
fallen. The Riksbank also raised its repo rate at the end of 1997, partly due to the risk of rising wage 
inflation. The 1998 bargaining round took place during the aftermath of the Asia crisis, while the krona 
appreciated  significantly,  which  probably  had  a  subduing  effect  on  wage  demands  in  the  export 
industry. These negotiations entailed the herald of a new "Saltsjöbaden spirit" in the Swedish labour 
market with the signing of the 1997 Industrial Agreement by twelve employers' associations and seven 
BIS Review 63/2002 
 1
 trade unions in industry.1 The Industrial Agreement, which covered approximately 600 000 employees 
and ran for a period of three years, was meant to provide a foundation for a good wage development 
by  promoting  industrial  development,  profitability  and  competitiveness.  The  agreement  primarily 
contained important rules on the system of negotiating, such as rules to reduce the risk of periods with 
no  agreement  and  to  reduce  the  risk  of  conflicts  breaking  out.  Similar  bargaining  agreements  were 
signed between the parties in the central government, local and regional government sectors and for 
white collar workers in commerce. These agreements stipulated that industry should lead the way in 
wage agreements in relation to other sectors of the economy, an idea that originated in the EFO model 
designed by the Swedish Trade Union Confederation (LO), the Confederation of Swedish Enterprise 
(SAF) and the Swedish Confederation of Professional Employees (TCO) at the end of the 1960s.2 
There  was  also  a  development  towards  a  more  decentralised  and  individualised  wage  formation, 
which  has  had  a  subduing  effect  on  wages.  Many  agreements  gave  the  local  social  partners  the 
freedom to determine and distribute the wage scope themselves. However, the local negotiating scope 
was often limited to some extent by block rules regarding the size of this scope and guarantees for a 
minimum wage increase for each individual. 
The 1998 bargaining rounds marked a break in trend with regard to the rate of wage increase. The 
annual nominal rate fell from approximately 8 per cent during the period 1970-1997 to around 3.5 per 
cent during the period 1998-2000. The outcome may be regarded as moderate taking into account the 
rapid recovery in the economy and the large increase in employment that took place during the period 
covered by the agreement. The fact that there were unused resources also helped to keep down the 
rate of wage increase. Low inflation meant that real wages increased considerably. During a 20-year 
period up to the mid-1990s, real wages rose by an average of only 0.5 per cent a year, but over the 
past five years the average increase in real wages has been approximately 3 per cent a year. 
The  development  towards  a  more  decentralised  wage  formation  process  continued  in  the  2001 
bargaining rounds. All those in the central government sector have local wage formation, compared 
with around one-fifth in the private sector. Some of the agreements signed were completely without 
figures so that everything was determined at local level, without any individual guarantees or centrally-
established levels. This applies to one-third of the employees in the public sector and 7 per cent of 
those in the private sector.3 
Prior  to  the  2001  bargaining  rounds,  the  unions  in  LO  decided  to  improve  the  wage  situation  for 
women in the public sector in relation to industrial workers. However, the wage bargaining between 
the employers and the Swedish Municipal Workers' Union broke down and after mediation the social 
partners  reached  a  central  agreement  that  entailed  wage  increases  of  around  3.7  per  cent  a  year 
during the period 2001-2003, with the possibility of local agreements on higher wage increases. The 
Municipal Workers' Union agreement was thus one of the most advantageous among the LO unions. 
This time, nurses and teachers were the first onto the field with regard to wage bargaining and they 
signed 5-year agreements, which roused some concern that high  wage agreements stemming from 
the favourable demand situation would spread to the rest of the labour market. The average level of 
the wage agreements in the economy was around 3 per cent, which is slightly higher than the previous 
bargaining round in 1998, when the agreements came out at around 2.6 per cent. However, it shows 
that the social partners have moved closer to a non-inflationary wage agreement, despite the fact that 
economic activity was high when the bargaining rounds began in autumn 2000. 
Why has the rate of wage increase been subdued over the past decade? 
Studies made by the Riksbank show that the slowing down in the rate of wage increase during the 
1990s was primarily due to the fact that the formulation and organisation of monetary policy had led to 
lower  inflation  expectations  (since  1996  inflation  expectations  among  the  social  partners  have 
                                                      
1   See, for instance, Nils Elvander, "Industriavtalet och Saltsjöbadsavtalet - en jämförelse" (The industrial agreement and the 
Saltsjöbaden agreement - a comparison), Arbetsmarknad & Arbetsliv No. 3, 2002, pp. 191-204. 
2   Gösta Edgren, Karl-Olof Faxen & Clas-Erik Odhner, Wage Formation and the Economy, Allen and Unwin, 1973. 
3   The  National  Mediation  Office,  "Avtalsrörelsen  och  lönebildningen  2001"  (Bargaining  rounds  and  wage  formation  2002), 
annual report from the National Mediation Office, 2002. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2002
 fluctuated between 1.5 and 2.7 per cent) but also to the fact that the demand for labour declined in 
connection with the economic recession at the beginning of the 1990s.4 A high level of credibility for 
the inflation target has pushed down inflation expectations. Stable inflation expectations make it easier 
for the social partners to negotiate new wage agreements. They do not need to worry that pay packets 
will  contain  mostly  air  and  they  have  no  need  to  safeguard  by  demanding  high  nominal  wage 
increases, as was often the case before. 
The  institutional  changes  in  wage  bargaining  may  also  have  contributed  to  more  subdued  wage 
increases.  The  coordination  of  wage  bargaining  rounds  with  centrally-established  agreement  levels, 
but a local distribution of wages, mean that the cost to society of excessive agreements is accounted 
for and that market forces exercise a restraining influence on wage demands at local level.5 
The tendency towards a greater element of local wage formation has made the wage process more 
flexible during the 1990s. Other important explanations are that new compensation methods, such as 
bonus wages and profit-sharing have been introduced in many areas of the labour market, which has 
probably increased flexibility. Companies are then able to reduce their payroll expense to some extent 
during  downturns  in  the  economy.  During  the  1990s,  there  has  also  been  a  development  towards 
limited period employments, which should lead to greater flexibility in the labour market. These new 
elements in the functioning of the labour market may help the Riksbank to combat inflation and will 
probably be good for growth and thus employment in the long term. However, they must be weighed 
against a possible deterioration in security of employment for the individual. 
How high can the rate of wage increase go without causing inflation to accelerate? 
In the long term the development of real wages must reflect the labour force's ability to produce goods 
and services. Thus, real wages can only rise as long as productivity is increasing. If real wages rise 
faster than productivity, companies are forced to either raise their prices if they can, which means that 
inflation  rises,  or  to  reduce  their  labour  force  or  curtail  their  operations.  Nominal  wages  can  thus 
increase by the total of the inflation target of 2 per cent and the growth in productivity. If we assume 
that the Swedish productivity rate trend is approximately 1 to 2 per cent, a reasonable assessment is 
that an average increase in payroll expense of around 3.5 per cent should be sustainable in the long 
term.  However,  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  the  arguments  regarding  wage  scope  are  based  on 
several assumptions. The first concerns an increase in total payroll expense, i.e. both wage increases 
through collective or local bargaining and other types of increase in payroll expense, such as payroll 
tax and collective charges. The second entails initial profit margins being sufficiently high to stimulate 
investment  and  enable  continued  rapid  growth  in  the  economy.  The  final  assumption  concerns  the 
overall,  average  wage  scope  for  the  country  as  a  whole.  The  definition  of  a  long-term  sustainable 
wage  increase  may  differ  between  sectors  and  regions  depending  on  the  different  conditions  for 
production technology, productivity development and competition. 
If the economy is not balanced, there may be a short-term deviation in nominal wage developments 
from the long-term sustainable level. This could be due to a stronger exchange rate, for instance. The 
inflation  target  is  expressed  in  terms  of  CPI,  which  consists  of  the  prices  of  both  imported  and 
domestically-produced goods and services. If imported inflation, which comprises approximately one-
third  of  CPI,  develops  weakly  as  a  result  of  a  stronger  krona  or  lower  international  price  pressure, 
domestic prices may rise more rapidly than 2 per cent over a period of time without causing a threat to 
the inflation target. There is then temporary scope for nominal wage increases above the level implied 
by productivity growth. 
Payroll expense has risen on average by approximately 3.9 per cent a year from the beginning of the 
1990s up to 2001, which is slightly more than the "wage norm" implies. At the same time, inflation has 
been at an average of only 1.8 per cent. An important explanation as to why the increase in payroll 
expense could be so high without triggering an acceleration in domestic inflation is that productivity 
has developed strongly. Since the beginning of the 1990s, the increase in productivity throughout the 
                                                      
4   Friberg,  K.  and  E.  Uddén  Sonnegård,  "Changed  wage  formation  in  a  changing  world?",  Sveriges  Riksbank  Economic 
Review 1, 2001. 
5   Calmfors, L. & Driffill, J., (1988), "Bargaining structure, Corporatism and Macroeconomic Performance", Economic Policy 6. 
BIS Review 63/2002 
 3
 economy has been approximately 2.0 per cent, while the average increase during the 1980s was only 
around 1.2 per cent. 
The strong growth in productivity at the beginning of the 1990s was partly due to the fact that primarily 
companies  with  low productivity  were driven  to closure during the crisis,  at  the same time as there 
were extensive cutbacks in staff. There has also been a structural transformation in Swedish trade and 
industry towards a more knowledge-intensive production. During the second half of the 1990s there 
were  deregulation  processes  in  several  fields,  for  instance  the  electricity  and  telecommunications 
markets, which led to an increase in productivity. In addition, Sweden benefited from the strong growth 
in the IT and telecommunications sector, which has shown greater increases in productivity than other 
areas of the economy. Increased use of IT in traditional manufacturing industry and service operations 
probably  also  contributed  to  the  increase  in  productivity.  In  addition  and  at  a  more  general  level, 
greater macroeconomic stability has probably reduced uncertainty and facilitated long-term investment 
decisions, which in the longer term is positive for the development of productivity. 
There  were  also  considerable  unused  resources  following  the  crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s, 
which  could  be  put  into  use  when  the  economy  recovered.  Between  the  years  1991  and  1994 
approximately 500 000 jobs disappeared; many of those who lost their jobs left the labour force but 
have  returned  as  economic  activity  has  picked  up.  Even  today  we  have  not  returned  to  the 
employment levels prevailing before the crisis in 1991. 
When demand in the economy slackened in connection with the international downturn in economic 
activity  last  year,  many  companies  chose  to  retain  personnel  because  unemployment  was  at  a  low 
level and it would be difficult to obtain new labour. As a result, productivity developed weakly during 
2001. Compared with earlier economic downturns, the decline in productivity was modest. Now that 
companies  have  begun  to  utilise  more  effectively  the  labour  they  had  retained,  we  can  see  that 
productivity  has  increased  by  2.6  per  cent  during  the  first  half  of  this  year,  compared  with  the 
equivalent period last year. The fact that a large part of the increase in productivity in the 1990s can 
be  attributed  to  certain  industrial  sectors,  such  as  the  IT  and  telecommunications  sector,  whose 
relative significance has declined, indicates that productivity will grow at a more modest rate in future. 
However,  a  continued  macroeconomic  stability  that  facilitates  long-term  decision-making,  a  higher 
level  of  education  during  the  1990s  and  certain  improvements  in  competitive  pressure  indicate  that 
productivity growth can be higher in future than during the 1970s and 1980s.6 
Future challenges for wage formation 
The  Municipal Workers'  Union's  termination  of  its  collective  wage  agreement  for  450  000  members 
before the third year and the demand for relative wage changes entail touchstone for wage formation. 
The union has for a long period watched its wages situation deteriorate in relation to industrial workers 
and other groups in the public sector. During the previous bargaining rounds, however, the LO unions 
were agreed that the Municipal Workers' Union should receive higher wage increases than the other 
member  unions  in  order  to  improve  its  relative  wages.  However,  the  union  is  dissatisfied  with  the 
outcome  so  far,  which  it  claims  has  given  only  0.4  percentage  points  above  the  wage  increases 
achieved  through  collective  bargaining.  This  union's  members  are  currently  among  those  with  the 
lowest wages in the labour market, with an average wage of approximately SEK 16 000. 
The Municipal Workers' Union's wage demands are not in themselves a threat to the inflation target, 
as  long  as  other  groups  in  the  labour  market  are  prepared  to  stand  back  in  favour  of  this  union's 
members. However, there is a risk that other trade unions will follow their example and also demand 
higher wages. Approximately 70 per cent of the employees in trade and industry have the possibility of 
renegotiating  their  agreements  during  the  final  year  of  the  agreement.  Already,  there  have  been 
demands for compensation if the Municipal Workers' Union members should be given higher wages. 
However,  several  trade  unions,  such  as  Metall  (the  Swedish  metalworkers'  union)  and  SIF  (white-
collar workers' union), whose agreements cover approximately 300 000 employers, have stated that 
they do not intend to terminate their agreements in advance. 
                                                      
6   See the box "Has potential growth slackened?" in Inflation Report 2002:2. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2002
 There  has  thus  been  a  relative  deterioration  in  wages  for  the  members  of  the  Municipal  Workers' 
Union over a long period of time. However, restoring wage relations must also take its time. In a low 
inflation economy it is only possible to achieve marginal changes in one year. 
Relative wages
Index 1992=100
Private, blue-collar
Private, white-collar
Central govt
Local govt
County council
1,08
1,06
1,04
1,02
1,00
0,98
0,96
0,94
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
 1,08
1,06
1,04
1,02
1,00
0,98
0,96
0,94
2001
2000
Source: Statistics Sweden.
2002
 The Municipal Workers' Union is not the only one to have seen its wage position deteriorate in relation 
to other professional groups. Another example is industrial workers, who have seen a deterioration in 
their  wage  position  relative  to  nurses  and  teachers,  groups  that  have  had  a  very  good  wage 
development in recent years. In general, blue-collar workers' wages have increased more slowly that 
those of white-collar workers and wages in the local government sector have increased more slowly 
than  those  in  the  private  sector,  while  wages  in  central  government  and  regional  government  have 
developed relatively well. Relative wage changes are perhaps the most difficult wage formation issue 
in a low inflation economy, as the social partners must be able to manage wage imbalances between 
different groups'  wage situations  without generating  a  wage spiral.  Employees do not merely  watch 
real  wages,  but  also  their  relative  wages,  which  were  previously  institutionalised  with  earnings 
development guarantees built into the agreements. Previously, high inflation facilitated relative wage 
changes, but in a low inflation regime it is more difficult for a group to raise its wages as it must entail 
other groups receiving lower nominal rises and perhaps no real increase. 
At the same time, one must be aware that relative wage changes are a necessary element in a market 
economy.  There  is  currently  a  shortage  of  labour  in  health  and  welfare,  so  from  a  labour  market 
perspective it is natural that this shortage will be expressed in higher relative wages in these areas. 
Larger retirement pensions combined with a greater need for care services over a longer period due to 
demographic developments will aggravate this labour shortage in future. The total recruitment needs 
in health and welfare professions are estimated by the Swedish National Labour Market Administration 
(AMS) to be approximately 527 000 persons up to the year 2015, of which 180 000 are professions 
requiring university level training and 347 000 are professions requiring upper secondary school level 
training,  such  as  care  personnel.7  Given  the  present  training  dimensions,  this  entails  a  deficit  of 
around 22 000 persons a year up to the year 2015. The low wages make new recruitment difficult and 
the number of applicants with the upper secondary school care programmes as their first choice has 
                                                      
7   Swedish National Labour Market Administration (AMS), Den framtida personalförsörjningen inom vård och omsorg - Tillgång 
och rekryteringsbehov fram till år 2015 (Future personnel supply in health and welfare - Supply and recruitment needs up to 
the year 2015), Ura 2002:3. 
BIS Review 63/2002 
 5
 declined nationwide from approximately 12 000 persons in 1990 to around 3000 in 2001.8 Prior to the 
present academic year, there were only 11 people who had the care programme as their first choice 
here in Stockholm county. These groups have market forces behind them. 
Nurses  and  teachers  are  examples  of  professional  groups  that  have  received  support  from  market 
forces  to  raise  their  wages  in  recent  years.  The  large  demand  in  relation  to  supply  has  meant  that 
nurses  have  increased  their  wages  by  an  average  of  25  per  cent  over  the  past  five  years.9  The 
shortage  of  nurses  is  expected  to  intensify  in  the  near  future  and  AMS'  short  range  forecast  has 
nurses  on  top  of  the  list  of  immediate  shortages.  Although  there  is  considerable  interest  in  nursing 
training - the number of applicants with this as their first choice amounted to 3.2 per place on a course 
for the previous academic year - the number of course places is insufficient.10 
Teachers  have  also  succeeded  in  raising  their  wages  in  recent  years.  Last  year  wages  for  upper 
secondary  school  teachers  increased  by  an  average  of  6  per  cent.  The  baby  boom  of  the  1990s 
means that the shortage of teachers will increase and peak in 2005, when there will be a shortage of 
23 000 teachers - the greatest need is for upper secondary school teachers.11 There may be a need 
for  relative  wage  changes  to  encourage  more  people  to  train  as  teachers  and  to  remain  in  the 
profession. If we take the example of a teacher in science subjects, such as mathematics and general 
science, this person would probably also be capable of attaining a Master of Engineering degree. The 
wage difference between these professions is very large. The highest paid upper secondary school 
teachers  in  mathematics  and  science  earn  approximately  SEK  25  000  kronor  a  month,  while  a 
competent graduate engineer can earn many times this amount.12 
There  is  a  risk  that  the  shortages  we  see  in  the  labour  market,  and  which  clearly  motivate  wage 
increases for certain professional groups, lead to an inflationary rate of wage increase. It is therefore 
important for the Riksbank to analyse the supply side of the labour market. So far there is mainly a 
shortage of persons with certain healthcare training and of teachers in science and technical subjects. 
In the longer term, however, a lower supply of labour is expected and an increase in demand. The 
population  increase  that  Sweden  has  experienced  during  the  1990s  will  gradually  decline  and  with 
effect  from  2010  growth  in  the  working  population  will  be  negative.13  The  large  population  growth 
among the younger and older age categories risks reducing labour force participation, as these age 
groups generally have a lower participation than average. In addition, there is a proposal for shorter 
working hours with effect from 2004, which risks reducing the labour supply measured in hours even 
further. 
Wage development during the forecast period 
Over  the  past  year  employment  has  developed  at  a  surprisingly  strong  rate,  despite  the  subdued 
demand  in  the  economy.  The  labour  force  reserve  should  be  regarded  as  small,  if  one  uses  the 
registered labour force as a measure. The percentage of unemployed and persons in labour market 
policy  programmes  amounted  to  6.7  per  cent  in  September.  In  the  October  Inflation  Report  the 
Riksbank made the assessment that the labour market would be austere in future, which would result 
in wage increases of approximately 4 per cent over the next two years. The forecast took into account 
the fact that the shortage in local authorities and county councils could lead to higher wage increases 
in these sectors than in trade and industry. However, the strained economic situation in many local 
authorities and county councils limits the scope for wage increases. 
                                                      
8   The National Agency for Education (2002), Barnomsorg, skola och vuxenutbildning i siffror (Childcare, schools and adult 
education in figures). 
9   Statistics Sweden's structural wages statistics. 
10   Swedish National Labour Market Administration (AMS) (2002), Den framtida personalförsörjningen inom vård och omsorg - 
tillgång och rekryteringsbehov till år 2015 (Future personnel supply in health and welfare - Supply and recruitment needs up 
to the year 2015), Ura 2002:3. 
11   The Swedish Association of Local Authorities, "Personalen i fokus 2000" (Personnel in focus 2000), 2001. 
12   Statistics Sweden's structural wages statistics. 
13   Statistics Sweden. 
6 
 BIS Review 63/2002
 During  2001  productivity  growth  was  very  weak,  but  so  far  this  year  productivity  has  developed 
relatively  strongly.  The  rate  of  increase  is  expected  to  be  somewhat  subdued  over  the  coming  two 
years as an increase in demand occupies a larger percentage of companies' resources. Unit labour 
costs  are  therefore  expected  to  be  halved  next  year  compared  with  last  year,  which  should  check 
domestic inflation. In addition, we still believe in an appreciation of the krona during the forecast period 
due to fundamentals, which have subduing effect on imported inflation. It is therefore estimated that 
payroll expense could increase by an average of just over 4 per cent a year during the forecast period 
without any threat to the inflation target. However, 4 per cent is too high in the slightly longer term. 
There  is  a  great  risk  that  this  figure  will  become  established  as  a  norm,  as  payroll  expenses  have 
increased by approximately 4 per cent a year over the past five years. If Sweden were to participate in 
Stage Three of EMU, we cannot have a rate of wage increase that deviates from the average in the 
euro countries. If the "norm" for payroll expense increases is 3.5 per cent, this means that nominal 
wage agreements must be signed at lower levels. This is because the scope must also cover wage 
drift and other wage costs, such as collective fees and reductions in working hours. 
Conclusion 
In  the  October  Inflation  Report  we  foresaw  a  slightly  more  prolonged  economic  recovery  than  had 
earlier been expected. The weak development in the financial markets in the wake of bankruptcies and 
accounting  scandals  had  contributed  to  the  start  of  a  decline  in  confidence  from  companies  and 
households. In Sweden demand had been upheld relatively well, but it was estimated that fiscal policy 
needed to be tightened up to manage the expenditure ceiling. This means that growth may be more 
subdued in future. Inflation was assumed in the main scenario to be in line with the inflation target one 
and  two  years  ahead,  albeit  at  the  lower  edge  of  the  interval.  The  risks  we  foresaw  for  Swedish 
inflation were mainly related to developments in the financial markets and to wage formation. In that 
situation, we chose to leave the repo rate unchanged and decided to hold an extra monetary policy 
meeting, which will take place tomorrow. 
The  Municipal Workers'  Union's  termination  in  advance  of  the  third  year  of  its  collective  agreement 
need not in itself constitute a threat to the inflation target, as long as other groups in the labour market 
are prepared to stand back in favour ot this union's members. However, if other groups were also to 
demand higher wages, the inflation target might be threatened. The Riksbank would then be forced to 
tighten monetary policy by raising the repo rate, which would lead to lower growth and employment. 
During the past two wage bargaining rounds in 1998 and 2001, the social partners indicated that wage 
formation had improved. It remains to be seen whether wage formation is now sufficiently flexible to 
manage the necessary changes in relative wages. Thank you. 
BIS Review 63/2002 
 7
