 Willem F Duisenberg: The transformation of the European financial system 
Welcome speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the Second 
ECB Central Banking Conference, 24-25 October 2002, Frankfurt am Main, 24 October 2002.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am pleased to welcome you to Frankfurt, to the second ECB Central Banking Conference, entitled 
"The transformation of the European Financial System". This event is the largest and most important 
open ECB conference and is held every two years.  
The first ECB Central Banking Conference took place in November 2000. It focused on price stability, 
which  is  the  ECB's  primary  objective,  and  that  of  many  other  central  banks  worldwide.  It  was  a 
successful event, and I am convinced that this year's conference will be too.  
Indeed, looking around, I am happy to see that this second conference has evidently aroused much 
interest  and  attracted  researchers  from  leading  institutions,  officials  from  most  of  the  major  central 
banks, from ministries of finance, various European and international bodies and the media. In view of 
this year's topic, we also decided to invite representatives from commercial financial institutions and 
from supervisory authorities. I should like to extend a special welcome to the representatives of the 
central banks of the countries that are negotiating to join the European Union; these negotiations will 
hopefully be concluded fairly soon. I should, of course, also like to thank the speakers, discussants, 
panellists and chairpersons of the sessions. 
Since the early days of the ECB and the first ECB  Central Banking Conference, sufficient time has 
passed for us to assess whether we at the ECB have made an effective contribution to the relationship 
we  have  with  the  academic  world.  The  academics  here  today  should  be  the  first  to  be  asked  this 
question. From our side, I am inclined to say that we have been effective. I am in particular referring to 
the  success  of  our  Graduate  Research  and  Visitors  Programme.  In  this  context,  I  should  like  to 
announce  the  establishment  of  five  fellowships  for  young  researchers  working  in  top-priority  fields 
within the Financial Research Network. The Executive Board has decided to call these fellowships the 
'Lamfalussy  Fellowships',  in  honour  of  the  first  President  of  the  European  Monetary  Institute  (EMI), 
who  has  made  an  impressive  contribution  to  the  process  of  European  monetary  and  financial 
integration.  
Another  example  of  successful  co-operation  and  exchanges  of  information  between  the  academic 
world and the ECB is the launching of a series of conferences and research networks. Of these, the 
ECB-CFS research network on "Capital markets and financial integration in Europe" has the closest 
ties  to  the  theme  of  this  year's  conference  –  the  transformation  of  the  European  financial  system. 
Some  of  you  may  have  attended  the  initial  workshop  here  in  Frankfurt  last  April.  It's  a  European 
initiative; future workshops are to be held at the Bank of Finland in Helsinki, in March next year, and at 
the Bank of Greece next November. Also related to the present theme is the Eurosystem monetary 
transmission mechanism network.  
Why  have  we  chosen  the  transformation  of  the  European  financial  system  as  our  subject  on  this 
occasion?  
The  establishment  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  almost  four  years  ago,  and  the 
introduction of the euro banknotes and coins were real milestones. In respect of the Maastricht Treaty, 
they appear to mark the completion of the process of monetary integration in Europe. But we shouldn't 
regard Monetary Union as an end in itself. The introduction of the euro will have – and already has 
had – a powerful influence on the development of financial markets in Europe and their integration, as 
we will learn and discuss today. 
The implications of these developments are manifold and profound, in particular for central bankers, 
but also for other policy-makers. Let me mention a few examples.  
First  and  foremost,  the  transformation  of  the  financial  system  has  an  impact  on  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. For example, the emergence of new financial instruments and changes in the use of 
existing ones affect the choice, behaviour and interpretation of forward-looking financial indicators of 
underlying  economic  variables,  such  as  consumer  price  inflation  and  GDP  growth.  Moreover,  the 
implications  for  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  are  of  supreme  importance  to  the 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 1
 ECB. But I'll say no more on this matter now, as my colleague Otmar Issing will cover it in greater 
depth in his dinner speech this evening.  
Second, financial system transformation affects the implementation of monetary policy. I will give you 
an example. Our weekly main refinancing operations with money market counterparties are conducted 
on  the  basis  of  repurchase  agreements  ("repos").  This  requires  a  list  of  eligible  collateral  for  such 
operations. In a changing financial environment, a central bank has to ensure that eligible collateral 
allows market participants to have efficient and equal access to central bank liquidity. 
My third example of the importance of financial system transformation to central banks relates to the 
payment systems function. Most central banks in industrialised countries run a large-value payment 
system  and  are  involved  in  the  oversight  of  other  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems.  For 
reasons of efficient liquidity management by private banks, the Eurosystem's TARGET system allows 
for intra-day overdrafts that are fully collateralised. For TARGET to perform efficiently, it is therefore 
very important that securities settlement systems are interlinked or consolidated in a way which allows 
a smooth flow of collateral across the euro area.  
Fourth, past experience has shown that structural change in financial systems may have an impact on 
financial  stability.  Hence,  the  structure  and  modus  operandi  of  the  authorities  responsible  for 
supervising financial markets and institutions must be designed to prevent any instability from arising. 
This is, as you are aware, quite a topical issue in the European Union. Central banks have a genuine 
interest in this issue, which clearly has its origins in the Treaty on European Union. The Treaty states 
that the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) shall "contribute to the smooth conduct of policies 
pursued by the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the 
stability  of  the  financial  system".  These  and  related  issues  will  be  considered  in  tomorrow's  policy 
panel discussion, which will start off on the basis of a paper contributed by my colleague Tommaso 
Padoa-Schioppa. 
Structural  change  in  the  financial  system  is  important  not  only  to  central  bankers  but  to  other 
policy-makers  as  well.  For  instance,  all  policy-makers  should  have  a  clear  interest  in  a  further 
integration  of  European  financial  markets.  The  economic  literature  tells  us  that  an  integration  of 
financial  markets  is  very  likely  to  contribute  to  economic  growth  by  making  the  allocation  of  capital 
more  efficient.  The  paper  by  Jean-Pierre  Danthine  in  our  third  session  tomorrow  will  address  this 
issue.  This  is  why  the  freedom  of  capital  flows  is  one  of  the  "four  freedoms"  at  the  heart  of  the 
Europe's single market. Indeed, increasing financial integration has always been a major item on the 
European political agenda. In this context, also the establishment of Economic and Monetary Union 
should be regarded as giving an important impetus to European financial integration. As things stand 
now, it is clear that full integration of European financial markets, to the extent possible of course, has 
not  been  achieved  yet,  despite  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  Although  in  some  areas,  such  as  the 
unsecured money market or the bond market, the euro seems to have boosted market integration, in 
other areas, such as repo and equity markets, the impact has been much weaker. The need for further 
efforts in this direction is fully recognised by many institutions, including the ECB, and is at the heart of 
the  European  Union's  initiative  to  create  a  truly  integrated  market  for  financial  services.  The  Vice-
President will address this issue tomorrow in his summing-up. 
The second ECB Central Banking Conference is structured very much like the first one. Today and 
tomorrow, there will be three sessions covering a number of issues related to the general theme of this 
conference,  and  based  on  research  papers  and  contributions  from  discussants.  A  policy  panel  will 
follow these sessions. 
The first session will deal with developments in European banking. The paper by Jean Dermine takes 
a look at how the European banking system has changed since the Treaty of Rome in 1957. It then 
asks a provocative question: how "real" is the single banking licence? The second session, tomorrow 
morning, will address the changing character of European finance, and in particular consider to what 
extent Europe is shifting from bank financing to market financing. In their paper, Luigi Zingales and 
Raghu Rajan will assess recent developments in this respect, and impediments to a further shift to a 
more  market-based  financial  system.  Our  speaker  in  the  third  session,  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  will 
illustrate  the  benefits  from  the  discipline  that  economic  theory  can  impose  on  our  thinking  when 
analysing  European  equity  market  integration.  He  will  also  present  a  generalised  approach  to 
estimating the importance of country and sector effects in portfolio allocations. One of his discussants, 
Bruce  Carnegie-Brown,  will  draw  on  his  experience  as  a  market  expert  to  interpret  for  us  recent 
developments in bond markets. Finally, as already mentioned, the policy panel, which will be the final 
session of the conference, will discuss the role of central banks in the maintenance of financial stability 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2002
 against  the  background  of  the  transformation  of  the  European  financial  system.  I  am  particularly 
pleased  to  see  that  we  have  been  able  to  bring  together  such  highly  esteemed  policy-makers  and 
academics for this purpose. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I should like to finish at this point and hand over to our first speaker. I sincerely 
thank you again for coming here today. I wish you a very interesting and stimulating discussion, and I 
look forward to hearing about the results of the second ECB Central Banking Conference.  
BIS Review 60/2002 
 3
