 Bank of Japan’s November report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 20 November 2002 
 The Bank’s view2 
Japan’s economy has stabilized as a whole, but there is greater uncertainty toward recovery. 
With regard to final demand, while the decline in business fixed investment has almost come to a halt, 
private consumption continues to be weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public 
investment is declining. While signs of recovery are still not observed in domestic demand, exports are 
losing their momentum. 
The completion of the cutbacks in inventory stocks still underpins the increase in industrial production, 
but the pace of increase has become slower as exports are not rising anymore. As for the employment 
situation, the overtime hours worked continue to increase and the number of employees, which widely 
covers various non-regular employees such as temporary workers, appears to have stopped declining. 
However,  as  firms  are  still  maintaining  their  stance  on  reducing  personnel  expenses,  household 
income continues to decrease noticeably due to, among other factors, an ongoing decline in wages. 
Thus, the employment and income situation of households overall remains severe. 
Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared prospect for overseas economies throughout next 
year  is  that  they  will  follow  a  gradual  recovery  path.  However,  an  increasing  number  of  economic 
indicators  are  softening  in  some  countries,  particularly  in  the  United  States.  Based  on  this 
development, the recovery in overseas economies is likely to be anemic at least for the time being. 
Therefore,  exports  and  industrial  production  are  expected  to  be  more  or  less  unchanged  for  the 
immediate future. 
With respect to domestic demand, public investment is projected to follow a declining trend and private 
consumption  is  likely  to  remain  weak  for  some  time  due  to  the  severe  employment  and  income 
situation.  Business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  be  supported  by  the  improvement  in  corporate 
profits to date, but a distinct recovery is unlikely for the time being due to, among other things, greater 
uncertainty regarding overseas economies. 
Overall,  assuming  that  overseas  economies  will  recover  next  year  even  at  a  moderate  pace,  the 
increase in exports and production will resume, making the foundations of Japan’s economic recovery 
gradually  firmer.  However,  the  economy  is  unlikely  to  show  clear  signs  of  recovery  for  some  time, 
since  exports  and  production  are  expected  to  be  virtually  unchanged  for  the  time  being  while 
restraining  forces  such  as  excessive  labor  input  and  debt  persist.  Furthermore,  the  uncertainty 
regarding the outlook for the U.S. and other overseas economies, including geopolitical factors and 
their effects on the economies, is becoming greater. On the domestic side, stock prices have fallen to 
a  considerably  low  level.  Hence,  the  progress  in  the  disposal  of  non-performing  loans  of  financial 
institutions and its effects on stock prices, corporate  finance, and the economy, should be carefully 
monitored. 
On  the  price  front,  import  prices  are  starting  to  turn  up  reflecting  the  rise  in  oil  prices  during  the 
summer and into the fall, and the depreciation of the yen. Domestic wholesale prices are virtually level 
since  the  rise  in  import  prices  and  the  improvement  in  the  balance  of  supply  and  demand  in  the 
materials industries have almost been offset by the decline in machinery prices and electricity charges. 
However, consumer prices remain on a gradual downtrend and corporate services prices continue to 
decline. 
                                                      
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
November 18 and 19, 2002. 
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on November 18 and 19 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 67/2002 
 1
 Looking  at  the  conditions  influencing  price  developments,  import  prices  are  projected  to  continue 
firming up for the time being as the effects from the rise in oil prices will remain. However, the overall 
supply-demand condition is expected to keep exerting downward pressure on prices for a while amid 
persistently weak domestic demand, although the completion of inventory adjustment and the rise in 
capacity utilization rates will support prices to some degree. Moreover, factors such as the ongoing 
technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will 
continue  to  restrain  prices.  Under  these  circumstances,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  expected  to 
remain virtually level for a while. Consumer prices are expected to stay on a declining trend for the 
time  being  at  the  current  gradual  pace.  While  the  slower  growth  in  imports  of  consumer  goods  is 
expected to alleviate the downward pressure on prices to some extent, the faster pace of decline in 
wages may possibly reinforce the ongoing decline in prices, especially for services prices. 
As for the financial market, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan is 
recently moving at around 17-18 trillion yen, as the Bank provides further ample liquidity following the 
guideline for money market operations decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 30. 
Under  these  circumstances,  in  the  short-term  money  markets,  the  overnight  call  rate  continues  to 
move at very close to zero percent. Meanwhile, TB and FB rates, which declined temporarily after the 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  October  30,  have  inched  up  since  mid-November  as  banks  have 
held off buying TB and FB in response to a drop in bank stock prices. 
Yields on long-term government bonds declined below 1.0 percent for the first time since November 
1998 as banks and institutional investors increased investment in bonds, and are moving around 1.0 
percent  recently.  Yield  spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds  and  corporate  bonds)  and 
government bonds remain virtually unchanged. 
Meanwhile,  stock  prices  declined  and  are  recently  moving  around  8,000-8,500  yen  due  to  rising 
uncertainty about the economic outlook. 
In the foreign exchange market, the U.S. dollar is weakening again on the whole reflecting the strained 
situation in the Middle East and the deterioration in the U.S. economic indicators. The yen is currently 
being traded in the range of 119-122 yen to the U.S. dollar. 
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious  in  extending  loans  to 
firms  with  high  credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip 
companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are becoming slightly 
more  severe.  In  the  corporate  bonds  and  CP  markets,  the  issuing  environment  for  firms  with  high 
credit ratings is accommodative, but the environment for firms with low credit ratings is severe. 
Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms’ business 
fixed investment remains sluggish while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. Growth rates of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP issued are on a 
declining  trend  and  the  amount  outstanding  dropped  slightly  below  the  previous  year’s  level  in 
October. 
Meanwhile,  according  to  business  surveys,  the  financial  position  of  firms,  particularly  that  of  small 
firms, remains severe. 
The monetary base exhibits a high year-on-year growth rate of around 20 percent. The year-on-year 
growth rate of the money stock is around 3.0-3.5 percent. 
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market 
conditions as a whole continues to be extremely easy partly due to the additional monetary easing by 
the Bank. Long-term interest rates are low. The money stock and the monetary base maintain high 
growth  rates  relative  to  that  of  the  economic  activity  as  a  whole.  However,  stock  prices  remain 
unstable.  In  corporate  finance,  the  fund-raising  environment  of  firms  with  low  credit  risks  is 
accommodative on the whole, but with regard to firms with high credit risks, the stance of investors 
remains severe and the lending attitudes of private banks are becoming more cautious. Under these 
circumstances, the government released the “Comprehensive Measures to Accelerate Reforms” which 
includes policies to accelerate the disposal of non-performing loans. Including the effects arising from 
these measures, developments in the financial and capital markets including stock prices, the behavior 
of financial institutions, and the situation of corporate finance require closer monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2002
