 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Changes in the financial services industry 
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the 16th European 
Finance Convention, London, 6 December 2002. 
 Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
May I begin by congratulating you, Claudio - and your colleagues - on organising such a remarkable 
16th European Finance Convention here in London, spread over the past five days. I don't think I've 
ever seen such a distinguished and comprehensive list of speakers - ranging from politicians, central 
bankers and financial regulators and representatives of the international financial institutions, as well 
as representatives of private sectoral and specialist financial services trade associations and experts 
from commercial companies - all assembled on one program. 
I gather that the attendance has not been all that it might have been during the week. But perhaps 
that's not surprising: anyone with the stamina to attend even half of your proceedings is certainly a 
chronic  insomniac.  But  those  who  have  been  here  will  have  been  rewarded  by  knowing  everything 
there is to know about the recent development and current state of the financial services industry and 
how it might evolve. 
And they still have to listen to me! But don't despair - it's the last lap - and I'll try to keep it short! 
You have certainly had a great deal to discuss. The financial services industry - globally and not just 
regionally within Europe or nationally - has been going through a prolonged and continuing period of 
unprecedented change. 
There are to my mind two main drivers of that change - first, the progressive shift - within the industrial 
world but increasingly also over the past decade or so in emerging markets and transition economies - 
away  from  varying  degrees  of  centralised  economic  administration  towards  an  increasingly  open, 
market-based  approach;  -  and,  secondly,  the  revolution  in  information  and  communications 
technology. 
The potential economic advantages of free market competition nationally, and its logical counterpart in 
free trade and the free movement of capital internationally are now pretty well taken for granted just 
about everywhere. While no-one would pretend it's a perfect guide, profitability is the best guide we 
have to allocating limited real and financial resources to wherever they can be most productively used. 
So it is - potentially - the most effective means we have of generating the wealth, and employment and 
rising living standards we all want to see. And liberalisation or deregulation - including liberalisation in 
the financial sector - needs to be seen in this context. 
Of course it cannot mean simply a free-for-all. Markets need to be fair as well as free if they are to 
function efficiently in practice - they need rules which minimise artificial or non-commercial distortions 
and  the  related  resource  misallocation  that  would  otherwise  arise.  And  they  need  rules  that  reflect 
public  policy  concerns,  relating  particularly  in  the  case  of  financial  markets  to  systemic  stability, 
consumer protection and fair competition. I will come back to that. 
The second main driver of change in the financial services industry in particular is, as I say, the ICT 
revolution, which has made possible new financial instruments and investment strategies, new means 
of measuring, monitoring and managing risks and new - and cheaper - delivery, trading and settlement 
mechanisms and so on, all of which facilitate the greater competition and greater efficiency we need. 
These  global  influences  are  of  course  at  work  within  Europe,  like  everywhere  else.  But  change  in 
Europe in particular is being driven also by two Europe-specific factors - the single European market 
program,  which  is  essentially  an  advanced,  regional,  form  of  the  broader  international  shift  towards 
free  trade  and  the  freedom  of  capital  movement;  -  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  which,  by 
eliminating  currency  risk  between  the  participating  countries,  is  making  a  substantial  further 
contribution to increasing the depth and liquidity of European financial markets, including the (small-E) 
euro markets here in London. 
These  four  key  elements  provide  the  context  for  the  ongoing  current  debate  on  how  best  we  can 
promote the single, integrated, European financial market - and I mean by “we” not just the authorities, 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 1
 who  have  an  interest  in  the  macro-economic  efficiency  of  the  market,  but  also  market  participants 
themselves, who stand to benefit at the micro-economic level from the new opportunities it will provide. 
But  before  I  move  on  to  that  question  perhaps  I  might  go  off  at  what  may  seem  something  of  a 
tangent, and reflect briefly upon our own experience here in the UK as we moved - in fits and starts 
certainly  but  in  the  same  general  direction  -  from  a  heavily  administered  economic  and  financial 
system to one which is now very much market based. 
Even before I started at the Bank 40 years ago post-war controls had largely been dismantled. But the 
economic and financial system was still governed by all kinds of direct controls - exchange controls, 
credit ceilings - coupled with directional guidance, business restrictions - on the activities of building 
societies for example, the queuing of equity issuance, prices and incomes policies, public ownership of 
large  parts  of  industry,  and  so  on  -  all  of  which  have  now  gone.  It's  true  that  plenty  of  regulation 
remains - reflecting public policy concerns relating essentially to competition, consumer protection and 
systemic stability. Indeed it has intensified  in these areas. It's hard  now to imagine that  we had no 
formal banking supervision at  all in this country  until  about twenty  years  ago. But for the most part 
such regulation today does not tell us what we can and cannot do, rather it sets the criteria that we 
must meet, and the behavioural standards we are expected to observe, in doing whatever it is that we 
choose to do. It leaves much more room for both consumer and producer choice, including producers 
from overseas, and much more room, and more incentive, therefore for competition and innovation. 
And, in that less prescriptive, more permissive, environment, the new technologies have brought about 
massive changes in traded instruments, in the way in which markets operate and are organised and in 
payments,  settlements  and  delivery  arrangements  and  so  on,  which,  while  not  without  occasional 
problems, have overwhelmingly on balance brought massive benefits in terms of market efficiency. 
In  reflecting  on  this  whole  process  in  the  UK,  there  are  a  number  of  characteristics  of  the  general 
approach that I think have been important. 
The  first  relates  to  the  extent  to  which  it  was  market-driven.  No  attempt  was  made  as  far  as  I  am 
aware  -  certainly  not  by  the  Bank  -  to  tell  market  players  what  they  should  do  individually  or  in 
organising themselves collectively. Of course we followed what they were getting up to very closely, 
and  always  stood  ready  to  help  when  we  were  called  upon  by  the  markets  to  do  so,  as  we 
occasionally were, intervening on our own initiative only to ensure that the public interest was properly 
respected. For the most part we took the view that market participants know better than we do what 
will work and what won't; it is after all their salaries if not their jobs that are on the line. 
Where  public  policy  issues  were  involved,  we  established  a  tradition  of  extensive  consultation  right 
across the relevant sections of the market - a tradition which the FSA has certainly maintained. In the 
UK's relatively well-developed markets - particularly the wholesale markets - we recognised early on 
that  where  intervention  was  judged  to  be  necessary  -  in  the  interest  of  market  transparency  or  of 
prudential  or  behavioural  conduct  for  example  -  it  needed  to  be  informed  by  those  who  properly 
understood  the  subtleties  of  the  market  if  we  were  to  reduce  the  risk  of  unforeseen  consequences 
which  could  either  frustrate  the  purpose  of  the  intervention  or  unnecessarily  obstruct  market 
innovation. In some instances this approach, which I suppose might be described as market-sensitive, 
involved  encouraging  the  market  itself  to  address  the  particular  issue  in  question  as  a  preferable 
alternative  to  official  action.  I  think  of  the  Takeover  Panel,  for  example,  or  the  work  of  people  like 
Adrian  Cadbury  -  under  the  auspices  of  the  Stock  Exchange  -  in  developing  corporate  governance 
standards,  or  of  the  professional  organisations  which  set  and  police  accountancy  rules.  A  similar 
approach was followed in relation to many commercial banking issues - through approved codes of 
conduct  in  relation  to  their  dealings  with  customers  accompanied  by  an  ombudsman  scheme.  We 
were in this country sensitive to the need to distinguish between different aspects of financial market 
activity - very obviously in the case of the distinction between wholesale and retail activity - in trying to 
find the most appropriate ways of reflecting legitimate public concerns. 
Where there has been official intervention, it has, again by now well-established tradition, sought to 
avoid discrimination - whether between different types of financial institution or in the form of protective 
nationalism in favour of British-owned businesses, provided everyone undertaking a particular activity 
played by the same rules. That approach has not necessarily always been popular, I have to say, with 
some  of  those  who  might  have  benefited  from  such  discrimination!  But  it  is  certainly  one  of  the 
reasons for London's attraction as an international financial centre including its attraction to so many 
financial  companies  from  elsewhere  in  Europe.  And  that  international  presence  in  turn  contributes 
enormously to the efficiency of the London market - and indeed the European market of which we are 
very much a part. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2002
 Chairman,  I  could  go  on  reflecting  on  our  own  experience  of  all  this  -  but  I'm  conscious  that  the 
weekend  beckons  -  and  the  relevant  question  is  how  it  all  relates  to  the  development  of  the  single 
financial market across Europe. 
The potential benefits of integration I take for granted. The continuing debate is about how - given that 
we all start from different positions and with different traditions and with different public policy priorities, 
we  get  from  here  to  there.  It  may  well  be  that  continuous  public  pressure  for  higher  and  higher 
standards  in  financial  markets  everywhere  are  leading  to  greater  official  intervention  any  way.  But 
integration  was  itself  always  bound  to  involve  more  intervention  as  the  EU  member  states  moved 
towards some degree of harmonisation of standards, requiring legal agreement at the European level 
and then reflected in national legislation. And a great deal of progress has, of course, already been 
made  in  that  direction  through  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  which  is  due  in  principle  to  be 
completed in 2005. But everyone accepts that a great deal remains to be done - in the context of the 
integration  agenda  -  and  in  fact  it  is  bound  to  be  an  ongoing  process  as  markets  evolve  and  new 
issues arise. In that context the recent agreement on Alexandre Lamfalussy's proposals for a faster 
track procedure in securities markets has been generally welcomed. 
But  the  on-going  debate  extends  beyond  that  to  where  more  precisely  we  want  to  get  to.  At  one 
extreme  -  and  I  exaggerate  to  make  the  point  -  some  appear  to  have  a  vision  of  maximum 
harmonisation across the EU, with uniform regulation and centralised oversight at some point in the 
future, whereas others lean more towards harmonisation only to the extent to which it is demonstrably 
necessary,  with  mutual  recognition,  and  an  EU-wide  passport  based  primarily  on  the  removal  of 
barriers to cross-border activity. Of course that approach leaves plenty of room for debate about what 
exactly “demonstrably necessary” means. Underlying the debate at that level are legitimate differences 
in priorities as between the different public policy concerns - how much weight to put upon consumer 
protection  as  against  systemic  stability  or  freer  competition,  for  example,  which  are  not  necessarily 
easy  to  resolve  even  at  the  national  level.  And  there  may  -  just  possibly  -  also  be,  less  legitimate, 
differing perceptions of national self interest. 
The truth is that there are no easy answers, and I think myself that we are bound to move forward in a 
pragmatic, incremental, way - recognising the different considerations that apply in different areas of 
the markets rather than on the basis of a grand design. 
In this context, I am actually rather encouraged by the recent discussion papers put out by Eurofi and 
the Wicks group, which stand back a little from the more immediate issues and look at the way forward 
in a broader - and longer-term - perspective. 
They seem to me to have quite a lot in common in terms of immediate priorities, although there are 
important differences in terms of where we may ultimately end up. I welcome in particular their shared 
emphasis  on  involving  practitioners  in  consultation  on  the  way  forward  at  every  stage  -  indeed  we 
might  have  made  more  progress  if  that  procedure  had  been  more  generally  adopted  hitherto.  I 
welcome also the emphasis in the Eurofi paper on evolution - which is implicit too in Wicks - but I am 
less sure about the Eurofi presumption at this point of necessary and inevitable progression towards 
eventual centralisation. But, whatever one's views about the particular suggestions and proposals in 
the two papers the really important thing is that the issues they raise should be debated and discussed 
- by market participants as well as by the relevant authorities. And that's why I think that conferences 
of this kind are important, Chairman. 
I very much hope that following on from your Convention the important issues that have been raised 
will continue to be explored in the various trade associations and professional organisations that have 
been represented here, and that they will make their voice heard in the councils of Europe on the way 
forward, as indeed they traditionally have in the context of developing our own markets here in the UK. 
I will have every confidence that they will. 
I'm  grateful  to  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  join  you  this  afternoon  and  I  wish  you  and  the 
European single market in financial services every success. 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 3
