Yukitoshi  Funo:  Economic  activity  and  prices  in  Japan,  and
monetary policy in Japan
Speech by Mr Yukitoshi Funo, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting
with business leaders, Miyagi, 21 June 2018.
I. Recent Economic and Price Developments
A. Overseas Developments
 I would like to begin my speech by talking about overseas economies. The business sentiment of
manufacturing firms on a global basis has maintained its improving trend, and the world trade
volume has continued to recover. In this situation, overseas economies have continued to grow
firmly on the whole.
In terms of the outlook, overseas economies are expected to continue growing firmly. According
to the World Economic Outlook, released in April 2018 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
the global growth rate is projected to be 3.9 percent in both 2018 and 2019.
Looking  at  developments  by  major  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  expanding  and  the
European  economy  has  continued  to  recover.  The  Chinese  economy  has  continued  to  see
stable  growth  on  the  whole.  Other  emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting  economies
have been recovering moderately on the whole, reflecting in particular an increase in exports and
the effects of those economies’ stimulus measures.
As for the outlook, the U.S. economy is expected to keep expanding and the European economy
is  projected  to  continue  recovering.  The  Chinese  economy  is  likely  to  broadly  follow  a  stable
growth  path  as  authorities  conduct  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  in  a  timely  manner.  Other
emerging economies and commodity-exporting economies are likely to continue their moderate
recovery on the whole.
Risk factors to the overseas economic outlook are wide ranging, as exemplified by (1) the U.S.
economic policies and their impact on global financial markets, (2) developments in emerging
and  commodity-exporting  economies,  (3)  negotiations  on  the  United  Kingdom’s  exit  from  the
European Union (EU) and their effects, and (4) geopolitical risks. In addition, uncertainty is high
regarding  future  developments  in  trade  policies  worldwide,  and  therefore  these  developments
warrant attention. I hold the view that it is important to stay vigilant regarding these risk factors,
especially now that overseas economies are continuing to grow firmly.
B. Japan’s Economy and Prices
1. Economic activity
I will now discuss the economic situation in Japan. Japan’s economy is expanding moderately,
with a virtuous cycle from income to spending operating. The real GDP growth rate continued to
represent positive growth for eight consecutive quarters on a quarter-on-quarter basis through
the  October-December  quarter  of  2017,  and  thereafter  registered  minus  0.6  percent  for  the
January-March quarter of 2018 on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis. While the contribution
of  net  exports  on  real  GDP  growth  has  remained  slightly  positive,  that  of  domestic  private
demand has been relatively weak.
With regard to the outlook, Japan’s economy is likely to continue its moderate expansion. In fiscal
2018,  the  economy  will  probably  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential.   Namely,
1
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending
being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors, mainly against the background of
highly accommodative financial conditions and the underpinnings through government spending.
Meanwhile, exports are expected to continue their moderate increasing trend on the back of the
firm growth in overseas economies. In terms of Miyagi Prefecture, given that there has been an
increase in regularly scheduled domestic and international flights at Sendai International Airport,
the number of passengers using the airport in fiscal 2017 registered a record high, and this is
expected to contribute to the regional economy through tourism. In fiscal 2019 and 2020, Japan’s
economy is expected to continue on an expanding trend supported by external demand, although
the  growth  pace  is  projected  to  decelerate  due  to  a  cyclical  slowdown  in  business  fixed
investment and the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike.  According to the April 2018
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) released by the Bank of
Japan, the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the economic growth rate are 1.6
percent for fiscal 2018, and 0.8 percent each for fiscal 2019 and 2020.
2
1.  Under a specific methodology, Japan’s potential growth rate is estimated to be in the range
of 0.5-1.0 percent. However, the estimate of the potential growth rate varies depending on
the methodologies employed and could be revised as the sample period becomes longer
over time. Thus, it should be regarded as being subject to a considerable margin of error.
2.  It is assumed that the consumption tax will be raised to 10 percent in October 2019 and that
a reduced tax rate will be applied to food and beverages — excluding alcohol and dining-out
— and newspapers. Policies concerning the provision of free education are also factored
into the forecasts, based on information available as of April 2018.
2. Prices
Let  me  now  explain  price  developments.  Although  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the
consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food is in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent, it has
continued to show relatively weak developments compared to the economic expansion and the
labor market tightening, remaining at around 0.5 percent excluding the effects of energy prices.
With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food)
is  likely  to  continue  on  an  uptrend  and  increase  toward  2  percent,  mainly  on  the  back  of  the
improvement  in  the  output  gap  and  the  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.
Specifically,  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of
change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) presented in the April 2018 Outlook Report are 1.3
percent  for  fiscal  2018  and  —  on  a  basis  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  scheduled
3
consumption tax hike — 1.8 percent each for fiscal 2019 and 2020.
1.  3Assuming that the rise in the consumption tax will be fully passed on to prices of taxable
items, excluding those to which a reduced tax rate will be applied, the effect of the October
2019  consumption  tax  hike  on  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less
fresh food) for October 2019 onward is estimated to be 1.0 percentage point; the effect for
fiscal  2019  and  2020  is  estimated  to  be  0.5  percentage  point  for  each  year.  It  also  is
assumed that the effects of policies concerning the provision of free education will not be
reflected in the CPI, as statistical treatment of these effects is not yet decided.
II. Keys to Assessing the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices
In what follows, I would like to discuss several points that I think deserve particular attention in
terms of realizing the outlook for economic activity and prices that I mentioned earlier.
A. Supply-Demand Conditions in the Labor Market and the Income Situation
Let me first talk about supply-demand conditions in the labor market and the income situation. As
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the economy has continued its moderate expansion, the output gap has continued to improve;
the figure for the October-December quarter of 2017 — the most recent data available – was in
positive  territory  of  around  1.5  percent.  Furthermore,  supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor
market have continued to tighten steadily. The year-on-year rate of increase in the Labour Force
Survey-based number of employees accelerated to the range of 2.0-3.0 percent, and against this
backdrop, the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has risen steadily. Moreover, a perception of
labor  shortage  suggested  by  the  employment  conditions  diffusion  index  (DI)  in  the Tankan
(Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) has heightened, and the unemployment
rate has been around 2.5 percent recently, which is slightly below the structural unemployment
rate. These indicators of supply-demand conditions in the labor market show that the degree of
labor market tightness has been at around the level last seen in the first half of the 1990s or in
the first half of the 1970s. In terms of the outlook, as Japan’s economy is likely to continue on a
growing trend at a pace above its potential, it is expected that the number of employees will keep
increasing  and  that  the  supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  will  continue  to  tighten
steadily.
Amid such supply-demand conditions in the labor market, the year-on-year rate of increase in
hourly scheduled cash earnings of part-time employees, which are responsive to supply-demand
conditions in the labor market, has exhibited relatively high growth recently of around 2.0 percent
on  average.  On  the  other  hand,  the  increase  in  overall  employees’  hourly  cash  earnings  in
nominal terms has remained moderate, and total cash earnings per employee also have risen
moderately,  albeit  with  some  fluctuations.  Going  forward,  the  rate  of  increase  in  overall
employees’ hourly cash earnings is expected to accelerate as that in base pay has started to do
so as well. However, there is a risk that firms will remain cautious with their decisions on wage
setting, and in this context, I am paying attention to their stance regarding wages going forward.
B. Prices
Next, I will turn to price developments, taking into account supply-demand conditions in the labor
market and the income situation. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh
food and energy) has been at around 0.5 percent. While the fact that the pace of increase in the
CPI has been moderate compared to the economic expansion and the labor market tightening is
partly attributable to the sectoral shock of such factors as price declines at major supermarket
chains mainly resulting from intensifying competition with other types of retail businesses, this
reflects the fact that the mindset and behavior based on the assumption that wages and prices
will not increase easily have been deeply entrenched among firms and households. There have
been moves by firms to make efforts to absorb a rise in labor costs by increasing labor-saving
investment  and  streamlining  their  business  process,  while  limiting  wage  increases  —  which
correspond to the labor shortage — mainly to part-time employees.
In the outlook for prices, the main factors that determine inflation rates — the output gap and
inflation expectations — are assessed as follows. First, the output gap has improved steadily,
and it is projected to continue expanding moderately within positive territory in fiscal 2018, both
on  the  labor  and  capital  sides,  reflecting  the  increase  in  demand  at  home  and  abroad.  Going
forward, although such expansion is likely to pause, mainly due to the effects of the scheduled
consumption  tax  hike,  the  output  gap  is  expected  to  remain  substantially  positive.  Second,
medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been more or less unchanged recently. As for
the outlook, such expectations are likely to follow an increasing trend and gradually converge to
around 2 percent on the back of the following: (1) in terms of the adaptive component, with the
improvement in the output gap, firms’ stance is likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and
prices, and (2) in terms of the forward-looking component, the Bank will pursue monetary easing
through its strong commitment to achieving the price stability target.
Nevertheless, if competition among firms — which provide goods and services that are difficult to
differentiate — intensifies further, prices of these goods and services may not rise even if the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
output  gap  widens  within  positive  territory.  Also,  there  is  a  risk  that  a  rise  in  firms’  and
households’ inflation expectations will lag behind if it takes time for firms’ stance to shift toward
raising  wages  and  prices  and  inflation  consequently  remains  relatively  sluggish.  Therefore,  I
believe that it is necessary to carefully examine developments in this regard.
III. Conduct of Monetary Policy
Let me now turn to the Bank’s monetary policy.
The  Bank  has  set  the  price  stability  target  at  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of
change in the CPI and has been conducting monetary policy to achieve this target at the earliest
possible time. What is important here is that it conducts monetary policy based on the principle
that  the  policy  shall  aim  at  “achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound
development of the national economy,” as stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act. In other words, the
Bank is not simply trying to achieve a rise in prices by setting a specific deadline by which the
target will be achieved. On this point, let me note that the April 2018 Outlook Report ceased to
provide a description on the projected timing of achieving the 2 percent price stability target, so
as to clarify that the timing is not a deadline by which the target will be achieved. If prices rise in a
stable manner and firms and households start to behave based on this assumption, prices of
goods  and  services  will  rise,  which  in  turn  will  increase  firms’  sales  and  profits.  With  such
increases,  wages  would  rise  accordingly,  leading  to  more  active  consumption.  The  Bank  is
aiming  for  an  economy  with  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  operating  as  the  price
stability target of 2 percent is achieved.
With  a  view  to  achieving  this  target,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing,
considering developments in economic activity and prices, as well as financial conditions, under
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control introduced by the
Bank in September 2016.
This  policy  framework  consists  of  two  major  components.  The  first  is  yield  curve  control,  in
which the Bank facilitates the formation of short- and long-term interest rates that are considered
most  appropriate  for  maintaining  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target. At
present, according to the guideline for market operations, the Bank sets the short-term policy
interest rate at minus 0.1 percent and purchases Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that
10-year  JGB  yields  will  remain  at  around  0  percent.  The  second  component  is  an  inflation-
overshooting  commitment  in  which  the  Bank  continues  with  the  monetary  easing  framework,
aiming to achieve the price stability target, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in
a stable manner. On this point, the Bank makes clear that it will continue expanding the monetary
base  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  observed  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)
exceeds 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner.
I  would  like  to  summarize  economic  and  price  developments  in  Japan.  The  economy  has
continued  its  moderate  expansion,  but  prices  have  continued  to  show  relatively  weak
developments,  mainly  against  the  background  that  firms’  wage-  and  price-setting  stance  has
remained  cautious.  Regarding  the  outlook  for  prices,  risks  are  skewed  to  the  downside,
especially  concerning  developments  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  and  this
warrants  attention.  Financial  conditions  are  highly  accommodative.  There  is  no  sign  so  far  of
excessively  bullish  expectations  in  asset  markets  or  in  the  activities  of  financial  institutions.
Furthermore, prolonged downward pressure on financial institutions’ profits under the continued
low interest rate environment could create risks of a gradual pullback in financial intermediation
and of destabilizing the financial system. However, at this point, these risks are considered not
significant, mainly because financial institutions have sufficient capital bases.
Given  this  situation,  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  is
being maintained. Nevertheless, there is still a long way to go to achieve the target. I believe that
it is necessary that  the  Bank  continue  to  persistently  pursue  powerful  monetary  easing  under
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
QQE with Yield Curve Control.
IV. Challenges for Japan’s Economy
I  would  now  like  to  express  my  thoughts  regarding  the  current  situation  for  Japan’s  economy
from a longer-term perspective.
According to the Bank’s estimates, the potential growth rate, which was about 4 percent in the
latter half of the 1980s, has been in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent recently. It  can  be  said  that
Japan’s  growth  potential  has  been  sluggish,  mainly  reflecting  the  population  decline  and  low
productivity  growth.  Yet,  when  looking  at  the  economy  in  detail,  we  see  that  initiatives  toward
structural  reforms  and  growth  strategy  have  proceeded  among  a  wide  range  of  entities,  in  a
situation  where  the  output  gap  has  widened  within  positive  territory  and  further  tightening  has
been seen in terms of both labor and capital. I expect that such initiatives will lead to raising the
growth potential of Japan’s economy. Let me point to some examples.
On  the  labor  front,  an  increase  in  employment  has  been  seen  not  only  for  non-regular
employees, but also regular employees. At the same time, there has been progress in terms of
making extensive use of diverse human resources, including women, the elderly, and foreigners.
In  addition,  changes  have  begun  to  be  observed  in  the  seniority-based  wage  system.  These
developments can be perceived as one type of changes occurring in Japan’s labor market, which
previously had been rigid. My view is that bringing out the potential labor capacity that has not
been utilized will likely boost Japan’s labor productivity, which is low compared with that of the
U.S. and European economies.
On the capital front, an increasing number of firms have been taking measures to establish new
factories and expand production capacity against the background of such factors as supply-side
constraints.  Furthermore,  in  response  to  the  tight  labor  market  conditions,  firms  are  making
labor-saving  investments  not  only  at  production  sites  but  in  various  workplaces. At  the  same
time,  they  are  proceeding  with  streamlining  and  sophistication  of  business  process.  For
example, the financial industry is moving ahead with advancing financial technology as well as
making efforts to improve business efficiency. In the retail industry, while progress is being made
with saving labor at stores, integration of sales at brick-and-mortar stores and online sales is
also taking place.
If  such  initiatives  toward  structural  reforms  and  growth  strategy  proceed,  Japan’s  growth
potential will likely rise. However, attention needs to be paid to the point that these initiatives are
diverse and their pace of progress is not uniform. For example, the situation of labor shortages
varies depending on types of job and industry. For this reason, it is necessary to keep a close
watch on whether any imbalances arise amid increasing work demand across Japan. Let me
note that raising growth potential is a time-consuming task. Therefore, while the Bank’s conduct
of monetary policy stimulates aggregate demand and suitably tight supply-demand conditions are
being  maintained,  a  virtuous  cycle  in  which  active  demand  encourages  progress  in  various
initiatives should remain intact for a long period of time. I believe that, with a view to achieving its
price  stability  target  and  realizing  sustainable  economic  growth  in  a  coordinated  manner,  the
Bank should continue with its monetary easing policy and firmly support the various initiatives
taken by a wide range of entities.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
