Kevin  Stiroh:  Introductory  remarks  at  the  Community  Bankers
Conference
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution  Supervision
Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Community  Bankers  Conference,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 18 April 2018.
 On behalf of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, it’s my pleasure to welcome you to the 2018
Community  Bankers  Conference.    This  is  the  third  Community  Bankers  Conference  that  I’ve
attended since becoming the head of Supervision at the New York Fed and it is great to see the
turnout  continue  to  grow.    This  year  we  are  fortunate  to  have  nearly  one  hundred  fifty
representatives from community banks throughout the Federal Reserve’s Second District and
more than forty regulatory colleagues from multiple federal and state agencies.
Each year I look forward to this conference as it offers us, as regulators and supervisors, an
unparalleled  opportunity  to  exchange  views  and  perspectives,  to  identify  challenges  and
opportunities, and to promote a robust dialogue with senior managers and directors of smaller
financial institutions in the Second District.  This type of constructive engagement is critical for us
as we work to promote a safe and sound financial system that supports a strong economy.
The  theme  of  this  year’s  conference—“Navigating  Future  Risks  for  Community  Banks”—is
centered  on change,  which  is  appropriate  when  one  considers  the  broad  set  of  forces
transforming the U.S. financial system.  As you all know, the banking industry is confronting a
series  of  emerging  challenges  and  environmental  changes  such  as  a  rising  interest  rate
environment, new businesses and technologies that may disrupt the traditional financial services
industry,  and  novel  cyber-threats  that  seek  to  exploit  our  highly  interconnected  society.    In
addition, over the past year or so, we’ve witnessed significant turnover in the leadership at federal
regulatory bodies including the Federal Reserve, the FDIC, and the OCC, which has the potential
to change the regulatory environment.  And, finally on the legislative front, Congress is currently
considering  the  Economic  Growth,  Regulatory  Relief,  and  Consumer  Protection Act,  which  if
passed in current form would entail the most significant statutory change to the U.S. banking
regulatory  framework  since  the  passage  of  the  Dodd-Frank Act  in  2010.   All  of  this  change
presents both opportunities and threats.
For my remarks today, I’d like to explore three specific changes that are relevant for community
banks:  first, a shift in community banks’ business models in response to market changes and
regulatory  pressures;  second,  the  growing  competition  and  potential  disruption  introduced  by
“fintech” firms; and third, the critical threat that cybersecurity risks pose to all community banks.
 Following my remarks and throughout the day, I look forward to hearing from you about these
forces as well as on other changes, trends, and challenges that you and your firms are facing.
Before  I  begin,  I’d  like  to  thank  the  organizers  of  this  conference  for  putting  together  today’s
informative  and  timely  program,  as  well  as  our  many  speakers  and  panelists  for  their
participation.    In  addition,  please  note  that  my  comments  today  are  my  own  and  do  not
necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve
System.
Community Bank Business Models: Recent Trends
I’ll begin with some observations on recent trends in community bank lending.  This perspective
is  critical  because,  as  New  York  Fed  President  Bill  Dudley  stated  in  his  welcoming  remarks,
community banks are a vital component of the U.S. banking system.  They provide an array of
financial  services  to  a  wide  range  of  customers  and  business  sectors.    This  is  particularly
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
important as many of these sectors are considered “underserved” due to the limited presence of
physical banking locations in their locales.
As background, the New York Fed is the primary supervisor for 17 community banks and over
100 bank holding companies that operate throughout Upstate New York, in parts of Connecticut
and New Jersey, and in the greater New York City area.  Our staff in supervision monitors trends
and emerging risks in the financial services industry across the Second District, including those
associated  with  community  banks.  These  analyses  along  with  insights  we  gain  directly  from
interaction with community bankers inform our supervisory programs and allow us to tailor our
examination strategy and risk-focus for community banks.  
I’ll highlight a few interesting trends that our examiners and analysts have observed through this
monitoring.    For  the  three-year  period  ended  December  31,  2016,  aggregate  Second  District
community bank loans grew by 46 percent.   These loans were often funded by non-core funding
sources, which grew by 49 percent in the aggregate over the same period.  This raised concerns
among  supervisors  who  consider  non-core  funding  sources  as  higher  risk  from  a  safety  and
soundness perspective.
1
Moreover,  the  primary  source  of  loan  growth  for  this  period  was  commercial  real  estate.    In
response to this growing CRE concentration, the Fed intensified its monitoring of this sector and
directed our supervisory focus toward how firms are risk-managing their CRE portfolios.
More  recently,  during  2017,  we  saw  more  moderate  asset  growth  for  community  banking
organizations in the District—approximately 7.5 percent—which is in line with national peer group
averages.    Aggregate  loan  growth  in  2017  was  10.5  percent  for  the  year,  which  is  also
comparable to the national peer group averages.  Over this period, we observed a small shift
from commercial loan growth toward retail loan growth, specifically in the areas of one-to-four
family  homes  and  indirect  automobile  loans.    With  respect  to  funding  in  2017,  we  observed
strong growth in core deposits and less reliance on non-core funding sources—a positive trend
from a safety and soundness perspective.
In the competitive environment of the Second District, we’ve observed community banks seeking
revenue  from  more  niche  businesses  such  as  wealth  management  and  indirect  automobile
lending.  We’ve also  observed  community  banks  participating  with  other  banks  on  real  estate
lending, in part to better manage real estate concentrations.  Community banks are also seeking
to differentiate themselves from their larger competitors by marketing their more individualized
customer service.
In regard to liquidity, a number of community bankers have noted the influx in public deposits and
the challenges associated with putting these deposits to productive use.
Finally, although there has been a material improvement in asset quality over the last several
years, it will be important for senior management to continue to be prudent in their underwriting
practices and in monitoring any emerging risks in their portfolios.  The economy continues to
show a strong trajectory, but of course we need to remain alert to any potential slowdown.
As Second District community banks grow in line with their national peers, we are encouraged by
the increased reliance on core funding and strong asset quality.  We will, however, continue to
monitor  developments  that  may  pose  a  risk  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  and
banking system.
Fintech
A  second  major  change  for  community  banks—like  all  banking  institutions—is  the  potential
competition from new “fintech” firms. Since 2012 there has been over $40 billion in US-based
fintech investments including online lending-based platforms, capital markets, and payment and
2
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
settlement  services.       By  offering  traditional  financial  services  to  customers  through  new,
innovative  platforms  and  channels,  these  fintech  firms  pose  a  challenge  to  traditional  banking
business models.
Many  community  bankers  are  taking  a  proactive,  forward-leaning  approach  to  these  new
technologies with a focus on how they can be leveraged to improve their business and benefit
their  customers.  Among  the  opportunities  community  bankers  have  highlighted  during  our
discussions  are:  technological  solutions  that  reduce  back  office  costs;  more  efficient  loan
processing; and an improved customer experience through smartphone applications and other
mobile technology.  This proactive perspective leverages innovation as a strategic differentiator
and competitive advantage, rather than just a means to enhance efficiency.
The speed and magnitude of these changes also have implications for us as supervisors.  We
must  keep  pace  and  understand  the  risks  associated  with  innovation  so  that  we  can
appropriately  focus  our  supervisory  efforts  on  new  operational,  compliance,  and  reputational
risks.    For  example,  Supervisory  and  Regulatory  Letter  13–19,  “Guidance  on  Managing
Outsourcing Risk,” provides supervisory expectations on partnering with outside vendors.  While
supervisors can provide some focus on emerging risks, it is ultimately the responsibility of each
firm  and  its  board  to  identify  the  relevant  risks  associated  with  new  technologies  and  make
appropriate and prudent business decisions for their institutions and customers. 
Cybersecurity
The  potential  benefits  associated  with  these  new  technologies  are  accompanied  by  the  risks
posed  by  cybersecurity.    Cybersecurity  risks,  the  third  topic  on  my  list,  continue  to  raise
challenges  for  all  types  of  firms  in  the  financial  system,  ranging  from  supervised  banks  to
financial utilities to non-bank financial firms to government agencies.  While these entities differ in
size,  purpose,  and  mission,  the  common  threats  associated  with  cybersecurity  represent  a
universal concern.  Indeed, in my regular meetings with supervisory colleagues and supervised
institutions, cybersecurity is almost always at the top of the risk list.  Frequently cited challenges
by local institutions include: attracting and retaining information technology talent, as these skilled
individuals  are  in  high  demand  and  implementing  a  sufficiently  robust  vendor  management
program for technology services outsourced to third-party providers.  
While we expect firms to adequately manage a number of financial and operational risks such as
credit risk, market risk, and operational risk, the nature of the cybersecurity risk differs in one key
aspect – motivation.  A cybersecurity attacker might be a nation-state or hacker with the intention
to disrupt or damage a critical infrastructure sustaining the U.S. and global economy.  Or, the
attack may be financial in nature, where the perpetrator is engaging in fraud and seeking to profit.
These  motivations  suggest  that  the  cyber  threat  is  more  intentional  than  other  risks.    This
intentionality coupled with the resources of some perpetrators raises the stakes significantly and
makes cyber defense much more difficult. 
We recognize that addressing the cyber threat is a complicated and expensive undertaking, but it
is  an  essential  one.   All  banks,  from  the  largest  globally  systemically  important  to  the  small
community banks, are vulnerable to this threat and need to take the appropriate steps to identify,
protect, detect, respond, and recover.  
A critical aspect of cybersecurity is the need for banks to adequately invest in safeguarding their
systems  and  platforms  by  training  their  employees  on  how  to  identify  potential  cyber-attacks,
mitigate vulnerabilities, and escalate issues appropriately.  Moreover, to address potential insider
threats,  banks  must  establish  and  maintain  robust  protocols  and  controls  in  managing
employees’  access  to  the  firm’s  systems  and  databases.  Ensuring  that  sensitive  firm  data,
personal information, and critical infrastructure are accessible only to those trusted employees
who need access is vital to guard against accidental or intentional data loss, theft, or damage.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Supervisors  expect  that  institutions  create  a  strong  risk  culture  around  access  control  and
vendor management. Employees are banks’ first lines of defense against cyber vulnerabilities, so
investment  in  employee  training  is  critical.    By  raising  awareness  about  potential  threats  and
vulnerabilities,  a  bank  can  equip  employees  with  the  knowledge  and  judgment  to  recognize
attacks such as social engineering and mitigate the impact. In addition, training can reduce the
probability that an employee will unintentionally cause a breach.  For example, we have seen
deficiencies  due  to  weak  internal  controls  and  policies  and  procedures,  which  have  led  to
increased exposure to cybersecurity risk.  Institutions are expected to ensure service providers
comply with applicable regulations that are consistent with safe and sound banking practices.
Closing
I’ve  outlined  three  major,  transformative  changes  and  trends  that  all  of  us  in  this  room—
community  bankers,  regulators,  and  supervisors—are  currently  facing.    During  the  panels,
formal Q&As, and sidelines of the conference, I encourage you to share your views on these
topics and other changes that you are confronting, with a focus on the opportunities, risks, and
mitigants.
By  sharing  our  perspectives,  community  banks  can  continue  to  play  a  central  role  in  the
sustainable  provision  of  financial  services  to  customers  in  the  Second  District.  Moreover,  by
working  together  to  address  these  changes,  the  New  York  Fed  and  the  broader  regulatory
community  will  be  better  positioned  to  achieve  its  goal  of  creating  safe,  sound,  and  stable
banking and financial systems that support the U.S. economy.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
Aggregate Second District data is based on Call reports and UBPR data from 114 firms.
Fintech Trends to Watch in 2018, CB Insights.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
