Stephen S Poloz: Today's labour market and the future of work
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Chancellor  David
Dodge Lecture in Public Finance 2018, Kingston, Ontario, 13 March 2018.
I would like to thank Russell Barnett for his help with this speech.
Introduction
 I am delighted to be back at Queen’s, where I earned an undergraduate degree in economics
some 40 years ago. I remember this time of year well. It is a stressful time—whether you are
stressed about starting your career, getting into your next degree program, or just getting this
year’s work done.
Those of you who hope to join the workforce may be feeling both excitement and nervousness
about an uncertain future. At least the macroeconomic situation you face is a positive one. The
economy has created 283,000 jobs over the past 12 months, and the unemployment rate is as
low as it has been in more than 40 years.
However, this may still leave you wondering about the future. We have all heard stories of people
struggling  to  get  a  foot  in  the  door,  of  being  overqualified  and  underemployed,  and  of  the
challenges  of  building  a  stable  career  in  the  “gig  economy.”  Meanwhile,  automation  and
digitalization are disrupting entire industries and threatening to make some jobs obsolete.
Given  this  backdrop,  I  will  use  my  time  today  to  talk  about  Canada’s  labour  market—why  the
central  bank  pays  such  close  attention  to  it,  and  what  role  monetary  policy  can  play  in  its
performance. I will also take the risk of speculating a little on what lies further ahead for you—on
the future of work.
Labour, economic supply and potential output
Let me start with why the Bank of Canada—whose central objective is to target low and stable
inflation—cares so much about the labour market. Simply put, it is because inflation is driven by
the balance of demand and supply in the economy, and the labour market is the heart of that
balance.
When  demand  is  less  than  supply,  inflation  tends  to  fall,  and  vice  versa.  When  supply  and
demand  are  roughly  in  balance,  inflation  tends  to  stabilize  around  the  level  where  people’s
inflation expectations lie—in Canada’s case, our target of 2 per cent annual inflation.
To  maintain  this  balance,  a  central  bank  needs  to  understand  all  the  elements  that  make  up
supply and demand. At the top of the list for supply is labour. The more people available to work,
and the more productive they are, the greater the contribution that labour makes to supply. In
every economy, demographic forces and immigration determine the available workforce.
A complementary role in supply growth is played by investment. Investment spending expands or
improves an economy’s capital stock—the machinery and equipment available to workers, as
well as infrastructure such as roads, ports or information technology networks. New investment
can give existing workers updated tools that raise their productivity. Or, it can mean an expansion
of  the  firm,  which  is  accompanied  by  new  job  creation.  Both  channels  raise  the  economy’s
potential output.
Canada has reached the phase of the economic cycle where investment usually takes over as
the  lead  engine  of  growth  and  this  capacity-building  process  becomes  central.  I  think  of  this
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
phase of the cycle as the “sweet spot,” where rising demand actually drives the creation of new
supply.  With  many  companies  operating  near  their  capacity  limits,  growing  their  sales  further
means  increasing  investment,  leading  to  the  creation  of  new  jobs  and  increased  aggregate
supply. Obviously, this is a phase worth nurturing.
By far the most potent form of business investment is the creation of brand new companies.
New  firms  apply  the  latest  technologies  in  novel  ways,  sometimes  creating  completely  new
industries. As successful new firms exploit new technologies, they can grow very rapidly. Their
sales growth chart sometimes looks like a hockey stick, or the left side of the Eiffel Tower.
You  can  imagine  how  the  creation  of  numerous  new  companies  might  affect  the  overall
performance of our economy. Each firm that sees hockey-stick growth adds disproportionately to
the overall productivity of the economy. Indeed, historically, a large share of an economy’s gains
in productivity and new job creation have come from young companies.
This is why a period of slow productivity growth is usually associated with slow rates of new
company formation. We are—at long last—finally seeing some encouraging signs in these data.
This follows a long lacklustre stretch in the wake of both the global financial crisis and the period
of high oil prices and exceptional Canadian dollar strength from 2010 to 2013.
Importantly, this process of rapid growth generates higher incomes that people spend in every
sector  of  the  economy,  benefiting  everyone.  However,  newly  created  economic  growth  is
disruptive, sometimes destroying existing companies and jobs along the way. This may sound
like today’s issue, but it has been a characteristic of economic growth for all time. It was aptly
described a long time ago by Joseph Schumpeter as “creative destruction.” I will say more about
this process in a few minutes.
However,  none  of  this  highly  desirable  economic  growth  can  happen  unless  there  are  people
available to fill the newly created jobs. Accordingly, a healthy, well-functioning labour market is
critical, particularly at this stage of the business cycle.  
There are many ways to measure labour market health. We start with the unemployment rate
because it is intuitive and the most commonly reported indicator. It is also as low as it has been
since 1976 when Statistics Canada started tracking it this way, which is good.
But the unemployment rate does not tell the whole story. To illustrate, imagine someone whose
company  closed  back  in  2010  and  who  gave  up  looking  for  work  after  months  or  years  of
unemployment. This person is no longer participating in the labour market and so is not counted
as unemployed. But he or she could still be pulled back into the workforce if the right opportunity
came along and so represents a potential source of new supply.
Furthermore,  no  analysis  of  the  labour  market  is  complete  without  considering  the  impact  of
demographics, specifically, the impact of the Baby Boom generation. The first Baby Boomers
began  to  enter  the  labour  market  in  the  early  1960s  and  fuelled  labour  force  and  economic
growth  for  the  next  50  years.  This  demographic  support  is  now  fading.  Immigration  can  help
provide an important offset, but we should also be doing everything we can to develop untapped
sources of labour supply within our existing population.
Breaking down the numbers
After looking at a much wider range of labour market indicators, the Bank has concluded that
there  remains  a  degree  of  untapped  supply  potential  in  the  economy.  This  is  important,  for  it
means  that  Canada  may  be  able  to  have  more  economic  growth,  a  larger  economy,  and
therefore more income per person, without generating higher inflation. So, let me turn to a deeper
analysis of that issue.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Young  people  represent  one  source  of  untapped  potential.  Yes,  the  unemployment  rate  for
people in the 15 to 24 age group has declined to around 11 per cent. However, youth are not
participating in the workforce as much as they did 10 years ago.
Traditionally,  labour  force  participation  rates  decline  during  recessions  and  rebound  during
periods of economic growth. But while most other population groups have seen their participation
rates recover from the Great Recession, that has yet to occur for young Canadians.
Some have argued that this should not be a concern, because it reflects an increasingly popular
choice to remain in school and get more education. In cases where that is true, I certainly agree.
School enrolment has increased over the last decade. However, the full story is more complex.
For one thing, many students historically have chosen to work and go to school at the same
time.  I  am  sure  that  many  of  the  students  in  this  room  have  a  part-time  job,  not  just  to  earn
money but also to gain valuable work experience. I know I did. However, the current participation
rates of all student groups—males and females, 15 to 19 years old and 20 to 24 years old—are
all below pre-crisis levels. Further, while young people who are not at school have higher labour
force  participation  rates  than  students  do,  their  rates  are  all  lower  than  they  were  before  the
crisis.
Because this drop in youth participation coincided with the crisis and Great Recession, I cannot
believe that everything we are seeing today simply represents people choosing to stay out of the
workforce. Clearly, a good part of the decline is tied to the economic cycle, and a shortage of
opportunities. Other forces, including demographics, may be acting here as well.
The key point is that youth represent an important untapped source of potential economic growth.
If the youth participation rate were to return close to its level before the crisis, more than 100,000
additional young Canadians would have jobs.
An  even  more  significant  source  of  economic  potential  is  higher  labour  force  participation  by
women. While about 91 per cent of prime-age men participate in the labour force, the rate for
women is only about 83 per cent.
History suggests that this gap can narrow. Consider Quebec, where, 20 years ago, the prime-
age female participation rate was about 74 per cent. The provincial government identified barriers
keeping women out of the workforce and acted to reduce them, particularly by lowering the cost
of child care and extending parental leave provisions. Within a few years, proportionately more
prime-age Quebec women had jobs than women in the rest of Canada. Today, Quebec’s prime-
age female participation rate is about 87 per cent.
If we could simply bring the participation rate of prime-age women in the rest of Canada up to the
level in Quebec, we could add almost 300,000 people to our country’s workforce. The recent
Federal Budget introduced some new measures in this direction.
There’s more. Employment rates among indigenous peoples—one of the youngest demographic
groups in Canada—remain well below those of the rest of the country. And, as Senior Deputy
Governor  Carolyn  Wilkins  pointed  out  in  a  speech  last  month,  technological  advances  are
breaking down barriers that have been keeping some of the millions of Canadians who live with
disabilities out of the workforce.
Finally, much could be done to speed up the integration into the workforce of the growing number
of recent immigrants. This would allow their important contribution to the workforce to increase
more rapidly over time.
Put it all together, and it is not much of a stretch to imagine that Canada’s labour force could
expand by another half a million workers. To put this thought experiment into perspective, this
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
could increase Canada’s potential output by as much as 1.5 per cent, or about $30 billion per
year. That’s equal to a permanent increase in output of almost $1,000 per Canadian every year,
even before you factor in the possible investment and productivity gains that would come with
such an increase in labour supply. Clearly, that is a prize worth pursuing.
The role of monetary policy
The central bank has no role in implementing specific policies aimed at breaking down barriers to
labour force participation. However, that does not mean we have no role to play at all. The Bank
can certainly use its monetary policy to help bring about a stronger, better functioning economy
while still pursuing our inflation-targeting goal. This is particularly important in the current phase
of the economic cycle, with demand prompting investment that can pull more people into the
workforce.
Statistics  Canada  data  show  that  job  vacancies  have  been  rising  quickly,  reaching  a  record
470,000  last  autumn. And  we  hear  from  business  leaders  that  many  of  these  vacancies  are
going unfilled because they cannot find workers with the right skills. To have companies looking
for so many skilled workers is surely a sign of a strong economy. It shows the need for more
targeted  education,  as  well  as  on-the-job  training  programs  that  the  employer  tailors  to  fill  a
specific need.
But another important way to fill job vacancies is a process that economists call labour market
churn. Basically, churn describes the way people switch to jobs that better match their skills and
experience.  Churn  falls  sharply  during  recessions,  because  people  are  less  likely  to  take  a
chance on a new opportunity and companies are more inclined to hold onto their skilled workers.
However, in periods of strong growth and rising wages, we often see people who are already
employed become more willing to leave their current position and switch to a higher-paying job.
When one person takes that step, he or she leaves an opening that needs to be filled. A period of
job switching follows, where people move into better employment. Ultimately, people who have
been outside the labour force then see more opportunities and can be drawn back in.
Of course, we will never have a perfect matching of all workers and jobs. The regional nature of
our  economy  means  the  perfect  job  to  match  a  person’s  skills  and  experience  might  be
thousands of kilometres away. Further, there are still too many barriers that prevent workers in
one province from moving to a job in another province.
Labour market churn is a highly complex process that is difficult to predict. So is the creation of
new economic supply through investment prompted by strong demand or new firm creation. But
it should be clear that there are likely to be significant economic benefits associated with allowing
the economy to find its way to a higher, more productive economic equilibrium, if this can happen
within our inflation-targeting regime. We cannot know in advance how far the capacity-building
process can go, but we have an obligation to allow it to occur.
This is why the Bank has been careful to explain that it cannot take a mechanical approach to
policy in this context, even though we believe that interest rates are likely to move higher over
time. In fact, we have described this as a risk-management process. If the economy builds more
supply than usual, that will put downside risk on inflation; if less, that will create upside risk to
inflation, and it is our job to balance those risks.
Of  course,  these  are  not  the  only  issues  we  are  watching  closely.  My  colleague,  Deputy
Governor Tim Lane, listed many of these in his progress report speech last week. The issues
include  heightened  uncertainty  about  future  US  trade  policies,  changes  in  inflation  dynamics,
wage behaviour and the impact of interest rates on the economy, given high levels of household
debt.  In  this  situation,  we  will  remain  cautious  in  considering  future  policy  adjustments  and
dependent on incoming data to guide our assessments.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The future of work
So far, I have been talking about the untapped potential in today’s economy. Let me now say a
few words about the future of work, and what theory and history suggest may be in store.
We are at the start of what has been called the fourth industrial revolution. The integration of
digital technologies in virtually every part of our lives is just getting started. Like all revolutions in
human history, we can expect it to cause some significant dislocations. And like all economic
progress since the beginning of time, it will involve creative destruction.
The first industrial revolution saw the introduction of the steam engine and led to the first factories
and urbanization. This spawned the Luddite movement—textile workers who fought against the
technology that threatened their livelihood.
In  the  second  industrial  revolution,  electricity  and  the  internal  combustion  engine  changed  the
way goods could move around the globe. Countries began to specialize more, and international
trade became key to connecting supply and demand.
In the third industrial revolution, advances in computing power and communications technology
led  to  breakthroughs  in  the  way  information  could  be  stored,  processed  and  transmitted.  The
associated advances in global logistics enabled even greater specialization in production—the
development  of  global  supply  chains—making  the  world  even  more  dependent  on  trade  to
connect supply and demand.
Importantly, all of these revolutions caused hardship for people in industries that were disrupted.
Yet, the enormous gains in productivity and the advances these new technologies spawned form
the basis of our modern economy.
Whenever  a  groundbreaking  technology  arrives,  a  predictable  pattern  follows.  The  technology
disrupts  existing  industries,  leading  to  job  losses.  Governments  can,  and  do,  have  in  place
safety-net policies to cushion the blow for people directly affected. And, as I mentioned before,
new  companies  will  exploit  these  technologies  to  create  new  types  of  jobs  and  entirely  new
industries.  The  hockey-stick  growth  and  productivity  gains  help  boost  income,  which  flows
throughout the entire economy. This in turn increases demand in every sector of the economy,
creating new job opportunities and raising living standards.
Let me give an example from Canada’s history. At Confederation, 151 years ago, about half of
working Canadians were employed in agriculture in one form or another. As new technologies
disrupted farming, fewer people were needed on the farm, yet farm output continued to expand.
The same technologies created new opportunities for those who moved to cities. By the 1920s,
only one-third of Canadians were still involved in agriculture. By the 1950s, that figure was down
to 15 per cent and, today, it is less than 2 per cent. And, yet, agricultural output has more than
tripled over the past century.
Here at the start of the fourth industrial revolution, new applications are creating jobs that were
unimaginable just a few years ago. When most of us were kids, we did not dream about what we
would create with a 3-D printer, because 3-D printing had not been invented yet. Ten years ago,
there  were  no  smartphone  app  developers,  or  cloud  computing  engineers  or  social  media
managers.
It is human nature to focus on the negative. So, when we think about autonomous vehicles, for
example, people tend to dwell on the jobs that will begin to disappear for truckers and taxi drivers.
Clearly, governments need to support people who bear the brunt of technological change.
At the same time, we need to remember the positives—all the new jobs that will be created and
the people who will be needed to build these vehicles, to write their software, to maintain the
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
fleets once they are built, to redesign and construct roads, to coordinate traffic and so on. What
is  more,  truly  creative  entrepreneurs  will  think  about  new  ways  to  apply  this  technology,  for
example, to boost independence and productivity for many people living with disabilities.
Beyond this, we also need to remember the income-generating effect of these new jobs. The
higher incomes that are generated create demand, not just in the new sectors but also for other
goods  and  services  throughout  the  economy,  including  such  ordinary  things  as  housing  and
home renovations. This income-generating effect is likely one factor behind Canada’s strong job
growth last year in sectors such as manufacturing and construction—jobs where the required
skills  are  not  too  far  removed  from  those  required  in  sectors  of  the  economy  that  are  being
disrupted.
The  bottom  line  is  this:  throughout  history,  technological  advances  have  always  led  to  rising
productivity and living standards, and they have always created more jobs than they destroyed.
This is not to understate the pain that disruption can cause for individuals—we owe it to them to
work hard to create pathways forward, so all can participate in the evolving economy.
Conclusion
It is time for me to conclude.
The Bank of Canada has plenty of reasons to care about the state of the labour market. It has
become a good deal healthier over the past year or so, but we still see some slack remaining.
We expect to see increased investment—both in existing and brand new companies—as well as
labour market churn create more supply through higher productivity and employment. However,
these uncertain processes entail both upside and downside risks to inflation, and our monetary
policy remains particularly data-dependent as we balance those risks.
Of course, we are watching issues other than the state of the labour market and the evolution of
supply. Yet, even with all the unknowns, there is good reason to be optimistic about the Canadian
economy. These are exciting times. New opportunities, new technologies and new industries are
all waiting right around the corner. The students here today will be the ones who will shape the
future, with the tools developed through their imagination and ingenuity. I cannot wait to see how
it turns out.
I would like to thank Russell Barnett for his help with this speech.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
