Grant Spencer: Getting the best out of macro-prudential policy
Speech by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to INFINZ,
Auckland, 13 March 2018.
Introduction
 It is five years since we first introduced macro-prudential policy in the form of loan-to-value ratio
(LVR) restrictions in October 2013. It is time now to take a step back and review the experience
with this new policy framework.
Indeed we are committed to undertake such a review under the Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU)  on  Macro-prudential  Policy  that  was  signed  with  the  Minister  of  Finance  in  2013.  The
review will be undertaken jointly with Treasury as part of the Government’s broader review of the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act.
You  will  hear  a  wide  range  of  views  on  the  LVRs  from  a  number  of  perspectives  –  some
favourable and some less so. From the Reserve Bank’s perspective, the LVRs have assisted us
in achieving our economic and financial stability objectives. The LVRs have reduced housing-
related risk in the banking system and also helped to ease housing market pressures. The policy
has  been  particularly  useful  in  the  current  environment  of  globally  low  interest  rates,  where
domestic monetary policy has been unable to counter the strong housing cycle of recent years.
But do we have the most appropriate macro-prudential framework for our circumstances in New
Zealand?    What  role  could  the  other  instruments  in  our  toolkit  play  to  enhance  and/or
complement the LVRs? Should we be considering other macro-prudential instruments?  Is the
governance structure sensible?   There are diverse views on these questions.
With the review of the macro-prudential framework ahead of us, my intention today is to consider
the key issues that might be addressed and to offer some thoughts, based on our experience, for
options  to  improve  the  policy  framework.  I  have  been  closely  involved  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s
development  and  implementation  of  macro-prudential  policy  and  I  am  keen  to  see  macro-
prudential policy continue to develop as a credible and sustainable policy over the longer term. 
I will first discuss the New Zealand and international experience with macro-prudential policy, and
some  of  the  lessons  we  have  learned.    I  will  then  make  some  observations  and  suggestions
aimed at putting macro-prudential policy on a more systematic and sustainable footing. These
are my own views and are not a formal Reserve Bank position.
The New Zealand Experience
As set out in the MoU, the objective of our macro-prudential policy is to increase the resilience of
the  financial  system  to  credit,  asset  price  and  liquidity  shocks,  with  a  secondary  outcome  of
moderating the credit cycle. The four macro-prudential instruments – the countercyclical capital
buffer (CCB), sectoral capital overlays, the core funding ratio, and limits on high LVR mortgage
lending – are designed to provide additional buffers to the financial system on top of the baseline
prudential settings in periods of cyclical pressure. Given the potential impact and public profile of
the framework, the MoU requires the Reserve Bank to consult with the Government prior to the
use  of  the  macro-prudential  instruments.  Accountability  has  been  supported  by  our  regular
reporting on macro-prudential developments in our biannual Financial Stability Reports.
The first set of LVR limits in October 2013 was motivated by our concern about increasing risks
in the housing market and the associated trends in high-LVR lending by banks. Our view was
that increasing household indebtedness and a build-up of housing credit risk on banks’ balance
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
sheets, combined with an increasing degree of stretch in house prices, was making the financial
system increasingly vulnerable to a sharp correction in the housing market. The initial response
of  the  market  to  this  first  round  of  limits,  in  terms  of  housing  credit  growth  and  house  price
inflation, was encouraging. But further pressures and growing risks, particularly in Auckland, led
the Bank to refine the LVR policy in 2015 and again in late 2016. More recently, the moderation in
the  housing  market  and  associated  financial  stability  risks  have  allowed  us  to  begin  a  staged
easing of the policy, although we remain cautious in the face of ongoing housing shortages.
Based on this experience, our assessment is that the LVRs have had transitory effects on the
rate of house price inflation but have had sustained beneficial effects on the resilience of banks’
and households’ balance sheets. The share of outstanding mortgages with an LVR greater than
80  percent  has  steadily  trended  down  as  a  result  of  the  LVR  policy,  from  21  percent  in
September 2013 to 7 percent in December 2017.  Recent Reserve Bank estimates suggest that
1
banks’ credit losses from a severe housing downturn could be reduced by around 20 percent.  
Also, with larger equity buffers, fewer households would be under pressure to sell their house or
cut back on consumption in such a downturn.
Overall, I believe the LVR policy is regarded as a qualified success.  While it has its critics, it has
also  won  considerable  support  amongst  policy  makers,  the  public  and  the  banks.  The  banks
have  recognised  the  benefit  of  an  external  industry  constraint  that  prevents  an  escalation  of
mortgage risk as banks compete for market share through greater risk taking.  I take five broad
lessons from the experience with macro-prudential policy to date.
First, it is a policy that can reliably improve banking system resilience, on a sustained basis, but
that has limited capacity to influence asset prices. The latter should not surprise us given the
wide range of factors that influence asset prices more generally.
Second,  and  arising  from  the  first,  macro-prudential  policy  should  always  have  a  prudential
purpose, and be modest in its ambition. It should not seek to control housing or financial cycles. It
should  seek  to  build  resilience  to  these  cycles  while  at  the  same  time  lean  against  the
extremities of those cycles. 
Third, to improve transparency and understanding, macro-prudential policy should have a well-
understood  and  systematic  framework  for  policy  adjustments  that  is  fully  consistent  with  the
underlying prudential framework.
Fourth,  there  is  a  need  to  build  and  sustain  support  for  the  macro-prudential  framework  –
amongst  politicians,  the  public  and  the  banks  themselves.    To  succeed  long  term,  macro-
prudential  policy  must  gain  broad  acceptance,  along  the  lines  of  monetary  policy.  Part  of  the
challenge here is that many observers assume the main objective of macro-prudential policy is
to stabilise asset price and credit growth rather than build financial system resilience.
Fifth, a good infrastructure is required to support macro-prudential policy. The Reserve Bank has
invested heavily in better measurement and analysis of housing and rural credit risk. This has
had positive spin-offs for prudential policy more broadly.  
International Experience
The  countries  we  look  to  for  lessons  about  our  own  policy  are  those  with  similar  banking
systems and with a propensity for housing cycles – such as Australia, Canada, Ireland, and the
UK. The latter three have been active in macro-prudential policy for several years while Australia
has been a more recent starter. The experience of these countries tends to reinforce the lessons
I have mentioned. 
In Ireland, the Central Bank sees borrower-based macro-prudential policies as an integral part of
mitigating systemic risk from housing. Over time the Irish policy has been tailored to address
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
both the collateral (LVR) and serviceability (loan to income ratio (LTI)) dimensions of borrower
risk, with separate limits on each dimension for different categories of borrowers. The flexibility of
the policy means the Central Bank can proactively respond to risks it sees in different segments
of the mortgage market. The CBI commits to annually publish a review of the effectiveness and
2
calibration of its macro-prudential policy.
In  the  Bank  of  England’s  case,  they  place  a  limit  on  high  LTI  lending.  This  is  seen  as  an
‘insurance’ policy, with the calibration currently set at a non-binding level. The aim of the measure
is  to  prevent  a  deterioration  in  lending  standards,  not  necessarily  to  actively  lean  against
mortgage lending at present.  In a similar vein, the UK Financial Policy Committee’s approach to
setting the CCB is to maintain it at a positive, neutral level, and to stand ready to either raise or
lower it in line with the Committee’s assessment of aggregate risks to the system.  Further the
CCB  is  seen  as  an  important  signalling  device  –  underlining  the  FPCs  view  on  the  evolving
shape of systemic risk in the UK system.
3
4
We  should  also  consider  the  evidence  and  analysis  of  the  IMF  and  other  international  bodies
which have reviewed macro-prudential experiences across a number of countries.   While few
macro-prudential regimes have been tested through a full financial cycle, evidence suggests that
macro-prudential policies have limited success in leaning against asset price and credit growth
cycles,  particularly  during  strong  upswings.  The  key  benefit  of  capital  and  borrower-based
macro-prudential  tools  is  from  the  buffers  they  create  which  help  to  build  system  resilience
against potential shocks.
5
Regarding the shape of operating and governance frameworks for macro-prudential, there is no
clear  convergence  on  operating  models  and  the  sharing  of  responsibilities  between  different
parts of government. However, there is a growing consensus on the desirability of:
a clear assignment of the macro-prudential mandate and powers;
well-defined policy objectives that are modest as to what macro-prudential policy can and
should achieve;
the  need  for  high  quality  analysis  and  monitoring  of  systemic  risks  to  support  decision-
making; and
transparency and accountability mechanisms that support policy legitimacy.
Taken together, these elements  of  a  macro-prudential  framework  will  tend  to  support  both  an
ability and a willingness to act on the part of the macro-prudential authority.
It is also important to clearly articulate the processes underlying the policy framework, including
the  links  between  the  tools,  the  intermediate  targets  of  a  policy  intervention,  and  the  ultimate
stability  goal.  In  doing  so,  macro-prudential  authorities  can  improve  public  understanding  and
6
build an enduring constituency for financial stability.
The  IMF’s  recent  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programme  (FSAP)  benchmarked  the  New
Zealand macro-prudential framework against their view of emerging best practice.  The report
noted  approvingly  the  Bank’s  clear  mandate  for  financial  stability,  independence  of  the  Bank’s
decision-making process, and a demonstrated willingness to act.  Key recommendations of the
report were to further clarify the respective roles of the Bank and the Minister when considering
variations to the framework, such as inclusion of a debt to income (DTI) instrument in the toolkit,
and to continue to enhance accountability mechanisms.
7
What does all this mean for the New Zealand framework going forward?  I will first discuss the
policy instruments and then turn to the governance framework.
The Policy Instruments
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I doubt there is a single set of instruments that will always be relevant to meet evolving macro-
financial risks.  However, based on our own and international experience, I expect that both LVRs
and some form of debt servicing instrument will become part of the macro-prudential “furniture”
over  time.  They  represent  the  two  key  risk  factors  in  mortgage  lending,  and  I  expect  housing
cycles will continue to be an ongoing (but variable) source of systemic risk in the NZ financial
system.
The Counter Cyclical Capital Buffer (CCB) is likely to remain as part of the Basel 3 framework
and is commonly used internationally, including as a signalling device. While it has not yet been
activated in NZ, it could be given closer consideration when the Reserve Bank comes to look at
minimum  capital  ratios  as  part  of  its  broader  review  of  bank  capital  requirements.    The  Core
Funding  Ratio  (CFR)  is  an  existing  (micro)  prudential  policy  instrument.  It  currently  requires
banks to have at least 75% of their funding in “Core” instruments such as retail deposits. While
not yet used as a macro-prudential tool, it could easily and usefully be activated in response to an
increase in system-wide liquidity risk. The Sectoral Capital Ratio (SCR) has not been used to
date but would seem a potentially useful additional buffer against increasing risk in a particular
sector such as housing or dairy.  
Whatever instruments are relevant for the toolkit through time, I believe the upcoming Review
should consider a structure for macro-prudential instruments which allows them to be “off’ or
“on”  through  time,  but  where  they  remain  established  within  banks’  reporting  and  compliance
systems. These instruments relate to risk metrics that we expect banks to keep track of, whether
or not they are subject to ceilings or floors.  Macro-prudential policy would adjust back to ‘neutral’
or non-binding settings when no heightened risk is present and no policy constraint is intended. 
This  sort  of  structure  already  exists  for  the  CFR  and  the  CCB,  since  changes  to  these
instruments would overlay existing core funding and capital requirements. Neutral settings for the
LVRs and other instruments would be a matter for future analysis and consultation.
With  ‘neutral’  settings,  banks  would  not  need  to  remove/add  the  operational  frameworks  as
policies  are  turned  on  and  off.  Rather  they  would  just  need  to  adjust  the  settings  of  existing
policies.  The public would become increasingly familiar with the policies and the potential for
changes to settings.  Policy changes would become easier to implement and to communicate. 
In  principle,  macro-prudential  policy  would  follow  a  more  transparent  and  systematic  process
that looks more like our monetary policy process. Such an approach would be more amenable to
the analysis and assessment necessary for effective policy accountability.
While we stated at the outset in 2013 that LVRs would be temporary, I believe there is a case to
consider maintaining a policy infrastructure of this sort, with policies being adjusted through time
between binding and non-binding settings. This is similar to the ‘insurance’ approach adopted by
the Bank of England where a loan to income ceiling has been set at a non-binding level. One
aspect that would need to be considered carefully before moving in this direction would be any
increased risk of avoidance activity.
Regarding the contents of the policy tool-kit, the mix of instruments should slowly evolve through
time.  In  the  present  economic  and  financial  environment  I  support  retention  of  the  four
instruments listed in the MOU (LVRs, CCB, CFR, SCR) and the addition of a carefully designed
debt  to  income  (DTI)  or  debt  servicing  instrument.  You  will  recall  that  the  Bank  consulted  on
including a DTI instrument in the toolkit last year.  That process was overtaken by the general
election and a decision on inclusion or otherwise was deferred to the upcoming Macro-Prudential
Review.  The DTI is a natural complement to the LVR, focused on reducing the risk of borrower
default.  Many macro-prudential authorities overseas view some form of debt servicing ratio as a
key  anchor  and  safeguard  for  macro-financial  stability.  The  Review  should  give  serious
consideration to adding such an instrument to the toolkit.
Governance
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The current macro-prudential MoU gives decision making powers to the Governor, but commits
the Reserve Bank to prior consultation with the Minister and Treasury. The development of any
new  instruments  is  undertaken  in  consultation  with  the  Treasury  and  also  includes  public
consultation. In the case of policy adjustments, consultation with the banks is required ahead of
implementation. So the present governance model for macro-prudential policy has the Reserve
Bank in the driving seat, but requiring extensive consultation with Government and the public, in
particular when considering new instruments.
In  the  upcoming  review  of  macro-prudential  policy,  and  of  the  Reserve  Bank Act,  it  will  make
sense to integrate the intent of the current MoU into the Reserve Bank Act.  At present, macro-
prudential policy operates under the same high-level financial stability objective, and relies on the
same prudential powers, as conventional prudential policy. This has worked effectively to date
and I believe it is important to retain this common ground between the two policies, in particular
the same high level prudential purpose. However, the Review will be taking a fresh look at the
detail of the governance architecture, including operational objectives, policy guidance, prudential
powers, decision making and accountability mechanisms. In working through these areas it will
be important to allow for the differences between micro and macro-prudential policy.
What are these differences, and how might they be reflected in a revised governance structure? 
I see two key differentiating characteristics of macro-prudential policy: first, macro-prudential only
addresses  significant  systemic  shocks,  not  idiosyncratic  day-to-day  shocks;  and  second,
macro-prudential has a stabilisation role (albeit a secondary one) as it seeks to moderate cyclical
extremes in credit growth and asset prices.
Thinking about where the micro/macro-prudential differences might be reflected in a revised Act,
the first is in objectives. Current objectives for the Reserve Bank’s broad financial stability role
(sections 1A and 68 of the Act) are  focussed  on “promoting the maintenance of a sound and
efficient  financial  system”.  The  Bank  is  also  required  to  have  regard  to  any  statement  of
Government policy on the Bank’s functions issued by the Minister (section 68B). The objectives
and policy guidance for macro-prudential are consistent with this but more specific.  The current
MoU objective is:
“to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  domestic  financial  system  and  counter  instability  in  the
domestic financial system arising from credit, asset price or liquidity shocks.”
Guiding principles for macro-prudential in the MOU include the principle of supporting monetary
policy where possible and being fully consistent with micro prudential policy. The objective and
guidance from the MoU should be lifted into the Act and potentially enhanced, for example with
the principle that macro-prudential policies should be applied uniformly across all banks.
Further elements of the governance regime might include: a list of areas that macro-prudential
policies  could  be  applied  to ,  e.g.  capital,  loan  to  value  ratios,  debt  servicing  capacity;  and
potentially a PTA-like document that would express operational objectives agreed from time to
time  with  the  Government  of  the  day.  I  expect  the  technical  details  of  the  macro-prudential
instruments would continue to be set out in the Banking Supervision handbook.
8
The specific characteristics of macro-prudential that I have mentioned  ̶   the common ground
with  micro-prudential  policy  and  its  stabilisation  role   ̶     point  to  the  macro-prudential  mandate
remaining with the Reserve Bank. There are significant synergies across the micro and macro-
prudential functions, and the stabilisation aspect requires a macro-analysis capability and degree
of coordination with monetary policy. The IMF in its 2017 FSAP report underlines this point and
supports  the  Reserve  Bank  having  responsibility  for  macro-prudential  –  but  with  full
accountability.  They  point  out  that  shared  responsibility  models,  where  macro-prudential
decisions are made jointly by councils (e.g. made up of the ministry of finance, central bank and
regulatory agencies), often suffer from inaction bias.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
An important further aspect of governance is decision-making. Given the planned introduction of
a  new  decision  making  committee  (MPC)  for  monetary  policy,  the  Review  should  consider
establishing a financial policy committee (FPC) for decisions relating to both micro and macro
prudential policy.  The Reserve Bank has supported a two-committee (MPC/FPC) model in place
of the current single Governing Committee, for example in the Bank’s 2017 “Briefing for Incoming
9
Minister”.  
I  would  expect  an  FPC  to  have  overlapping  membership  with  the  MPC,  at  least  including  the
Governor. However, it would likely include internal financial policy experts who do not sit on the
MPC.  Externals could be included on the FPC, although the complexity of the subject matter, the
high volume of prudential decisions, and the need to avoid conflicts of interest would severely
limit  the  number  of  viable  candidates.  Unlike  in  the  UK  where  there  are  separate  micro  and
macro-prudential committees, it would be sensible in the New Zealand context to have a single
FPC that covers all prudential/regulatory policy issues. This would help to ensure consistency
between the micro and macro-prudential policy frameworks. The FPC would be responsible for
all decisions involving changes to the prudential/regulatory framework and also give guidance to
the Governor on the shape of the Reserve Bank’s supervisory framework. Potentially the FPC
could be a sounding board for important supervisory actions with respect to individual financial
institutions. However, such operational decisions can be highly complex and, in stress situations,
very time-critical. They should therefore continue to be the final responsibility of the Governor.
The FPC would need to be held accountable for its micro and macro-prudential decisions.  This
would  continue  to  be  achieved  through  scrutiny  by  the  Reserve  Bank  board  on  behalf  of  the
Minister; by the Parliament through FEC; and by the public and financial markets through policy
consultations  and  transparent  reporting.  The  six-monthly Financial  Stability  Report  would
continue  to  be  an  important  accountability  document,  supported  by  speeches  and,  potentially,
published FPC minutes.
As I mentioned, the information infrastructure will play a crucial role. There have been significant
improvements in the information collections since the advent of macro-prudential policy in 2013.
The increasing richness of data and analysis will continue to play a crucial role in underpinning
macro-prudential decision making and the associated accountability structure.
Conclusion
In conclusion, there is a broadly held view that macro-prudential policy has been a useful addition
to  the  financial  policy  toolkit  since  its  introduction  in  2013.  While  having  limited  scope  to
sustainably  influence  credit  and  asset  price  cycles,  macro-prudential  rules  have  significantly
improved the resilience of banks’ balance sheets to potential housing market shocks.
With  the  upcoming  Review  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  financial  policy  framework,  it  is  timely  to
consider ways in which macro-prudential policy may be improved and more broadly accepted. 
We  need  to  get  the  best  out  of  macro-prudential  policy  and  position  it  as  a  lasting  policy
framework.
We  have  close  to  five  years  of  experience  to  draw  on.  Key  lessons,  reinforced  by  the
international experience, are that macro-prudential policy must be modest in its ambitions and
always  have  a  prudential  rationale.    Macro-prudential  policy  cannot  be  used  simply  to  try  and
manage the housing cycle.  It must be applied consistently and backed by sound analysis, with
transparent reporting and accountability.
In  anticipation  of  the  Review  I  have  presented  some  thoughts  on  how  the  macro-prudential
framework may be improved, through a more systematic approach to policy adjustments, and a
clearer  articulation  of  the  governance  structure  within  the  Reserve  Bank Act.  Such  changes,
including  potentially  a  new  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC),  should  assist  in  gaining  public
understanding and help to put macro-prudential policy on a sound footing for the future.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Macro-prudential is a very new policy framework that has filled an important policy gap.  It needs
to be given the best chance of future success.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
See  Box A  in  the  November  2017 Financial Stability Report. Since banks’ risk weights are designed to be
proportionate to the riskiness of their lending, the decline in the high-LVR share has reduced the regulatory
capital buffers held against these loans. To counter this, the Reserve Bank has separately increased capital
requirements for high-LVR and investor mortgages since 2013.
See Central Bank of Ireland (2017), Review of residential mortgage lending requirements.
See, for example, Bank of England (2017), Financial Stability Report, November 2017.
See Bank of England (2016), The Financial Policy Committee’s approach to setting the countercyclical capital
buffer.
See IMF-FSB-BIS (2016) Elements of Effective Macroprudential Policies: Lessons from International Experience.
See,  for  example,  CGFS  (2016), Objective-setting and communication of macroprudential policies,  and  Gai
(2017), The Design, Implementation and Governance of Macroprudential Policy.
IMF (2017), New Zealand Financial Sector Assessment Program: Technical note – Macroprudential institutional
framework and policies.
Along the lines of section 78 in the current Act.
2017 Briefing to the Incoming Minister
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
