Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de  Guindos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  13  September
2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels at least
through the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued
sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we will continue to make net purchases
under the asset purchase programme (APP) at the current monthly pace of €30 billion until the
end  of  this  month. After  September  2018,  we  will  reduce  the  monthly  pace  of  the  net  asset
purchases  to  €15  billion  until  the  end  of  December  2018  and  we  anticipate  that,  subject  to
incoming data confirming our medium-term inflation outlook, we will then end net purchases. We
intend to reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP for
an extended period of time after the end of our net asset purchases, and in any case for as long
as  necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation.
The incoming information, including our new September 2018 staff projections, broadly confirms
our previous assessment of an ongoing broad-based expansion of the euro area economy and
gradually  rising  inflation.  The  underlying  strength  of  the  economy  continues  to  support  our
confidence  that  the  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  to  our  aim  will  proceed  and  will  be
maintained even after a gradual winding-down of our net asset purchases. At the same time,
uncertainties  relating  to  rising  protectionism,  vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets  and  financial
market volatility have gained more prominence recently. Significant monetary policy stimulus is
still  needed  to  support  the  further  build-up  of  domestic  price  pressures  and  headline  inflation
developments over the medium term. This support will continue to be provided by the net asset
purchases until the end of the year, by the sizeable stock of acquired assets and the associated
reinvestments,  and  by  our  enhanced  forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest  rates.  In  any
event,  the  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  adjust  all  of  its  instruments  as  appropriate  to
ensure  that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  the  Governing  Council’s  inflation  aim  in  a
sustained manner.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP increased by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2018, following
growth at the same rate in the previous quarter. Despite some moderation following the strong
growth performance in 2017, the latest economic indicators and survey results overall confirm
ongoing broad-based growth of the euro area economy. Our monetary policy measures continue
to underpin domestic demand. Private consumption is supported by ongoing employment gains,
which,  in  turn,  partly  reflect  past  labour  market  reforms,  and  by  rising  wages.  Business
investment  is  fostered  by  the  favourable  financing  conditions,  rising  corporate  profitability  and
solid demand. Housing investment remains robust. In addition, the expansion in global activity is
expected to continue, supporting euro area exports.
This  assessment  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  September  2018  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
projections for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 2.0% in
2018,  1.8%  in  2019  and  1.7%  in  2020.  Compared  with  the  June  2018  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised down slightly for
2018 and 2019, mainly due to a somewhat weaker contribution from foreign demand.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook can still be assessed as broadly balanced. At
the  same  time,  risks  relating  to  rising  protectionism,  vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets  and
financial market volatility have gained more prominence recently.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 2.0% in August 2018,
down from 2.1% in July. On the basis of current futures prices for oil, annual rates of headline
inflation are likely to hover around the current level for the remainder of the year. While measures
of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally  muted,  they  have  been  increasing  from  earlier  lows.
Domestic  cost  pressures  are  strengthening  and  broadening  amid  high  levels  of  capacity
utilisation and tightening labour markets, which is pushing up wage growth. Uncertainty around
the  inflation  outlook  is  receding.  Looking  ahead,  underlying  inflation  is  expected  to  pick  up
towards  the  end  of  the  year  and  thereafter  to  increase  gradually  over  the  medium  term,
supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  continuing  economic  expansion  and  rising
wage growth.
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  September  2018  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections  for  the  euro  area,  which  foresee  annual  HICP  inflation  at  1.7%  in  2018,  2019  and
2020, which is unchanged from the June 2018 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth declined to 4.0% in July 2018, from
4.5% in June. Apart from some volatility in monthly flows, M3 growth is increasingly supported by
bank credit creation. The narrow monetary aggregate M1 remained the main contributor to broad
money growth.
The recovery in the growth of loans to the private sector observed since the beginning of 2014 is
proceeding. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations stood at 4.1% in July
2018, while the annual growth rate of loans to households stood at 3.0%, both unchanged from
June.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to
significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  access  to  financing  –  in
particular for small and medium-sized enterprises – and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal policies, the broad-based expansion calls for
rebuilding fiscal buffers. This is particularly important in countries where government debt is high
and for which full adherence to the Stability and Growth Pact is critical for safeguarding sound
fiscal positions. Likewise, the transparent and consistent implementation of the EU’s fiscal and
economic governance framework over time and across countries remains essential to bolster
the resilience of the euro area economy. Improving the functioning of Economic and Monetary
Union remains a priority. The Governing Council urges specific and decisive steps to complete
the banking union and the capital markets union.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
