Juyeol  Lee:  Opening  address  -  2018  Bank  of  Korea  International
Conference
Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the 2018 Bank of Korea International
Conference, Seoul, 4 June 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It is a pleasure for me to bid a warm welcome to you all, to the 2018 Bank of Korea International
Conference. I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to Professor Robert Hall, of Stanford
University,  and  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  former  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  who  will  deliver
keynote  speeches  this  morning,  and  to  all  of  our  distinguished  moderators,  speakers  and
discussants. Let me also say how deeply I appreciate the invaluable contributions of Professor
Thomas Sargent to this conference, all the way from the planning stage.
This year marks a decade since the Global Financial Crisis upon the failure of Lehman Brothers.
The global economy suffered the worst crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s, and was
long unable to recover from the recession that followed. Fortunately, the global economy is now
reemerging from the aftermaths of the crisis: growth has gained momentum, and the markets
have stabilized. This is a result of many countries’ work in cooperation to make their financial
systems more stable. It is also due to their unprecedentedly bold and active monetary policies to
support the recovery.
Central  banks  are  now  working  to  normalize  the  post-crisis  policies.  The  environment  for
monetary policy has also changed significantly from the one prior to the crisis. In this differing
environment, therefore, we have inevitably come to a position to consider how to perform our
existing roles, as well as whether there are any new roles demanded to us.
Let me start by talking about some of these changes in the monetary policy environment facing
many central banks today, and about the policy concerns arising from them. 
First are the concerns about the changing slope of the Phillips Curve. Prior to the crisis, a fall in
unemployment during recovery tended to result in a rise in inflation: that is, the Phillips Curve
used  to  slope  downward  in  the  short-run.  However,  we  are  now  having  doubts  about  this
relationship, hence are facing difficulties in deciding the policy.  
Secondly, there are concerns that the neutral rate of interest－an important guiding measure for
policy stance－may have fallen significantly. A lower neutral interest rate means that we have
smaller room for policy rate cuts in face of the economic downturn. It makes the interest rate
more  likely  to  reach  its  lower  bound,  making  it  difficult  for  us  to  address  business  cycles.
Furthermore, the neutral rate may continue to stay low, due to the long-term factors such as
population aging, declining productivity and increasing preference for safe assets. 
Thirdly, we now need to consider outward spill-overs of one’s monetary policy, together with the
“spill-backs” to one’s own economy. Countries now have closer trade and financial relations than
ever, so that the impact of major economies’ policies on international financial markets and the
world economy comes back to influence themselves. For instance, we saw in 2013 during the
Taper Tantrum that the Fed’s signal to change its monetary policy stance caused sudden capital
outflows  from  emerging  economies  and  global  financial  market  unrest.  Recently  also,  the  US
interest  rate  hikes  and  the  stronger  US  dollar  have  contributed  to  financial  unrest  in  some
emerging economies. As advanced economies normalize their monetary policies going forward,
these sudden capital outflows and market unrest can recur at any time. 
These changes in the monetary policy conditions pose challenges shared by many countries.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Across the world, we see considerable amount of ongoing discussion about how central banks
should respond. Hoping to see a similarly valuable discussion in this conference, I would like to
make a few remarks.  
First  of  all,  we  will  have  to  find  ways  to  keep  monetary  policy  effective  even  in  this  new
environment. When central banks in advanced economies saw policy rates reach the zero lower
bound, they mobilized a variety of unconventional measures. We yet need further research that
details  the  conditions  for  successful  large-scale  asset  purchases,  forward  guidance  and
negative interest rates, as well as their long-term effects. We also need to talk about whether
countries other than those with a key currency can use such unconventional measures as part of
the monetary policy toolkit, and if not, about what are their policy alternatives. 
Moreover, to keep our policies effective, we will have to work even further on communication.
People  feel  greater  uncertainty  about  our  policies  as  both  the  policy  environment  and  the
responses are changing, possibly making our monetary policy less effective and less credible.
Central banks need to communicate their policies more actively to reduce these uncertainties
and  manage  peoples’  expectations.  We  also  need  to  think  about  how  we  can  do  so  more
efficiently, given today’s widespread use of online and social media. 
Additionally, we need to realize the limitations of monetary policy and actively pursue a proper
policy  mix.  In  general,  government  spending  does  not  crowd  out  demand  by  much  during
demand slowdowns as it did not, for example, right after the financial crisis, so that an expansive
fiscal policy together with accommodative monetary policy can achieve macroeconomic stability
more  effectively.  Macroprudential  policy  is  crucial  as  well.  In  a  low-growth low-inflation
environment, financial imbalances are likely to build up as the monetary policy tends to mainly
aim  at  economic  recovery.  To  secure  financial  stability －another  important  goal  of  monetary
policy－it is indispensable to coordinate monetary policy with macroprudential policy. 
Honored guests, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Due  to  the  recent  changes  in  economic  structures  and  financial  environment,  our  monetary
policy is facing new challenges never experienced before. I look forward to seeing here－through
the active exchange of your views for two days－many policy options proposed to help overcome
the  challenges  that  monetary  policy  is  facing.  And  I  hope  that  all  of  us,  at  the  end  of  the
conference, will have gained some profound insights about how central banks will continue to
evolve into the future. 
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
