Mario Draghi: IMFC Statement
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  thirty-seventh
meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington DC, 20 April 2018.
 The euro area economy has been expanding robustly, with growth broad-based across countries
and sectors. The economy grew by 2.8% in year-on-year terms in the fourth quarter of last year,
according  to  the  latest  estimate.  This  strong  performance  has  translated  into  notable
improvements in the labour market. The unemployment rate in the euro area has dropped to its
lowest level since 2008, while the number of people employed has increased by almost eight
million since mid-2013. Notwithstanding the latest economic indicators, which suggest that the
growth cycle may have peaked, the growth momentum is expected to continue.
Domestic  demand  remains  the  mainstay  of  the  ongoing  recovery,  underpinned  by  the  ECB’s
monetary  policy  measures.  Private  consumption  is  supported  by  employment  gains  and
increasing  household  wealth.  Business  investment  has  strengthened  amid  improvements  in
corporate  profitability,  very  favourable  financing  conditions  and  solid  demand.  In  addition,  euro
area exports are benefiting from the broad-based global expansion.
The latest ECB staff projections put annual real GDP growth at 2.4% in 2018, 1.9% in 2019 and
1.7%  in  2020.  While  recent  data  releases  have  overall  been  weaker  than  expected,  risks  to
growth  remain  broadly  balanced.  Downside  risks  continue  to  be  related  primarily  to  global
factors, including rising protectionism. The latter may have already had some negative impact on
global sentiment indicators. In this context, preserving free and open trade that is underpinned by
multilateral cooperation is crucial to foster a favourable global economic environment.
While  headline  inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  been  somewhat  volatile  in  recent  months,  this
largely reflects the impact of base effects in energy and food inflation. Measures of underlying
inflation  remain  subdued  overall,  but  are  expected  to  rise  gradually  over  the  medium  term,
supported by the ECB’s monetary policy measures and in line with the ongoing re-absorption of
economic slack and rising wage growth. The latest ECB staff projections point to annual euro
area headline inflation of 1.4% in 2018, 1.4% in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020. Exchange rate volatility
and financial conditions represent sources of uncertainty which require monitoring with regard to
their possible implications for the medium-term outlook for price stability in the euro area.
Looking  ahead,  while  our  confidence  in  the  inflation  outlook  has  increased,  remaining
uncertainties still warrant patience, persistence and prudence with regard to monetary policy. An
ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  remains  necessary  for  underlying  inflation  pressures  to
continue  to  build  up  and  support  headline  inflation  developments  over  the  medium  term.
Accordingly,  our  net  asset  purchases  are  intended  to  run  at  the  current  monthly  pace  of  €30
billion  until  the  end  of  September  2018,  or  beyond,  if  necessary,  and  in  any  case  until  the
Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation
aim.  Furthermore,  the  ECB  will  continue  to  reinvest  the  principal  payments  from  maturing
securities for an extended period of time after the end of the net asset purchases, and in any
case for as long as necessary. Finally, the Governing Council continues to expect the key ECB
interest rates to remain at their present levels for an extended period of time, and well past the
horizon of the ECB’s net asset purchases.
The  condition  and  resilience  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector  has  continued  to  improve.  The
aggregate Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of significant institutions in the euro area stood at 14.3%
at the end of the third quarter of 2017, up from 13.7% a year earlier. Euro area banks also saw
their profitability improve in 2017, in part supported by the robust economic expansion and the
limited  cost  of  risk.  Continued  efforts  to  address  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  resulted  in  an
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
overall decrease in the NPL ratio for banks under ECB supervision from 6.5% to 5.2% in the third
quarter of 2017. Notwithstanding these positive developments, a number of structural challenges
continue  to  dampen  banks’  profitability  prospects.  These  include,  to  varying  degrees  across
countries and banks, cost inefficiencies, excess capacity and a lack of income diversification,
while NPLs still remain high in some countries. In this context, a comprehensive action plan for
dealing with legacy asset quality issues has been adopted by the Council of the European Union
and is now being followed up by EU and national authorities. The ECB has published guidance to
banks  on  NPLs,  including  its  supervisory  expectations  for  the  prudential  provisioning  of  new
NPLs. Furthermore, in cases where Level 3 assets are material for specific banks, we continue
to devote significant attention to potential valuation issues through both our off-site and on-site
supervisory processes.
With  respect  to  financial  stability  more  broadly,  the  economic  recovery  has  improved  the
resilience not only of banks but also of the non-financial sector in the euro area. Private sector
debt  ratios  have  declined  in  recent  years.  There  are  so  far  no  indications  of  excessive  credit
growth or broad-based asset price misalignments in the euro area. However, developments in
asset  prices  require  close  monitoring  as  risk-taking  continues  to  gain  momentum  in  financial
markets and valuations are becoming stretched in some market segments. The ECB expects
the national macroprudential authorities in the euro area to remain vigilant and continue to use
the macroprudential policy instruments at their disposal to counteract any emerging risks when
necessary. On its part, the ECB will contribute within its macroprudential mandate.
The positive developments in the euro area are not independent of the global growth momentum.
Open  trade,  investment  and  sustainable  financial  flows  play  a  key  role  in  the  cross-border
diffusion  of  new  technologies  that  drive  forward  efficiency  improvements.  They  need  to  be
underpinned  by  effective  multilateral  cooperation,  both  in  the  field  of  trade  and  in  financial
regulation and supervision, to help avoid major disruptions in global financial stability. Preserving
openness is crucial if the global economy is to thrive and to secure its growth potential.
In the euro area, decisive contributions from areas beyond monetary policy remain necessary to
raise  the  longer-term  growth  potential  and  reduce  vulnerabilities.  The  current  favourable
economic conditions, in a politically stable environment, should help euro area countries to step
up the implementation of reforms and thereby spur innovation and investment, further creating
new jobs and reducing unemployment. A full and consistent application of the EU’s economic
governance framework, including the European Semester and the  macroeconomic  imbalance
procedure, remains crucial to effectively incentivise national ownership of structural reforms. The
current  solid  economic  expansion  also  calls  for  fiscal  buffers  to  be  rebuilt  in  line  with  the
requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact. The full and consistent implementation of the Pact
is  essential  to  ensure  credibility  and  confidence  in  the  EU  fiscal  framework,  to  rebuild  fiscal
buffers  in  national  budgets  for  potential  challenges  ahead  and  to  safeguard  public  debt
sustainability. This is particularly important in countries where government debt remains high. In
addition, all euro area countries would benefit from intensifying efforts towards achieving a more
growth-friendly composition of public finances.
The Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) should be strengthened, first by implementing what
has already been agreed  and  finishing  the  common  projects  we  have  started:  completing  the
banking  union,  strengthening  the  governance  and  the  operational  capacity  of  the  European
Stability  Mechanism  and  building  a  capital  markets  union.  At  the  same  time  work  needs  to
continue on designing and establishing a time frame for an effective and incentive-compatible
euro area stabilisation function. A more complete EMU will be the foundation for a stable and
resilient euro area economy contributing to global economic growth and financial stability.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
