Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 25 January 2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, first of all let me wish you a Happy New Year. The Vice-President and I
are very pleased to welcome you to our press conference. We will now report on the outcome of
today’s meeting of the Governing Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-
President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the  key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels for an
extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we confirm that our net asset purchases,
at the new monthly pace of €30 billion, are intended to run until the end of September 2018, or
beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment
in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. If the outlook becomes less favourable, or if
financial conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in
the path of inflation, we stand ready to increase the asset purchase programme (APP) in terms
of  size  and/or  duration.  The  Eurosystem  will  reinvest  the  principal  payments  from  maturing
securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time after the end of its net asset
purchases,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary.  This  will  contribute  both  to  favourable
liquidity conditions and to an appropriate monetary policy stance.
Incoming information confirms a robust pace of economic expansion, which accelerated more
than expected in the second half of 2017. The strong cyclical momentum, the ongoing reduction
of  economic  slack  and  increasing  capacity  utilisation  strengthen  further  our  confidence  that
inflation will converge towards our inflation aim of below, but close to, 2%. At the same time,
domestic  price  pressures  remain  muted  overall  and  have  yet  to  show  convincing  signs  of  a
sustained  upward  trend.  Against  this  background,  the  recent  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate
represents  a  source  of  uncertainty  which  requires  monitoring  with  regard  to  its  possible
implications for the medium-term outlook for price stability. Overall, an ample degree of monetary
stimulus remains necessary for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up and support
headline  inflation  developments  over  the  medium  term.  This  continued  monetary  support  is
provided  by  the  net  asset  purchases,  by  the  sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets  and  the
forthcoming reinvestments, and by our forward guidance on interest rates.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Real
GDP increased by 0.7%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 2017, following similar growth
in the second quarter. The latest economic data and survey results indicate continued strong and
broad-based growth momentum at the turn of the year. Our monetary policy measures, which
have  facilitated  the  deleveraging  process,  continue  to  underpin  domestic  demand.  Private
consumption  is  supported  by  rising  employment,  which  is  also  benefiting  from  past  labour
market reforms, and by growing household wealth. Business investment continues to strengthen
on  the  back  of  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  rising  corporate  profitability  and  solid
demand. Housing investment has improved further over recent quarters. In addition, the broad-
based global expansion is providing impetus to euro area exports.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook are assessed as broadly balanced. On the
one  hand,  the  prevailing  strong  cyclical  momentum  could  lead  to  further  positive  growth
surprises  in  the  near  term.  On  the  other  hand,  downside  risks  continue  to  relate  primarily  to
global factors, including developments in foreign exchange markets.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.4% in December 2017, down from 1.5% in November.
This  reflected  mainly  developments  in  energy  prices.  Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current
futures prices for oil, annual rates of headline inflation are likely to hover around current levels in
the  coming  months.  For  their  part,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  subdued  –  in  part
owing to special factors – and have yet to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend.
Yet, looking forward, they are expected to rise gradually over the medium term, supported by our
monetary policy measures, the continuing economic expansion, the corresponding absorption of
economic slack and rising wage growth.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with
an annual rate of growth of 4.9% in November 2017, after 5.0% in October, reflecting the impact
of the ECB’s monetary policy measures and the low opportunity cost of holding the most liquid
deposits. Accordingly, the narrow monetary aggregate M1 continued to be the main contributor to
broad money growth, expanding at an annual rate of 9.1% in November, after 9.4% in October.
The recovery in the growth of loans to the private sector observed since the beginning of 2014 is
proceeding. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 3.1% in
November  2017,  after  2.9%  in  October,  while  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households
stood at 2.8% in November, compared with 2.7% in October. The euro area bank lending survey
for the fourth quarter of 2017 indicates that loan growth continues to be supported by increasing
demand and a further easing in overall lending conditions.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to
significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  access  to  financing  ‒
notably for small and medium-sized enterprises ‒ and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from 
for  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but
close to, 2%.
the  monetary  analysis  confirmed 
the  need 
the 
to  strengthening 
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  decisively 
longer-term  growth  potential  and  reducing
vulnerabilities.  The  implementation  of structural reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be
substantially stepped up to increase resilience, reduce structural unemployment and boost euro
area  productivity  and  growth  potential.  Regarding fiscal  policies,  the  increasingly  solid  and
broad-based  expansion  strengthens  the  case  for  rebuilding  fiscal  buffers.  This  is  particularly
important  in  countries  where  government  debt  remains  high. All  countries  would  benefit  from
intensifying efforts towards achieving a more growth-friendly composition of public finances. A
full,  transparent  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the
macroeconomic  imbalance  procedure  over  time  and  across  countries  remains  essential  to
increase the resilience of the euro area economy. Strengthening Economic and Monetary Union
remains a priority. The Governing Council welcomes the ongoing discussions on completing the
banking union and the capital markets union, and on further deepening Economic and Monetary
Union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
