  Opening remarks by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the launch of the Project Khokha report 
 Sandton Convention Centre, Johannesburg 
5 June 2018 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. 
 On behalf of the South  African Reserve Bank (SARB), I would like to extend a sincere 
and warm welcome to everyone here today on the occasion of the launch of the report on 
Project Khokha, which had as its scope the trial of interbank wholesale settlement using 
distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT).  This  was  our  first  DLT  initiative;  its  aim  was  to 
contribute to the global initiatives that assess the application and use case for DLT.  
 I  am  pleased  to  confirm  that  Project  Khokha  was  successful  in  that  it  proved  that  the 
typical daily  volume of the South African payments system could be processed in less 
than  two  hours  with  full  confidentiality  of  transactions  and  settlement finality.  This  was 
done  using  ISO1  20022  standard  messages  within  two  seconds  across  a  network  of 
distributed nodes and with the requisite resilient distributed consensus. 
 The SARB is pleased that so many of you have taken the time out of your busy schedules 
to join us today. We appreciate that there is great interest in this work, both locally and 
from abroad. 
                                                 
1 International Organization for Standardization 
 Page 1 of 4 
I will make brief introductory remarks and then hand over to the Governor of the SARB, 
Mr Lesetja Kganyago, to deliver the keynote address. 
 My remarks centre around three observations.  
 Barely six months ago, I could not have imagined that we would successfully trial the use 
of DLT to process high-value transactions. This was in part because I am acutely aware 
of  the  challenges  involved  in  building  wholesale  payments  capabilities  and  appreciate 
that, and proofs of concept can be both complex and take time to develop. As an example, 
the  requirements  for  such  an  endeavour  need  to  be  carefully  defined,  prioritised,  and 
mapped 
into 
functional  and 
technical  specifications.  Furthermore, 
the  coding, 
development and testing required is an intense and laborious exercise. Add to that the 
challenge of integration between multiple participants one comes to an appreciation why 
such initiatives are often multi-year projects.  
 The design, building and delivery of Project Khokha happened in less than three months. 
This  is  a  noteworthy  achievement.  It  is  evident  that  the  pace  of  innovation  and 
technological  development  requires  a  shift  to  this  new  ‘agile  design  approach’  which 
demands  fast  turnaround.  After  all,  the  mantra  of  financial  technology,  or  ‘fintech’,  is 
‘design flexibly, fail fast and succeed sooner’. This rapid prototyping and agile process to 
trial  new  ways  of  innovating  in  financial  services  is  rapidly  becoming  the  norm.  As 
regulators, we are keenly aware that the days of playing catch-up with often long lags are 
no longer appropriate as such an approach may allow for systemic risk to build and for 
market conduct failures to go unchecked.  
 Project Khokha is therefore significant as it has demonstrated that regulatory institutions 
are  indeed  capable  of  responding  to  the  rapidly  changing  environment  with  agility, 
flexibility  and  speed.  The  insights  gained  will  also  be  beneficial  in  other  areas  of  the 
SARB’s activity which extend beyond fintech initiatives.  
  Page 2 of 4 
My  second  observation  is  that  the  success  of  complex  projects  is  built  on  strong 
collaboration – even in the trial or prototyping phase. This goes beyond the collaboration 
between participants; this also involves connecting with experts on ongoing unresolved 
challenges. For example, reaching settlement finality on DLT was a major issue not long 
ago. With the speed of change and a dedicated global effort, issues such as these are 
addressed over shorter timeframes as compared to the past. 
 I am proud to announce that Project Khokha has contributed to the global DLT body of 
knowledge as it is thought that this was the first time that the Istanbul Byzantine Fault 
Tolerance consensus mechanism and the Pedersen commitments for confidentiality had 
been  used  with  Quorum.  This  helped  to  ensure  that  the  tokenised  rand  remained  a 
legitimate transaction during transfer, and it assisted with the honouring of participants’ 
privacy and confidentiality requirements. 
 It is evident that, in this new digital economy with potentially decentralised architecture, 
progress  is  made  by  gradually  crossing  new  frontiers  and  by  extending  concepts  and 
solutions.  There  is  little  doubt  that  DLT  has  huge  potential,  but  that  it  equally  has  a 
substantial  road  ahead  before  large-scale  adoption  across  multiple  interconnected 
systems  can  be  considered.  Much  more  work  is  required,  and  collaboration  is  of  vital 
importance as it deepens the collective knowledge base in an area where there is great 
variability in understanding due to the speed at which the technology is changing.  
 There  is  huge  expectation  among  the  broader  financial  services  community  around 
emerging exponential technologies such as blockchains and distributed ledgers. Multiple 
trials  across  many  different  industries  across  the  globe  are  taking  place.  As  South 
Africans, we should be active participants in leveraging innovation and technology to drive 
efficiencies within our financial system in order to reduce frictions. We furthermore should 
leverage the immense social and welfare benefits that these developments may deliver 
while ensuring that financial stability is not compromised. 
  Page 3 of 4 
Finally,  while  contributing  to  these  efforts,  we  should  be  careful  not  to  treat  emerging 
technologies  as  a  panacea  for  every  problem.  Whereas  rapid  prototyping  brings  the 
benefit  of  gaining  practical  insights  and  a  deeper understanding,  critically  reflecting  on 
what works and what doesn’t is an important aspect of the journey. Complex networked 
ecosystems  encompass  multiple  dimensions:  policy,  legislation,  economics,  process, 
governance,  business  and,  of  course,  legacy.  The  economists  will  remind  us  of  the 
‘stickiness’ and integrated nature of path-dependent systems. I would thus encourage all 
of us to continue to trial new approaches with vigour, but equally to be frank about the 
applicability and appropriateness of new emerging architectures.  
 Finally, let me take this opportunity to thank the Project Khokha team that has  led this 
effort. Many thanks to the banking participants, the ConsenSys and PwC2 teams, and of 
course  the  numerous  SARB  colleagues  and  departments  that  have  been  actively 
involved. Special thanks to Mr Edward Leach, the business owner, and to Dr Arif Ismail, 
Mr Gerhard van Deventer and Mr Anrich Daseman of the FinTech Unit.  
 With that, I would like to hand over to Governor Kganyago to reflect on the advent of the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution, the emergence of fintech, as well as the SARB’s role amidst 
all these changes. The team will then take us through specific detail on Project Khokha, 
its main findings and potential future work.  
 Thank you. 
                                                
2 PricewaterhouseCoopers Inc 
 Page 4 of 4 
