Guy Debelle: Risk and return in a low rate environment
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Financial
Risk Day 2018, Sydney, 16 March 2018.
 Thanks  to  Christian  Vallence  for  his  input  and  to  Tomas  Cokis,  David  Halperin  and  Paul
Hutchinson for the volatility analysis.
Today I am going to talk about some issues around risk and return in a low rate environment, in
line with the theme of the conference. I am going to highlight questions that strike me as worth
asking about the way return and risk are reflected in the current configuration of asset prices. I
will suggest some considerations worth thinking about in trying to answer those questions from
the  investor  side.  I  will  also  describe  how  issuers  have  adjusted  their  strategies  to  avail
themselves of the low rate environment.
One of the main points I would like to make is that the low interest rate structure underpins many
asset prices. That is, asset prices which might look expensive are more reasonably priced given
that the rate structure currently is at historically low levels. So in my view, a fundamental question
that  you  need  to  think  about  as  an  investor  is:  will  the  current  rate  structure  remain  at  these
levels, or will it return to the higher levels we have seen in the past? If the rate structure remains
near historic lows, then valuations can persist. But if it rises, then asset valuations need to be
reassessed. The second and related question is: what is the risk that such a shift in the rate
structure occurs and am I being adequately compensated for that risk?
Low interest rates
I am going to use the rate structure in the US, and particularly the yield on a US 10-year Treasury
bond to illustrate the shift in the rate structure (Graph 1).
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
As you are all aware, in the wake of the financial crisis and the sharp decline in global growth and
inflation,  monetary  policy  rates  round  the  world  were  reduced  to  historically  low  levels.  In  a
number of countries (Australia being one notable exception), the policy rate was lowered to its
effective lower bound, which in some cases was even in negative territory.
In part reflecting the low level of policy rates and the slow nominal growth post crisis, long-term
bond  yields  also  declined  to  historically  low  levels.  10-year  government  bond  yields  in  some
countries,  including  Germany,  Japan  and  Switzerland  have  been  negative  at  various  times  in
recent years. In 2015, over US$14 trillion of sovereign paper had negative yields.
For the past decade, the yield structure in the US has been lower than at any time previously. Let
me put in context the current excitement about the 10-year yield in the US reaching 3 per cent. In
the three decades prior to 2007, the low point for the yield was 3.11 per cent.
All this goes to say that we have been living in a period of unusually low nominal bond yields. How
long will this period last?
One way to think about this question is to ask whether what we are seeing is the realisation of a
tail event in the historical distribution of interest rates.  While this tail event has now lasted quite a
long time, if you thought it was a tail event, then you would expect yields to revert back to their
historical mean at some point. You also wouldn’t change your assessment of the distribution of
future realisation of interest rates.
1
On the other hand, it might be the case that the yield structure has shifted to a permanently lower
level because of (say) secular stagnation resulting in structurally lower growth rates for the major
economies for the foreseeable future. If this were the case, you would change your assessment
of future interest rate outcomes.
I don’t know the answer to this question, but it has material implications for asset pricing.
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
As I said earlier, the prices of many assets could be broadly validated if you believe the low rate
structure  is  here  to  stay.   This  is  because  the  lower  rate  structure  means  that  the  rate  with
which you discount expected future returns on your asset is lower and hence the asset price is
higher for any given flow of future earnings.
2
The current constellation of asset prices seems to be based on the view that the global economy
can grow strongly, with associated earnings growth, but that strong growth will not lead to any
3
material increase in inflationary pressure.
You might want to question how long such a benign conjuncture could last. Current asset pricing
suggests that the (average) expectation of market participants is that it will last for quite a while
yet.
It is also worth pointing out that it is possible that a move higher in interest rates occurs alongside
higher expected (nominal) dividends because of even higher real growth. If this were to occur it
would not necessarily imply that asset prices have to adjust. It would depend upon the relative
movements in earnings expectations and interest rates; that is, the numerator and denominator
4
in the asset price calculation.
5
How might we know whether the distribution of interest rates has shifted? One can think of the
interest rate distribution as being anchored by the neutral rate of interest. I talked about this in the
Australian context last year.  As I said then, empirically the neutral rate of interest is difficult to
estimate. It is even harder to forecast. The factors which affect it are often slow moving. But
sometimes they aren’t, most notably around the time of the onset of the financial crisis in 2007–
08,  when  estimates  of  the  neutral  rate  declined  rapidly  and  significantly.  Currently,  there  is  a
debate in the US as to whether the neutral rate of interest has bottomed and is shifting up. This
raises the question as to the degree and speed with which such a movement in the neutral rate
in the US might translate globally.
All of these questions highlight to me the inherent uncertainty about the future evolution of interest
rates. One might decide that interest rates are going to continue to remain lower for longer, but I
struggle to see how one can hold that view with any great certainty. Yet there appears to me to
be very little, if any, compensation for this uncertainty in fixed income markets. Most estimates of
the term premium in the 10-year US Treasuries are around zero, or are even negative (Graph 2).
Investors are not receiving any additional compensation for holding an asset with duration.
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
That is, one can have different views about the longevity of the current rate structure.  But, in part
reflecting  these  different  views  about  longevity  as  well  as  the  unusual  nature  of  the  current
environment,  there  is  a  significant  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the  future.  Yet  many  financial
prices do not obviously offer any compensation for that uncertainty.
Low volatility
6
It’s not only in the term structure of interest rates where compensation for uncertainty is low.
Measures of implied volatility indicate that compensation for uncertainty about the path of many
other financial prices is also low, and has been low for some time. This has been true across
short and long time horizons, across countries, including Australia, across asset classes, and
across individual sectors within markets (Graph 3 and 4). I will discuss some of the possible
explanations  for  this,  drawing  on  material  published  in  the  RBA’s  February Statement  on
Monetary Policy, and also discuss the recent short-lived spike in volatility in equity markets.
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
  5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Implied volatility is derived from prices of financial options. Just as the term premium measures
compensation  for  uncertainty  about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates,  implied  volatility  reflects
uncertainty about the future price of the asset(s) underlying a financial option. The more certain
an investor is of the future value of the underlying asset, or the higher their risk tolerance, the
lower the volatility implicit in the option’s price will be.
Thus, one interpretation of the recent low level of volatility is that market participants have been
more  confident  in  their  estimates  of  future  outcomes.  This  is  consistent  with  the  observed
reduction in the variability of many macroeconomic indicators, such as GDP and inflation, and a
decline  in  the  frequency  and  magnitude  of  the  revisions  that  analysts  have  made  to  their
forecasts of such variables (Graph 5). Given the importance of these variables as inputs into the
pricing of financial assets, it’s no surprise that greater investor certainty about their future values
has in turn given investors more certainty about the future value of asset prices.
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
As you can see from all three graphs, a similar degree of certainty about the future was present
in the mid 2000s, when there was a high degree of confidence that the ‘Great Moderation’ was
going to deliver robust growth and low inflation for a number of years to come.
Monetary policy is also an important input into the pricing of financial assets, so a reduction in the
perceived  uncertainty  around  central  bank  policy  settings  may  also  have  contributed  to  low
financial market volatility. Monetary policy settings have been relatively stable in recent years, and
where central banks have adjusted interest rates or their purchases of assets, these changes
have  tended  to  be  gradual  and  clearly  signalled  in  advance.  Central  banks  have  also  made
greater use of forward guidance as a policy tool to attempt to provide more certainty about the
path of monetary policy.
But while central banks might act gradually and provide this guidance, the market doesn’t have to
believe the guidance will come to pass. There are any number of instances in the past where
central  bank  forward  guidance  didn’t  come  to  pass.  In  my  view,  it  is  more  important  for  the
market to have a clear understanding about the central bank’s reaction function. That is, how the
central bank is likely to adjust the stance of policy as the macroeconomic conjuncture evolves. If
that  is  sufficiently  clear,  then  forward  guidance  does  not  obviously  have  any  large  additional
benefit, and runs the risk of just adding noise or sowing confusion.
Hence  an  explanation  for  the  low  volatility  could  be  the  assumption  of  a  stable  macro
environment  together  with  an  understanding  of  central  bank  reaction  function,  rather  than  the
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
effect of forward guidance per se.
The low level of implied volatility could also reflect greater investor willingness to take on financial
market risk. This is consistent with measures that suggest demand for derivatives which protect
against uncertainty has declined. It is also consistent with other indicators of increased investor
appetite for financial risks, such as the narrowing of credit spreads. This increased risk appetite
may in part reflect the low yield environment of recent years; protection against uncertainty is not
costless, and so detracts from already low returns.
There has also been an increased interest in the selling of volatility-linked derivatives by investors
to  generate  additional  returns  in  the  low  yield  environment  in  recent  years.  Effectively,  some
market participants were selling insurance against volatility. They earned the premium income
from those buying the insurance whilever volatility remains lower than expected, but they have to
pay out when volatility rises. In recent years, there was a steady stream of premium income to
be had. (This is even more so if I were a risk neutral seller of insurance to a risk-averse buyer, in
which  case,  the  expected  value  of  the  insurance  should  be  positive.)  But  the  payout,  when  it
came, was large. I will come back to this shortly in discussing recent developments.
This reduced demand for volatility insurance combined with increased supply saw the price fall.
Such an extended period of low volatility is not unprecedented, although the recent episode was
among  the  longest  in  several  decades  (Graph  6).  Prolonged  periods  of  low  volatility  have
sometimes been followed by sudden increases in volatility – although generally not to especially
high levels – and a repricing of financial assets. A rise in volatility could be associated with a
reassessment of economic conditions and expected policy settings, in which case, one might
not expect the rise to last that long. In contrast, a structural shift higher in volatility requires an
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
increase in uncertainty about future outcomes, rather than simply a reassessment of them. But
just as I find it puzzling that term premia in fixed income markets have been so low for so long, I
similarly  find  it  puzzling  that  measures  of  volatility  do  not  seem  to  embody  much  uncertainty
either.
The  recent  spike  in  volatility  in  early  February  is  interesting  in  terms  of  the  market  dynamics,
7
coming as it did after a prolonged period of low volatility.
From around September 2017, there had been a rise in bond yields, most notably in the US, as
confidence about the outlook for the US and global economy continued to improve. This rise in
yields accelerated in January 2018, again most notably in the US, in large part in response to the
passage of the fiscal stimulus there. As Graph 7 shows, the rise in Treasury yields in the first
part  of  this  year  reflected  both  a  rise  in  real  yields  and  compensation  for  inflation.  This
reassessment  of  the  macroeconomic  outlook  was  also  reflected  in  a  reassessment  (albeit
relatively small) of the future path of monetary policy in the US. It is also worth noting that the real
yield can incorporate any risk premium on the underlying asset. So the recent rise may also be a
result of a change in the assessment of investors about the riskiness of US Treasuries.
In light of the reassessment of the macro environment it was somewhat surprising that through
the month of January, equity prices in the US rose as strongly as they did. As I discussed at the
outset of this speech, I would expect that a shift upwards in the structure of interest rates would
result in a repricing of asset prices more generally. In late January, this indeed is what happened:
equity prices declined, again most sharply in the US. There was a sharp rise in volatility. The
initial rise in volatility was exacerbated by the unwinding of a number of products that allowed
retail investors (and others) to sell volatility insurance, and the hedging by the institutions that had
offered those products to their retail customers. Indeed, unwinding is a euphemism as, in some
cases,  the  retail  investor  lost  all  of  their  capital  investment.  Having  seen  the  legendary  Ed
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Kuepper  and  the  Aints  again  last  Friday,  it’s  worth  remembering  to  “Know  Your  Product”,
otherwise it will be “No, Your Product”.
What is particularly noteworthy about this episode is how much the rise in volatility, and the large
movements  in  prices,  was  confined  to  equity  markets.  While  volatility  rose  in  other  asset
classes, it did not increase to particularly noteworthy levels. For example, there was relatively
little spillover to emerging markets. This is in stark contrast to similar episodes in the past. The
fact that these products were particularly associated with volatility in US equity prices appears to
have contributed to the limited contagion. Also noteworthy is how short-lived the rise in volatility
has been (to date). In discussions with market participants, one possible cause of this is that the
unwinding  of  volatility  positions  has  been  largely  confined  to  the  retail  market,  which  was
relatively  small  in  size.  There  does  not  seem  to  have  been  much  adjustment  in  the  volatility
exposures of large institutional market participants to date.
That said, it is conceivable that this episode gives a foretaste of the sort of market dynamics that
might occur if there were to be a further rise in yields as the market reassesses the outlook for
output and, particularly, inflation.
Demand and supply dynamics
Another consideration in thinking about future developments in the yield structure is the balance
of demand and supply in the sovereign debt market. It is often difficult to assess the degree of
influence that demand and supply dynamics have on the market. But there are some noteworthy
developments occurring at the moment that are worth highlighting.
Graph 8 shows the net new debt issuance by the governments of the US, the euro area and
Japan, and the net purchases of sovereign debt by their respective central banks. It shows that
the peak net purchases by the official sector occurred in 2016. This happens to coincide with the
low point in sovereign bond yields, but I would not attribute full causation to that. The central bank
purchases are a reaction to the macroeconomic conjuncture at the time which itself has a direct
influence  on  the  yield  structure.  That  said,  one  of  the  main  aims  of  the  central  bank  asset
purchases was to reduce the term premium.
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  in  2018,  there  is  going  to  be  a  net  supply  of  sovereign  debt  to  the  market  from  the  G3
economies for the first time since 2014. This reflects a few different developments. The Federal
Reserve  started  the  process  of  reducing  the  size  of  its  balance  sheet  last  year  by  not  fully
replacing maturing securities with new purchases. While this is a very gradual process, it is a
different dynamic from the previous eight years. At the same time, the US Treasury will issue
considerably more debt than in recent years to finance the US budget deficit, which has grown
from  2  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2015  to  over  5  per  cent  in  2019  as  the  Trump  administration
implements its sizeable fiscal stimulus.
In  Europe,  the  fiscal  position  is  gradually  improving,  but  the  ECB  has  started  the  process  of
scaling back its purchases of sovereign debt, with some expectation these might cease entirely
at the end of the year. In Japan, the Bank of Japan is still undertaking very large purchases of
Japanese  Government  debt,  which  are  larger  even  than  the  sizeable  net  issuance  to  fund
Japan’s fiscal deficit.
Meanwhile,  there  is  no  expectation  of  significant  reserve  accumulation  by  central  banks  or
sovereign  asset  managers,  which  can  often  take  the  form  of  sovereign  debt  purchases. And
financial  institutions,  which  have  been  significant  accumulators  of  sovereign  bonds  in  recent
years as they sought to build their liquidity buffers, are not expected to accrue liquid assets to the
same extent again in the foreseeable future.
So the net of all of this is that some of the demand/supply dynamics in sovereign bond markets
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
will be different this year from previous years. For a number of years, central banks purchased
duration from the market, but that is in the process of reversing. In that regard, an issue worth
thinking about is that the central banks don’t manage their duration risk in their bond holdings at
all.  Nor  do  they  rebalance  their  portfolios  in  response  to  price  changes,  unlike  most  other
investors  whose  actions  to  rebalance  their  portfolios  back  to  their  benchmarks  act  as  a
stabilising influence.
An  additional  issue  worth  thinking  about  is  that,  through  its  purchases  of  mortgage-backed
securities, the US Federal Reserve removed much of the uncertainty associated with the early
prepayment  of  mortgages  by  homeowners  by  absorbing  the  impact  of  prepayments  on  the
maturity profile of its bond portfolio. Private investors typically hedge this risk, and their hedging
activity contributes to volatility in interest rates. As the Fed winds down its balance sheet, it is
putting  this  negative  convexity  risk  back  in  the  hands  of  private  investors,  and  the  associated
interest rate volatility will return to the market.
Issuance in a low rate environment
To date I have been discussing developments in the rate structure from the perspective of the
investor. But it is also interesting to examine how issuers have responded to the historically low
rate structure.
Graph 9 shows that many issuers have responded to the low rate structure, and particularly the
absence of any material term premium, by lengthening the maturity of their debt, aka “terming
out”. Moreover, lower interest rates on their new issuance have resulted in the average duration
of their debt rising by even more.
The  first  two  panels  show  that  is  true  of  most  sovereigns.  The  Australian  governments,
Commonwealth and State, have proceeded along this path. The Australian Office of Financial
Management (AOFM) has significantly extended the curve in Australia, by issuing out to a 30-year
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
bond. A number of bonds have been issued well beyond the 10-year maturity, which was the
standard end of the yield curve for a number of years. This has also helped state governments to
increase the maturity of their issuance.
One  interesting  exception  to  the  general  tendency  to  term  out  their  debt  is  the  US  Treasury,
which is undertaking a sizeable amount of issuance at the short end of the curve.
Corporates have also termed out their debt. Some corporates have issued debt with maturities
as long as 50 years, which is interesting for at least two reasons. Firstly, a 50-year bond starts to
take on more equity-like features. Secondly, many corporates don’t even last 50 years.
The Australian banks have also availed themselves of the opportunity to term out their funding for
relatively  little  cost.  The  recently  implemented  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR)  further
incentivises them to do this. As my colleague Christopher Kent noted a couple of days ago, the
average maturity of new issuance of the Australian banks has increased from five years in 2013
to six years currently (Graph 10).  As with other issuers, this materially reduces rollover risk. The
banks have been able to issue in size at tenors such as seven or ten years that they historically
often thought to be unattainable at any reasonable price.
8
While the low rate structure has often been perceived to be a challenge from the investor point of
view,  it  has  been  an  opportunity  for  issuers  to  reduce  their  rollover  risk  by  extending  debt
maturities.
Conclusion
The structure of interest rates globally has been at an historically low level for a number of years.
This  has  reflected  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  associated  monetary  policy
response. If the global recovery continues to play out as currently anticipated, one would expect
that the monetary stimulus will unwind, which would see at least the short-end of yield curves
rise.
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, there have been factors behind the low structure of interest rates which are
difficult to understand completely and raise questions about its durability. I have discussed some
of them here today. In particular, I find it puzzling that there is little compensation for duration in
the  rate  structure.  While  there  are  explanations  for  why  interest  rates  may  remain  low  for  a
considerable period of time, there is minimal compensation for the uncertainty as to whether or
not  this  will  actually  occur. At  the  same  time,  equity  prices  embody  a  view  of  the  future  that
robust growth can continue without generating a material increase in inflation. Again, there is little
priced in for the risk that this may not turn out to be true.
The ongoing improvement in the global economy, together with the fiscal stimulus in the US has
caused some investors to question these views. If interest rates continue to rise without a similar
rise in expectations about future earnings growth, one would expect to see a repricing of other
assets, particularly equity markets. Such a repricing does not necessarily mean a major derailing
of the global recovery, indeed it is a consequence of the recovery, but it may have a dampening
effect.
At the same time, we need to be alert for the effect the rise in the interest rate structure has on
financial market functioning. The recent spike in volatility is one example of this. In my view, that
was a small example of what could happen following a larger and more sustained shift upwards
in the rate structure. The recent episode was primarily confined to the retail market. The large
institutional positions that are predicated on a continuation of the low volatility regime remain in
place. That said, I have expected that volatility would move higher structurally in the past and this
has turned out to be wrong. But I think there is a higher probability of being proven correct this
time.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See Kozlowski J, L Veldkamp, V Venkateswaran (2018), ‘The Tail that Keeps the Riskless Rate Low’, available
at , NBER Working Paper No. 24362.
One may also want to think about the relatively low level of spreads in a number of fixed income markets, as my
colleague Christopher Kent talked about earlier this week. In some markets (but not all), these spreads are
close to pre-financial crisis levels. See Kent C (2018), ‘Australian Fixed Income Securities in a Low Rate World’,
Address to the Debt Capital Markets Summit, Sydney, 14 March.
Note this scenario is at odds with a secular stagnation view of the world where future earnings growth would not
be strong.
Blanchard OJ (1981), ‘Output, the Stock Market and Interest Rates’, American Economic Review, Vol 71, Issue 1,
pp 132–143.
Debelle G (2017), ‘Global Influences on Domestic Monetary Policy’, Committee for Economic Development of
Australia (CEDA) Mid-Year Economic Update, Adelaide, 21 July.
To be clear, by the current rate structure, I don’t mean that the yield curve remains literally unchanged but rather
that short-term rates will evolve in line with the forward rates embedded in the current yield curve.
For a discussion of some of the market structure issues, see various posts over recent months under the title of
‘People are Worried that People aren’t Worried Enough’ in his Money Stuff blog’, available at , by Matt Levine, as
well as “VIX VapoRubOut’, available at ,”, blog post by Craig Pirrong aka the Streetwise Professor.
Kent C (2018), ‘Australian Fixed Income Securities in a Low Rate World’, Address to the Debt Capital Markets
Summit, Sydney, 14 March.
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
