   An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the National Asset and Liability Management Conference 
 London  
2 March 2018 
 Challenges for emerging-market central banks 
 Good  morning, ladies and gentlemen, and thank you for the opportunity to  address 
you on some of the challenges facing emerging-market central banks.  
 Since  the  most  recent  global  financial  crisis,  central  banks  have  faced  mounting 
challenges.  Not  only  were  they  at  the  forefront  of  saving  the  global  economy  from 
collapse; they were also seen as ‘the only game in town’ in restoring economic growth. 
Central banks also began to play a more pivotal role in ensuring financial stability in 
general. With these additional responsibilities and expectations, the independence of 
central banks became increasingly questioned, as financial regulation is considered 
by some to be primarily political in nature rather than technical.  
 The  economic  dimension  to  independence  is  also  of  importance,  particularly  in 
emerging-market economies.  
 My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  these  two  dimensions  of  independence  and  will 
consider  the  extent  to  which  emerging  markets  have  increased  their  resilience  in 
recent years. 
   Page 1 of 11 
 Political independence 
 The case for central-bank independence is based on the time inconsistency argument 
that politicians promise low inflation but are tempted to go for higher growth through 
expansionary monetary policies. An independent central bank, with a clear mandate 
to  maintain  price  stability  and  without  the  concerns  of  the  electoral  cycle,  is  better-
placed to focus on and achieve price stability.  
 The problem of ceding enormous power to unelected officials in democratic societies 
is  solved  by  distinguishing  between  goal 
independence  and  operational 
independence. In many countries, central banks have been granted the latter form of 
independence.  This  distinction  accords  neatly  with  an inflation-targeting  framework, 
where the goal of monetary policy – the inflation target – is set by law or by the elected 
government, and the central bank has to implement monetary policy and achieve the 
inflation target without political interference.  
 Pressures on central banks to use monetary policy to stimulate growth are not new. It 
is  generally  accepted  among  central  bankers  that  while  monetary  policy  can  affect 
cyclical growth, its ability to determine longer-term potential output is limited. Since the 
global financial crisis, we have seen the potential output estimates in many countries 
being  revised  downwards.  And  while  the  need  for  structural  reforms  has been  very 
clear in many countries too, the focus has been on monetary policy to sustain a growth 
recovery.  
 Concerted  central-bank  actions  were  probably  successful in  preventing a  full-blown 
global depression, but their ability to bring about a growth recovery was less certain. 
There were, at times, excessively high expectations as to what monetary policy could 
achieve  with  respect  to  growth,  and  failure  in  this  respect  had  the  potential  to 
undermine the credibility and legitimacy of monetary policy in general. In the event, 
recovery has taken some time, and it is only now that we are seeing a return to ‘normal’ 
growth rates on a sustainable basis. We have yet to see if the massive expansion of 
balance  sheets  and  the  high  levels  of  liquidity  generated  by  low  interest  rates  and 
 Page 2 of 11 
quantitative  easing  will  ultimately  lead  to  the  high  inflation  that  some  have  feared. 
While this is unlikely, it remains a risk. 
 The  global  crisis  originated  in  the  financial  sector  and  subsequently  required  a 
rethinking of  the  role  of  central  banks  with  respect  to  financial  stability.  Prior  to  the 
crisis, this responsibility was often not explicitly part of central-bank mandates. Since 
then, much has changed. And while there are differing approaches among countries, 
the tendency has increasingly been to locate this responsibility within central banks.  
 A financial-stability mandate becomes more complex when dealing with the issue of 
independence, as it does not fit neatly into the ‘goal versus operational independence’ 
dichotomy. What constitutes financial-stability goals is less clear-cut than in the case 
of monetary policy. In addition, the policies that are available to achieve or maintain 
financial  stability  often  require  cooperation  and  coordination  between  various 
regulatory authorities, including, at times, the fiscal authorities. A challenge for central 
banks  is  ensuring  that  monetary-policy  independence  is  not  undermined  in  the 
process.  This  is  particularly  the  case  in  the  event  of  conflicts  between  competing 
objectives.  
 Furthermore, macroprudential policies – for example caps on loan-to-value and loan-
to-income ratios and criteria for loan eligibility – often have a more visible distributional 
dimension, and financial-sector lobbies and interest groups are usually strong. As a 
consequence,  central  banks  have  unwittingly  been  thrust  more  squarely  into  the 
political  realm.  As  their  responsibility  for  financial  stability  increases,  central  banks 
could become increasingly politicized, more so than in the case of monetary policy. 
Macroprudential policies are often likened to taking the punchbowl away just as the 
party is starting. Such actions are never popular. 
 If  independence  is  to  be  maintained,  central  banks  need  to  foster  the  political 
consensus that underpins independence. This requires even greater transparency and 
accountability than in the case of monetary policy. Central banks also need to have 
the courage and political backing to make tough calls. There is always the danger that 
unhappiness with central-bank actions in the financial-stability field could undermine 
the credibility and legitimacy with respect to their core mandate of price stability. 
 Page 3 of 11 
 The issue of independence can also be related to central-bank balance sheets, which 
were  brought  under  greater  scrutiny  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  The 
balance  sheets  in  the  advanced  economies  expanded  dramatically  following  the 
extraordinary  monetary-policy  measures  undertaken  in  those  economies.  As  I  will 
elaborate on a little later, these actions also had implications for the balance sheets of 
central banks in the emerging markets.  
 It is generally agreed that central banks should not be too concerned about incurring 
losses or making profits on their balance sheets. These should be regarded as part of 
the broader government budget constraint. Furthermore, central banks do not have a 
profit motive but act in the broader interest of the economy. However, central banks 
that incur continuous losses may ultimately require recapitalization by government and 
may  consequently  bring  themselves  under  greater  political  scrutiny.  These  issues 
could divert attention from their core mandate.  
 The South African experience is perhaps instructive – although not unlike the problems 
faced by other emerging markets. The South African Reserve Bank recorded losses 
for  five  consecutive  years  from  2010,  mainly  attributable  to  reserve-accumulation 
activities. As capital flows to the emerging markets expanded as the search for yield 
intensified, many central banks attempted to ameliorate the impact on their currencies 
by buying reserves.  
 In  South  Africa’s  case,  we  stepped  up  reserve  accumulation  –  not  to  influence  the 
currency, but rather to add to what we considered to be a suboptimal level of reserves.  
 Whatever the motive, the impact on profitability is the same. With interest rates at the 
lower  bound  in  the  advanced  economies  and  typically  significantly  higher  in  the 
emerging markets, sterilization activities were conducted at a loss. Countries differ as 
to  how  they  treat these losses,  and  the  preferred  approach  often depends  on legal 
frameworks  and  institutional  structures.  It  can,  however,  in  some  instances  raise 
questions about central-bank activities, as they are often seen as ‘losing taxpayers’ 
money’ and putting independence at risk. 
  Page 4 of 11 
Monetary-policy independence 
 While  the  political  dimension  of  independence  remains  an  ongoing  challenge,  the 
issue of monetary-policy independence in the emerging markets has come to the fore 
again recently. This is against a backdrop of  what appears to be a turning point for 
global financial markets, following an extended period of low volatility and low interest 
rates  in  the  advanced  economies and an absence  of inflation  pressures.  For  some 
time  now,  the  world  has  been  anticipating  interest-rate  normalization  in  the  United 
States  (US)  in  particular.  To  date,  this  has  been  happening  at  a  very  slow  and 
measured pace, and has been well communicated.  
 Over  the  past  few  weeks,  global  financial  markets  have  reacted  to  the  prospect  of 
tighter-than-expected  monetary-policy  settings  in  the  US.  There  was  a widespread 
market reaction to the sharp drop in US equity prices and a large spike in the  VIX. 
After the initial bout of volatility, the markets appear to have stabilised somewhat, but 
they remain vulnerable to further changes in sentiment and perceptions of risk. It does 
seem, however, that the prolonged period of easy  money and highly liquid markets 
may be coming to an end, raising concerns about spillovers to the emerging markets 
who, as usual, are the innocent bystanders. 
 The current turbulence in global financial markets coupled with the return of volatility 
is in some ways reminiscent of the so-called ‘taper tantrum’ of 2013. After a number 
of years of interest rates at the zero bound and quantitative easing, the world suddenly 
faced the prospect of a withdrawal of stimulus. The mere suggestion that the Federal 
Reserve  System  (Fed)  was  considering  a  reduction  in  quantitative  easing  hit  the 
financial markets hard. Long bond yields ratcheted up in the US, raising fears that the 
nascent growth recovery would be reversed. In the event, the Fed had to allay fears 
of an excessively tight policy cycle and, in reality, what tightening has occurred since 
then has been very moderate and well communicated. 
 But while there are similarities to the taper tantrum, there are important differences as 
well. At that stage, it was only the US that was looking to tighten policy. Today, the 
cycle is more synchronised. There are expectations for a more aggressive tightening 
cycle in the US than had previously been priced in, and further interest-rate increases 
 Page 5 of 11 
are  expected  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  addition,  the  European  Central  Bank  is 
beginning  a  gradual  withdrawal  of  stimulus.  Monetary  policy  in  Japan  is,  however, 
expected to remain highly accommodative.  
 A further important difference between then and now is that, after a number of false 
starts,  the  growth  recovery  in  the  advanced  economies  appears  to  be  more 
entrenched and broad-based. This will be positive for the emerging markets.  
 There are also tentative signs that inflation may be on the rise as well, and the likely 
fiscal expansion in the US is also expected to provide some impetus. Wage growth in 
the  US,  which  has  been  surprisingly  subdued  despite  the  tighter  labour-market 
conditions, recently showed signs of increasing and contributed to much of the recent 
bout of volatility in the markets.  
 This  time  does  seem  to  be  different,  and  monetary-policy  tightening  appears  to  be 
more clearly countercyclical. 
 The market overreaction at the time of the taper tantrum in 2013 had a marked effect 
on a number of emerging markets, who had been the main beneficiaries of the capital 
flows  generated  by  the  highly  liquid  conditions.  Long  bond  yields  in  the  emerging 
markets  increased  and  currencies  depreciated  as  capital  flows  began  to  reverse. 
Monetary policies were generally tightened, although there were differences in timing 
and degree. 
 According to Eichengreen and Gupta1, the countries hit the hardest were those with 
wide fiscal and current-account deficits and open capital markets. South Africa fell into 
this  category,  along  with  Brazil,  India,  Indonesia,  and  Turkey  –  together  given  the 
dubious title of ‘the fragile five’. Since then, however, most emerging markets have 
adjusted significantly and are more resilient. But this resilience is currently being put 
to the test.  
                                                       
1 Eichengreen, B and Gupta, P. 2013. ‘Tapering talk: the impact of expectations of reduced Federal 
Reserve security purchases on emerging markets’. World Bank Working Paper No 6754 
 Page 6 of 11 
One of the clear lessons of the 2013 episode was that the emerging markets are not 
immune to monetary-policy developments in the advanced economies. This raises the 
question  as  to  whether  small  open  economies  (and  that  is  what  most  emerging 
markets  are)  can  conduct  monetary  policy  independently  of  developments  in 
advanced-economy  financial  markets.  The  traditional  Mundell–Fleming  model  has 
taught us that monetary policy cannot be conducted independently where exchange 
rates are fixed. However, flexible exchange rates were expected to provide insulation 
against  cross-border  spillovers.  Furthermore,  perfect  exchange-rate  flexibility  would 
obviate the need for reserves. This view of the world has changed since then, and for 
good reasons. Very few countries allow their exchange rates to float freely nowadays.  
 In the past few years, the issue of monetary-policy independence and the insulation 
properties of flexible exchange rates have been reconsidered. There is little doubt that 
very few countries are immune to spillovers from developments in the major advanced 
economies. The question is: to what extent, if at all, can emerging markets insulate 
themselves from external shocks?  
 The  well-known  ‘trilemma’  tells  us  that,  with  free  capital  mobility,  independent 
monetary policies are possible only if exchange rates are floating. However, the sheer 
scale of financial globalisation in recent years has led to a rethinking of the trilemma. 
Hélène Rey2, for example, has posited the existence of a global financial cycle that is 
strongly related to monetary conditions in the US and to changes in uncertainty and 
risk  aversion.  It  is  argued  that,  because  credit  cycles  and  capital  flows  respond  to 
global factors, they may be inappropriate for the prevailing cyclical conditions of many 
economies.  This  implies  that,  for  some  countries,  the  global  cycle  can  lead  to 
excessive  credit  growth  when  the  economy  is  booming  and  excessive  contraction 
during  a  downturn.  In  other  words,  it  is  conditions  in  the  advanced  economies  that 
determine domestic financial conditions in the smaller economies, and not domestic 
policy rates. 
                                                       
2 Rey, H. 2015. ‘Dilemma, not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy 
independence’. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21162. 
 Page 7 of 11 
As Obstfeld, Ostry, and Qureshi3 have pointed out, there are a number of reasons why 
we  would  expect  monetary  policy  to  be  constrained  where  financial  integration 
pertains.  For  example,  the  substitutability  between  domestic  and  external  financing 
could  limit  the  effectiveness  of  domestic  policy  interest-rate  changes  on  credit 
extension  and  asset  prices.  They  also  note  that,  even  if  we  observe  divergences 
between short-term rates as an indicator of insulation, there is likely to be greater co-
movement of longer-term rates. Much will then depend on the extent to which long-
term rates influence real variables. 
 For Rey, therefore, the trilemma does not exist. Rather, it is a dilemma – or what she 
calls  ‘an  irreconcilable  duo’.  That  is:  independent  monetary  policies  are  possible  if, 
and only if, the capital account is managed, directly or indirectly, via macroprudential 
policies.  These  could  include  capital  controls  if  macroprudential  policies  are 
insufficient.  In  other  words:  flexible  exchange  rates  do  not  ensure  independent 
monetary policies when capital is highly mobile. This is a rather significant conclusion 
for  emerging  markets  as  it  means  that,  under  conditions  of  free  capital  mobility, 
monetary-policy independence is not possible, irrespective of the prevailing exchange-
rate regime.  
 But this view is not without its critics. For example, Obstfeld et al. and Gita Gopinath4 
agree that the dilemma view may be overstated.  However, their evidence suggests 
that although the trilemma lives on, it does not appear to exist in its strong form. They 
show  that  countries  with  exchange-rate  flexibility  are  less  sensitive  to  changes  in 
global risk and less prone to economic boom-bust cycles. And although independence 
is not absolute, there is less loss of independence than in the case of countries with 
fixed exchange rates. In other words: the choice of exchange-rate regime does matter, 
but we should not expect complete independence with flexibility. The trilemma may be 
weakened, but it still applies.  
 Furthermore, the extent to which countries can conduct independent monetary policies 
also depends on their underlying resilience to global spillovers. It is generally accepted 
                                                      
3 Obstfeld, M, Ostry, J D and Qureshi, M S. 2017. ‘A tie that binds: revisiting the trilemma in emerging 
market economies’. International Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/17/130. 
4 Gopinath, G. 2017. ‘Rethinking macroeconomic policy: international economy issues’. A paper 
presented to the conference on ‘Rethinking macroeconomic policy IV’ at the Peterson Institute for 
International Economics. 
 Page 8 of 11 
that most emerging markets have also become more resilient since the taper tantrum: 
the macroeconomic fundamentals have generally improved and the domestic financial 
markets have developed further. In particular, real policy rates are generally higher, 
inflation is within the target range in most of the inflation-targeting emerging markets, 
and both fiscal and current-account deficits have generally narrowed. For example: for 
a selected sample of non-oil-exporting emerging markets5, current-account deficits as 
a  percentage  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  have  narrowed  significantly  since 
2012, averaging 0.7% in 2016 compared with 2.2% in 2013.   
 In South Africa’s case, our deficit has narrowed from its widest level of almost 6% of 
GDP in 2013 to its current level of 2.3% of GDP.  
 The  deficits  of  the  other  so-called  ‘fragile’  countries  have  also  shown  sizeable 
contractions. As a group, therefore, they have greater ability to withstand the impact 
of  exogenous  shocks,  including  sudden  stops  and  higher  interest  rates  in  the 
advanced economies.   
 An  indicator  of  increased  resilience  is  the  fact  that,  since  the  crisis,  a  number  of 
emerging markets have made considerable progress in developing deeper and more 
accessible domestic-currency-denominated bond markets. They no longer suffer from 
what is often referred to as ‘original sin’. South Africa is again a good example of this. 
Prior to the crisis, although South Africa had a well-developed domestic bond market 
by  emerging-market  standards,  non-residents  held  about  9% of 
total  rand-
denominated government debt. Today, this stands at around 40%. 
 This  development  is  seen  as  reducing  emerging-market  dependence  on  foreign-
currency debt. It is also seen as a means to reduce exposure to external shocks and 
increase resilience. However, this does not insulate emerging markets completely. A 
sudden stop or a reversal of flows would impact on bond yields and the exchange rate. 
The  ability  to  absorb  exchange-rate  changes  would  differ  from  country  to  country. 
Countries with lower levels of foreign-currency indebtedness would be less sensitive 
                                                      
5 Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, 
South Africa, Thailand, Turkey 
 Page 9 of 11 
to  the  balance-sheet  effects  of  large  exchange-rate  changes.  Furthermore,  it  also 
implies that bond yields become more sensitive to global factors.  
 Nevertheless,  there  is  evidence  that  local-currency  credit  spreads  are  much  less 
correlated across countries than foreign-currency credit spreads, and global factors 
explain significantly less variation in local-currency spreads than in foreign-currency 
spreads.6 In a similar vein, work by Shakill Hassan7 at the South African Reserve Bank 
shows a low correlation between South African short-term rates and global rates, but 
the  correlation  increases  for  longer  maturities.  Yields  at  the  short  end  of  the  South 
African  terms  structure  are  highly  responsive  to  domestic  factors  which  affect  the 
domestic monetary-policy stance. By contrast, long-term yields are highly responsive 
to changes in global bond-market developments. 
 A further indicator of increased resilience is the level of foreign-exchange reserves – 
something that would be close to the heart of the attendees of this conference. As I’ve 
mentioned earlier: despite increased exchange-rate flexibility, the need for reserves 
has  not  disappeared.  We  have  seen  that,  over  time,  foreign-exchange  reserve 
holdings have increased quite markedly in the emerging markets. This is true even if 
we exclude China, which has the largest holdings of reserves. Since 2005, the reserve 
holdings  in  a  sample  of  emerging  markets  referred  to  earlier  (excluding  China) 
increased by 178% by the year 2017.  
 It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  primary  motive  for  reserve  accumulation  is 
precautionary, as insurance against speculative attacks in times of crisis. According 
to research conducted by the International Monetary Fund8, there is strong empirical 
evidence that reserves reduce the likelihood of balance-of-payments pressures in the 
emerging  markets.  Reserves  could  provide  the  means  to  respond  to  exogenous 
shocks,  and  could  calm  or  even  prevent  disorderly  markets.  Central  banks  have, 
however,  tended  to  accumulate  rather  than  to  use  reserves  –  a  phenomenon 
sometimes referred to as ‘the fear of losing reserves’.  
                                                       
6 Du, W and Schregger, J. 2016. ‘Local currency sovereign risk’. Journal of Finance 71(3). 
7 Hassan, S. 2015. ‘Speculative flows, exchange rate volatility and monetary policy: the South African 
experience’. South African Reserve Bank Working Paper Series WP/15/02.  
8 International Monetary Fund. 2014. Assessing reserve adequacy – specific proposals. 
 Page 10 of 11 
While higher levels of reserves may create the perception of resilience, simply having 
reserves on their own is not an effective buffer against speculative attacks or crises. 
Reserves do not eliminate vulnerabilities. They are not a substitute for sound policies 
and strong, well-regulated financial sectors. 
 Conclusion 
 In conclusion, it would appear that, at long last, the recovery from the global financial 
crisis  is  on  track.  It  has  been  a  difficult  path,  with  a  number  of  false  starts  and 
disappointments. No doubt, the road going forward will not be without its difficulties. 
The  recovery  itself  is  expected  to  bring  about  new  challenges,  for  the  emerging 
markets  in  particular.  It  is  inevitable  that  monetary-policy  normalization  in  the 
advanced economies will happen, and that the era of high global liquidity will come to 
an end. The impact on capital flows and global financial markets will create particular 
challenges  for  central  banks  at  a  time  when  political  independence  is  being 
questioned. While vulnerabilities differ from country to country, the emerging markets 
in general appear to be more resilient in the face of the recent market volatility. Their 
macroeconomic fundamentals and policies have improved, making them better-placed 
to weather the storm than was the case five years ago.  
 Thank you. 
  Page 11 of 11 
