Mugur  Isărescu:  Closing  remarks  -  EUROFI  High  Level  Seminar
2018
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the
EUROFI High Level Seminar 2018, Bucharest, 27 April 2018.
 I am honored to be invited to give a few closing remarks at this EUROFI conference. EUROFI
has turned, over the years, into a major European event that deals with financial issues.
The Great Recession compelled governments and central banks, regulators and supervisors of
finance, to put into motion a radical reform of the ways financial industry does function. I do not
wish to bother you with remarks that repeat what seems to have become a new conventional
wisdom.  However,  it  is  never  redundant  to  remember  that  oversize,  too  high  leverage,
unconstrained and reckless risk-taking, dangerous financial products, insufficient transparency,
and,  not  least,  poorly  understood  systemic  risks,  have  forced  the  content  and  the  pace  of
reforms. The European Institutions created a new regulatory framework after the eruption of the
Crisis.  The  European  Systemic  risk  Council  (ESRB)  represents  the  attention  we  all  give  to
interconnectedness, to systemic risks that show up in financial markets. Not long ago, our widely
embraced practices and thinking in central banking, in the regulation and supervision of finance,
seemed  like  indestructible  building  blocks.  The  expansion  of  shadow  banking,  Fintech,  non-
conventional  threats  under  the  appearance  of  cyber-attacks,  tail  events  in  general,  keep  us
vigilant and ask from us open-mindedness and constant reexamination of our beliefs.
There is much in the evolution of financial markets which provides puzzles; I am referring to the
persistence of very low inflation in spite of large scale QEs, the flattening of the Philips Curve, the
emergence of parallel currencies, etc. There is also a revival of attempts to control capital flows
under the embodiment of macro-prudential means and a growing concern of central banks with
financial stability. As a matter of fact, quite often, financial stability seems to have become the
dominant  goal  of  central  banks  in  our  turbulent  times.  Developments  in  the  EU,  which  are
pertinently reflected by the sessions of this EUROFI conference, indicate that, in spite of major
progress achieved in redoing the regulation and supervision of finance, still much needs to be
done. Some of the problems we do encounter are linked with the legacy of the Crisis and the
years that preceded it.
It  would  be  a  shame  if  necessary  reforms  are  not  undertaken  while  there  is  a  window  of
opportunity –as international financial organizations, European specialized bodies, including the
ECB, emphatically argues. A slowdown is inevitable in time and it would be wise to have policy
space at that time and more robust economies. But much depends on what governments do and
whether they have the courage and social and the political support, apart from a critical mass of
vision and well-articulated policies.
I do not wish to examine here issues related to reforms that go beyond the completion of the BU
(Banking Union). But one thing is clear to me: unless the degree of diversity in the Euro area is
smaller, unless economic divergence (that is illustrated by dynamics after the introduction of the
euro)  is  reduced,  further  troubles  will  arise.  Jacques  de  Larosiere,  one  of  our  doyens  and  a
former president of EUROFI, never tires of pointing out this fact. Economic convergence is badly
needed in the monetary union, where policy space for undertaking the correction of large external
imbalances  (deficits)  is  much  diminished.  I  think  that  proposals  made  by  the  EC,  by  various
governments,  offer  hope  that  better  policies  will  be  articulated  in  the  not  too  distant  future.
Romania and other New Member States are bound (by the treaties of accession) to join the Euro
area. And we care enormously that the Euro area, through its policy arrangements and tools, will
enable economic convergence.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Coming from Romania, speaking today in Bulgaria, let me take this opportunity to share with you
some of the challenges faced by non-euro Member States, in particular the ones in Central and
Eastern  Europe.  Much  has  been  said  about  growth  and  inflation  in  the  euro-area,  as  well  as
about stage of the banking union. Less attention has been paid to Member States which want to
join the banking union and the euro-area in the foreseeable future, but still need to implement
structural  reforms  to  get  there.  Their  experience  is  relevant,  nonetheless,  for  the  Euro  area
Member  States  as  well,  as  the  common  market  and  free  movement  of  capital  is  a  two-ways
street.
Financial and business cycles in euro-area and non-euro area are not perfectly aligned. Growth
is now much stronger in Eastern Europe, and the output gap has turned positive earlier than in
the euro-area. Inflation has also reemerged in non-euro area. Some of it is cyclical, as it comes
from international commodity prices, other supply side factors, but also from a strong domestic
demand. Yet, some of it is structural, as any catching-up process is inflationary in nature. Higher
wage  growth  pressure  is  normal,  up  to  a  point,  in  view  of  large  wage  differentials,  migration
flows,  and  labor  market  tightening.  Despite  the  wage  growth,  CEE  countries  are  becoming
increasingly competitive, as productivity also grows. This is why the current account position of
non-euro member states is better now than before the crisis.
The  monetary  policy  normalization  cycle  runs  also  at  a  different  pace.  Even  within  CEE
countries,  while  the  monetary  stance  remains  largely  accommodative,  the  situation  is  quite
heterogeneous regarding inflationary expectations, policy objectives, and policy tools used. As
regards Romania, we started the tightening of monetary policy by hiking the rate twice this year,
after further narrowing the corridor around the policy rate last year, but a gradual approach is
warranted by the need to avoid sharp currency appreciation in the regional context.
In our case, the policy normalization has been supported by two favorable developments in the
banking sector. First, the NPLs ratio dropped from 22% at end-2013 to 6.4% at end-2017, making
it  the  largest  adjustment  in  Europe  over  a  relatively  short  time  period.  At  the  core  of  this
adjustment  were  conservative  requirements  for  provisioning  NPLs,  our  hands-on  supervision
approach, and a fiscal facility that was conducive to the development of the secondary market for
NPLs. Second, the share of local currency denominated loans in the total stock of loans has
increased from one third prior to the crisis to two thirds nowadays. This reduced the contagion
risk and improved the transmission mechanism of the monetary policy.
A  somewhat  higher  inflation  and  an  earlier  start  in  the  policy  normalization  cycle  have  to  be
considered  in  view  of  another  challenge,  which  is  the  lower  level  of  financial  intermediation.
Some countries are facing the dilemma recently portrayed in a Bruegel Institute paper, between
raising inflation and decreasing appetite for risk, the latter being reflected in the lower levels of
credit to GDP. The solutions adopted are diverse. While some central banks are embracing a
higher  inflation,  and  try  to  stimulate  financial  intermediation,  others  try  to  reign  in  inflationary
expectations and have already started the tightening cycle. Nevertheless, the issue of financial
intermediation remains important, as credit for the corporate sector would need to replace direct
fiscal incentives in most of these economies as a driver of growth, if we want growth to remain
sustainable.
The low financial intermediation in the banking sector comes, first of all, from the demand-side.
Households’  distribution  of  income  and  credit  is  more  uneven  in  CEE  than  in  euro-area;  and
corporate  balance  sheets  have  not  been  repaired  to  the  same  extent  as  the  banks’  balance
sheets were. As for the alternatives on the supply-side, the capital market is thin, and the role of
the  other  financial  institutions  is  less  important  than  that  of  banks  –  although  there  are  some
differences in country-level data.
This  leads  us  to  another  challenge  which  has  become  increasingly  important  in  non-euro
Member States: the sovereign-bank nexus. Indeed, banks operating in non-euro area countries
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
are more exposed to the domestic sovereign debt, as they hold a higher share of it. However,
sovereign securities are the only highly liquid assets available in large amounts in small markets;
hence  banks  have  no  realistic  alternative  to  build  liquidity  buffers.  Moreover,  government  debt
levels in CEE are much lower than the euro-area average.
The contrast between high banks’ exposures to sovereign debt and low government debt in non-
euro  countries  emphasizes  the  structural  challenges  in  these  countries.  Any  solution  for
addressing the sovereign-banks nexus should account for the specificities of non-euro Member
States, and in general of emerging countries not issuing debt in a reserve currency. In the spirit
of  European  integration,  any  limit  should  be  addressed  to  the  banks’  group  level,  not  at  the
subsidiaries  level  –  a  solution  which  would  help  preventing  fire  sales  and  would  not  affect
financial stability in these countries.
This takes me to the issue of integrated financial markets in Europe, not only in the euro-area. As
Peter Praet mentioned in last year’s Eurofi held in Malta, “private risk-sharing was the general
principle of the new European rules such as the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (…)
making banks equally liable across countries for the amount of risk they want to take into their
respective balance sheet”.
A pending issue for the completion of the Banking Union rests with the home-host approach in
the resolution process. One of the main tasks within the resolution planning process for groups
is to identify the most suitable resolution strategy and ensure its viability. Most of the resolution
authorities  and  banking  groups  have  embarked  in  a  Single  Point  of  Entry  (SPE)  resolution
strategy at European level, acting according to their declared standing and European structure.
The Single Point of Entry (SPE) resolution strategy is, by definition, the reflection of the idea of
unity and cohesion, the purpose of the European Union.
When an MPE strategy is preferred, authorities must ensure the separability of the subsidiaries
from  the  parent  bank  not  only  as  a  gone  concern,  but  also  as  a  going  concern.  If  the  local
subsidiary does not act independently in its daily activities, it is unlikely that it will be able to do so
in case of turmoil. According to European legislation, treasury functions, risk management and IT
services  are  the  most  important  areas  of  operational  independence  to  be  secured  –  and,
therefore, they are at the heart of the home-host issue. This is particularly relevant for non-euro
Members States from Central and Eastern Europe.
We agree that, at least until the conditions for an MPE strategy are met, the parent banks should
continue to provide support for their subsidiaries. But how to do this it is a more delicate issue.
One way would be to transform subsidiaries into branches. Indeed, from an operational point of
view  the  switch  from  subsidiaries  to  branches  could  bring  some  benefits.  However,  a  higher
burden will be placed on home countries’ authorities, as these will have to take into account and
protect financial systems and economies in the host countries. The home Deposit Guarantee
Scheme (DGS) will be subject to a very high pressure in case the group fails and it must pay for
the guaranteed deposits.
Although equal treatment and solidarity are desirable, the branches seem to escape the safety-
net  that  has  different  patterns  in  each  country.  National  legal  frameworks  for  resolution  and
liquidation procedures would still be the main drivers in a failing situation, but these are limited.
An alternative solution for securing a de facto group financial support for the subsidiaries by using
market  instruments  would  relate  to  MREL  (minimum  requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible
liabilities). If parent banks buy the local subsidiaries’ eligible debt, this would represent a non-
intrusive  market  solution  for  the  problem  of  financial  support,  while  observing  the  current
resolution  framework. Also,  it  would  make  central  banks  in  CEE  more  likely  to  accept  MPE
(multiple point of entry) strategies in the future – as long as potential losses will be covered by
parent banks.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The late Andrew Crockett, former General Manager of BIS, was one of the first to emphasize the
important role of financial stability, distinct but complementary to price stability.
The  aftermath  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  shown  us  that  crisis  management  and
resolution is also a public good, correlated with, but independent from, price and macro financial
stability.
For financial integration in Europe to work, and for banking union to move forward, we should
remember that there is one common market. The European legislation and the new proposals as
well, which we broadly welcomed, do not refer to two asset classes of capital: inside and outside
the banking union. Eventually, we will all be members of the banking union, and it is our joint
responsibility to secure a level playing field.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
