Benoît  Cœuré: A  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-European
Financial Infrastructures
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, at the first meeting of the Euro Cyber Resilience Board for pan-European Financial
Infrastructures, Frankfurt am Main, 9 March 2018.
 It is a pleasure to welcome you back to Frankfurt. Our last meeting was in June last year. Today,
we  will  discuss  the  future  course  of  the  high-level  cyber  resilience  forum  for  pan-European
financial market infrastructures, critical service providers and competent authorities.
Establishment  of  the  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-European  Financial
Infrastructures
technological  advances  have  enabled  cybercriminals 
Recent 
to  conduct  ever  more
sophisticated,  precise  and  powerful  attacks. And  nobody  is  immune  to  cyber  risks,  including
businesses, financial infrastructures and public administrations. So we should avoid a “blame
and shame” culture and work together.
The ECB and the Eurosystem are striving to lead by example. At the ECB, overseers, operators,
supervisors and IT security services are working together more closely on cyber issues. Within
the Eurosystem, there has been close collaboration on implementing the Eurosystem oversight
cyber  resilience  strategy  for  financial  market  infrastructures  that  we  presented  at  our  last
meeting,  in  line  with  CPMI-IOSCO’s  guidance  on  this  topic.   The  Market  Infrastructure  Board,
which  is  in  charge  of  Eurosystem  financial  market  infrastructures,  has  also  scaled  up  its
activities to ensure the continued cyber resilience of its systems and platforms.
1
Eurosystem  initiatives  are  part  of  a  growing  international  effort  to  combat  cyber  threats.  The
CPMI-IOSCO  guidance  is  being  implemented.  In  October  2017,  the  Financial  Stability  Board
(FSB)  delivered  a  stocktake  report  of  relevant  regulations  and  supervisory  practices  to  G20
finance ministers and governors, and G7 ministers and governors published the “Fundamental
Elements  for  Effective Assessment  of  Cybersecurity  in  the  Financial  Sector”.   The  FSB  will
produce a common lexicon of important terms, while the G7 Cyber Expert Group continues to
work  on  third-party  risks,  cross-sector  coordination  and  threat-led  penetration  testing,  and  will
make proposals for G7 cross-border cyber crisis simulation exercises.
2
In this context, the Eurosystem aims at coordinating its own activities in the field of cyber risks
with that of market participants and other public authorities to succeed in protecting the financial
system  from  cyber  threats.  I  therefore  invite  you  today  to  become  part  of  the  Euro  Cyber
Resilience Board (ECRB) for pan-European Financial Infrastructures – a regular forum where we
can work together in a trusted environment.
The ECRB’s objective is to enhance the cyber resilience of financial market infrastructures and
their  critical  service  providers,  as  well  as  that  of  the  wider  EU  financial  sector,  in  line  with
international standards. This will be achieved by fostering trust and collaboration and facilitating
joint initiatives – whether among market players or between market players and authorities. The
ECRB will thus contribute to the overall stability of the EU financial system.
The  ECRB  will  have  no  formal  powers  to  impose  binding  measures  and  will  not  make
supervisory judgements. Its legitimacy will stem from the voluntary commitment of its members
to abide by its common positions, statements and strategic views.
The  ECRB  will  be  chaired  by  the  ECB,  which  will  be  closely  involved  together  with  national
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
central banks and observers from the relevant European public authorities. This will ensure that
the  ECRB  acts  in  the  interest  of  Europe  as  a  whole.  Its  common  positions,  statements  and
strategic views will be adopted by consensus.
To kick off the work of the ECRB, we would like to reflect with you on possible work items which
we  could  address  collectively. As  part  of  this,  we  will  also  report  on  two  of  our  most  recent
activities.
First,  a  cyber  resilience  survey,  developed  under  the  Eurosystem  oversight  cyber  resilience
strategy, was conducted across more than 75 payment systems, central securities depositories
and central counterparties throughout Europe. As you will see, the survey highlighted a number
of very pertinent issues for discussion, such as cyber governance, training and awareness, and
cyber incident response.
Second,  the  Eurosystem  is  currently  finalising  the  main  elements  of  the  European  Threat
Intelligence-Based Ethical Red-Teaming (TIBER-EU) Framework. This is an interesting concept
which we hope will raise the level of cyber resilience in Europe and enable cross-border, cross-
authority testing, which has not been done before.
We look forward to hearing your feedback on these two initiatives. We will also update you on the
forthcoming market-wide exercise, which will explore the challenges of a specific cyber scenario
and see how we can work closer together in times of crisis.
I am confident that we will have a fruitful discussion. I will now hand over to my colleague Sabine
Lautenschläger, who will make some introductory remarks from the supervisory perspective.
After that, I would like to invite the European Commission representative to briefly introduce the
very  recently  published  “FinTech Action  plan”,  which  presents  some  interesting  points  to  be
considered with regard to the cyber resilience of the financial sector.
Thank you.
1
2
Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and International Organization of Securities Commissions
(CPMI-IOSCO)  Guidance  on  cyber 
infrastructures,  available
resilience 
at: www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD535.pdf
financial  market 
for 
 Available at: www.mef.gov.it/inevidenza/documenti/PRA_BCV_4728453_v_1_G7_Fundamental.pdf
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
