Claudia  Buch:  Keynote  address  –  “Are  post-crisis  statistical
initiatives completed?”
Keynote  address  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  IFC  Chair  and  Vice-President  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at 
the  Ninth  IFC  Conference  "Are  post-crisis  statistical 
initiatives completed? ", Basel, 30 August 2018.
*   *   *
Let me welcome you to the 9th biennial conference organised by the Irving Fisher Committee.
We  are  very  glad  to  welcome  speakers  and  participants  from  IFC  central  banks  and  from
international organisations. I would especially like to welcome the authors of the seven papers
which  are  being  considered  for  this  year’s  "Young  Statistician Award". A  panel  of  experts  will
choose a winner who will be announced towards the end of the conference.
Ten  years  have  elapsed  since  the  financial  crisis.  Central  banks  statistics  have  contributed
significantly  to  our  understanding  of  the  financial  system,  systemic  risks,  and  potential
vulnerabilities. Against this backdrop, this conference asks: Are post-crisis statistical initiatives
completed?
Statistical initiatives are not an end in themselves: They need to address demand for information
among the general public, academics, and policymakers. They need to balance the costs and
benefits of collecting information. And they need to make best use of the available technology.
Before going into these issues, let me give a quick refresher on post-crisis statistical initiatives.
1. What has happened since the crisis?
The  global  financial  crisis  highlighted  significant  gaps  in  data  needed  to  understand  financial
stability  risks  and  implications  for  the  real  economy.  Post-crisis  reforms  under  the  G20  Data
1
Gaps Initiative (DGI) thus focused on:
the assessment of international and cross-sector relationships,
the monitoring of risks in the financial sector,
better communication of official statistics.
The first phase of the DGI in the years 2009-15 focused on conceptual work. Key deliverables
include
revised Financial Soundness Indicators,
the FSB’s annual Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report , and
a  standardised  data  template  for  the  collection  of  data  on  global  systemically  important
banks (G-SIBs).
2
The second phase, which  started  in  2015,  is  focusing  on  implementation  and  data  collection.
Emphasis  is  being  placed  on  monitoring  of  risk  in  the  financial  sector,  vulnerabilities,
interconnections and spillovers.
Linkages and contagion effects
As regards understanding cross-border and cross-sector linkages, we have made progress in
terms  of  analysing  contagion  effects.  The  first  three  sessions  of  the  conference  will  address
contagion  effects  and  their  measurement  through  reporting  from  multinational  enterprises,
identification  of  international  exposures  and  international  flows  of  funds,  and  managing  cross-
border impacts on financial accounts.
1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  IFC  has  highlighted  the  usefulness  of  nationality-based  indicators.  Nationality-based
indicators complement residency-based statistics. For example, they help understand who takes
the  underlying  economic  decisions,  who  is  exposed  to  final  risks,  and  in  which  countries  the
ultimately  responsible  unit  resides.  This  work  was  conducted  in  cooperation  with  international
organisations, in particular the OECD. 
Granular data and information systems
Shocks affecting individual banks or firms can have significant aggregate effects (Gabaix 2011,
Amiti and Weinstein 2018). Yet, the collection of sufficiently granular statistics on individual banks
and firms can be difficult and costly. Although a lot of granular information is potentially available,
using and merging different datasets has been complicated by a lack of harmonised identifiers or
the existence of legal constraints.
In  2017,  the  IFC  and  the  European  Committee  of  Central  Balance  Sheet  Data  Offices
(ECCBSO)  published  a  report  which  highlights  the  usefulness  of  firms’  individual  financial
statements  (IFC  2017a).  The  report  shows  that  the  coverage  of  firm-level  balance  sheet
information  has  improved.  Yet,  comparing  data  across  different  jurisdictions,  and  matching
balance sheet data with other statistics, remains challenging.
The  report  also  indicates  that  the  use  of  granular  financial  data  is  often  constrained  by
confidentiality  considerations.  It  is  important  for  us  to  improve  information  systems.  The
International  Network  for  Exchanging  Experience  on  Statistical  Handling  of  Granular  Data
(INEXDA)  is one example of such information sharing.
3
One  area  where  granular  data  are  particularly  relevant  is  the  surveillance  of  risks  to  financial
stability.  By  their  very  nature,  financial  stability  concerns  arise  whenever  risks  to  individual
institutions or sectors threaten the stability of the financial system as a whole. In 2017, the IFC
therefore co-organised a workshop with the National Bank of Belgium to share views on data
4
collection for macroprudential analysis.
Understanding how shocks propagate within the financial system requires entity-level information
on interlinkages and spillovers. This information is needed to monitor risks and to assess the
effects of post-crisis financial sector reforms.  Important data gaps, however, are still a major
obstacle to the effective assessment of the impact of post-crisis reforms (ESRB 2016, Eurostat
2017, and OECD 2017). Among them are the measurement of prices in the real estate sector,
the  assessment  of  household  vulnerabilities,  and  new  developments  such  as  related  to
6
FinTech.
2. Data and policy evaluation
5
Collecting data is not, and should not be, an end in itself. We need to join the dots, not just collect
them. Data provide information about the structure and state of the financial system, and they
can be used to assess the effects of post-crisis financial sector reforms.
After  the  crisis,  several  major  reform  initiatives  were  launched,  which  aim  at  enhancing  the
stability  and  resilience  of  the  global  financial  system.  So  far,  national  and  international  bodies
have focused on monitoring  the  implementation  of  these  reforms  (FSB  2016).  To  answer  the
question of how financial sector reforms have affected market dynamics and the real economy,
we need to go a step further. In 2017, the G20 leaders have thus adopted a framework for the
evaluation of reform effects (FSB 2017). The framework has three elements: causally attributing
observed trends in financial markets to reforms, understanding relevant heterogeneities across
banks, countries, and over time, and understanding general equilibrium effects.
One crucial objective of policy evaluation is to make a distinction between the effects of reforms
on individual firms, and the effects on the financial system. (Short-term) costs of reforms for the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
private sector, such as costs of compliance, are often more visible and easier to measure than
longer-terms benefits for society as a whole. Some of these benefits arise through shifts in costs
from  the  public  to  the  private  sector:  withdrawing  implicit  public  guarantees  for  financial
institutions  increases  the  costs  of  debt,  because  creditors  cannot  rely  on  bailouts  and  thus
demand higher risk premia. This will show up as a private cost. Yet, society as a whole benefits if
7
the financial system becomes more stable and if risk is not shifted to the public sector.
To  see  why  structured  policy  evaluation  is  needed,  take  the  effects  of  increased  capital
requirements.  Better  capitalised  banks  are  more  resilient  and  can  lend  more  to  the  real
economy. At the same time, post-reform trends in bank lending have differed across countries,
banks,  and  industries.  This  raises  a  number  of  questions:  Has  lending  declined  because  of
weaker credit demand? Do banks lend more prudently? What has been the impact of regulations
on  stability  and  growth?  Does  bank  lending  support  sectoral  reallocation  –  and  thus  growth?
Aggregate  time  trends  in  lending  do  not  answer  these  questions.  Rather,  micro  data  and
empirical methods for (causal) identification are the basis for well-informed policy decisions.
A good data strategy is crucial for policy evaluation. Data on trade repositories have, for example,
been an important element of a recent evaluation of derivatives market reforms. The Financial
Stability Board (FSB) recently released a consultative report on the impact of post-crisis reforms
on  incentives  for  central  clearing.   Many  of  the  insights  in  this  report  are  based  on  trade
repository data, but the report also mentions important shortcomings in the use and availability of
data.
8
In  2017,  the  IFC  conducted  a  survey  to  investigate  data  collected  by  trade  repositories.  The
report, which will be released soon, contains interesting insights:
Data from trade repositories are useful for macroprudential risk assessment, for analysing
market transparency, and for microprudential risk assessment.
Most jurisdictions collect some data on derivatives, but there are still considerable gaps.
Using these data for policy work remains limited due to incomplete coverage, reporting lags,
and the complexity of the existing data.
3. Data and new technologies
The arrival of new technologies and data sources has been another structural change. New data
sources  –  typically  summarised  under  the  label  "Big  Data"  –  can  provide  information  that
complements or even replace traditional statistics. New technologies such as machine learning
can allow making better use of existing data and improve the efficiency of producing statistics.
Let me briefly review the key trends as they are reflected in the work of the IFC.
Big Data and machine learning
Big Data has become a buzzword. It can open up new business opportunities and information
sources, but it also raises concern about data confidentiality and privacy. In 2015, the IFC thus
reached out to central banks to learn about the relevance of Big Data to central banks. Big data
are flexible and available in real time. They thus complement existing statistics and support policy
analysis. Yet central banks’ actual involvement has remained limited, given the costs of handling
and using Big Data. The IFC has decided to start pilot projects, related not only to the internet but
also to the various large micro datasets that are already available (eg administrative, commercial
and financial market datasets). Conferences and workshop events in this area have been co-
organised in 2017 and 2018 with the Bank of Indonesia.
Another  area  in  which  technological  advances  are  delivering  new  opportunities  for  central
bankers  and  statisticians  is  the  realm  of  machine  learning.  For  example,  the  Bundesbank
currently  tests  a  neuronal  network  for  generating  forecasts  on  price  movements  in  US-
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Treasuries  over  short  time  horizons  (1-10  days)  in  order  to  support  and  inform  the  decision
making process in portfolio management. Other projects explore the use of machine learning for
quality assurance, record linkages, or merging datasets. The IFC continues to support cross-
institutional collaboration in this space through conferences such as this one.
FinTech
The central banking world is also increasingly engaged in understanding the impact of FinTech
on the financial system and financial stability. FinTech can be defined as technologically-enabled
financial  innovation  that  could  result  in  new  business  models,  applications,  processes  or
products  with  an  associated  material  effect  on  the  provision  of  financial  services.  It  is  rapidly
modifying the structure of financial markets, by eg fostering new forms of credit (peer-to-peer
lending),  leading  to  the  emergence  of  cryptocurrencies,  and  prompting  changes  in  payments
systems. The rapid innovation of FinTech means risks are constantly changing and there are
many avenues to explore.
In response to these developments, the IFC has committed to undertaking further work in this
area  to  support  central  banks’  understanding  of  risks  and  opportunities  related  to  FinTech.
Yesterday, the IFC Committee agreed to set up a task force to work on data issues related to
FinTech, in close cooperation with international standard setters including the Basel Committee
on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures
(CPMI).
4. Summing up
A lot has happened in the ten years that have elapsed since the crisis: Data gaps have been
closed; new technologies transform the production of statistics; structured evaluations of post-
crisis financial sector reforms have been kicked off at the G20 level.
In order to sustain these efforts and to transform "data" into "information", let me emphasise a
few points:
First,  central  bank  statistics  are  used  by  many  stakeholders:  analysts,  researchers,
policymakers, and private market participants. These stakeholders will use our statistics only if
they are easily accessible. Communication with stakeholders, a clear legal basis to support data
sharing,  the  use  of  joint  methodological  standards,  and  measures  to  protect  confidential
information are thus crucial (IFC 2015).
Second,  when  discussing  new  data  initiatives,  the  costs  and  benefits  need  to  be  weighed  up
carefully. Detailed, granular data improve analytical work, and thus contribute to better policies
and  public  welfare.  But  reporting  of  statistical  and  supervisory  information  can  be  costly,  in
particular if data initiatives are not well coordinated. Improving the trade-off between costs and
benefits requires long-term strategic planning and consultation with industry. 
Third, policy analysis and statistical work can be integrated and coordinated more closely. Before
launching policy projects, data needs should be carefully considered, and sufficient time should
be  budgeted  for  data  work.  Statistical  initiatives  have  to  take  into  consideration  the  type  and
granularity  of  data  needed  to  conduct  good  causal  evaluation  studies.  Both  require  close
coordination between statistical and policy departments in central banks.
5. References 
Amiti, Mary, and David E. Weinstein (2018). How much do idiosyncratic bank shocks affect
investment? Evidence from matched bank-firm loan data. Journal of Political Economy 126
(2): 525-587.
Atkeson, Andrew G., Adrien d’Avernas, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill (2018).
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Government  Guarantees  and  the  Valuation  of  American  Banks.  National  Bureau  of
Economic Research. NBER Working Paper 24706. Cambridge MA.
European Systemic Risk Board – ESRB (2016). Recommendation on closing real estate
data gaps (ESRB/2016/14), October 2016.
Eurostat  (2017).  Commercial  property  price  indicators:  sources,  methods  and  issues,
Statistical Report.
Financial  Stability  Board  –  FSB  (2016).  Implementation  and  Effects  of  the  G20  Financial
Regulatory Reforms, 2nd Annual Report. Basel.
Financial  Stability  Board  –  FSB  (2017).  Framework  for  Post-Implementation  Evaluation  of
the Effects of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms. Basel.
Financial Stability Board – FSB  and International Monetary Fund – IMF (2016). The financial
crisis  and  information  gaps.  Second  phase  of  the  G-20  data  gaps  initiative  (DGI-2).  First
Progress Report.
Financial Stability Board – FSB  and International Monetary Fund – IMF (2017). The financial
crisis and information gaps. Second phase of the G-20 data gaps initiative (DGI-2). Second
Progress Report.
Gabaix, Xavier (2011). The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 79(3):
733-772.
Irving Fisher Committee on Central Bank Statistics – IFC (2015). Data-sharing: issues and
good practices. Report to BIS Governors prepared by the Task Force on Data Sharing.
Irving Fisher Committee on Central Bank Statistics – IFC (2017a). Uses of central balance
sheet  data  offices’  information.  Proceedings  of  the  IFC-ECCBSO-CBRT  conference  in
Özdere-İzmir, Turkey, on 26 September 2016. IFC Bulletin 45.
Irving Fisher Committee on Central Bank Statistics – IFC (2017b). Data needs and statistics
compilation for macroprudential analysis. Proceedings of the IFC-National Bank of Belgium
Workshop in Brussels on 18-19 May 2017. IFC Bulletin 46.
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  –  OECD  (2017).  Households’
Financial  Assets  and  Liabilities,  stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=QASA_7HH,
accessed 27 August, 2018.
 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
For details, see FSB and IMF (2016) and FSB and IMF (2017).
For details, see www.fsb.org/2018/03/global-shadow-banking-monitoring-report-2017/
See www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Bundesbank/Research/RDSC/INEXDA/inexda.html?https=1
For details, see IFC (2017b).
www.fsb.org/2017/07/framework-for-post-implementation-evaluation-of-the-effects-of-the-g20-financial-
regulatory-reforms/
For details, see www.fsb.org/2017/06/financial-stability-implications-from-fintech/
Recent evidence shows that, between 1970 and 1985, franchise values of US banks were not high, market-to-
book values of bank equity were closely aligned, and implicit government guarantees were small (Atkeson,
d’Avernas, Eisfeldt, and Weill 2018). Between 1996 and 2007, market values of bank equity rose, banks took on
more risk, and the value of government guarantees increased.
For  details,  see  www.fsb.org/2018/08/fsb-and-standard-setting-bodies-consult-on-effects-of-reforms-on-
incentives-to-centrally-clear-over-the-counter-derivatives/
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
