Ravi  Menon:  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore's  Annual  Report
2017/18
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at MAS'
Annual Report 2017/18 Media Conference, Singapore, 4 July 2018.
 Good morning. Welcome to MAS’ Annual Report media conference.
GLOBAL ECONOMY
Let me begin with three broad statements about the global economy.
One, the current expansion in the global economy is likely to be sustained this year.
Two, the global growth cycle has matured and is probably past its peak.
Three, tail risks to growth have grown significantly over the last six months.
The current expansion in the global economy is likely to be sustained through this year.
Last year, global GDP growth was at its strongest since 2011, at 3.8%. This momentum has
carried into this year and is expected to persist.
The strength of the global economy is anchored on three mutually reinforcing upturns – in
manufacturing, in trade, and in investment.
Global manufacturing is still expanding.
Industrial  production  rose  by  3.4%  in  2017  and  leading  indicators  like  new  orders  for
capital goods remain healthy.
World trade has kept pace with GDP growth.
Emerging Asia in particular is experiencing healthy expansion in trade, on the back of
stronger demand in the G3 economies.
Investment growth has picked up.
Business capital expenditure in the G3 and Asia increased by 3.6% in 2017.
Capex spending in the US is expected to be sustained, on the back of corporate tax
cuts, deregulation, and positive business sentiment.
The global economy is also being supported by accommodative macroeconomic policies.
Monetary policy remains highly accommodative in the Eurozone and Japan.
Fiscal  stimulus  in  the  US  will  more  than  offset  the  gradual  unwinding  of  monetary
accommodation.
Across  the  major  economies,  labour  markets  are  strengthening  and  wages  are  rising,
underpinning consumer demand.
The global growth cycle has matured and is probably past its peak.
While growth remains healthy, it has ceased to accelerate, particularly in the Eurozone and
Japan. 
In the Eurozone, the initial spurt in domestic spending last year has stepped down to a
more sustainable pace.
In Japan, the fiscal boost is over.
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The US economy, albeit still growing strongly, is already at full employment.
At least part of the fiscal stimulus is likely to be dissipated through higher inflation.
In  China,  investment  growth  has  slowed,  with  the  shift  in  policy  focus  to  addressing  the
country’s vulnerabilities, such as high levels of indebtedness and excess capacity.
From a sectoral perspective, the global tech cycle has moved into a consolidation stage,
with inventory build-up fading.
The Global Manufacturing PMI has eased in recent months to 53.1 in May, although it
remains in the expansionary zone.
risks 
Tail 
months.                                 
to  global  growth  have  grown  significantly  over 
the 
last  six
Earlier this year, I described the “Goldilocks” state of the global economy—healthy growth,
low inflation, and easy financial conditions.
I  had  then  also  warned  that  the  “three  bears”—inflation,  protectionism,  and  financial
1
instability—could make an appearance any time to spoil the party.
Six months later, we can say that at least two of the three bears have been sighted—inflation
and protectionism.
First, the risk of more rapid inflation has heightened.
Inflation  is  on  an  upward  path  globally,  and  in  the  US  has  reached  the  Fed’s  2%  target
amidst a tightening labour market.
Accordingly, last month, the Fed indicated a faster pace of monetary policy normalisation.
The expectation now is for two more rate hikes this year.
But if inflation surprises on the upside, the Fed could be compelled to hike more.
This would tighten global financial conditions by more than currently anticipated.
Tighter global financial conditions could trigger market volatility and dampen corporate
spending.
As  interest  rates  rise,  some  firms  could  face  debt-servicing  problems,  especially  in
emerging market economies with relatively high levels of leverage.
And besides the risk of faster rate hikes, two things are happening that threaten to tighten
global financial conditions even more:
first, the unwinding of the Fed’s balance sheet which withdraws US$ liquidity from global
markets; and
second,  the  increased  issuance  of  US  Treasury  bills  to  fund  fiscal  expansion,
which accentuates tightness in US$ funding.
We are already seeing some capital outflows from emerging market economies, alongside
some tightness in US$ liquidity and funding markets.
This is to be expected.  But if the withdrawal of US$ liquidity becomes more acute, some
emerging market economies could face serious bouts of financial volatility.
But  Asian  economies  are  in  a  relatively  stronger  position  to  absorb  these  financial
shocks.
Economic fundamentals in Emerging Asian economies are stronger since the taper tantrum
in 2013.
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Foreign reserves and bank capital buffers are larger while financial regulatory frameworks
are more robust.
And policymakers in Asia are more prepared to make macro-policy adjustments as needed,
including pre-emptive interest rate hikes to support exchange rate stability.
The second risk to the global economy is rising protectionism.
Protectionism  is  rearing  its  ugly  head  on  three  trade  fronts:  US-China;  US-EU;  and  US-
Mexico-Canada.
Thus  far,  the  US  has  imposed  tariffs  on  solar  panels,  washing  machines,  steel  and
aluminum imports from all major trading partners. It has announced tariffs of 25% on US$50
billion of imports from China, and has threatened tariffs of 10% on another US$200 billion of
imports from China.
Both China and Europe have announced retaliatory tariffs.
The immediate effect of these trade restrictions is limited and does not threaten global
growth … yet.
The announced tariffs are estimated to shave around 0.1% point off China’s growth, with the
US economy similarly impacted by China’s retaliatory measures.
The real risks from the tariffs are spillover effects, escalation, and economic uncertainty
—all of which could severely undermine global growth.
First, spillover effects. 
The impact of the tariffs will be felt not only in the countries involved but across the value
chains that span several countries.
Second, escalation.
If tariffs are applied to a much broader range of goods, trade flows would be severely
impaired and the impact on growth would be greater.
Third, uncertainty.
The  threat  of  further  escalation  is  beginning  to  dampen  business  confidence  and
unsettle financial markets. 
If  businesses  around  the  world  take  a  wait-and-see  approach,  the  global  recovery  in
investment could be curtailed.
The world has clearly moved from trade tension to trade conflict. 
If this escalates into a trade war, all three engines of global growth—manufacturing, trade,
and investment—will stall.
Bottomline: the global economy is still in good shape but the momentum has started to
flag and tail risks have grown. 
So while global growth should be good this year, it may not be quite as good as last year.
SINGAPORE ECONOMY
Against this global backdrop, the Singapore economy is expected to remain on a steady
expansion path in 2018.
Overall GDP growth is expected to come in at around 2.5–3.5% in 2018.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  trade-related  cluster—manufacturing,  wholesale  trade,  transport  and  storage,
making up about 45% of GDP—will continue to benefit from external demand and the
global tech cycle.
There is a structural upshift in the end-demand for semiconductors globally.
Chips are now being used across a wide range of applications beyond computers - including
in smartphones, automotives, and “Internet of Things” (IoT) devices.
The modern services cluster—financial, ICT, and professional services, making up 30%
of  GDP—will  continue  to  benefit  from  firm  regional  demand  and  ongoing  digital
transformation among corporates.
Regional  demand  for  financial  intermediation,  and  wealth  and  asset  management  will
support growth in financial services.
Growing adoption of ICT and automated customer platforms by corporates are expected to
boost demand for various ICT and business services, including cloud storage, data security,
and IT consultancy.
The  domestic-oriented  cluster—construction,  retail  and  food,  health  and  education
services, making up 25% of GDP—has lagged somewhat but is expected to catch up in
the quarters ahead. 
In  2017  and  Q1  2018,  this  cluster  contracted,  as  the  drag  from  construction  offset  the
modest  growth  in  health,  education  and  other  essential  services.  The  retail  and  food
segments were largely flat.
But part of the weakness should dissipate.
Contracts awarded for public infrastructure projects and the pace of private residential
en-bloc activities indicate a recovery in construction works in the quarters ahead.
And  firm  labour  market  conditions  and  healthy  consumer  demand  should  support  a
recovery in retail & food services.
While  the  central  prognosis  for  the  Singapore  economy  this  year  remains  intact,
spillovers from global trade conflicts bear close watching.
These spillovers arise from Singapore’s role as a node in the regional electronics production
value-chain, as well as a hub for air and sea transport and financial intermediation services.
These  are  important  intermediate  inputs  to  the  main  trade  flows  between  the  US  and  its
trading partners.
Bilateral  trade  between  the  US  and  China  indirectly  contributes  to  about  1.1%  of
Singapore’s GDP.
Flows between the US and EU contribute about 0.5% to Singapore’s GDP.
NAFTA trade contributes 0.6%.
INFLATION AND MONETARY POLICY
Inflation in Singapore has been within expectations—on a modest uptrend but still below
historical norms.
MAS  Core  Inflation  this  year  is  expected  to  average  in  the  upper  half  of  the  1–2%
forecast range.
Core inflation averaged 1.5% in the first five months of 2018, up slightly from 1.4% in Q4 last
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
year, mainly due to higher retail inflation.
It  is  projected  to  rise  gradually  over  the  course  of  2018,  with  the  gradual  absorption  of
remaining slack in the labour market and the attendant pickup in domestic demand.
CPI-All Items inflation is similarly projected to be in the upper half of the 0–1% forecast
range for 2018 as a whole.
Accommodation costs are forecast to decline less sharply than last year, while private road
transport inflation is expected to fall.
MAS’ inflation forecasts are robust to alternative outcomes for key external prices, including
the upsides to global oil prices.
MAS  has  revised  its  global  (Brent)  oil  price  assumption  to  an  average  of  US$72  per
barrel for the year as a whole, up from US$66 previously.
MAS undertook a measured tightening of monetary policy in April this year after keeping
to a neutral stance for two years.
The  slope  of  the  S$  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  policy  band  was  increased  slightly,
consistent with a modest and gradual appreciation path.
The gradual normalisation of monetary policy was appropriate in the context of the continued
mild ascent of core inflation since H2 2016.
Core inflation is now around 1.5% at mid-year and we expect it to rise further, approaching
2% by year-end as the labour market continues to tighten.
Monetary policy is predicated on baseline projections of growth and inflation.  It does not
aim to pre-empt tail risk scenarios.
While  we  are  closely  monitoring  the  global  risk  factors  mentioned  earlier,  our  baseline
forecast is for continued economic expansion and gradually rising inflation.
The threat of a disruptive trade war has risen, but remains a tail risk for now. 
Our approach therefore has been to begin monetary policy normalisation but to do so in an
incremental fashion in view of still-benign inflation and growing trade-related tail risks.
In  the  short  term,  the  policy  band  provides  sufficient  room  for  the  S$  nominal  effective
exchange rate to accommodate modest shocks to the Singapore economy.
Future adjustments to monetary policy will depend on how the economy evolves and our
updated assessments of inflation and growth prospects.
PROPERTY MARKET AND MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY
The Singapore property market has seen a resurgence in prices and transactions over
the past year.
Prices  of  private  housing  have  increased  9.1%  since  the  trough  in  Q2  2017.    This  has
mostly offset the cumulative price decline of 11.6% during the four-year period between mid-
2013 and mid-2017.
The number of property transactions over the last 12 months was around 25% higher than
during the previous 12 months.
New housing loans over the last twelve months have risen by 34% year-on-year.
The  recovery  in  the  property  market  is  welcome  but  it  should  not  decouple  from
economic fundamentals.
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
If property prices rise too rapidly, they will outpace the growth in income.
Households will have to take on more leverage than they are able to manage; this risk
will be compounded as interest rates rise over time.
A rapid increase in prices also raises the risk of a destabilising market correction later when
additional supply comes on-stream.
MAS,  the  Ministry  of  National  Development,  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  are  closely
monitoring  developments  in  the  residential  property  market,  and  remain  committed  to
ensuring a sustainable market.
FINANCIAL INDUSTRY TRANSFORMATION MAP: A MID-TERM REPORT CARD
I will now move on to the financial services sector. 
The Financial Services Industry Transformation Map (ITM) sets out strategies co-created
by MAS and the industry to make Singapore a leading global financial centre in Asia.
We have set ambitious targets over the 5-year period from 2016 to 2020:
value-added growth in financial services of 4.3% p.a. and
creating 3,000 net jobs in financial services and 1,000 net jobs in FinTech p.a..
We are now exactly at the half-way mark of the ITM; let me give a report card on how the
industry has fared so far.
Financial  services—defined  as  the  finance  and  insurance  industry  excluding  holding
companies, slightly different from the DOS definition—grew an average of 3.3% per year
during 2016 and 2017.
This is below the 5-year target of 4.3% per annum.
Financial services growth was very weak in 2016, at just 1.8%, reflecting slower regional
growth and trade.
Growth rebounded strongly to 4.9% last year, driven by the strong performance of the fund
management segment and steady growth in financial intermediation.
The growth momentum has been sustained in the first half of this year and we are looking at
another good year for financial services.
We remain confident of meeting the 5-year average growth target of 4.3%.
We saw a net increase of 7,800 jobs in financial services and FinTech over 2016 and
2017, close to our ITM target of 8,000 jobs.
Job growth was mainly driven by the insurance and fund management industries, and to a
lesser extent by the banking industry. 
IT has emerged as a key functional area driving hiring demand across financial services—
some  of  the  fastest  growing  job  roles  are  in  software  development,  cyber  security,  data
analytics, artificial intelligence, and business process engineering.
FinTech alone is estimated to have contributed close to 2,000 of the net jobs created during
these two years.
MAS expects job growth in financial services this year to exceed the ITM target.
Let me now take stock of progress in each of the three pillars of the ITM:
business strategies
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
jobs and skills; and
innovation and technology.
BUSINESS STRATEGIES
I will start with our business strategies.
Singapore continued to do well in asset management, with assets under management
(AUM) increasing by an average 12.7% p.a. over 2016 and 2017.
Growth  was  robust  across  both  traditional  and  alternative  assets  on  the  back  of  higher
valuations and continued inflows to Asian markets.
We continued to anchor the operations of global asset managers in Singapore.  Example:
AIA set up its first group-wide regional investment hub here.
Efforts to grow the private financing market are also showing signs of promise.
Alternative AUM grew by an average 16.9% p.a. over 2016 and 2017, led by venture capital
and private equity.
There are currently about 220 VC and PE managers located in Singapore with the majority
of PE managers focused on growth and buyout strategies.
Around  85%  of  their  investments  are  across  Singapore  and  the  region,  targeting  higher
growth sectors such as consumer and retail, healthcare and IT.
We are also doing well in wealth management, with private banking AUM expanding an
average of 6.6% p.a. over 2016 and 2017.
A growing number of Asia’s wealthiest families have set up Family Offices in Singapore to
access investment opportunities in Asia.
Singapore’s  growth  as  a  wealth  management  hub  rests  on  its  reputation  as  a  clean  and
trusted jurisdiction.
Singapore’s activation of a broad network of Automatic Exchange of Information, or AEOI,
relationships, reaffirmed its commitment to international standards of transparency and tax
cooperation.
Singapore is emerging as a leading Asian bond market, with corporate debt issuance
volumes rising by 22% p.a. over the last two years.
MAS’  Asian  Bond  Grant  scheme  has  supported  Asian  companies  to  raise  international
capital in Singapore.
Much  of  the  increase  in  debt  issuances  here  was  by Asian  issuers—mostly  from  China,
Indonesia and India—raising debt capital in Singapore for the first time.
Green bonds are also gaining traction, with local and foreign issuers issuing over S$2 billion
of green bonds here.
The life insurance industry is doing well, with net premiums growing by 16% p.a. over
2016 and 2017.
Growth  was  boosted  by  Asian  consumers  demanding  more  savings  and  investment
products in search of yield.
Non-life insurance business is, however, facing structural challenges and weak growth.
Net non-life premiums grew by just 2% p.a. over 2016 and 17. 
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Business conditions have been challenging globally, due to excess capacity and downward
pressure on premiums.
But Singapore remains attractive as the premier reinsurance hub in Asia.
Global reinsurance players such as Swiss Re and Munich Re have recently set up their
regional headquarters here.
And we are making a push into alternative risk solutions such as risk pools and insurance-
linked securities or ILS.
Foreign  exchange  trading  declined  last  year  although  we  remain  the  third  largest  FX  centre
globally.
Singapore’s average daily FX trading volume grew by 20.5% in 2016 but declined by 6.7% in
2017.
This was mainly due to lower volatility in key currencies such as the Japanese Yen; and
some temporary trading desk turnover which has since been filled.
We are making headway in our strategy to position Singapore as an e-trading hub for FX,
facilitating better price discovery during Asian hours and better execution for players in the
region.
XTX Markets, a global FX liquidity provider, has announced its plans to set up its pricing
and trading engine in Singapore.
We are working with other key banks and e-trading platforms in the pipeline.
JOBS AND SKILLS
Let me move on to the second pillar of the ITM—jobs and skills.
More finance professionals are going for training and development.
Some 27,000 financial industry professionals have benefited from SkillsFuture programmes
during 2016-2017.
There remains, however, a shortfall of specialised talent in IT—which we are addressing
in two ways:
MAS, IMDA, the Institute of Banking and Finance and institutes of higher learning are working
together to deepen the local IT talent pool at the entry level.
IBF  is  engaging  financial  institutions  on  developing  local  IT  talent  through  company-led
training and professional conversion programmes (PCPs).
We have ramped up efforts to reskill and redeploy banking professionals into emerging roles.
Job roles are changing as banks pivot towards digital banking models over time. 
We must ensure that our banking professionals can take on these new roles.
More than 3,000 consumer banking employees will be reskilled through a PCP over the next
two years, acquiring relevant skills in sales, product development, and digital engagement.
PCPs are also in the works for two more areas in banking –
wealth management (which is rapidly growing) and
operations and support (which is undergoing disruptive change).
IBF will launch a dedicated career centre next month, to offer integrated support across
career planning, skills development, and job placement.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
While the financial industry continues to create jobs on a net basis, there is a lot of churn
and movement in the industry.
Skills development, career pathways, and job placements need to be looked at holistically.
IBF  will  leverage  on  its  strong  network  with  financial  institutions  to  help  professionals
navigate and make their career transitions.
IBF will also work closely with partner agencies – e2i, NTUC and WSG – to support financial
sector professionals looking to move into other sectors. 
INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY
The third pillar of the ITM is innovation and technology.
Singapore has global mindshare today as one of the leading Fintech hubs in the world.
Our  FinTech  agenda  is  well  known  and  there  will  be  other  occasions  to  talk  about  the
various initiatives.
Today, I want to emphasise the central role played by regulation in promoting innovation and
technology.
To get innovation right, we must get regulation right.
This is a creative tension – managing risk while facilitating innovation.  It calls for a pragmatic
and flexible approach; there is no one-size-fits-all approach.
Sometimes, it means not rushing to regulate so that we do not front-run innovation
e.g.  in  the  case  of  block  chains  or  distributed  ledgers  where  the  technology  is  still
evolving.
Sometimes, it means updating regulation to take account of new technologies and new risks
e.g.  in  the  case  of  cloud  computing  and  robo-advisers,  where  we  issued  special
guidelines.
Sometimes,  it  means  being  specific  about  the  risks  we  want  to  address  and  taking  a
targeted approach to regulation
e.g. in the case of crypto assets where we focus on the crypto intermediaries for anti-
money laundering purposes rather than the crypto assets.
Sometimes,  it  means  taking  an  activity-based  approach  to  regulation,  setting  rules  for
specific activities rather than the entity as a whole
e.g.  in  the  case  of  the  proposed  Payment  Services  Bill,  where  licensees  will  be
regulated  according  to  the  activities  they  conduct  because  different  activities  pose
different risks.
The  trick  is  to  identify  the  risks  we  are  most  concerned  with  and  finding  the  most
targeted  way  of  regulating  those  risks  so  that  the  business  has  maximum  latitude  to
innovate and grow.
Now, there is one more approach in MAS’ tool kit and that is the “regulatory sandbox”. 
The regulatory sandbox facilitates live experimentation of innovative financial services and
business models within pre-defined boundaries.
MAS is probably the second jurisdiction in the world to introduce the regulatory sandbox and
it is one of the most comprehensive ones around.
It  has  attracted  much  attention  here  and  abroad  and  I  thought  I  will  end  off  with  a  quick
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
progress report on what has been happening in the sandbox.
The sandbox basically provides a conduit for both regulated and unregulated firms to
engage MAS with innovative ideas and proposals.
Since  its  launch  in  June  2016,  MAS  has  provided  guidance  to  more  than  140  firms  and
individuals.
We  have  received  more  than  40  sandbox  applications,  covering  a  broad  range  of
financial services and technologies.
The services offered include investment management, broking, crowd funding, cross-border
funds transfer, insurance, and financial advisory.
We  see  interesting  applications  of  big  data,  distributed  ledgers,  machine  learning  and
artificial intelligence, to increase efficiency or derive new insights.
Of the 40 over applications we received:
Nearly half withdrew their applications for various reasons, exemplifying the fluidity of
innovation and the natural volatility in the business of start-ups.
About a third proceeded without the need to be tested in the sandbox.
We take this as a positive reflection of our existing regulations, which provide sufficient
flexibility for innovative models while safeguarding against risks.
It is not necessary that innovation needs to happen only in a sandbox.
The remainder of the applications—about one in five—were approved or are under
review. To cite a few experiments in the sandbox:
Kristal Advisors, is experimenting with machine learning to determine and recommend
suitable investment portfolios for its customers.
Thin  Margin,  a  start-up  that  offers  online  money-changing  at  competitive  exchange
rates, is creating a hassle-free experience for its customers.
LumenLab, is experimenting with distributed ledgers on gestational diabetes insurance,
which  can  trigger  claims  payout  automatically  to  the  insured  upon  meeting  certain
conditions.
This has been a learning journey for MAS too and we have been trying to improve how
we manage the regulatory sandbox.
We have streamlined our internal processes and made the sandbox application form more
straightforward, reducing the processing time for sandbox applications.
We  are  now  exploring  the  idea  of  “pre-defined  sandboxes”  where  firms  can  start  their
experiments more quickly without going through the rigorous review with the current case-
by-case approach.
CONCLUSION
Let me wrap up.
The global economy has had a good run so far and signs are that the rest of the year will
be reasonably good.
But as you know from following the World Cup, things do not always turn out as expected.
The  risks  that  could  derail  economic  growth  have  heightened  somewhat  and  bear  close
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
watching.
The financial sector has been doing well.
Not only growing in importance as a global financial centre, but also serving Asia’s economic
development,  and  facilitating  Singapore’s  transition  to  an  innovative  and  digital  economy
while creating good jobs for Singaporeans.
And  Singapore  has  been  able  to  do  this,  not  only  because  of  the  strong  partnership
between the industry and MAS, but also the stability and trust that underpin the financial
system.
Maintaining financial stability and trust are central to MAS’ mission.
The annual report summarises our many regulatory and supervisory initiatives – to make
derivatives markets safer, to enhance cyber security, to promote a good risk culture in our
financial institutions.
The annual report also devotes two pages of infographics to the enforcement actions MAS
has taken against those who breach our regulations or fail to meet our standards.
MAS does not tolerate:
abuse of our financial system for money laundering or tax evasion;
misconduct or manipulation in our securities markets; or
mis-selling to consumers who place their trust and money in our financial institutions
and their representatives.
But being a no-nonsense regulator does not stand in the way of being also business-
friendly.
For financial institutions who want to grow their business in Singapore, build up the skills of
their employees, or want to innovate or experiment with new technologies, MAS is a happy
partner and collaborator.
1
“The  Goldilocks  Economy  –  Will  the  Three  Bears  Return?”,  Speech  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director,
Monetary Authority of Singapore, at UBS Wealth Insights Conference, 15 January 2018.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
