Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: In real time
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at InstaPay Go Live, Manila, 23 April 2018.
 On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I welcome everyone to this important event, another
significant milestone in our shared goal of having a safer, more efficient, affordable and reliable
payments system.
Today, the country launches another priority Automated Clearing House (ACH) under the National
Retail Payment System (NRPS). 
We call it,  “InstaPay.”
Like  the  PESONet  launched  in  November  of  last  year,  InstaPay  is    innovative.    It  is  likewise
expected to create new markets and add new value.  Its launch and operation further improves
the Philippine retail payment system and moves us closer to creating a cash-lite economy. Our
vision,  to  create  an  inter-operable  payment  ecosystem,  allowing  seamless  electronic  fund
transfers and payments from one account to another, is not only being articulated.  It is becoming
REAL now.  In real time. 
InstaPay’s  name  fully  represents  what  this  newest  ACH  achieves  —  real  time  account-to-
account payments or transfers of funds.  Instant payments.
The interoperability of InstaPay allows users to enjoy seamless transactions between accounts
maintained  in  any  of  the  participating  institutions  both  bank  and  non-bank.    Beneficiaries  are
assured of immediately receiving transaction amounts in full.... no deductions.
Consumers need not leave their homes or places of work to withdraw cash and make over-the-
counter payments for bills. Conveniently available on electronic delivery channels through  mobile
apps and internet banking facilities provided by participating banks and e-money issuers, on a 24
hour basis, 365 days a year, payments via Instapay can be made anytime. Payments can be
made even after banking hours, on weekends or holidays.   With InstaPay, electronic payments
can also be made to the government for taxes, licenses, and other fees in real time.
Catering to low value payments, InstaPay safely and quickly moves funds.  It produces efficiency
in terms of cost and resources.  Reduced cash usage will allow banks and the government to
minimize security, transport, overhead, and other incidental costs that come with cash handling.
With InstaPay, we see greater empowerment of both the public and private sectors.  Greater
efficiencies  of  electronic  payment  channels  will  also  bring  about  an  accelerated    velocity  of
payments, increasing economic activities.
We see a rise in public confidence in making electronic payments — this can, and will result in
positive culture change!  As more and more consumers gain confidence in making electronic
payments, we look forward to the market expanding with more innovations.
Participating  financial  institutions  are  granted  greater  opportunities  to  diversify  and  widen  the
products and services they offer.  Innovation in financial services delivery will thrive.  With a more
efficient  retail  payments  infrastructure,  various  services  will  emerge  as  the  needs  of  financial
consumers evolve and become more sophisticated.  
We  anticipate  the  emergence  of  a  new  competitive  space  where  service  innovation  is
encouraged. New business models, technologies, industry wide collaborations and partnerships
will  be  developed.    With  the  implementation  of  NRPS  and  the  launch  of  new ACHs  such  as
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
InstaPay,  financial  institutions  will  be  challenged  to  develop  innovative  business  models
customized  to  their  target  markets’  needs,  to  ensure  client  loyalty,  and  to  better  compete  for
market share.
Our  efforts  in  implementing  the  NRPS  are  rapidly  providing  individuals,  businesses  and
government,  additional  options  on  how  to  complete  payments,  collections  or  disbursements,
depending on their specific needs and the characteristics of the fund transfers or payments.
Right  now  as  we  launch  InstaPay,  we  have  seven  (7)  pioneer  BSP-Supervised  Financial
Institutions capable of sending and receiving payments.  In addition, another thirteen (13) are able
to receive payments.  By the middle of this year — in a few months — we expect more financial
institutions  to participate in InstaPay.   In parallel, the BSP is engaging the private sector and the
government to encourage their adoption of InstaPay and PESONet to meet their payment system
requirements.    We  now  have  critical  mass.    It  is  only  a  matter  of  time  before  we  attain
widespread usage.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  digital  transformation  of  financial  services  is  happening  now!  The
country’s financial services industry needs to evolve to remain competitive and relevant.
The steps we have taken to implement the NRPS — the launch of PESONet and now, InstaPay,
would not have been possible without constant and close dialogue and collaboration with you, our
partners in the industry and with the Philippine Payments Management Inc.  (PPMI), an industry-
led self-governing body and an important ally in pursuing NRPS goals.  Our collaboration and
cooperation is real, authentic and has produced real results.
Working  together,  I  am  sure  that  the  PPMI  and  the  BSP  can,  and  will  continue  to  foster 
economic  growth  though  the  promotion  of  electronic  payments.  We  shall  continue  to  work 
together  in  establishing  a  safe,  efficient,  and  reliable  retail  payment  system  to  make  our 
country more competitive in this Digital Age.
Congratulations everyone on the launching of InstaPay. 
Maraming Salamat! Mabuhay tayong lahat!
2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
