Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Islamic finance – building solutions for a
sustainable future
Speech by Mr Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the 3rd Annual Symposium on Islamic Finance "Islamic Finance - Building
Solutions for a Sustainable Future", Kuala Lumpur, 12 December 2017.
*   *   *
rd
It is an honour for me to be here today at this 3  Annual Symposium on Islamic Finance. We are
gathered here to engage and affirm our vision towards realising the potential of Islamic finance in
supporting the Sustainable Development Goals that form the new global development blueprint.
Time  is  of  the  essence  in  meeting  the  goals  and  targets  by  2030.  We  have  to  collectively
strategise our actions to bring them to life. How we balance economic prosperity, social equity
and environmental responsibility matters greatly to the world. It is without a doubt that we cannot
have continued prosperity without sustainability.
In  my  remarks  this  morning,  I  will  touch  on  the  current  global  economic  environment  and
challenges  facing  the  world  that  point  to  the  need  for  us  to  promote  fiscal,  social  and
environmental sustainability. I will also discuss the imperatives that can strengthen the role of
Islamic  finance  in  promoting  inclusive  growth,  reducing  inequality  and  accelerating  poverty
reduction.
The  past  50  years  has  been  a  period  of  extraordinary  global  economic  expansion.  The  world
economy expanded sixfold and average per capita income nearly tripled. Considerable progress
was made in elevating living standards in many corners of the world, with hundreds of millions of
people lifted out of poverty. The world economy has also gone through great transformation. We
now have a truly global village. Closer ties have been formed between countries with the help of
rapid technological progress and increased international integration. Stronger trade and financial
linkages follow suit, at a rigour, more than could have been imagined, half a century ago.
Yet, against these gains, the world faces daunting challenges affecting sustainability that could
dramatically alter the overall growth outlook in the next 50 years. Today, I would like to name
three  challenges  that  confront  us.  The  first  is  climate  change.  What  was  once  a  theoretical
discussion in lecture halls, today, climate change has impacted us more frequently and in more
visible  ways  than  ever  before.  The  increasingly  complex  needs  and  demands  of  modern
civilisation have indeed exerted a significant toll on the environment. Over the past two decades,
carbon dioxide emissions have risen significantly, leading to a wide range of problems such as
rising  sea  levels;  melting  glaciers;  and  more  extreme  weather  events.  It  is  alarming  that  the
number of reported weather-related natural disasters has increased threefold since the 1960s.
The effects of these events have been devastating – economic activities have been disrupted;
large resources have been rechannelled; and vulnerable segments of societies have been the
most affected. The El Niño phenomenon for example, affected many developing countries that
are dependent upon agriculture and fishing, particularly those bordering the Pacific Ocean. Last
year, it left millions of people hungry and in need of food aid; water shortages across Southeast
Asia; and higher food prices globally. Closer to home, thousands have been displaced after the
northern state of Penang was hit by the worst flood in more than 20 years. These are indications
that despite progress made in regulating global emissions of greenhouse gases over the past
decades, we need to do more to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change.
Moving  on  to  the  second  challenge  –  growing  inequality.  Globally,  the  benefits  of  economic
growth have been uneven. In reality, not all members of society have fully benefitted from the
growth. While some have gained, many have been dislocated – feeling that they have been left
behind. Today, global inequality is at its highest since the 19th century. Recent studies show that
the richest 1% now owns half of the world’s wealth combined. In stark comparison, 70% of the
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
world’s adult population holds only 3% of the global wealth. Globally, continued widening of the
inequality  gap  would  be  detrimental  to  economic  growth  and  social  progress  in  the  long-run.
Inequality is a threat to growth if it leads to those in the low income segment suffering poor health
and low productivity; and to struggle in obtaining quality education. Governments worldwide are
already taking steps to address this concern – but more collective effort is needed to make any
significant progress – in closing the gap between the rich and the poor.
The third challenge is the retreat in globalisation. Increasingly inward-looking political sentiment
poses  serious  threat  to  trade  liberalisation  –  which  has  formed  the  global  economy’s  growth
engine  since  the  1980s.  Two  decades  ago,  trade  liberalisation  enabled  developing  countries
such as China and India to achieve exceptional growth, and in the process, unshackling millions
from  deep  poverty.  The  calls  for  trade  protectionism  that  are  rife  in  the  advanced  economies
today is therefore a major concern. If left unaddressed, the upsurge in protectionism and insular
policies may lead to a reverse in globalisation, which would be detrimental to living standards.
I have painted a rather bleak picture that depicts the fragile state of today’s world. Various forces
at play have led us to where we are now – finance being one of them. While finance has lifted the
lives  of  many,  some  argue  that  it  has  derailed  from  its  intended  objectives,  leading  to  many
economic,  environmental  and  social  problems  that  we  face  today.  They  argue  that  the  global
economy is very much driven by global financial capital, with most of it managed by financial
entities that are attuned to financial risk and return considerations. Beyond these considerations,
the non-financial impacts of an investment or ‘externalities’, such as rain forest destruction; water
and air pollution are rarely considered and often simply ignored. I believe that the truth is more
complicated  than  that,  and  that  these  views  disregard  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in
making finance more “ethical” in recent years. Regardless, I believe that it is timely to recalibrate
our moral compass – and to explore innovative ways and solutions that finance can offer to build
a more sustainable future. If I may say, to discover humanity within the world of finance.
As  we  embark  on  this  quest,  we  can  consider  the  role  that  Islamic  finance  can  play  in
contributing towards sustainable development. With positive values and  ethical  considerations
ingrained within Islamic finance, it provides a ready and workable blueprint for finance that best
works for the people and the planet. In supporting economic growth that is both inclusive and
environmentally  sound,  Islamic  finance  can  potentially  realise  the  promise  of  sustainable
development – that is to not leave anyone behind. Ultimately, it can help to build shared prosperity
for  not  only  the  generation  of  today,  but  also  the  generations  to  come.  There  is  already  large
acceptance of Islamic finance in the global economy, with global assets amounting to USD1.9
trillion in 2016. But the success of Islamic finance cannot, and must not be measured solely on
headline numbers such as this. In our move towards a sustainable future, the way forward for
Islamic finance, in my view, lies in four imperatives.
First,  Islamic  finance  must  prove  its  capacity  to  innovate.  In  these  rapidly  changing  times,
innovation has to be far from static and to continuously keep ahead of time. Just as the needs of
the economy and society change, Islamic finance also needs to evolve to keep pace in being part
of  the  solutions.  To  achieve  quality  growth,  innovation  has  to  focus  on  amplifying  the  positive
value  and  impact  of  Islamic  finance  to  the  economy  and  society.  This  necessitates  Islamic
finance moving beyond being perceived as mere imitations of conventional finance. A step up is
to have distinct modifications made to the products, services, business practice and operations
of  Islamic  finance.  The  desired  level  of  innovation  is  however  –  to  significantly  improve  the
offerings of Islamic finance and to build a sustainable business model to meet the unfulfilled ‘real’
needs  of  the  economy  and  customers.  The  delivery  of  products  and  services  to  SMEs  for
example, can be remodelled to reflect deep understanding of their needs and circumstances.
This paves the way for tailor made financial services solutions that can better assist aspiring
entrepreneurs. To illustrate, the financing model of Islamic banks for SMEs can be more holistic
–  to  include  provision  of  entrepreneurship  training  and  consulting  services,  as  well  as
infrastructure support. This model not only leads to greater sustainability, but also provides more
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
meaningful customer experience.
Within the Islamic capital market, we already see good examples of innovation in the form of
green sukuk, an innovative financing vehicle to combat climate change. The recent issuances of
the world’s first green sukuk by two energy companies in Malaysia have kicked start the growth
of  green  sukuk  market  and  will  significantly  boost  the  “cleantech”  movement.  Fundamentally,
Islamic finance is well positioned to advance the green agenda, as environmental protection and
sustainable  growth  objectives  are  already  embedded  within  its  principles.  The  structures  of
sukuk make it well-suited to channel global Shariah-compliant capital to fund renewable energy
and  climate  change  projects.  Socially  responsible  investment  (SRI)  sukuk  has  also  made  its
debut  with  the  unique  vaccine  sukuk  programme  launched  in  2014  that  raised  funds  worth
USD500 million for children’s immunisation in a number of poor countries. These are proofs of
new ways of mobilising resources to increase sustainable humanitarian financing to reach non-
traditional donors and responsible investors.
Innovation within the Islamic social finance space can also assist to address a number of issues
facing the ummah and society at large. Waqf, sadaqah and zakat have large potential to become
important additional sources of financing for people in need of aid. Each year, Muslims worldwide
generously donate through these channels. The global volume of zakat itself, collected each year
through formal mechanisms is estimated to be in the tens of billions of dollars. A conservative
estimate by Islamic Development Bank indicated that there is at least USD600 billion of zakat
collected are available to meet humanitarian needs. I believe that if collected and channeled in
the  right  way,  the  funds  can  be  of  great  value  in  fighting  poverty,  leading  to  long-term  social
improvements and long-term resilience of communities. Islamic banks can play a greater role
and participate more actively in this area, particularly in developing innovative ways to enhance
access  to  and  outreach  of  zakat.  Positive  partnerships  between  Islamic  banks  and  zakat
institutions is a means to explore in this regard, to provide greater convenience to customers,
while strengthening public trust and confidence in the system.
Second,  Islamic  finance  must  embrace  the  tech  revolution  to  power  up  innovation.  Fintech  is
rapidly  changing  the  facets  of  the  global  financial  industry,  reshaping  the  expectations  of
consumers  and  businesses  on  financial  services.  For  Islamic  finance,  there  are  large
opportunities in fintech to develop financial solutions that can help drive Islamic finance to deliver
even  greater,  wider  and  deeper  positive  impact  –  particularly  in  realising  its  promise  in  risk-
sharing and providing support for genuine and productive economic activities. An example is the
Investment Account  Platform  in  Malaysia,  which  is  a  multi-bank  online  platform  that  connects
investors to viable economic ventures, mainly SMEs. Technology can also widen access to and
increase  outreach  of  social  financing  instruments  through  digitisation  of  collection  and
disbursement of its proceeds. Fintech startups such as LaunchGood and SkolaFund are already
making their name in social impact initiatives, which is a promising start.
The reality however is that Islamic fintech is still in its infancy and growing – and there is plenty of
catching up with conventional peers to do. What is required in making this leap is for leaders to
think far across and beyond the industry that we are familiar with today. The transition can be
accelerated by challenging conventional wisdom on competition to create new value curve and
market  spaces.  Through  this,  the  Islamic  finance  industry  can  strategically  leverage  on
technology  to  deliver  innovative  solutions  that  can  create  sustainability,  including  financial
inclusion  solutions  that  can  help  bridge  the  “digital  divide”.  The  industry  can  certainly  take
inspiration from the agility of the non-financial services industry to adopt, adapt and collaborate
with fintech players – a strategy proven to be far superior. A good example is the partnerships
formed between over 11,000 post offices in the U.K with a couple of fintech startups that have
enabled  these  challengers  to  extend  their  simple,  transparent  online  services  to  in-branch
facilities.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The third imperative – Islamic finance must invest in capacity for the future, in particular in talent
– for long term sustainable value creation. The journey ahead is one that is long and complex.
This  calls  for  the  industry  to  fight  the  war  for  talent  relentlessly.  The  industry  can  go  far  if  it
broadens its talent sphere, by providing top talent careers that are not just financially rewarding
but  also  intellectually  stimulating  and  socially  meaningful.  This  is  a  win-win  strategy.  For  the
industry, attracting quality talent with a passion in creating greater good through Islamic finance
helps in building a more sustainable business model. Such top-notch talent is essential in driving
and executing innovative business strategies that will realise the full potential of Islamic finance.
For  the  talent  themselves  –  such  career  opportunities  will  increase  their  engagement  and
commitment  –  hence  driving  their  productivity  to  achieve  tangible  results.  With  a  more
demanding future ahead of us, greater talent preparation is also required to effectively provide
and implement solutions to real world problems. A much broader set of competencies that go
beyond knowledge in the application of Islamic finance principles provides a stronger foundation
to achieve this aim. This includes wider skills and knowledge ranging from green financing to
conducting  holistic  assessments  of  credit  linked  to  value-based  intermediation.  Knowledge  of
behavioural finance can also be used to “nudge” customers into making good financial decisions.
Only  with  constant  renewal  and  transformation  of  Islamic  finance  professionals  that  we  can
remain ahead of the curve.
Fourth, which is my final point, is that the march towards globalisation of Islamic finance must
continue. A  reflection  on  the  past  traces  us  to  the  origins  of  Islamic  finance,  with  its  roots  in
supporting  international  trade  and  commerce.  An  overview  of  modern  day  Islamic  finance
however – with the exception of sukuk – appears to be more domestic centric. It is timely for
Islamic finance to play a more prominent role in mobilising capital to strengthen global trade and
investment linkages. After all, it is in line with the aspiration for Islamic finance to support real and
productive economic sectors. The need is more compelling as international trade has a key role
in promoting economic growth. Greater participation in trade can also ultimately alleviate poverty
in developing countries. This mission is particularly important now, given recent setbacks in the
march towards globalisation. Globally, we see that prospects in trade are improving, with trade
between  emerging  economies,  particularly Asia  is  expected  to  increase  by  USD5.3  trillion  by
2030. Access to conventional trade finance is however a continuous challenge faced by many
developing countries. Said differently, this is a window of opportunity for Islamic finance to offer
new  solutions,  and  to  prove  itself  as  a  viable  channel  to  complement  conventional  financing
solutions.
Shariah-compliant  trade  finance  solutions  can  also  provide  the  much  needed  support  for  the
multi-billion dollar halal export industry that has increasing participation of SMEs. This can assist
businesses to meet the strong demand for halal products and services globally. Islamic finance
already has a good head-start in the trade finance scene, with a wide range of Islamic financial
products that are now available to importers and exporters. More can be explored to widen the
spectrum of Shariah-compliant trade finance offerings and enhance trade finance facilitation by
Islamic  finance  players  to  spur  greater  cross-border  trade,  particularly  by  SMEs.  To  cite  an
example, enhancing the availability of trade credit takaful as a risk mitigant can help spur greater
cross-border trade. I also believe that more can be done to deploy technology to untap the large
business opportunities in trade, which includes the integration and digitalisation of trade finance
as well as e-commerce.
Let  me  now  conclude.  The  issue  of  sustainability  is  a  matter  of  grave  concern  for  the  global
community. If sustainable development takes a backseat, the global landscape in the future will
look  very  different.  We  might  see  the  gains  that  we  have  built  and  enjoyed  over  the  decades
erased.  The  clock  is  ticking,  and  the  world  has  to  act  now.  On  its  part,  Islamic  finance  must
contribute  towards  generating  solutions  to  this  challenge.  In  this  endeavour,  steadfast
commitment from the Islamic finance industry to innovate; to embrace fintech; to invest in talent;
and  to  play  a  greater  role  in  international  trade  is  crucial.  Islamic  finance  must  be  a  force  for
global good, proving that the sustainability agenda isn’t just good for the world, but is good for
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
business. It must prove the dictum “doing well by doing good”. This is what Shariah calls us to do
– to benefit the people and planet; and bringing greater prosperity to the ummah. 
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
