Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Moving the capital markets dialogue forward
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  120th Anniversary  of  the  Bureau  of  the  Treasury,  Manila,  27
November 2017.
 Finance  Secretary  Carlos  G.  Dominguez  III,  SEC  Chair  Teresita  J.  Herbosa,  PDIC  President
Roberto B. Tan, National Treasurer Rosalia V. de Leon, Commissioner Ephyro Luis B. Amatong,
BAP Senior Associate Director Pinky S. Padronia, MART President Michael Joseph M. Delfino,
colleagues  from  government  agencies,  friends  from  industry  associations  and  media,  good
afternoon.
Today is a joyous occasion marked by significant milestones. My heartfelt congratulations to the
Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) as you celebrate your 120th anniversary.  It is also apt that today,
we  witness  the  launch  of  several  initiatives  that  will  deepen  the  local  currency  debt  market,
including especially infrastructure support to facilitate market transactions.  ...there are so many
occasions of significance on this day! 
Looking back
1
In a 2006 paper I wrote, I described the corporate bond market as “expanding but nascent” . 
While  our  local  currency  bond  market  has  grown  substantially  over  the  last  decade,  it  still
remains  one  of  the  smallest  in  the  region.    The  numbers  show  that  the  outstanding  local
currency  bonds  represent  only  34.2  percent  of  the  country’s  GDP,  largely  composed  of
government-issued debt.
As market participants, you are very familiar with the challenges we face in our local currency
debt  market. 
Imperfections  of  pricing
methodologies that lead to problems related to an unreliable yield curve… Limited ability of the
market to offer hedging instruments… We have seen how these long-outstanding issues limit the
growth and development of our debt market.
Irregular  supply  and  market 
fragmentation  … 
Three months ago at a kick-off event at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), we began, what I
called  then,  “a  meaningful  conversation”  among  market  participants  –  prime  movers  and
stakeholders in our debt market, from both the government and private sectors. Understanding
the importance of a deeper and more active capital market, to complement bank lending and
serve  as  an  alternative  source  of  industry  financing  and  to  manage  risks,  we  made  a  bold
commitment, and unveiled the Philippine roadmap for developing the local debt market. 
The roadmap
The roadmap was deliberately designed to adopt a sequential approach, where urgent reforms
and foundational issues are prioritized over an 18-month time frame. These include increasing
the volume and consistency of treasury issuances across the key benchmark posts, organizing
the  repo  market  for  government  securities,  and  enhancing  the  government  securities  eligible
dealers (GSED) program to support secondary market liquidity, developing the yield curve, and
strengthening the market oversight framework.
Moving the dialogue forward
Since  August,  we  have  been  working  closely  with  you  to  implement  the  outlined  initiatives. 
Following  the  endorsement  by  BTr  of  the  implementation  of  the  Government  Securities  Repo
Program  and  the  grant  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  of  a  provisional
license  to  MART  as  a  self-regulatory  organization  (SRO),  the  Monetary  Board  approved  last
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
November 23, 2017, the assignment of a zero-percent reserve requirement (RR) on the repo
transactions  under  the  Program,  issued  through  BSP  Circular  No.  983.  The  zero-percent  RR
together with the exemption from DST minimize friction costs on repo transactions that conform
to international best practices.
During last August’s workshop, I remarked that a meaningful conversation is only as good as the
actions and changes that follow it. Today, we have a clearer understanding and fulfillment of our
respective roles in the capital market reform agenda. 
Reform agenda operationalized
Our  capital  market  reform  agenda  officially  unfolds  with  the  inaugural  repo  trade  under  the
Government  Securities  Repo  Program.    We  also  anticipate  the  announcement  of  the  GSED
market-makers later on. Our roadmap is being operationalized!  Today’s inaugural launch of the
organized  repo  market  is  a  clear  manifestation  that  we  have,  indeed,  moved  beyond
conversations and plans, and have taken concrete actions to achieve our common objectives. 
The Government Securities Repo Program
The  Government  Securities  Repo  Program  is  a  key  initiative  under  the  Local  Currency  Debt
Market Development Reform package. The BSP strongly believes that the establishment of an
organized  repo  market  is  a  key  element  in  developing  and  deepening  the  domestic  financial
market. 
In  particular,  the  organized  interdealer  repo  market  is  expected  to  boost  market  liquidity  and
enhance  price  discovery  as  it  gives  GSEDs  the  ability  to  quote  two-way  prices.  Further,  the
“deliver-out, true sale basis” feature of this instrument is expected to provide market makers the
ability to take positions and provide them greater flexibility in managing their portfolios.
We recognize, however, that the reuse of underlying government securities without appropriate
safeguards can contribute to increased counterparty and settlement risks, as well as the build-up
of excessive leverage in the financial system.  The establishment of an organized repo market
therefore  addresses  these  concerns  through  appropriate  financial  market  infrastructure,
regulatory oversight, and prudent governance standards. 
Initiatives of the Bangko Sentral
On the part of BSP, last year, we issued reporting requirements on repo transactions designed
to  capture  timely  and  comprehensive  transaction-level  data.  This  will  strengthen  our  financial
surveillance,  particularly  in  monitoring  market  trends  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  repo  market.  In
turn, this will enable the BSP to formulate effective policy responses to ensure continued stability
of the financial system.
Strategic financial sector reforms, such as the development of the local currency debt market,
are high priority.  The foreign exchange market reforms and digitization of the financial system
are other critical and complementary reforms. 
Forward together
The  task  of  implementing  reforms  is  fraught  with  challenges.    It  is  a  long  journey  but  we  are
taking purposeful strides forward, together. To be sure, there is still much work to be done. There
are  further  refinements  in  operational  rules,  data  access,  and  monitoring  processes.  Other
aspects of the roadmap need to be implemented. These are challenges that cannot be taken on
or  addressed  by  any  one  regulatory  agency,  institution,  or  industry  association  alone.  Our
partnership must endure.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Congratulations everyone!
Happy 120th Anniversary again to the Bureau of the Treasury!
Thank you and good afternoon!
1
The corporate bond market in the Philippines, BIS Papers No. 26, February 2006
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
