Loi Bakani: The inclusion imperatives - advancing policies, targets
and plans
Keynote address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the Asia-
Pacific Financial Inclusion Forum on “The Inclusion Imperatives: Advancing Policies, Targets and
Plans”, Tokyo, 27-28 June 2018.
Acknowledgements
 Chul Ju Kim, Deputy Dean of the Asia Development Bank Institute;
Nobuhide Hayashi, Chairman of Mizuho Bank and Co-Chair of the Finance and Economics
Working Group of APEC Business Advisory Council (ABAC);
Annmaree O’Keeffee AM, Chairperson, Foundation for Development Cooperation (FDC),
Michelle Curry, CEO of the FDC,
Senior Government Officials,
Industry Experts,
Distinguished Delegates of the APEC economies,
Development Partners & Ladies and Gentlemen;
Good morning,
Let me acknowledge the Foundation for Development Cooperation, and the co-conveners of this
summit, ABAC  and  the Asian  Development  Bank  Institute  (ADBI)  for  bringing  us  together,  to
continue discussing financial inclusion in a holistic way.
Evolving Regional and Global Initiatives for Financial Inclusion
Distinguished guests, effective financial inclusion is critical to drive an inclusive development that
has a positive impact for people at the grassroots. As we all know, 2018 is Papua New Guinea’s
year as APEC chair and there has been a need for APEC economies to cooperate to bring forth
policy outcomes that reflect the aspirations of APEC collectively and meet the high expectations
of the people in our economies. PNG’s focus is on achieving increased understanding in APEC
towards advancing trade and economic policies that secure regional integration inroads; ease
connectivity bottlenecks and structurally promote more inclusive and sustainable growth. PNG
through the Finance Ministers Process has been able to champion financial inclusion. I see this
forum  as  an  important  opportunity  to  engage  in  high  level  dialogue  to  review  current  trends,
recent  achievements,  ongoing  challenges  and  opportunities  relative  to  financial  inclusion  and
inclusive growth for the region.
To complement our various national level financial inclusion initiatives, there have been a number
of global initiatives aimed at increasing financial inclusion. Over 40 countries have set targets for
financial inclusion in the past two years, through platforms like the G-20 Financial Inclusion Peer
Learning  Program  (PLP)  and  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion’s  (AFI)  Maya  Declaration.
Complementary alliances at the private sector level or topical level (such as alliances focused on
improving electronic payments systems) provide an additional engine for framing and motivating
countries  to  strive  for  high  financial  inclusion  goals.  The  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable
Development  recognises  that  eradicating  poverty  in  all  its  forms  and  dimensions,  including
extreme  poverty,  is  the  greatest  global  challenge  and  an  indispensable  requirement  for
sustainable development.
The  APEC  Finance  Ministers  have  set  a  clear  objective  for  this  Forum  which  is  “to  identify
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
th
concrete actions that financial policy makers can take to expand the reach of financial services to
the underserved.” Now in its 8  year, the Forum is taking a distinctive approach by broadening
the view on financial inclusion as an enabler of inclusive growth and development with a strong
focus on implementation as reflected in this year’s theme: “A Call to Action- Advancing Policies,
Targets and Plans.” 
Wealth Creation
You will recall, in August 2017, FDC hosted the Wealth Creation Roundtable in Port Moresby,
Papua New Guinea to discuss strategies for ‘Wealth Creation’ across the Pacific region. The
question addressed was the definition of Financial Inclusion to be broadened so that the demand
side  needs  are  a  more  vital  contribution  to  the  supply  side  focusing  more  on  the  positive
contribution to people’s lives, wellbeing and prosperity as opposed to what solution we want to
sell them. Essentially highlighting that financial inclusion needs to be more than just accessibility
and  affordability,  it  is  about  achieving  secure  financial  outcomes  in  the  form  of  assets  and
protections,  where  wealth  building  is  the  aim,  and  for  wealth  transfer  the  inflexion  point  in
sustainable poverty reduction inter-generationally.  In PNG and in other economies, reports show
that access to a bank account does not drive usage however mere access to a bank account
‘counts’  as  being  financially  included.  After  reviewing  PNG’s  first  national  financial  inclusion
strategy, two priority areas were added on, that is, the Informal economy including agriculture
and the Resources Sector, recognizing the need to leverage opportunities and advance financial
inclusion  within  the  resources  sector  and  enhance  access  to  and  usage  of  finance  for
enterprises in the informal economy including agriculture.
As such, the need for ‘Asset Building’ policies and programs as an extension of the focus on
financial  inclusion  of  the  poor,  was  highlighted  in  that  2017  roundtable  forum.  A  means  to
generate Wealth Creation can be to define the investment opportunity for superannuation funds
into  the  micro  banking  sector.  There  is  currently  estimated  to  be  over  USD  30  billion  within
superannuation/provident  and  sovereign  wealth  funds  in  the  Pacific  countries,  making  these
funds  some  of  the  largest  financial  institutions  in  the  region.  Well  leveraged,  these  funds  can
offer  significant  potential  for  long  term  and  sustainable  economic  growth;  however,  many
countries struggle to realise the opportunity latent within this financial base.
Structural Reforms
Creating the structural and institutional environment in terms of economic policy that addresses
pathways  to  optimise  the  investment  and  utilisation  of  these  funds  is  important.  Utilising  and
leveraging  better  financial  returns  to  support  and  direct  Asset  Building  outcomes  requires
cooperation across an interdisciplinary eco-system but the benefits – economically, socially and
morally  –  make  the  undertaking  worthwhile.  For  example,  in  most  developing  countries,  the
informal sector represents between 30-35% of GDP, while it is estimated that the “dead capital”
residing in untitled poor dwellings globally is worth more than USD10 trillion.
To  address  this,  policy  reforms  are  often  considered  as  ways  to  strengthen  markets  and
stimulate  growth.  Throughout  the  forum,  you  will  look  to  develop  mechanisms  in  creating  the
structural  and  institutional  environment  in  terms  of  economic  policy  that  achieve  financial  and
economic  inclusion  and  addresses  pathways  for  the  vulnerable  or  unserved  community  to
accumulate productive assets.
While  these  topics  contain  several  key  issues  for  which  reforms  are  necessary  to  stimulate
growth within the finance sector, they often lack enough consideration of the necessary actions
which will have the greatest impact on marginalized population segments; namely low income or
rural communities and those operating outside of the formal financial sector. While discussions
on  reforms  for  government  securities  and  capital  markets  have  in  the  past  included  specific
reference  to  the  informal  sector,  reforms  or  actions  that  would  specifically  address  this  core
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
group of stakeholders have been limited.
This  situation  highlights  the  opportunity  to  revisit  how  Wealth  Creation  or Asset  Building  can
effectively be applied to the informal economy. As the host of APEC and on behalf of all Pacific
island  countries,  PNG  would  like  to  accentuate  the  issue  of  Wealth  Creation  as  a  driver  for
economic  development  calling  for  high-level  policy  dialogue  and  stakeholder  cooperation  and
reforms in key areas such as government capacity, collection of consumer data and creating an
enabling  environment  for  the  development  of  online  or  digital  financial  products  and  services.
These  issues  should  be  further  aligned  with  broader  reforms  related  to  the  investor  base,
regulatory frameworks and market infrastructure focused on the goal of accelerating inclusive
economic growth.
Women’s Economic Empowerment
If we agree with the adage that “a rising tide will lift all boats”, then a deeper focus on programs
and policies that increase the participation of people in the informal economy to build productive
assets, and portfolios of financial securities through products such as savings and insurances, is
vital. Women are critical part of the informal economy and make enormous contributions to the
economy.  Investing  in  women’s  economic  empowerment  sets  a  direct  path  towards  gender
equality, poverty eradication and inclusive economic growth. While I have been encouraged by
our  progress  in  Papua  New  Guinea  of  women  led  micro-businesses,  increased  women  with
bank accounts and increased women recipients of financial literacy training – but more must be
done. It is not just about having a gender specific numerical target of additional bank accounts –
it’s important that structural reforms enhance women’s roles and contribution to the economy.
Development Finance, SDGs and Financial Inclusion in the Region
Let  me  draw  your  attention  to  the  links  between  development  finance,  the  Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and financial inclusion in the region. Global experience shows that
financial inclusion has a significant impact on lifting the ultra-poor and poor out of poverty in a
number of countries, and the Asia-Pacific is no exception. Financial inclusion plays a critical role
across a range of sectors vital to sustainable development. The Pacific Forum Leaders SDGs
Roadmap, seeks to ensure that member countries and development partners are able to deliver
on the SDGs. Central to the success of the Roadmap is country ownership and a specific focus
on SDG 17, which looks at the means of implementation – including partnerships and secure
development  finance  for  the  attainment  of  the  SDGs  as  a  whole.  The  key  tenets  of  financial
inclusion  overlap  significantly  with  the  current  regional  agenda  on  financing  for  development.
Development  financing,  which  includes  climate  and  disaster  finance,  combined  with  financial
literacy and financial empowerment is crucial to mobilise finance for development and adaptation
initiatives  across  the  region.    Pacific  Island  Countries  require  additional  finance  for  long-term
development,  on  top  of  the  required  resources  to  address  sudden  economic  shocks  and
extreme weather events. Distinguished guests will note for instance that recent cyclones in the
Pacific region in Fiji, Samoa, Tonga and Vanuatu, have on average wiped out around 30-60 % of
the national economy. A devastating impact by anyone’s measure.
In recent years, Forum Economic Ministers have decided to look at innovative financing solutions
for regional and national initiatives – including the use of resources within the region, such as our
superannuation funds and excess liquidity in the banking sector. Of course, such proposals are
still under development.  Furthermore, development partners and private, public partnerships and
collaborations are looking into options for increased accessibility to climate and disaster finance,
including policy advice on contextualised financial instruments. So, while we continue to develop
innovative  development  financing  options  at  the  regional  level,  attention  is  also  required  to
address  the  concerns  of  those  at  community  level  and  small  and  micro  business  owners. 
Financial  inclusion  initiatives  which  are  being  considered  across  our  region  to  mobilise
microfinance  and  insurance,  ensure  better  use  of  remittances,  credit  and  savings  through
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial literacy, as well as embrace fin-tech solutions to reduce the transaction costs of access
to finance will help build a stronger microeconomic foundation for a more holistic, resilient and
sustainable development for our countries. In addition, global initiatives such as micro-insurance
for healthcare, life, crop and livestock are being piloted or are planned for roll out in the Pacific. I
hope that these initiatives can eventually be offered and implemented on a full scale where such
services are desperately needed to improve livelihoods.   I look forward to the discussions that
we will have on these initiatives in the next two days.
The Future of Financial Inclusion in APEC
Throughout  this  Summit  you  will  look  to  develop  innovative  mechanisms  to  ensure  greater
financial  inclusion  for  our  people  in  the  APEC  region.  I  would  like  to  leave  you  with  three
proposals.  First,  I  urge  you  to  consider  priority  areas  of  structural  and  regulatory  reform  to
promote financial inclusion. Reflect on schemes that encourage and incentivise the development
of  gateway  products,  removal  or  reduction  of  processes  that  are  barriers  to  inclusion,  and
investments  that  build  long  term  prosperity  for  the  region’s  vulnerable  community.  Second,  I
urge you to explore leveraging digital platforms and mobile technologies to enable opportunities to
create  and  monetize  non-traditional  assets  also  taking  into  account  the  role  of  data  and
consumer  protection. Third,  I  encourage  you  to  consider  the  role  of  women  in  economic
inclusion and what more can be done to push for progress or harness their influence in financial
and economic reform.
Conclusion
Distinguished Delegates, in closing let me thank the Foundation for Development Cooperation,
and the various development partners for your continued support in promoting financial inclusion.
Your discussions are to focus on issues that are at the very heart of sustainable development
and poverty reduction. These are not trivial matters, but are issues upon which the lives of many
depend. I wish you well in your deliberations, and urge you to take on your tasks with energy,
knowing that you contribute to the welfare and benefit of our people – particularly those who are
in most need of support.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
