Yves Mersch: Interview in Börsen-Zeitung
Interview with Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Börsen-Zeitung, conducted by Mr Mark Schrörs und Mr Detlef Fechtner on 18 December and
published on 29 December 2017.
 Mr Mersch, the euro area economy is booming and inflation is picking up. Will 2018 be
the year of monetary policy change for the ECB, with a shift away from the ultra-loose
monetary policy of the crisis years?
The  change  actually  already  got  under  way  a  year  ago.  We  first  reduced  our  monthly  asset
purchases from €80 billion to €60 billion, and as of January we will in fact be down to €30 billion.
We are also letting our targeted longer-term refinancing operations expire. So it really cannot be
said  that  we  have  not  taken  the  improved  data  into  account.  Our  monetary  policy  is  data-
dependent, and we always react to the latest developments. This will also be the case in 2018.
But the ECB has always downplayed the significance of all these decisions. Do you think
that market participants have understood that the change is already under way, as you
say it is?
Sometimes markets react more quickly than expected and sometimes they take a bit longer. And
sometimes they overreact, so we have to be very careful. We don’t want to cause any upset. But
it is indeed surprising that long-term interest rates are now lower than they were in the summer,
although  growth  has  surprised  very  positively  and  growth  and  inflation  forecasts  have  been
adjusted upwards. It doesn’t really follow.
The main thing for 2018 will be a decision on quantitative easing (QE), i.e. the large-scale
purchase  of  assets,  which  is  currently  locked  in  until  2018.  If  growth  and  inflation
develop as currently expected, will that be the end of QE?
We will make that decision when the time comes. Keeping the end-date open now was the right
thing for the Governing Council to do. The first step is to implement the decision to halve our
purchases to €30 billion. But as ECB President Mario Draghi recently said, we are now more
confident that inflation is on a sustainable path towards our medium-term objective of below, but
close to, 2%. But the more confident we are of meeting our objective, the more the likelihood of a
further increase in our purchase programme trends towards zero.
So  far  there  has  been  a  one-sided  promise  to  increase  QE  “in  terms  of  size  and/or
duration”, i.e. maintain the “easing bias”, if the outlook for inflation worsens or financing
conditions become unduly tight.
It’s certainly a valid question to ask whether a promise that has a near-zero probability should
continue to be made. Indeed, in the short term the risks to growth and inflation are more on the
upside,  meaning  that  both  could  turn  out  to  be  higher  than  currently  forecast.  So  it  makes
increasingly less sense to give a one-sided signal that addresses the eventuality of the situation
unexpectedly deteriorating. So there is certainly scope for adjusting our communication on the
easing bias soon. To a certain extent, this has already been done with the statement about our
greater  confidence  in  the  path  of  inflation.  In  addition,  it  is  clear  that  the  net  purchases  are
becoming less important compared with the holdings on the central bank’s balance sheet, the
reinvestments and forward guidance. This will no doubt be reflected in our communication as
well.
If QE comes to an end in 2018, would it be sufficient to start communicating on this in the
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
summer, or would preparations have to start earlier?
It shouldn’t be left until the very last minute – the markets should be prepared in a proactive and
ongoing  way.  This  is  important  so  that  we  avoid  false  expectations  and  short-term  market
turbulence. It would certainly be appropriate to take a position on this point before summer 2018.
Would there need to be a gradual winding-down from €30 billion, a “tapering”, or could
the ECB drop to zero in one step?
We  haven’t  yet  gone  through  the  various  options  in  the  Governing  Council.  The  expert
committees  will  also  need  to  be  involved  in  the  preparations.  Our  aim  is  not  to  cause  an
unnecessary stir in the markets, and we will stick to this position.
The markets were recently hoping for more information about how the reduction to €30
billion would be distributed between the individual purchase programmes. Doesn’t the
Governing Council need to provide more guidance on this?
We will continue to purchase mainly public sector bonds, and the rest will be invested in private
sector instruments. Corporate sector purchases will probably account for a slightly larger share,
as we won’t necessarily reduce these purchases proportionally. But the exact composition of the
€30  billion  will  depend  on  the  situation  in  the  market.  We  need  a  certain  amount  of  flexibility,
because market conditions can change quickly.
Is the ECB still in control of affairs, especially now that self-imposed purchase limits are
becoming increasingly relevant?
We are able to conduct our asset purchase programme. The important thing here is that we
want to remain market-neutral. And we shouldn’t overdo the discussion on the composition of the
€30 billion. Including reinvestments, we will still be buying securities for more than €50 billion in
some months. The question of whether we invest, say, €1 billion more or less in corporate bonds
is not decisive.
To  what  extent  have  the  Governing  Council’s  discussions  been  affected  by  the
Steinhoff  issue  –  that  is,  losses  resulting  from  the  purchase  of  bonds  issued  by  the
beleaguered  furniture  retailer  –  especially  given  that  Council  members  hold  very
different views on corporate sector asset purchases?
The Steinhoff case hasn’t resulted in any discussion in the Governing Council about changing the
asset  purchase  programme.  We  have  certain  rules  regarding  the  suitability  of  individual
instruments. We don’t blindly buy 100% of a given bond, we watch the market constantly. The
important thing for me is that we don’t take on excessive risk. We also keep a constant eye on
our risk management framework and adjust it if we see a need to do so.
The Governing Council doesn’t want to consider raising interest rates until “well” after
the end of net QE purchases, which is known as “sequencing”. This follows the example
of  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  United  States.  But  the  Federal  Reserve  never  had
negative rates. Doesn’t at least the negative deposit facility rate need to be scrapped
more quickly?
The slightly negative interest rates support our asset purchase programme. If we had not had
them, we might have needed to buy greater volumes to achieve the same effects. But the net
purchases are becoming increasingly less significant. And the sequencing is something that the
markets have understood very well. So we need to move step by step towards a normalisation of
our monetary policy, we shouldn’t rush it.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
But isn’t the negative rate a special case?
There  are  very  different  views  about  negative  interest  rates.  We  haven’t  seen  any  excessive
distortions so far, and the advantages predominate. But this does not lead me to conclude that
we  should  hang  on  to  negative  rates  for  a  long  time  to  come.  Can  you  imagine  that  a  whole
generation is growing up without knowing what it means to gain interest on money? There is a
risk  of  the  savings  culture  being  undermined,  and  we  need  to  keep  a  close  eye  on  this.  The
bottom line is that we need to approach the normalisation of our monetary policy carefully and
gradually. But we also need to be very careful that we do not act too tentatively and too late and
end up falling “behind the curve”.
How much do you worry that the ECB would have hardly any ammunition left with which
to counter a future downturn?
We are always saying that fiscal policy should build up buffers in good times. But that is also true
for monetary policy. If a central bank were to run out of ways to react to a recession, that would
be  worrying.  This  too  demonstrates  that  the  current  level  of  interest  rates  is  certainly  not  the
normal state of affairs.
In the United States the first interest rate rise came 14 months after the end of QE. In the
case of the ECB, that would mean that if QE were to end in September 2018, the first rate
increase would be in November 2019. Some market participants are even reckoning with
2020. Do you feel comfortable with such expectations?
We do not follow the example of others. Our actions are determined solely by the requirements
of the euro area. 2019 and 2020 are a long way off; nobody can make reliable predictions that far
ahead.  I  can  only  advise  against  tying  oneself  down  so  far  in  advance.  That  could  damage
credibility.
But the forward guidance on interest rates goes in that direction.
Forward guidance at some point reaches its limits. That has to be acknowledged. It was a useful
additional tool in a specific context. But once we start heading back towards normality, forward
guidance  should  not  be  expanded,  it  should  be  scaled  back.  We  shouldn’t  limit  our  room  for
manoeuvre indefinitely.
Are banks, businesses and governments sufficiently prepared for a future interest rate
turnaround?
There have always been people who believe in Father Christmas and who think that everything
will  continue  as  it  is.  Those  who  don’t  prepare  themselves  for  increases  in  interest  rates  will
ultimately be at a disadvantage. Even changes in the purchase programmes will affect the yield
curve. But it’s not the ECB’s task to guarantee that the curve will always remain so flat. We, the
ECB, via monetary policy normalisation, should pay heed to moving our focus from long-term
interest rates back to the short end. The more a central bank concentrates on the long term, the
closer it gets to redistribution – this is worrying from the perspective of economic governance
(“Ordnungspolitik”).
Who has the most catching-up to do – banks, business or governments?
Some countries need to do much more to solve the problem of non-performing loans, the NPLs.
Other countries are still taking on too much new debt, and others meanwhile have not built up
any fiscal buffers at all. It must be clear to everyone that we don’t conduct monetary policy for
individual economic actors, but for the whole of the euro area economy.
Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann is concerned that the ECB will face ever greater
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
political pressure.
Of course, some countries are more resistant to reform than others. But we’ve also seen that
countries which hadn’t undertaken reforms for a very long time were, in the end, able to do the
necessary. Consider the reforms in France under President Emmanuel Macron. Such reforms
are certainly more convincing for markets than merely making proposals on creating a European
“debt union”.
Concerning  NPLs,  the  ECB’s  banking  supervisors  want  to  be  stricter,  but  are
encountering  a  lot  of  political  opposition  within  the  EU. Are  the  euro  area  countries
unwilling after all to address the problems of their banks?
The NPL problem has to be solved, no doubt about that. But you have to distinguish between
substance and form. We supervise the banks, but are not the regulator. The relevant institutions,
within  their  competences,  must  address  the  problems  in  a  timely  and  determined  manner.
Despite  all  the  criticism  of  the  form  no-one  should  hide  behind  it  and  wait  for  the  problem  to
resolve itself.
Could you imagine banking supervision being separated from the ECB sometime, as is
being demanded particularly in Germany?
I can imagine a lot of things. But I’m not convinced that the previous German model was better.
Personally, I am very strongly convinced that monetary policy needs access and proximity to the
supervisory authority in order to fulfil its mandate. There is no ideal model for this proximity. I’m
not convinced by the argument that supervision would function better outside the ECB.
The ECB was also criticised for pushing for a change to its statute in order to obtain
more effective control over clearing houses. Was that a mistake?
No.  A  stronger  role  for  the  ECB  in  the  oversight  of  central  counterparties  is  quite  clearly  a
monetary policy responsibility. I fail to understand those insinuating that we are expanding our
mandate. Monetary policy has to deal with those entities where liquidity is collected and pooled. If
we didn’t take care of this, we would be recklessly negligent of our mandate.
How concerned are you about the rising value of Bitcoin? Is it a risk to financial stability?
First  of  all,  Bitcoin  turnover  is  between  €250  and  €350  billion.  The  volume  is  therefore
comparatively  low.  That’s  why  Bitcoin  trading  is  not  at  present  an  issue  for  monetary  policy.
Regarding  the  increase  in  price,  we  are  seeing  speculative  hype  that  might  be  a  cause  for
concern.  But  of  course  individual  investors  are  free  to  gamble.  However,  if  something  goes
wrong, they should not come to us and say we should have outlawed it and protected them from
themselves. Second, there are now banks which hold positions in Bitcoin. It is a matter for the
supervisors to judge how big the risks are. Third, and what concerns me most, is when financial
market infrastructures such as stock exchanges enter this business. That poses a major threat
to financial stability.
So you don’t think much of Bitcoin futures and other recent developments?
If these transactions are kept separate from others, it’s a secondary matter who wins and who
loses. However, if all the participants in these financial centres are jointly liable, that can create
difficulties,  for  instance,  for  banks  or  the  whole  system. And  if  the  banking  system  gets  into
trouble, there will again be demands for support from the ECB. I would say from the outset: we
shouldn’t do this.
Do you think that private cryptocurrencies could become a real alternative to central
bank money?
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Money  needs  trust.  Public  currencies,  for  example  the  euro,  have  the  backing  of  public
institutions  such  as  the  ECB.  Many  of  these  currencies  have  no  backing,  nothing.  It’s  a
somewhat different matter for the underlying technology, the blockchain. That’s a challenge we
all  have  to  face,  especially  banks.  Each  institution  has  to  know  that  in  the  future  financial
intermediation will no longer be heaven-sent, but has to be fought for.
Bundesbank Executive Board member Carl-Ludwig Thiele has raised hopes for a return
of the €500 banknote. The Governing Council’s decision to stop issuing the €500 only
relates to the second series of banknotes and probably a new series of banknotes will
appear in the next decade. Is that correct?
Strictly speaking, the decision to suspend the €500 banknote only concerns the second series,
so that’s correct. But it’s unlikely that we would resume production. We shouldn’t try to turn the
clock back. In theory, the Governing Council is free to change its mind tomorrow. But I think the
chances of that are as high as for additional net purchases under QE.
Let us come back in more detail to the matter of monetary policy: do you think that there
will be a return to the normality that prevailed before the global financial crisis – or is
there  a  “new  normal”,  with,  for  example,  inflation  at  a  permanently  lower  level  and
instruments such as bond purchases being a permanent feature?
I don’t think we’re already living in a “new normal”. The discussion on this should continue but
caution is called for. There are certainly factors which have a lasting impact on prices – ageing
populations, new technologies, globalisation. But many of the factors that keep inflation below
target are also temporary. I am convinced, as is the Governing Council, that we are definitely able
to reach our objective of below, but close to, 2%. We are already seeing a build-up of reflationary
forces. In the future we can certainly have a debate about our objective – as we did in the early
2000s. But we shouldn’t have this debate if we are just short of our objective. That would only
destroy confidence.
Irrespective of 2% – is “inflation targeting” outdated?
Inflation targeting is fashionable, but it’s fading. In a region as varied as the euro area, we were
well advised not to impose on ourselves a strict inflation targeting regime, but to be more flexible.
We have settled for a definition of price stability over the medium term of below, but close to,
2 %. I think it has served us very well.
And are you worried that the era of central bank independence could be coming to an
end?
I am very concerned about these discussions. But as central bankers we also have our own
responsibility: the more space we occupy, the more we need to ask ourselves whether that is
still compatible with our independence. We need a tightly defined mandate. The closer we move
to the political domain the greater the risk of our getting burnt.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
