Geoff  Bascand:  The  effect  of  daylight  -  disclosure  and  market
discipline
Speech by Mr Geoff Bascand, Deputy Governor and Head of Operations of the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, to members of the NZ Bankers' Association, Auckland, 28 February 2018.
1
Introduction
 Thank you for coming today and giving me the opportunity to share the Reserve Bank’s views on
disclosure.  I’m going to cover how we use a disclosure regime to support a sound and efficient
financial system and the beneficial impact of more informed stakeholders.
The  Reserve  Bank’s  prudential  framework  emphasises  the  importance  of  disclosure  of
information from the entities we have responsibility for regulating and supervising – registered
banks, licensed insurers and licensed non-bank deposit takers (NBDTs). It’s a key part of market
discipline, one of the three pillars of our prudential framework.  It reflects the influence investors
and  other  stakeholders  can  have  on  an  institution’s  behaviour  and  risk  profile.   By  potentially
influencing the business’ behaviour, stakeholders can contribute to its long term viability, and the
health of our financial system more generally.
2
One of the Reserve Bank’s key statutory purposes is a sound and efficient financial system.  So
our interests are well aligned with stakeholders who want information on a financial institution’s
performance, strength, and risk profile. Indeed the demand for meaningful market information is
broad,  ranging  from  depositors,  policyholders,  shareholders,  creditors,  through  to  rating
agencies, credit and market analysts, and the financial media.
The Reserve Bank as the prudential regulator is also a ‘user’ of such information – it informs our
policy settings (e.g. capital ratios) and information may inform a range of specific supervisory
actions to address any concerns about an entity we might have (e.g. to assess solvency and
associated risks).
I  should  note,  however,  the  information  set  we  have  includes  the  same  information  that  is
provided  to  the  public,  as  well  as  other  ‘private’  information  that  institutions  report  to  us,
sometimes  under  compulsion  of  statutory  powers.  This  latter  set  might  be  more  granular,
detailed or proprietary.  Information may also be kept confidential to the Reserve Bank to avoid
market  disruption  or  because  it  may  have  a  detrimental  impact  on  an  individual  financial
institution’s competitive position. In addition, there are constraints on public disclosure contained
in  our  governing  legislation   which  prevent  public  disclosure  of  that  information  except  in
prescribed  circumstances.  Those  provisions  allow  regulated  entities  and  the  Bank  to  discuss
sensitive  commercial  information  in  candour,  which  is  a  necessary  element  for  prudential
supervision.
3
There are some limits to what is sensible to disclose and when; such judgements can be quite
contentious.  Moreover, we recognise that disclosure is not without cost. While mindful of these
considerations, the Reserve Bank is disposed towards openness and enhancing disclosures.
I’m  going  to  touch  on  attributes  that  make  information  relevant  and  useful  for  external
stakeholders including that it is reliable, accessible and comparable. I’ll also highlight some key
initiatives  to  improve  our  disclosure  regime  including  the Bank  Financial  Strength  Dashboard,
follow-ups to the bank director attestation review, and related initiatives in the insurance sector.
Why is disclosure important?
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
In general terms the disclosure of information is a response to the inherent issues when two
economic agents enter into a transaction. Typically one party has greater information than the
other – a situation termed ‘asymmetric information’.
Disclosure helps resolve a number of potential conflicts.  These can be internal – for example
between an institution’s senior management and directors who are monitoring performance on
behalf of owners. And external – between the institution and a range of other stakeholders.
In short, managers have better firm-specific information than directors, shareholders and other
stakeholders,  and  don’t  necessarily  have  an  incentive  to  fully  report  information  that  may  be
detrimental to their self-interests, or the interests of the institution as a whole.
Therefore  both  board  directors  and  external  stakeholders  demand  information  from  a  firm’s
managers so they can carry out their respective monitoring roles. There is a well-established
literature  on  corporate  governance  that  focusses  on  the  various  mechanisms  designed  to
address  the  internal  informational  advantage  between  management  and  the  Board.    Hence,
disclosure also supports an entity’s internal monitoring or ‘self-discipline’ – a second pillar of our
prudential framework. I’ll return to the topic of corporate governance when I cover the Reserve
Bank’s bank director attestation review.
Public disclosure can be challenging.  There may be weak incentives for a financial institution to
produce  and  share  information.  While  market  participants  may  demand  information,  what’s
produced  may  not  meet  their  needs,  be  ad  hoc  and/or  not  based  on  generally  accepted  and
comparable accounting standards, for example. And there may be few ways of being sure the
information being provided is reliable and gives a fair picture of the institution’s financial position –
something that otherwise may only emerge once an institution comes under stress or evidence
of fraud is made public.
There  is  a  clear  role  for  professional  bodies  and  regulatory  authorities  to  set  minimum
requirements attached to publicly disclosed information in order to help ensure its integrity, and to
make it ultimately useful for stakeholders.  These include auditors, accounting standards boards,
stock market exchanges, financial market conduct authorities and prudential authorities.
There are a number of local and international examples that illustrate the importance of public
disclosure – or more to the point, the failings of poor disclosure:
In  the  United  States  a  number  of  financial  and  accounting  scandals  in  the  early  2000s
associated  with  Enron  and  WorldCom,  prompted  a  major  overhaul  of  regulation  which
included a focus on increased financial disclosure. These scandals also highlighted another
aspect of public disclosure tied to the necessary independence of auditors and their role in
attesting to the veracity of financial reporting.  Serious conflict of interest issues can arise in
the relationship between a financial institution and the auditors/accounting firms it hires.
Here in New Zealand, the finance company sector experienced a wave of failures prior to the
Reserve Bank assuming responsibility for the regulation of ‘non-bank deposit takers’ in 2008.
The  failures  featured  inadequate  risk  management,  including  over-exposure  to  certain
sectors and related-party lending. The poor quality of information disclosed to ‘mum and dad’
investors  was  another  key  failing.TV  advertisements  with  well-known  New  Zealand
personalities  painted  a  misleading  picture  of  the  risk-reward  profile  for  their  potential
investments. Compounding the problem was the advice potential investors were receiving
from financial advisers during this period.
Internationally the demand for public disclosure and transparency has increased since the
global  financial  crisis  (GFC).  The  crisis  highlighted  the  difficulty  of  evaluating  complex
financial  products  and  deficiencies  in  public  disclosure  across  a  number  of  jurisdictions. 
The  complexities  served  to  heighten  uncertainties  about  the  financial  strength  of  some
individual banks, and undermined confidence in the banking system as a whole.
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Good public disclosure
It  is  clear  that  there  are  real  benefits  from  public  disclosure  of  information  –  provided  that
information is trustworthy. It helps to:
Build stakeholder confidence that the institution is presenting an accurate and reliable picture
of its financial position, and complying with all relevant laws, regulations and rules. It helps
avoid  both  the  perception  and/or  realisation  of  financial  malfeasance  on  the  part  of  the
institution. The old adage that ‘sunlight is the best disinfectant’ is relevant here.
Enable diverse private sector stakeholders to monitor the institution and make appropriate
and well-informed decisions on whether to invest in the institution as a potential shareholder,
bondholder or depositor, or to enter into an insurance contract in the case of insurers.
Create a well-informed market, which is a precondition for improving the efficiency of the
financial  system  by  helping  to  better  allocate  society’s  scarce  resources.    Welfare  is
enhanced  when  funds  flow  freely  between  more  and  less  risky  investment  opportunities,
provided those risks can be discerned and priced adequately. This applies to investments in
financial institutions as much as it does to the businesses and financial products that they
lend to or invest in.  For example, riskier financial institutions should face commensurately
higher funding costs.
There  is  some  evidence,  mostly  from  the  United  States  and  Europe,  that  market  information
affects the pricing, risk and behaviour of financial institutions.  The Reserve Bank has recently
4
undertaken  some  analytical  work  that  finds  similar,  albeit  tentative,  results  for  New  Zealand.  
This analysis also suggests that the more visibility disclosures get, the more impact they have.
This work is informing our evolving approach to disclosures, set out below.
The disclosure of information, by itself, will not achieve the benefits described above. Too much
information, and the wrong sort, can obfuscate, confuse and detract from market participants’
ability to monitor and exert discipline over financial institutions.  Too much information may also,
paradoxically, be used to hide evidence of poor practice or wrong-doing. Most importantly, the
information itself needs to be trustworthy and meet a number of attributes to be effective.
International  standards  identify  a  number  of  characteristics  of  public  information  that  can
5
enhance the benefits of disclosure and market discipline:
Decision-useful and accessible: That means  presented in a way that is appropriate for
the information and distributed in ways market participants can easily access.
Timely: Information should be of sufficient frequency and timeliness to be useful.
Comprehensive  and  meaningful:  Information  should  be  sufficiently  comprehensive  so
market  participants  can  form  a  well-rounded  view,  including  the  risks  faced.  It  should  be
sufficiently aggregated to provide a proper overall picture, and sufficiently disaggregated so
distinct material items can be clearly identified.
Reliable: Information should accurately reflect what it purports to describe. Note, there is
some  potential  trade-off  between  reliability  (getting  the  numbers  100  percent  right)  and
timeliness.
Comparable:  The  methods  and  assumptions  used  in  the  preparation  of  information
(particularly for financial reporting based on accounting standards which allow a degree of
flexibility)  should  be  transparent..  More  explicit  standardisation  of  reporting  requirements
(both financial and other information) would enhance comparability and the identification of
how banks differ by financial performance, business activities, various prudential metrics,
risk profile and risk management processes/practices.
Consistent over time: Disclosure should enable trends to be identified in the institution’s
balance sheet position, performance and risk profile over time.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Taken  together,  these  criteria  provide  a  useful  framework  for  benchmarking  disclosure
requirements and outcomes across different financial sectors.
Global efforts to enhance and improve financial institution disclosure
Following the GFC there has been a global and ongoing effort to improve public disclosure and
consequently market discipline. For example, the international standards for supervision of banks
produced  by  the  Basel  Committee  were  revised  in  2012.  They  now  include  two  new  core
principles  on  Financial  reporting  and  external  audit  (BCP  27)  and  Disclosure  and
transparency  (BCP  28)  which  replaced  a  single  core  principle  on  Accounting  and
disclosure from the earlier 2006 standards.
6
The  Basel  standards  are  used  by  the  IMF  in  their  Financial  Sector Assessment  Programme
(FSAP) which evaluates a member country’s approach to banking supervision. The IMF recently
conducted  an  FSAP  for  New  Zealand  and  I’ll  touch  on  the  results  of  their  assessment
shortly.  While the Reserve Bank’s mandate is prudential (i.e. financial soundness), disclosure is
also very important from a market conduct and consumer and investor protection perspective. 
These latter objectives generally sit with other entities, but equally demand high quality disclosure
of  information.  Regulation  has  also  evolved  significantly  in  the  conduct  dimension,  in  New
Zealand through the Financial Markets Conduct Act (2013) and the establishment of the Financial
Markets Authority in 2011.
For  the  insurance  sector,  the  International Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS)  is  the
global standard setter, with core principles first issued in 2011. The IAIS’ principles are also used
by the IMF for FSAP purposes. ICP 20 is on Public disclosure and requires the supervisor to set
requirements  for  insurers  to  disclose  relevant,  comprehensive  and  adequate  information.    It
needs to be timely and give policyholders and market participants a clear view of their business
activities, performance and financial position.
The Reserve Bank’s approach to registered bank disclosure
Public  disclosure  has  been  a  cornerstone  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  to  prudential
regulation  and  supervision,  particularly  since  1996  when  the  disclosure  regime  for  registered
banks was introduced. The Reserve Bank has periodically reviewed the disclosure regime and
made changes that underscore the Reserve Bank’s commitment to effective disclosure.  It’s an
ongoing process and there are further improvements we are making.
A brief overview of the bank disclosure regime
Currently  all  registered  banks  are  required  to  produce  disclosure  statements  on  a  quarterly
basis. The required content varies depending on whether it is a full year, half year or ‘off-quarter’
disclosure statement, and whether the bank is locally incorporated or a branch of an overseas
incorporated  bank.   The  disclosure  statements 
financial  reporting  and  other
supplementary information, such as a bank’s capital adequacy position and asset quality.
include 
7
The Reserve Bank’s disclosure requirements for banks are overlaid on top of financial reporting
obligations in the Financial Markets Conduct (FMC) Act 2013 and Financial Reporting Act 2013,
which are enforced by the Financial Markets Authority (FMA). Under   those Acts banks must
prepare annual financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices.
The  Act  also  requires  that  the  annual  financial  statements  are  audited  by  a  qualified
auditor.  Banks are exempt from many of the product disclosure requirements of the FMC Act by
virtue of the separate disclosure regime imposed under the RBNZ Act.
8
RBNZ disclosure statements must be signed by bank directors, attesting to the veracity of the
information provided (for branches, the NZ CEO also signs). Banks must publish their quarterly
disclosure  statements  on  their  websites  and  make  hard  copies  available  on  request.  The
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
attestation  links  a  bank’s  internal  governance  processes  and  practices  (thereby  aligning  the
interests of senior management and the Board) to the supply of public information.
Reserve  Bank  additional  requirements  include  the  preparation  of  off-quarter  and  half  year
disclosure statements based on interim financial reporting standards, a requirement for the full
year  disclosure  statement  to  include  the  auditor’s  report,  including  an  opinion  on  the
supplementary  information  that  is  provided,  and  penalties  for  false  or  misleading  director
attestation.  Reserve  Bank  supervisors  also  meet  annually  with  the  audit  firms  of  registered
banks.
IMF FSAP evaluation of the Reserve Bank’s approach to bank disclosure
The IMF assessed the Reserve Bank’s disclosure framework for registered banks against the
core principles developed by the Basel Committee. For BCP 27 Financial reporting and external
audit the New Zealand regime was assessed as ‘largely compliant’ – effectively a pass mark.
The  New  Zealand  legal  framework  provides  for  financial  statements  to  be  prepared  in
accordance  with  New  Zealand  equivalents  to  internationally  recognised  accounting  standards,
and  to  be  audited  by  a  qualified  external  auditor  in  accordance  with  equivalent  standards  to
international auditing standards.
One specific area where New Zealand was marked down was because the Reserve Bank does
not  determine  or  verify  that  banks  use  valuation  practices  consistent  with  New  Zealand
accounting standards, relying instead on the existing auditing process and director attestation.
The IMF recommended that the Reserve Bank engage in a more focussed way with external
auditors to discuss valuation practices of banks in their financial reporting.  We will add this to the
list of issues that we explore in our engagement with auditors.
For BCP 28 Disclosure and transparency, the Reserve Bank received the highest grade, being
assessed as ‘compliant’. The IMF noted that the Reserve Bank is committed to achieving high-
quality  disclosure  by  banks  in  line  with  international  standards.  There  were  no  specific
recommendations; however we were encouraged to extend disclosure to include information on
bank staff remuneration. We don’t currently require that and see remuneration frameworks as
the responsibility of directors.
The Bank Financial Strength Dashboard – improving the accessibility and comparability
of bank information
The Reserve Bank regularly reviews the specific requirements it imposes on banks to ensure the
disclosure  regime  remains  fit  for  purpose.  A  major  review  over  2009–11  streamlined
requirements, resulting in cost savings for banks without weakening market information. More
recently the Reserve Bank undertook a Regulatory Stocktake over 2014–15. The objective was to
enhance the efficiency, clarity and consistency of the prudential requirements for banks and non-
bank deposit takers. Reviewing bank disclosure requirements was a key part of the Stocktake
and in particular whether off-quarter disclosure requirements continued to deliver clear benefits,
relative to the costs imposed on banks to prepare.
The Stocktake concluded that there was little merit in continuing to impose off-quarter disclosure
requirements on branches, but some form of continued disclosure for locally incorporated banks
was warranted.
The  Stocktake  also  highlighted  issues  with  accessing  and  comparing  disclosure  statements.
Differences in how information is presented reduce the ability of non-expert users to review and
understand disclosure information.  It also imposes costs on more experienced users in their
efforts to compare across registered banks.
Currently the Reserve Bank provides a summary table on its website of individual bank data. This
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
is  based  on  the  non-templated  bank  disclosure  statement  data  (i.e.  non-standardised)  and
therefore suffers from the same issues noted above. In addition, the summary table does not
hold a prominent place on the website, nor is the data particularly timely.
As a consequence the Reserve Bank has developed and consulted on a Bank Financial Strength
Dashboard  concept  that  will  be  a  big  step  forward  in  reporting  of  bank  information.  The
Dashboard will be a user-friendly interactive online tool that will provide a central repository of key
information about the prudential and financial condition of New Zealand incorporated banks.  The
underlying  data  will  be  updated  quarterly  and  hosted  on  the  Reserve  Bank’s  website.  The
information will be drawn from data that banks provide to the Reserve Bank and presented in an
accessible and user-friendly format. Importantly, the new Dashboard will allow users to make
side-by-side  comparisons  of  banks  in  an  `apples-with-apples’  scenario  on  key  subject  areas.
They are likely to include: credit ratings, capital adequacy, asset quality, profitability, the balance
sheet, and liquidity.
The  main  benefits  of  the  Dashboard  are  the  material  enhancement  to  market  discipline  by
improving  the  accessibilityand  comparability  of  information  available  to  market  participants.
This will significantly reduce the costs for existing users of disclosure statements to digest and
analyse  bank-specific  information  and  conduct  comparative  analysis.  In  addition,  the  Reserve
Bank  expects  that  the  Dashboard  will  widen  the  range  of  stakeholders  who  will  use  publicly
disclosed bank information, extending the points of influence and avenues of market discipline.
Ordinary depositors are one group who arguably only exert a fairly weak level of influence over
banks at the moment. While retaining the Reserve Bank’s prudential focus, the Dashboard will
also  contribute  to  the  wider  public  policy  objectives  for  informed  investor/consumer  decision-
making.
The Dashboard information will be aim to be comprehensive with a high-level summary of key
metrics, and the ability to drill down to more detailed information. Simple text will accompany the
data  to  help  explain  it  to  users.  Additional  content  is  expected  to  be  added  over  time  as
experience  with  the  Dashboard  builds  and  we  receive  feedback  from  users.  The  quarterly
standardised and comparable data will enable users to readily identify trends in data, and hence
be consistent over time.
It is expected that the publication lag will also be somewhat shorter as data would be updated on
the Reserve Bank’s website within two months compared to four months at present –therefore
improving the timeliness of the data.
While  the  Dashboard  information  will  not  be  subject  to  the  same  formal  director  attestation
requirements, the reliability of  the  information  provided  by  banks  will  be  ensured  by  the  due
diligence that the Reserve Bank expects banks to add to their internal processes tied to private
reporting. Banks will have the opportunity to review their own Dashboard data prior to publication,
as  well  as  providing  commentary.    The  Reserve  Bank  will  process  all  corrections  to  private
reporting  before  publication  of  the  Dashboard.  In  addition,  banks  will  be  able  to  correct  their
Dashboard  data  after  publication  has  occurred.  These  revisions  will  be  made  transparent  in
order to support market discipline.
We are finalising web page development for the Dashboard and release is currently planned for
late May using banks’ data for Q1 2018.  There will be an awareness campaign to promote the
Dashboard as a user-friendly, authoritative and reliable source of information.
All banks, including branches will still be subject to half and full year disclosure requirements and
the  associated  director  attestation  process.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  be  making  technical
amendments to the half and full year disclosure requirements so they align with the quarterly
information provided in the Dashboard.
Improving bank reporting of regulatory capital
 
6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Current disclosure requirements include information on regulatory capital. Banks must provide
information on their capital ratio which includes a risk-adjusted measure of banks’ assets (risk-
weighted  assets).  New  Zealand  banks  use  either  a  standardised  approach  to  risk-weights
(prescribed  by  the  Reserve  Bank),  or  an  approach  based  on  internal  modelling  and  various
regulatory  formula  (currently  used  by  the  big-4  banks).  The  calculations  are  crucial  to
understanding banks’ exposures and financial strength but can be difficult to evaluate.
The standardised approach for the calculation of risk-weights is inherently more transparent to
the  public  than  the  customisation  of  internal  models.  Even  for  the  Reserve  Bank,  which  has
access to banks’ modelling documentation and regularly meets with the big-4 banks’ modelling
teams, it is sometimes unclear how risk-weights have been arrived at.
The  Reserve  Bank  is  currently  reviewing  capital  requirements  for  locally  incorporated  banks,
including the disclosure of risk-weighted asset data.  It is our view that improvements to their
transparency can be made, and we are consulting on this and any associated costs that may
arise.
In the December 2017 consultation document (PDF 1MB), and broadly consistent with recent
Basel guidance, the Reserve Bank is proposing an option that would require the big-4 banks to
disclose capital ratios under both the internal models and standardised approaches – so-called
‘dual reporting’. The Reserve Bank hopes that as a result of dual reporting internal models banks
will provide more public explanation of the reason for any marked variation between their internal
models measure and the standardised calculation, as well as their modelling assumptions and
methods in general.
Bank director attestation review
As  I  discussed  earlier,  the  bank  disclosure  regime  is  supported  by  a  requirement  for  bank
directors  to  attest  to  (i.e.  sign-off  on)  the  accuracy  of  information  contained  in  the  disclosure
statements.  This  is  a  crucial  aspect  of  New  Zealand’s  regulatory  regime.  Directors  are
responsible and accountable for the integrity of bank reporting.  Due diligence helps support the
internal governance processes of the bank, driving responsibilities, systems and processes to
generate and scrutinise management information.
The  question  arises  as  to  how  confident  users  can  be  in  the  robustness  of  attestation
statements.  Directors and users of disclosure statements are aided by the reporting of external
auditors, but to what extent should the Reserve Bank review the information directors have relied
on, or independently test and challenge their assurances?
Currently,  the  Reserve  Bank  evaluates  the  reliability  of  directors’  attestations  and  compliance
with  RBNZ  guidelines  through  reviews  of  documentation  such  as  risk  appetite  statements,
financial  information,  reports  submitted  to  bank  management,  and  meetings  with  bank
management and directors.
The IMF (in its 2017 FSAP report), while not contesting the attestation regime, urged the Reserve
Bank to more rigorously test attestations through specific reviews, especially for locally-owned
banks.  For example, they expressed a concern that the Reserve Bank did not undertake much
independent verification of banks’ internal risk management practices or Board effectiveness.
Last year, and partly in response to the IMF’s FSAP, the Reserve Bank undertook a thematic
review of the attestation process across 15 locally-incorporated banks. The review was carried
out  by  Deloitte  on  behalf  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Deloitte  determined  the  attestation  regime  as
‘largely effective’ based on a weighted average of scores using their methodology, with some
variation across individual banks. Deloitte noted a number of a general issues that potentially limit
the effectiveness of the regime:
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
A reliance on high-quality directors to make the regime work. The number of directorships
held  by  directors,  length  of  tenure,  lack  of  banking  experience,  risk  of  capture  by
management and lack of diverse skills on the Board all potentially affect the effectiveness of
the regime.
There is a correlation between the effectiveness of the attestation regime and an open and
honest culture within the bank. Sign-off from directors is only appropriate if they believe that
staff at all levels will communicate ‘bad news’ upwards.
In the absence of Reserve Bank guidance, banks could be applying different processes to
verify  attestations;  applying  different  materiality  thresholds,  and;  applying  some  policies
differently. There may be a role for the Reserve Bank to provide more specific guidance on
specific policies, and to independently verify an individual bank’s attestation process.
The  Reserve  Bank  has  begun  considering  both  the  findings  from  the  IMF  FSAP  (which  were
released in April last year), and those from the more recent attestation review.
In  relation  to  FSAP,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  closely  examining  the  recommendations  that,  taken
together, may further enhance the three pillar approach to regulation and supervision.
Particularly key are the recommendations about independent verification by the Reserve Bank of
banks’  internal  policies  and  processes,  and  the  provision  of  more  explicit  guidance  to  help
provide a better benchmark to support bank director attestation. Our view is that rather than a
fundamental  shift  to  a  more  intrusive  supervisory  regime  such  as  checking  an  individual
institution’s  reporting  via  on-site  inspections,  our  verification  is  likely  to  be  undertaken  through
greater  use  of  thematic  reviews  (i.e.  reviewing  policies  and  practices  across  the  banking
sector).  We continue to see directors and auditors owning the primary verification role.
The Reserve Bank will be considering the findings of the attestation review in the context of how
it might better support banks’ internal governance processes (i.e. self-discipline). No final policy
decisions have been made, but some elements of this enhanced approach may include:
More  frequent  engagement  with  bank  Board  of  directors.  This  will  provide  a  greater
opportunity for the Reserve Bank to communicate any concerns with directors, and help to
address the information asymmetry between senior management and directors described
earlier. The Reserve Bank will also gain a potentially better insight into the effectiveness of
the Board and how it is discharging its oversight duties.
The Reserve Bank will also consider how to support directors in understanding their duties,
via induction sessions for new independent directors.
The  development  of  guidance  on 
the  Reserve  Bank’s  expectations  around  risk
management.  This  will  help  provide  a  clearer  and  more  consistent  benchmark  for  bank
directors to attest whether they believe their institution is adequately managing risks.
Formally  embedding  a  ‘positive  assurance’  process  for  attestation  sign-off.  The  review
highlighted  that  most  banks  adopt  a  limited  or  ‘negative’  assurance  process  whereby
management states to directors that they are not aware of any compliance or risk appetite
breaches.  The  Reserve  Bank  would  prefer 
to  see  senior  management  actively
demonstrating or providing evidence of compliance to directors.
Reviewing requirements in the Reserve Bank’s corporate governance policy (BS14) related
to,  for  example,  tenure  limits  for  independent  directors,  limits  on  directorships  and
requirements on banking experience.
Reviewing  BS10  to  require  banks  to  undertake  on-going  suitability  assessments  of  their
directors and senior managers. The Reserve Bank will also be providing greater clarity on
the definition of ‘senior manager’ for the purposes of the current non-objection process.
Insurer disclosure
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overview of disclosure regime
Public disclosure of information also forms an important part of the market discipline pillar for the
insurance  sector  –  a  sector  the  Reserve  Bank  assumed  responsibility  for  in  2010  under  the
Insurance  (Prudential)  Supervision Act  (IPSA).  Section  4(e)  of  IPSA  defines  disclosure  in  the
public interest: “the desirability of providing to the public adequate information to enable the public
to make [their own] decisions”.
The insurer public disclosure regime is based on accounting and audit standards (enforced by
the FMA as is the case for registered banks). For example, the Financial Reporting Act requires
all insurers to produce audited financial statements within four months of the financial year-end.
These  financial  statements  are  available  from  the  Companies  Office  website,  while  some
insurers also publish them on their own website. 
Licensed insurers are also subject to additional disclosure requirements imposed by IPSA and
Reserve Bank standards and guidelines.
Under  IPSA  most  licensed  insurers  must  have,  and  disclose  on  its  website,  a  financial
strength rating prepared by an approved rating agency to policyholders before issuing and
renewing  insurance  policies.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  publishes  these  financial  strength
ratings  on  its  website.    Overseas  insurers  must  disclose  the  existence  of  any  overseas
policyholder preference if one exists.
Licensed Insurers must also disclose their financial strength ratings to policyholders before
entering into or renewing a contract of insurance.
As  part  of  Reserve  Bank  solvency  standards,  insurers  are  required  to  disclose  solvency
positions and regulatory capital information in their financial statements and on their website.
IPSA requires that actuarial information contained in financial statements is reviewed by the
licensed insurer’s appointed actuary and subject to a separate report which is included in the
financial statements.
Guidance material on governance creates an additional expectation on insurers tied to the
disclosure  of  governance  arrangements 
to  shareholders,  policyholders  and  other
stakeholders.
IMF FSAP evaluation of insurer disclosure regime
As I noted earlier, the IMF evaluates the effectiveness of insurance supervision by benchmarking
a  jurisdiction  against  the  26  core  principles  developed  by  the  IAIS.  With  respect  to  ICP  20
on Public disclosure, the New Zealand regime was assessed as ‘partly observed’ –reflecting that
some  gaps  exist.  The  IMF  argued  that  comparison  across  insurers  is  made  difficult  by
accounting standards that allow some management discretion on details to be disclosed, and
because  branches  are  allowed  to  present  solvency  information  using  home-jurisdiction
methodologies.
They  also  noted  that  disclosure  requirements  were  lacking  in  areas  such  as  asset-liability
management,  descriptions  of  risk  concentration  and  the  interaction  between  capital  adequacy
and risk exposures – in other words were not comprehensive.
The  IMF  recommended  improving  insurer  disclosure  in  a  number  of  areas,  including  ways  to
improve  solvency  information  to  make  it  easier  to  compare  across  insurers  and  between
subsidiaries and branches. This is particularly key as branches account for a much larger share
of the insurance market compared to the role branches play in the banking sector.
The  Reserve  Bank  is  currently  undertaking  a  review  of  IPSA.    A  number  of  the  IMF’s
recommendations will be considered during the legislative review.
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reserve Bank thematic review of disclosure requirements
The Reserve Bank has conducted its own review of insurers’ compliance with existing disclosure
requirements in a thematic review completed in June last year. The Reserve Bank sampled 36
insurers  and  was  generally  disappointed  with  the  overall  level  of  compliance  with  the
requirements. The most common issues were:
Insurers  not  meeting  requirements  to  disclose  financial  strength  ratings  in  writing  prior  to
policyholders  entering  into  and/or  renewing  a  contract  of  insurance.  For  some  overseas
insurers this included failure to correctly disclose the existence of an overseas policyholder
preference.
Solvency disclosure in financial statements being incomplete or incorrect.
Website disclosures being incomplete, incorrect or not updated.
The Reserve Bank has shared the general findings with all insurers and other interested parties
in order to improve compliance across the industry as a whole. In addition, the Reserve Bank
has followed up with individual insurers whose compliance levels were assessed as low or poor
– 19 of the 36 insurers sampled.
These insurers were provided with specific feedback and required to provide a written response
on the findings, actions taken and timeframes.   Insurers generally responded positively to this
feedback  and  have  taken  steps  to  improve  compliance  with  the  requirements,  giving  greater
comfort  on  the  internal  assurance  processes  tied  to  the  disclosure  requirements.    It  is  our
intention  to  undertake  a  further  review  of  compliance  in  2018;  however,  the  exact  timing  and
detail has yet to be finalised.
Statistical reporting is a key component of a disclosure regime. To date, statistical reporting on
the  insurance  sector  has  been  impeded  by  the  newness  of  the  regulatory  regime,  lack  of
historical information and inconsistent  or  poor  quality  of  information.   A  new  regular  statistical
publication on the insurance sector, which we believe will help incentivise the industry to provide
better quality information over time, was released for the first time yesterday. The Reserve Bank
is  considering  measures  to  enhance  the  integrity  of  insurers’  statistical  returns,  including  the
option of audited statements.
Public reporting of non-compliance and sanctions
A  further  aspect  of  disclosure  that  warrants  discussion  is  the  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  to
reporting on bank and insurer non-compliance with regulatory requirements.  As noted earlier,
most institution-specific matters are required to be kept confidential by the Reserve Bank.  For
registered banks, regulations setting disclosure requirements require that compliance breaches
will be reported in their disclosure statements.  However, public notice or censure of a regulated
institution by the Reserve Bank is also an available option, recognising that public understanding
and attention is likely to sharpen the incentives for good behaviour in future.  Recent preliminary
work by the Bank provides some evidence of market discipline when public notices have been
9
issued.
The  Reserve  Bank  assesses  the  merits  of  public  warnings  or  censures  on  a  case-by-case
basis, balancing the public interest in transparency and the deterrence effect against the natural
justice of protection of information if prosecution is being considered and the seriousness of the
offence. 
Alongside the Dashboard we also expect to begin reporting breaches on a separate page on our
website.  This  is  likely  to  provide  greater  transparency  around  non-compliance  breaches  than
current  reporting  practices,  due  to  information  about  breaches  being  published  on  a  more
frequent  and  accessible  basis.  In  this  context,  we  will  also  be  considering  whether  requiring
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
information to be published on very minor or inconsequential breaches may be disproportionate. 
We  are  aware  that  directors  are  concerned  that  undue  focus  is  being  given  to  immaterial
matters.
Conclusion
 Financial markets rely on information for their operation.  While there are many participants in
the information market contributing to its production, distribution and assurance, there are also
some problems and biases that can lead to less than full or meaningful disclosure by financial
institutions.  The role of regulators in supporting fair and accurate reporting is an important one. 
The  Reserve  Bank  places  considerable  store  on  public  disclosure  as  a  means  for  investors,
customers and other stakeholders to hold banks and insurers to account.
The Reserve Bank is introducing a number of initiatives to strengthen the disclosure system in
both banking and insurance.  The Bank Financial Strength Dashboard will significantly improve
the  accessibility,  comparability  and  timeliness  of  information  about  banks’  financial  positions. 
The  integrity  of  bank  reporting  appropriately  is  vouched  for  by  bank  directors  through  their
attestation  statements.    The  Reserve  Bank  is  actively  considering  steps  to  enhance  the
effectiveness of the attestation regime through expecting evidence of positive assurance, more
thematic reviews, more explicit guidance on good banking practices, more frequent engagement
with bank directors, and a review of the materiality of disclosures.  
The  insurance  sector  also  has  scope  to  improve  its  disclosure  performance.    Regulatory
initiatives will be considered during the review of IPSA, but in the meantime, disclosure practice
will  be  scrutinised  closely  through  our  engagement  with  insurers,  and  supported  by  new  and
expanded statistical reporting that commenced yesterday.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
I am very grateful to Chris Hunt for considerable help in the preparation of this speech, along with valuable
comments from other Reserve Bank colleagues.
See Fiennes, T (2016)’Regulation and the Importance of Market Discipline’, speech delivered to NZBA and Bank
of New Zealand, 4 February.
Section 105 Reserve Bank of NZ Act 1989; section 135 IPSA; section 54 NBDT Act.
Haworth, C (2018) ‘Measuring market discipline in New Zealand’ RBNZ Analytical Note .
There is a strong parallel with the desirable properties of official statistics. In 1994, the United Nations adopted
‘fundamental principles of official statistics’ recognising that reliable and objective information through official
statistics  is  crucial  for  decision  making. Statistics  New  Zealand  developed  ‘principles  and  protocols  for
producers  of  Tier  1  statistics’  in  a  similar  vein,  encompassing  principles  of  relevance,  integrity,  quality,
coherence, accessibility, confidentiality, etc.
See the Reserve Bank’s Financial Sector Assessment Programme page for information on the FSAP, including
the IMF’s main report and accompanying technical notes.
Off-quarter disclosure statements refer to the first and third quarters of a bank’s annual financial reporting cycle.
The FMA is also required to perform regular reviews of auditing firms on their compliance with the New Zealand
standards issued by the New Zealand External Reporting Board (XRB). The XRB is a body that implements all
accounting  and  auditing  standards  issued  by  the  International Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  and  the
International Auditing and Assurance Standard Board (IAASB) respectively, by issuing New Zealand equivalents.
Haworth (2018), op cit.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
