Mr  Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Private  cryptocurrencies  and  lessons
from a red paperclip
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Shareholders’ Association of the Philippines (SharePHIL) General
Membership Meeting and Cryptocurrency "The Truth & The Myth Forum", Makati City, 12 March
2018.
 Officers and members of the Shareholders’ Association of the Philippines, guests from the public
and private sectors, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon! 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  share  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  insights  and  initiatives  on  privately-issued
cryptocurrencies.  I am hopeful that in doing so, we will, as your theme suggests, be able to cut
through the “truths and myths” surrounding this fairly novel medium of exchange.  Notice though
that I make a key distinction as there’s such a thing as central bank-issued digital currency.  I’m
not  going  there  today  as  that’s  a  different  conversation  all  together  even  as  the  underlying
technology may be similar.
But there it is. Cryptocurrencies are a medium of exchange. The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
(BSP) recognizes this.  We have defined crypto or virtual currency as any “form of digitally stored
value created by an agreement within the community of virtual currency users.”   As far back as
2014,  the  BSP  advised  the  public  of  the  features,  benefits  and  attendant  risks  in  dealing  with
cryptocurrency. 
We  have  adopted  a  regulatory  approach  to  privately-issued  cryptocurrency  that  is  balanced,
open and flexible. This is to allow the market to promote financial innovation and for the industry
to take advantage of all its benefits and efficiencies – with prudence. 
We have issued (and will be ready to issue more) responsive regulations. Last February 2017,
we issued Circular No. 944. We now require businesses engaged in the exchange of privately-
issued  cryptocurrency  for  equivalent  fiat  money,  to  register  with  the  BSP  as  remittance  and
transfer companies. Moreover, we strongly cautioned the public against unscrupulous individuals
or  groups  who  offer  virtual  currency  pyramid  schemes  disguised  as  initial  coin  offerings  or
investment products. The advisory likewise provided tips on securing virtual currency accounts (I
think  this  thrust  is  something  SharePHIL  would  appreciate  given  its  mission  with  respect  to
consumer education and protecting investors’ rights.) 
To  be  clear,  we  do  not  endorse  privately-issued  cryptocurrencies  as  a  medium  of
exchange. Moreover, given their highly speculative and volatile nature, we do not endorse them
as investment vehicles either. 
Rather, our objective as a central bank is to address any risks that they may pose to the public
even  as  they  exist  as  a  fact  of  life.    This  is  consistent  with  our  goal  of  increasing  consumer
protection.  It is also in keeping with our advocacy against money laundering, terrorist financing
and other crimes  (As you know, given cryptocurrency’s reliance on the full anonymity of those
who  transact  in  them,  there  is  a  propensity  for  this  mode  of  payment  to  be  used  for  illegal
purposes).
In  keeping  with  our  mandate  to  promote  financial  stability,  we  also  aim  to  address  any  risks
posed by cryptocurrency to  the  financial  system.These  risks  are  not  imagined.  They  arise  as
cryptocurrency necessarily interplays with the non-digital world – the regular economy – when
they are exchanged into pesos or other traditional currency.
It is important to note that privately-issued cryptocurrency is not legal tender.  Unlike fiat money,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
such cryptocurrencies are not backed or guaranteed by any central monetary authority.  Only the
BSP has the sole power and authority to issue currency within the Philippines.  Under the law, no
other person or entity, public or private, may put into circulation, notes, coins or any other object
or document which might circulate as currency.  Our notes and coins are fully guaranteed by the
Government and are legal tender in the Philippines for all public and private debts.
While privately-issued cryptocurrencies do not enjoy legal tender status, they are, however, as a
matter of practice, used as a medium of exchange and a store of value.  But aren’t so many
other things? 
The red paperclip story
This brings to mind a story about a red paperclip that went viral. Some of you may be familiar
with it. In 2005, a Canadian blogger – Kyle MacDonald began a series of transactions which he
posted on-line.  He began with a red paperclip as a medium of exchange.  He exchanged this for
an  interesting  looking  fish-shaped  pen,  which  he  traded  for  an  odd-looking  doorknob…then  a
camp stove…so on and so forth.  By his thirteenth barter – in a little over a year —  MacDonald
was in possession of a movie role (a chance to act in a movie), which was finally traded for a
two-story farmhouse in a small Canadian town!  And it all started with a red paperclip!  (It’s an
interesting story.  You can google it!)
This  red  paperclip  story  has  uncomplicated  elements  that  differ  starkly  from  cryptocurrency’s
high-tech  world  of  blockchains,  miners  and  cryptography.    I  introduce  it  not  just  to  keep  your
attention  or  to  refresh  you  with  its  simplicity  but  because  there  are  powerful  and  common
lessons to be learned from it and from the phenomenon of cryptocurrencies.
These  are:   First, additional participants in a transaction exponentially increase value which is
defined,  measured  and  transferred  through  consent.  Second, there is power in leveraging on
digital technology as a connector of people.  Finally, people always count.  
in 
Using these points, allow me to share not only more insights on cryptocurrency, but also some
initiatives 
the  BSP’s  exciting 
  (unlike
cryptocurrencies)  we fully endorse.
Exponential increase in value through wide consent
financial  reform  agenda  – 
initiatives  which 
The first lesson from both the red paperclip story and the phenomenal use of privately-issued
cryptocurrencies is that additional participants in a transaction exponentially increase value.  This
value is defined, measured and transferred through consent.
The success of the red paperclip project comes from the fact that its transactors defined and
determined  what  they  deemed  to  be  valuable.  On  the  other  hand,  while  privately-issued
cryptocurrencies are fast gaining global popularity, we deem their acceptance as still limited. 
We believe privately-issued cryptocurrencies cannot completely fulfill the roles of money as a
store of value and as an independent unit of account.  Until such time that such cryptocurrencies
are able to fully demonstrate stability, the prospect that they will replace today’s fiat currencies
appears to be far-off.  They are simply still too volatile.
Power of technology to connect people
The second lesson is that there is power in leveraging on digital technology as a connector of
people. In the red paperclip story, it cannot be denied that the values that were traded were not
just in the objects themselves (They were, especially in the beginning, only ordinary objects and
might even be considered junk by many).
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Rather,  the  psychic  value  came  from  the  opportunity  to  be  on-line  personalities,  from  viral
exposure as all trades were posted on MacDonald’s blog that had gained quite a following.  As
with  cryptocurrencies,  the  great  socio-experiment  could  also  not  have  been  possible  without
dynamic computer-to-computer connections.
In  this  regard,  the  BSP  acknowledges  the  huge  potential  of  digital  technology,  that  includes
cryptocurrencies, to transform financial service delivery, specifically in the area of payments and
remittance. High-speed digital networks allow funds to move across the globe at a much faster,
cheaper and convenient way compared to traditional models. Their use is game-changing for the
unbanked, given their affordability and wider reach. 
As far as the BSP is concerned, this is worth looking into as it is consistent with its financial
inclusion advocacy.  For this reason, we continue to closely engage with various stakeholders,
including  fintech  players,  to  better  understand  varying  business  models,  processes  and
systems.   
Our priority is to develop a digital financial ecosystem that supports the diverse needs of all users
in a manner that is secure, sustainable, convenient and affordable. For the service providers –
whether new or incumbent, this ecosystem enables them to tap into a wider client base, diversify
revenue  sources  and  secure  new  growth  opportunities.  To  us,  this  line  of  pursuing  financial
inclusion is more in keeping with our financial stability objectives. 
The pillars of such an ecosystem that leverages on technology would include: an efficient retail
payment system that facilitates delivery of digital products, especially for small value transactors;
an expansive network of low cost touch points to on-board new clients and facilitate the digitizing
and  disbursing  of  cash  and  other  financial  transactions;  and  democratized  access  to  a
transaction account, wherein every person – regardless of economic and social stature – is able
to open an account and use digital finance products.  
Overall, this inclusive digital finance ecosystem will support the diverse needs of all users in a
safe,  convenient  and  affordable  manner.  It  would  have  the  right  mix  and  range  of  service
providers (banks and non-banks alike) and digital platforms to facilitate the sustainable delivery of
fit-for-purpose and affordable financial services, especially designed for the low income market. 
People always count
The final lesson in all this is that, “people always count.”  This is what drives us in the BSP as we
pursue game changing financial reforms to deepen financial markets, foster financial inclusion,
increase consumer protection and to basically improve the quality of life of all Filipinos.  
That being said, I must say that this new frontier of cryptocurrency brings up legitimate concerns
that affect people… that affect the public.  These issues are being looked into by the BSP and
other financial regulators globally. 
One issue is private cryptocurrency as an investment option.  Its value is volatile for starters. 
Thus,  we  earnestly  caution  the  public  that  before  speculating  or  investing  their  hard-earned
money  in  cryptocurrencies  —  as  with  any  other  type  of  investment  —  prospective  investors
should first know and fully understand the risks involved.
Because  people  matter,  we  at  the  BSP,  like  SharePHIL,  value  investor  education.  We  have
(together  with  the  Department  of  Finance,  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  Insurance
Commission  and  the Anti-Money  Laundering  Council)  made  plans  to  embark  on  a  nationwide
public information campaign on cryptocurrency.  The purpose is to inform and educate the public
on  what  cryptocurrencies  are,  their  uses  and  risks,  related  policies  and  regulations  in  the
Philippines, and possible pitfalls.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another serious concern is cryptocurrencies’ attractiveness to, and use by, money launderers
and terrorist financiers. This attractiveness stems from the anonymous and encrypted identities
of transactors in private cryptocurrency.  It is this very anonymity that cryptocurrency users value
most.  It enables them to transact in the so-called “dark web.”
Allow us at the BSP to offer a contrary idea:  There is power in identification. We believe that to
significantly catalyze a digital ecosystem, there must be a reliable national digital identification
system.  This  system  will  address  persistent  customer  on-boarding  issues  due  to  lack  of
acceptable IDs and the highly inefficient paper-based KYC processes which make serving small
value transactors unattractive. 
The  BSP  therefore  strongly  supports  the  passage  of  the  Philippine  ID  System  bill  which  was
identified by the Legislative Executive Development Council (LEDAC) in its August 2017 meeting
as an urgent measure. The Lower House has already approved its version on third reading.  At
the Senate, its version is  tentatively scheduled for sponsorship today, Monday, March 12 even
as we speak. Truly exciting!
The envisioned national ID system will be designed to ensure universal coverage, data integrity
and security, and optimum utility.  It will serve as an enabling platform for the efficient delivery of a
whole range of government and private sector services for all Filipinos – especially the currently
unserved.  Establishing a readily- verifiable digital identity will enable our people to open accounts
and use financial services more efficiently.
Closing thoughts
This message obviously comes from a Central Bank Governor wary of currencies that do not
qualify as legal tender and which are not backed by any monetary authority. 
But it is a message that comes too from a Central Bank Governor who has been labelled as a
“disruptor” – one that leads an institution that is ready to embrace the challenges of a rapidly
changing financial and economic landscape. 
This message is shared with this audience, a staunch advocate of investor rights and investors’
need for information.  It is a good match. 
As  I  close,  to  align  this  message  better  with  your  theme…  let  me  summarize  the  truths  and
myths of cryptocurrency from the BSP’s viewpoint:
Myth:    Privately-issued  cryptocurrencies  are  legal  tender  and  shall  soon  replace  fiat
currency.  Truth:  Cryptocurrencies,  not  backed  by  any  central  authority  are  not  legal  tender. 
Moreover, until they fully demonstrate stability, wide acceptability and other economic attributes,
they will not replace fiat currency any time soon.
Myth: Cryptocurrencies are bad and are only used for illicit activities.  Truth: Cryptocurrencies,
like fiat currencies, are neither good nor bad.  They are neutral. But, no doubt, BSP is mindful of
their wide use in illicit activities because of the anonymity of its transactors and is taking action in
this regard.
Myth:  The  BSP  endorses 
in  privately-issued
cryptocurrencies.   Truth:  The  BSP  allows  the  market  to  develop  but  it  has  also  issued
responsive regulations to uphold consumer protection and to maintain financial stability. The BSP
does not endorse or promote privately-issued cryptocurrencies but aims to address its risks as it
intersects with the financial system.
the  use  of  and/or 
investment 
Rest  assured,  the  BSP  maintains  a  forward-looking  approach  to  ensure  that  regulatory  and
supervisory frameworks are in tune with emerging trends and developments.  Through constant
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
surveillance and monitoring of the market environment, the BSP stands ready to adapt to future
challenges and opportunities ahead.
I hope I have delivered on the terms of reference for this forum.  You have been a wonderful
audience.  Thank you for your attention.
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
