Keynote Address: Mr. Jameel Ahmad, Deputy Governor, State Bank of Pakistan 
29th Annual Convention of the Association of Professional Bankers 
Colombo, 21 – 22 November 2017 
 H.E. Dr. Indrajit Coomaraswamy, Governor Central Bank of Sri Lanka;  
Mr.  Senarath  Bandara,  President  of  the  Association  of  Professional 
Bankers (APB) – Sri Lanka;  
Distinguished Members of the APB’s Executive Council;  
Esteemed Speakers, Dignitaries and Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good Evening and Ayubowan! 
It  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure for  me  to  be  here  today to  address  the 29th 
Annual Convention of the Association of Professional Bankers (APB) of Sri 
Lanka. I have always enjoyed visiting this beautiful country and am a great 
admirer of the friendly relationship that both our countries enjoy.  
Pakistan  and  Sri Lanka  are time tested  friends  and  share  cordial  bilateral 
relations which date back to as early as 1948. We have stood together and 
have  shared  strong  cooperation  with  each  other  during  difficult  times. 
Pakistanis are also grateful to the people and government of Sri Lanka for 
the visit of their cricket team to Pakistan last month which is a major step 
towards the revival of international cricket in our country. Pakistan and Sri 
Lanka  also share excellent economic cooperation.  Pakistan  is the second 
Page 1 of 15 
 
largest trading partner of Sri Lanka in South Asia while Sri Lanka was the 
first country to sign a Free Trade Agreement with Pakistan, which became 
operational  in  2005.  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  bilateral  trade 
between the two countries which is approximately USD 330 million today, 
has the potential to increase to more than USD 1 billion.  
I  would  also  like  to  commend  the  role  of  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  in 
fostering  financial  stability  in  the  country  and  achieving  decent  economic 
growth.  Central  Banks  of  both  our  countries  also  regularly  collaborate  on 
SAARCFINANCE  which  provides  an  excellent  platform  for  exchanging 
ideas  and  lessons  learned  among  central  banks  of  SAARC  member 
countries. I hope that the experiences especially in today’s rapidly evolving 
banking and financial sector can further be shared as these are interesting 
times for Central Banks around the world. 
theme 
Before sharing my thoughts on the main topic, I would like to felicitate the 
Association  of  Professional  Bankers  of  Sri  Lanka  for  regularly  organizing 
annual  conventions  on  topics  that  are  in  sync  with  today’s  changing 
realities and contribute to the debate on pertinent financial sector risks and 
i.e.  “Changing 
challenges.  The 
Dynamics:  Bank  of  the  Future”  is  of  particular  interest  to  banking 
professionals and policy makers given the fundamental shifts taking place 
in  the  financial  sector  and  the  wider  economy.  I  am  confident  that  the 
discussions  held  during  the  event  will  result  in  generation  of  innovative 
ideas  for  banks  and  provide  important  insights  on  the  challenges  being 
faced by the banking sector today and in days ahead. 
this  year’s  Convention 
for 
Page 2 of 15 
 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  in  my  speech,  I  would  therefore  reflect  on  the 
prevailing  course  of  banking  and  the  emerging  challenges  that  are 
reshaping  the  banks’  business  models  along  with  developments  in  the 
supervisory  approach  of  regulators.  But  more  importantly,  I  would  like  to 
talk  about  the  challenges  that  banks  and  their  regulators  face  due  to 
technological advancements. I will also briefly discuss the measures taken 
by  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  (SBP)  to  keep  up  with  the  changing  dynamics 
and  in  the  end  will  make  a  few  suggestions  that  can  help  prepare  the 
banking industry to adjust to the new paradigms. 
I will discuss the future of banks and banking by focusing on two themes: 
The  first  one  relates  to  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  of  2007-8  which  was 
perhaps the most significant event in recent financial history that presented 
challenges relating to financial stability to regulatory authorities around the 
globe. The second theme that I would like to discuss today is the impact of 
technology  on  banks  and  their  customers.  As  you  all  will  appreciate,  the 
bank customer of today, equipped with sophisticated gadgets and devices 
is  demanding  state  of  the  art  financial  services  from  the  comfort  of  their 
homes.  Neither  do  they  want  to  visit  a  branch,  nor  do  they  want  to  fill  up 
long forms in order to open an account. Is this a threat for the banks or an 
opportunity  to  transform?  I  believe  the  latter  is  true  which  I  will  explain 
afterwards in my speech.   
But let me begin by talking about the Global Financial Crisis and its impact. 
The decade preceding this crisis saw remarkable expansion in international 
banking.    As  a  result,  heightened  cross  border  lending  coupled  with 
sizeable presence of international banks across the globe, and particularly 
in  developing  countries,  manifested  an  increasingly  integrated  world  of 
Page 3 of 15 
 
banking and finance. The financial crisis actually forced regulatory attention 
towards  ensuring  financial  stability  by  beefing  up  capital  and  liquidity 
buffers,  more  stringent  regulations,  and  introduction  of  macro  prudential 
policy  toolkit.  There  is  no  doubt,  that  the  coordinated  efforts  made  by  the 
multilateral  bodies  and  regulators  have  facilitated  to  better  internalize 
systemic risk and strengthen the overall international financial system.  
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  while  the  post  crisis  regulatory  response  has 
resulted  in  a  more  robust  financial  system,  it  has  also  increased  the 
complexity of regulatory framework. To give you an idea of the complexity 
of  regulations,  I  will  briefly  describe  some  significant  financial  regulatory 
reforms which have been designated as priority areas for implementation:   
•  Number one: creation of a quick and effective resolution regime with 
no tolerance for using tax payers’ money to bailout failing banks; 
•  Two: application of stringent AML/CFT regulations to prevent the use 
of banking channels for illicit transactions.  
Important  Financial 
•  Three,  Implementation  and  adoption  of  policy  framework  on  Global 
Institutions  and  Domestic 
Systemically 
Systemically Important Banks as the prevailing regulatory regime and 
policies  may  not  be  sufficient  to  address  the  "negative  externalities" 
that large financial firms create.  
•  And  finally,  full  and  timely  implementation  of  Basel  III  to  ensure  a 
sound and properly functioning banking system that is able to support 
economic recovery and growth on a sustainable basis.  
 
Page 4 of 15 
 
Therefore, an important challenge and one of the top priorities of banking 
sector,  is  to  adapt  to  the  complex  regulatory  landscape  while  maintaining 
profitability.  And  let  me  tell  you,  this  is  a  big  challenge  as  not  only  the 
number  of  regulatory  changes  that  banks  need  to  comply  with  has  more 
than  tripled  since  the  last  decade  but  the  scope  and  complexity  of  these 
regulations have expanded from multiple perspectives.  
 
I  will  now  briefly  discuss  some  of  the consequences of the financial crisis 
and measures I just described.   
-  First, while the focus of these measures was to repair banks’ balance 
sheets and improve financial stability, they also led to contraction of 
the cross border lending activities.  
-  Second,  you  may  all  agree  that  since  the  Financial  Crisis,  a  partial 
reversal  in  international  banking  continues  as  multinational  banks 
from the developed world have scaled back their offshore operations.  
-  Third,  we  have  seen  that  the  post  crisis  profitability  of  banks  has 
declined  as  a  result  of  deleveraging  in  international  banks,  a  sharp 
slowdown  in  revenues  due  to  lower  demand  for  credit,  high  cost  of 
compliance,  and  various  other  policy  measures  adopted  by  central 
banks like the sustained lowering of interest rates.  
Ladies and Gentlemen; before we discuss how banks can address these 
challenges  let  me  switch  to  a  second  theme  which  is  about  the 
technological  and  digital  revolution  that  may  be  threatening  the  very 
existence  of  banks  today.  Traditionally,  the  banking  industry  has  been  an 
early  adopter  of  technology;  they  have  embraced  technology  to  automate 
and  consolidate  their  core  banking  operations  and  offer  services  like  the 
Page 5 of 15 
 
credit  cards.  1970’s  saw  the  emergence  of  SWIFT,  enabling  rapid  and 
secure  cross-border  financial  messaging  thus  speeding  up  trade  and 
remittance  transfers  across  countries.  During  the  decade  of  1980’s  and 
90’s services like the ATMs and Point of Sale terminals started becoming 
ubiquitous  and  central  banks  implemented  large  value  payment  systems 
like the Real Time Gross Settlement Systems. But, I think that the banks of 
our time have mostly been unable to keep up with the rapid technological 
evolution  of  the  post  dotcom  bubble  with  regard  to  innovative  product 
offerings and enhanced customer experience.  
Let me briefly describe some of the technological trends that our banks are 
facing today:  
First is the rise of internet, Social Media and mobile devices. On one hand 
social  media  allows  banks  to  reach  their  customers  directly  in  ways  that 
were  not  imagined  before  to  offer  them  a  variety  of  services  like  faster 
payments  and  instant  credits  while  on  the  other,  negative  perceptions 
about banks and their services can also spread like wildfire. I therefore will 
not  be  surprised  if  Social  Media  becomes  one  of  the  most  important 
sources  of  systemic  risk  going  forward.  But  banks  can  also  use  these 
technologies to strengthen their core functions like collateral monitoring and 
investment and lending decisions to manage their risks better. At the same 
time,  banks  can  collect  and  analyze  data  about  the  spending  behaviours 
and other related transactions of their customers to proactively respond to 
their growing needs.  
Second,  there  have  been  tremendous  enhancements  in  tele-density  and 
mobile broadband coverage while simultaneously the cost of not only these 
Page 6 of 15 
 
services  but  of  end  user  mobile  devices  has  also  rapidly  decreased. 
Customers can therefore  afford  smart  cell  phones,  watches  and  other  all-
time  connected  gadgets  and  by  using  those  can  access  their  bank 
accounts, avail financial services and advice, and make payments anytime 
from  anywhere.  Most  importantly,  they  can  decide  to  switch  their  service 
providers as easily as their mobile phone SIMs.  
Third, Fintech companies who are small start-ups are using technology to 
challenge banks  in  providing  innovative  financial services  like  digital  nano 
credit, crowd funding, peer to peer lending, online payments and financial 
advisory services with enhanced customer experience and in a more cost 
effective manner. On the other hand, large tech companies like Apple and 
Facebook are using their network power to make inroads in the domain of 
financial services thus threatening the very existence of banks themselves. 
Regulatory technology companies known as Regtech are offering low cost 
solutions to regulatory authorities for compliance purposes. In all likelihood, 
we would like to see the formation of partnerships of banks and these non-
bank  entities  for  lowered  costs  and  superior  customer  experience  in  the 
financial industry. 
Fourth is the rise of what is called cloud computing or cloud hosting. These 
cloud based arrangements can offer extremely cost effective fully managed 
solutions  including  hardware  and  software  as  a  service.  Businesses  now 
don’t have to worry about high cost of managing their IT or managing the 
associated  risks  rather  they  can  simply  outsource  them  to  these  cloud 
based  digital  platforms.  These  platforms  are  now  offering  the  concept  of 
“Banking  as  a  Service”  or  “Digital  Banking”  which  usually  runs  on 
infrastructure  provided  by  a  licensed  entity  and  offers  services  using  an 
Page 7 of 15 
 
ecosystem of Fintech start-ups. These platforms have the potential to drive 
down cost of providing banking services, especially for smaller banks, and 
open new opportunities of product innovation and service delivery.  
Fifth, advancements in artificial intelligence, machine learning and big data 
analytics are set to transform the financial industry in many ways especially 
in  areas  of  intelligent  customer  relationship  management  systems,  fraud 
detection and prevention, e-commerce and detection of AML/CFT issues.  
Sixth,  many  of  the  financial  services  customers  around  the  world  do  not 
want  to  go  to  a  brick  and  mortar  branch  to  open  a  bank  account  or  even 
conduct  financial  transactions;  they  would  like  to  be  identified,  authorized 
and  served  digitally.  So  regulators  and  government  authorities  are  now 
focusing on instituting Digital on-boarding programs using National Identity 
Databases.  
trusted 
third  parties 
the  need  of 
Finally, I would like to talk about the emergence of Block Chain technology 
that enables customers and financial institutions to be directly connected to 
each  other  without 
to  perform 
intermediation functions like settlement and reconciliation. This would mean 
that, for example, a security trade may settle bilaterally in almost real time 
without  the  need  of  a  depository  function;  or  smart  contracts  would 
eliminate  the  need  of  escrow  arrangements  in  cross  border  transactions. 
While  virtual  crypto  currencies  like  Bitcoin  that  run  on  Block  Chain 
technology  are  being  frequently  mentioned  for  their,  mostly,  upward  price 
fluctuations it is unlikely that they will gain systemic importance as a means 
of payment. However, Central Banks can experiment with the Block Chain 
technology and consider issuing digital currency of their own.   Block Chain 
Page 8 of 15 
 
also has the potential to change the landscape of cross border remittances, 
trade  finance,  payments  and  settlements  and  identity  management,  etc.  I 
am  therefore  not  surprised  to  see  the  interest  of  many  large  international 
banks that are experimenting with Block Chain technology these days and 
would like to see banks of our region do the same.  
While  combination  of  all  these  aspects  will  likely  drive  down  costs  for  the 
banks and help them improve their service delivery and product innovation 
capabilities  and  offer  enhanced  experience  to  the  customer,  we  must  be 
aware 
its  unintended  consequences.  These 
unintended consequences will primarily be related to consumer protection, 
data  privacy  and  money  laundering  which  are  easier  to camouflage  using 
sophisticated technology.  
technology  has 
that 
I must also mention that banks are facing aggravated challenges relating to 
cyber  security.  During  the  last  decade  or  so,  hackers  and  cyber  terrorist 
have gained much superior capabilities of espionage and afflicting damage 
and are now targeting the financial industry. The theft of electronic identity 
through  hacking  could  wipe  off  bank  accounts  of  customers  causing  not 
only  financial  but  reputational  losses  especially  to  larger  banks  and  their 
regulators.  The  proactive  detection  and  response  to  these  cyber  threats 
requires not only specialized security infrastructure within the organization 
but also enhanced mutual cooperation and information sharing among the 
banks.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  Since  I  have  discussed  various  challenges  that 
the  banking  industry  is facing  and certain  worrying  developments that  are 
threatening  its  performance,  let  me  briefly  share  with  you  what  we  at  the 
Page 9 of 15 
 
State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) have done so far and plan to do in the future 
to transform our banking sector.  
In  Pakistan,  the  banking  sector  constitutes  around  74  percent  of  the 
country’s  financial  sector  with  an  asset  base  equivalent  to  almost  55 
percent  of  the  country’s  GDP.  As  such,  the  stability  and  buoyancy  of  the 
banking  system  is  of  critical  importance.  Over  the  years,  continuous 
improvements  in  prudential  regulations  in  line  with  international  best 
practices  and  capital  strengthening  measures  have  significantly  improved 
the resilience of the banking system of Pakistan. The Capital Adequacy of 
the banking system at 15.6 percent is well above the local and international 
benchmarks.  
Like  elsewhere  in  the  world,  SBP  has  set  strengthening  the  financial 
stability  regime  as  one  of  its  key  priorities  under  its  Vision  2020.  SBP  is 
also  working  on  adopting  Risk  Based  Supervision  (RBS)  in  order  to 
advance  its  current  supervisory  regime  and  improve  its  supervisory 
efficiency.  We  are  also  looking  towards  a  sustainable  financially  inclusive 
system  which  can  spur  socio-economic  development  in  the  country. 
Recognizing  the  gaps  leading  to  financial  exclusion,  we  have  already 
developed  National  Financial  Inclusion  Strategy  (NFIS)  2020  which  lays 
down sound foundations for promoting financial inclusion and identifies the 
gaps  leading  to  persistent  financial  exclusion.  Our  strategic  approach  to 
tackle financial exclusion is focused at creating a proportionate policy and 
regulatory  framework  that  addresses  sector-specific  risks  and  strategies 
regarding infrastructure development and policy interventions - both on the 
supply and demand side for development finance sector like Microfinance, 
SMEs, Consumer Finance, Agriculture, Islamic Banking. 
Page 10 of 15 
 
I  am  also  happy  to  share  with  you  that  Pakistan  has  one  of  the  most 
sophisticated National Identity Systems which is run by a government entity 
called National Database & Registration Authority or NADRA. NADRA has 
gained  international  recognition  for  its  success  in  providing  biometric-
enabled identity solutions to all the citizens of Pakistan. The government of 
Pakistan  undertook  a  massive  initiative  to  biometrically  verify  all  SIMs 
issued  in  Pakistan  and  around  130  million  SIMs  were  re-verified  using 
NADRA’s  database.  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  also  capitalized 
this 
opportunity by requiring banks to use the NADRA database for digital on-
boarding of customers, especially the unbanked population, and mitigating 
the  risks  relating  to  Money  Laundering  and  Terrorist  Financing.  This  is  a 
great  example  of  how  technology  can  be  used  for  not  only  customer 
facilitation but for compliance purposes also.  
Due  to  rapid  technological  progress,  the  global  financial  and  payment 
landscape  is  transforming  very  rapidly.  SBP  has  long  recognized  the 
importance  of  technology  and  has  been  facilitating  banks  and  financial 
industry to reap the benefits of digitization. To keep pace with technological 
transformation  and  mitigate  the  associated  risks,  SBP  has  issued  various 
guidelines  encompassing 
for  Enterprise  Technology 
Governance  and  Risk  Management,  Payment  Systems’  Designation, 
Security  of 
Internet  Banking,  prevention  against  cyber-attack,  Risk 
Management in Outsourcing Arrangements by Financial Institutions, etc.  
 
I  am  pleased  to  share  that  last  year  SBP  facilitated  the  issuance  of  our 
domestic payment scheme called the PayPak. The encouraging aspect of 
PayPak  is  that  it  has  been  issued  by  a  private  entity  that  is  owned  by  11 
frameworks 
Page 11 of 15 
 
private  banks  thus  ensuring  full  blessing  and  participation  of  the  private 
sector  in  this  payment  scheme.  Moreover,  SBP  is  developing  a  National 
Payment  System  Strategy  to  modernize  the  clearing  and  settlement 
infrastructure  for  reducing  cost,  improving  efficiency,  enhancing  security, 
and strengthening its regulatory and supervisory oversight.  
 
SBP is also playing a very important role of facilitator and catalyst and our 
doors are open to innovation and innovative ideas. SBP is also facilitating 
the  entrance  of  non-banks  particularly  in  payments  arena  and  has  issued 
Rules  for  Payment  System  Operators  and  Service  Providers.  We  have 
seen encouraging response to these regulations and now a variety of non-
bank,  digitally  enabled businesses  have  entered  or  are  preparing to  enter 
the  Pakistani  market  with  innovative  and  customer  centric  products.  SBP 
also  engages  with  the  Fintechs  in  the  country  on  regular  basis  to 
understand their business models and facilitate them if required.   
 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  keeping  in  view  the  discussed  challenges  and 
opportunities,  banks  need  to  devise  certain  strategies  that  can  help  them 
grow and stay on course. I must say that banks are essentially required to 
acknowledge that times have changed and in order to stay competitive they 
must  embrace  technology  and  forge  new  partnerships  to  re-invent  their 
business  models.  I  will  go  to  the  extent  of  saying  that  the  upcoming  age 
may  become  the  age  of  less  or  even  non-intermediation  where  role  of 
intermediary  institutions  like  banks  and  their  regulators  could  become 
limited if they don’t embrace these changes pragmatically. 
Page 12 of 15 
 
Now  I  will  present few  suggestions  which can  help to proactively  address 
the challenges of the future: 
•  First, with regards to the global financial regulatory reforms, we need to 
be  proactive  and  consider  adopting  them  at  an  early  stage.  However, 
any  implementation  needs  to  be  proportional  to  the  complexity  of  the 
financial institutions and the system. While implementing the standards 
and regulations relating to AML and CFT we must be pragmatic in our 
approach  so  that  growth  of  banking  industry  or  their  customers  is  not 
hampered.  
•  Second,  authorities  are  now  increasingly  focusing  on  improving  the 
situation of financial inclusion in their respective jurisdictions. Banks and 
other players of the financial industry need to come forward and help in 
this 
regulatory 
requirements,  technology-enabled,  risk  based  approach  for  assessing 
client risk and customer on-boarding may be adopted.  
regard.  Without  compromising  on 
the  basic 
•  Third, Central Banks and other regulatory authorities must work towards 
creating a strong, robust and ubiquitous payments system with focus on 
developing  an  enabling  legal  and  regulatory  environment  that  is 
commensurate  with  the  new  technological  environment.  Some  of  the 
areas to be covered may include, but should not remain limited to cloud 
computing, data privacy and protection, cybercrime and formalizing the 
role  of  non-banks  including  critical  service  providers  in  the  area  of 
technology services.  
•  Fourth, it is important that we place special focus on formalizing the role 
of  non-banks  which  include  fintechs,  Payment  Service  Providers  and 
especially  Critical  Service  Providers  like  technology  and  telecom 
Page 13 of 15 
 
providers because the dependence of financial entities on these players 
is  becoming  critical  and  their  failure  may  threaten  the  overall  financial 
stability.  Regulators  must  especially  be  wary  of  issues  relating  to 
consumer protection, data privacy and money laundering arising due to 
new and complex partnerships and data sharing arrangements between 
banks, fintechs and IT service providers. 
•  Fifth,  banks  and  the  financial  industry  are  facing  threats  from  cyber 
terrorists which now have far superior capabilities, and probably a good 
knowledge  of  the  internal  vulnerabilities.  In  order  to  mitigate  this  risk, 
banks will have to pool-up their resources and share their experiences 
with each other on regular basis and devise strategies and programs to 
counter the threats they face as an industry. 
•  Sixth,  if  the  industry  concludes  that  block  chain  enabled  services  and 
their  providers  will  gain  more  prominence  going  forward  then  it  is 
important  to  take  proactive  measures  to  contain  their  influence.  For 
example, smart contracts and their legal enforceability in a court of law, 
role  of  crypto  currencies,  cross  border  trade  and  payments  and 
customer identity management are some of the areas that I think will be 
important to be looked into. 
•  Last but not the least, continuous capacity building of bankers and their 
regulators  is  the  key  for  growing  and  thriving  in  a  digital  future. 
Empowering finance professionals with requisite skills will be necessary 
in wake of increasing complexity of global standards and transformation 
taking  place  in  financial  industry.  Financial  industry  has  to  adopt 
collaborative  approach  for  enhancing  professional  capacity  of  their 
human  capital  through  local  and  international  solutions  to  keep  pace 
with the changing financial land scape. Central Banks must acquire and 
Page 14 of 15 
 
enhance  the  capacity  and  skill  set  of  their  staff  especially  in  areas  of 
algorithmic  based  system  audits,  system  integrity  &  security  audit  and 
data analytics based regulatory compliance skills.  
While  the  challenges  are  huge,  I  have  full  confidence  in  the  skills  and 
abilities of banking community in our two countries. I am sure that you will 
adapt  to  the  changing  realities  of  times  ahead,  take  these  challenges  as 
opportunities and deliver the best of best to citizens of your great country.   
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  In  the  end, I  would  like to  once  again thank the 
Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  and  the  Association  of  Professional  Bankers  – 
Sri  Lanka  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  Keynote  Address  for  this  year’s 
Annual Convention. 
Thank you for your attention! 
 Page 15 of 15 
 
