  29.05.2018 
 Testimony of the Governor of the Banco de España before the Senate in 
relation to the draft State Budget for 2018  
 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
 I appear before you today as part of the Senate’s debate and approval process for the State 
Budget for 2018.  
Allow me to begin by reviewing the current international economic setting of the Spanish 
economy  and  its  outlook.  I  shall  then  refer  to  the  main  aspects  of  this  draft  Budget.  To 
conclude,  I  will  mention what,  in  my  opinion,  are  the  main  challenges  for  fiscal  policy  in 
Spain in the coming years.  
The external setting of the Spanish economy  
The  external  setting  of  the  Spanish  economy  broadly  remains  favourable,  although  the 
global economy is subject to factors of risk that should not be ignored.  
Following several quarters of upward surprises, the opening months of this year have – more 
so in the euro area – seen some moderation in global economic activity whose scope is still 
uncertain. Notwithstanding, the information available continues to point to the maintenance 
of the current upturn over the next two or three years, underpinned by the correction of the 
previous imbalances, agents’ confidence, the favourable financing conditions and the boost 
from the expansionary fiscal policies in the United States.  
On the financial markets, despite the bout of marked volatility last February, asset values 
remain  high  by  historical  standards.  At  the  same  time,  recent  weeks  have  seen  an 
appreciation of the dollar, which would be consistent with the expectations of further US 
interest  rate  rises,  at  a  swifter  pace  than  that  in  other  economic  areas.  However,  this 
appreciation might also be partly in response to a certain safe-haven effect, in a context in 
which certain risks appear to be rising, in particular in some emerging markets and areas 
subject  to  a  high  degree  of  political  uncertainty.  This  latter  factor  is  also  contributing  to 
heightening the uptrend in oil prices witnessed in recent months. 
The decline in activity observed in the euro area during the first three months of 2018, from 
0.7% to 0.4% in terms of the GDP growth rate relative to the previous quarter, should be 
analysed with care. On one hand, it should be borne in mind that last year’s growth was 
particularly sharp (the highest since the start of the crisis, almost a decade ago); accordingly, 
it is reasonable to expect there should be some moderation. On the other, the as-yet very 
partial  information  available  does  not  allow  us  to  specify  to  what  extent  the  change 
witnessed  may have  been  due  to transitory  factors,  relating  to  the  weather  and  the high 
number of strikes in recent months in certain euro area countries, as opposed to other more 
durable  factors.  In  any  event,  forecasts  continue  to  suggest  that  the  sustained  rates  of 
increase of euro area activity will continue in the coming months, albeit with a tendency to 
ease.  
As  to  inflation,  the  latest  data  continue  to  evidence  very  moderate  behaviour,  with  an 
increase in April, for the euro area as a whole, of 1.2%. The projected reduction in the degree 
of slack in the economy should enable inflation rates in the area to draw closer to levels 
compatible  with  the  Eurosystem’s  objective  of  price  increases  below,  but  close  to,  2%. 
 
 3/9 
 Spanish economic developments and outlook  
Regarding the Spanish economy, the INE estimate for GDP growth in the first quarter of 
2018 shows a rate of increase of 0.7%, in line with the two previous quarters.  
That said, there has been a slight decline of 0.2 pp in the year-on-year rate of change from 
3.1%,  at  end-2017,  to 2.9% in  the  first  quarter of  this  year, which is  consistent  with  the 
continuation of  the  current  upturn,  albeit  at  a somewhat  lower  rate of increase  than that 
observed  in  the  past  three  years.  On  the  latest  projections  published  by  the  Banco  de 
España in late March, output is expected to expand by 2.7% in 2018, 2.3% in 2019 and 
2.1% in 2020. 
The  latest  information  would  broadly  confirm  this  scenario,  albeit  with  a  possible  slight 
upward revision this year and next, as a result of the greater fiscal boost built into the draft 
State Budget for 2018 and in the recently published Stability Programme Update for the 
period 2018-2021, on which I shall comment later.  
It is estimated that the growth of our economy will continue to be underpinned, above all, 
by national demand, but with a positive – though diminishing – contribution from the external 
sector. In particular, household consumer spending and residential investment will continue 
to  be  assisted  by  rising  employment,  the  sector’s  improved  financial  position,  the  fiscal 
impulse and favourable financial conditions. Also, the growth of demand and of corporate 
earnings, higher capacity utilisation and the aforementioned propitious financial conditions 
will continue to provide for significant increases in investment in capital goods.  
Nonetheless,  the  tailing  off  of  some  of  the  temporary  factors  that  have  supported  the 
increase  in  activity  in  Spain  in  the  most  recent  period  would  explain  the  moderation  in 
growth expected in the coming years. This would be the case were there to be a reversal in 
the trend of oil prices, in the expansionary effect of monetary policy and in the momentum 
of external markets, following their significant dynamism last year. 
As regards prices, the latest data continue to show, as in the euro area as a whole, very 
moderate behaviour, with the year-on-year growth of the CPI standing at 1.1% in April. The 
Banco de España projections published in March augured an increase of 1.2% for the year 
as a whole; however, it might ultimately be higher owing to the impact of the recent rises in 
oil prices. In this respect, the current volatility on the oil markets adds further uncertainty to 
the evolution of prices in the short term. In any event, for the more stable components of 
inflation (excluding energy), a gradual rise is forecast, in line with the expected increase in 
the degree of use of productive resources. 
The main risks and factors of vulnerability  
In this scenario, a series of risks should be highlighted.  
Globally,  behind  the  recent  increase  in  economic  activity,  an  expansionary  stance  has 
underlain demand-side policies in most geographical areas, in particular in the case of the 
monetary policy still maintained by the main advanced economies. By their very nature, it is 
to be expected that these measures will be reversed in the future, which might affect agents’ 
expectations.  While  the  various  economic  authorities  are  committed  to  a  process  of 
4/9 
  monetary  normalisation,  in  as  gradual  and  orderly  a  way  as  possible,  specific  bouts  of 
tightening on financial markets, as seen in the early months of this year, should not be ruled 
out.  
Against this backdrop, the US Administration’s recent measures also contain elements of 
uncertainty or risk.  
First, US fiscal policy has adopted a clearly expansionary stance, in a context of maintaining 
GDP growth rates clearly above potential over a prolonged period. Further, the decisions 
announced in respect of tariffs, mainly – but not only – vis-à-vis China, might, although they 
still affect only a limited group of sectors, trigger retaliation, with clearly negative effects on 
activity  and  global  trade.  This  adverse  circumstance  would,  within the  EU,  be  combined 
with the still-uncertain impact of Brexit on the UK economy and its trading partners. Finally, 
as the United States has broken the nuclear agreement with Iran, there might be further 
tensions on the oil market, with adverse effects on world growth.  
In the current setting these risks are relevant to the Spanish economy, given that it still has 
high  levels  of  public  and  external  debt,  which  make  it  particularly  vulnerable  to  negative 
developments on the international capital markets. At the same time, further increases in oil 
prices might particularly affect our economy in view of its high foreign energy dependence.   
Elsewhere, the political situation in Catalonia does not appear to have stabilised, thereby 
posing a further factor of uncertainty, with potentially adverse consequences for the Spanish 
economy as a whole. 
In the medium term, the expansion of our economy should cease to rest on the expansionary 
impulses  of  demand-side  policies  and  come  to  depend  on  more  durable  factors.  The 
estimates available on potential growth are relatively modest, meaning it is crucial to attempt 
to address some of the problems restricting it. These include most notably high structural 
unemployment, population ageing, a poor productivity trend and the technological capital 
deficit.  
Budgetary policy in 2018  
I  shall  now  discuss  the  main  items  of  the  draft  State  Budget  for  2018  approved  by  the 
Government on 27 March, and complemented by the Stability Programme Update for the 
period 2018-2021, submitted to the European authorities on 30 April.  
This second document already includes some of the measures added to the draft Budget 
in  its  passage  through  Parliament.  It  is  particularly  useful  in  that  it  offers  an  overview  of 
overall Spanish general (central, regional and local, including the Social Security system) 
government  budgetary  policy,  providing  a  broader  time  perspective  of  four  years.  In  a 
country as decentralised as Spain, it is impossible to properly assess public spending and 
revenue  policies  without  this  overview.  At  the  same  time,  an  effective  fiscal  policy, 
particularly when the starting point is a budgetary imbalance like ours, should be part of a 
consistent multi-year plan with specific measures.  
The Budget and the Stability Programme include macroeconomic projections that point to 
increases in real GDP in Spain of 2.7% in 2018, and slightly lower levels in the following 
 5/9 
 years:  2.4%  in  2019,  and  2.3%  both  in  2020  and  in  2021.  Nominal  GDP  is  expected  to 
increase by around 4.3% over the entire forecasting horizon. The growth forecast and its 
composition are broadly consistent with the baseline scenario of the Banco de España’s 
macroeconomic projections I outlined earlier.  
The Stability Programme envisages an overall general government deficit of 2.2% in 2018, 
in line with the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact. That should be conducive to 
Spain exiting the “excessive deficit” situation still prevailing. For the following years, further 
declines in the budgetary imbalance are envisaged, until resuming a slightly positive balance 
in 2021, for the first time since 2007. All tiers of government, including Social Security funds, 
should attain budgetary equilibrium in this horizon, according to the Programme.  
For  2018,  the  drive  to  correct  the  budgetary  imbalance  is  totally  concentrated  in  central 
government and in Social Security funds, which should reduce their respective deficits by 
1.2 pp and 0.4 pp of GDP to 0.7% and 1.1%. Conversely, the targets for regional and local 
government for 2018 are less demanding than last year and stand at -0.4% and 0% of GDP, 
respectively, compared with -0.3% and a surplus of 0.6% posted by these administrations 
in 2017. 
The fulfilment of these targets and the macroeconomic projections should lead to a decline 
in overall general government debt to 97% of GDP in 2018, and 89.1% in 2021, down 1.3 
pp and 9.2 pp, respectively, on 2017.  
Significantly, practically the entire adjustment in 2018, and somewhat more than two-thirds 
of that in the period 2018-2021, would be due to the cyclical effect, whereby the structural 
budgetary effort would be relatively modest.  
In  terms  of  its  composition,  the  Stability  Programme  envisages  an  increase  in  revenue 
somewhat  outpacing  that  in  GDP,  in  line  with  what  occurred  in  2017.  Expenditure, 
meantime,  after  having  posted  very  low  growth  in  the  past  four  years,  is  expected  to 
increase by 2.7% on average over the 2018-2021 period, although its weight in GDP will 
continue to diminish. 
On  the  revenue  side,  the  Stability  Programme  includes  the  personal  income  tax  cuts 
included in the draft Budget for 2018, which mainly affect the lowest-earning taxpayers, and 
which are expected to reduce the revenues relating to this tax in 2018 and 2019. This would 
be  partly  offset  by  the  introduction  of  a  new  tax  on  certain  digital  services,  which  might 
contribute to raising resources by around €600 million in 2018 and by €1.5 billion in 2019, 
according  to  the  Programme.  However,  this  new  instrument  is  still  relatively  undefined, 
meaning  it  is  difficult  to  judge  its  tax-raising  potential.  Overall,  and  as  stated  in  my  last 
appearance before Parliament in relation to the Budget, achieving the public revenue targets 
for  the  current  year,  2018,  will  entail  a  greater  response  by  tax  revenues  to  growth  in 
economic activity than has been historically observed.  
As  regards  the  expenditure  forecast  for  2018,  its  more  expansionary  trend  relative  to 
previous years is mainly due to the agreements reached on employment and compensation 
of public-sector employees, on one hand, and on the revaluation of pensions, on the other.  
6/9 
  The  agreement  reached  by  the  Government  with  the  main  trade  union  organisations 
includes  an  increase  in  public-sector  employees’  remuneration  of  1.75%  in  2018,  plus 
additional funds for targets and specific bodies that might entail a further 0.4 pp increase in 
total gross wages. In the following years, to 2020, there would be even higher increases 
than these. The budgetary plan also includes an extension to the hiring policy of the last two 
years, raising replacement rates in some sectors and enacting additional measures affecting 
working  hours  and  temporary  employment.  Against  this  background,  the  estimated  2% 
increase in public-sector employees’ remuneration in the Stability Programme for 2018 will 
probably be surpassed. 
With respect to welfare benefits, the Stability Programme reflects the 1.6% settlement for 
the revaluation of public pensions, both in 2018 and 2019. This increase will be 3% this 
year, 2018, in the case of minimum and non-contributory pensions. I shall later return to 
this. In any event, given the trend growth in the number of pensions and the substitution 
effect arising from the new pensions replacing those that are terminated, which are generally 
higher than was earlier the case, the forecast growth in the budget earmarked for welfare 
benefits in 2018 (3.7%) may also be surpassed. 
Among the remaining expenditure items for this year, goods and services purchases will 
notably continue to be contained, and interest payments to decline, while there will be a 
significant increase in public investment. This latter development is partly in response to the 
inclusion in 2018 of the expenditure associated with amounts for which the government may 
be  liable  under  the  insolvency-related  legal  proceedings  currently  affecting  certain  toll 
motorways. But even after adjusting for this effect, public investment is expected to be more 
expansionary  than  other  items,  as  was  the  case  in  2017.  All  told,  public  investment  is 
expected to stand at 2.1% of GDP in 2018, excluding the temporary effect arising from the 
above-mentioning  legal  proceedings,  a  level  far  below  the  average  for  the  previous  two 
decades, which was 3.6%. 
Overall, it may be concluded that the attainment of the budget deficit target for this year, 
namely 2.2% of GDP, is subject to significant risks. If they are not to materialise, potential 
slippage  from  the  projections  must  be  monitored  so  that  there  is  time  to  react  and  the 
objectives pursued are not compromised. In this respect, the forecasts published by the 
European Commission several weeks ago should be taken as a warning sign, given that a 
deficit almost 0.5 pp of GDP higher than this target is estimated. Should this failure to hit 
the target be confirmed, the structural deficit would also be impaired, making fiscal policy 
in 2017 procyclical, given the estimation that the output gap would have already moved into 
positive territory.  
 The importance of budgetary consolidation  
I should now like to move on to the importance of budgetary consolidation.  
Since 2009 Spain has embarked on an intense process of public finances consolidation, 
which has entailed a reduction in the overall general government deficit of 8 pp of GDP. 
Achieving such an adjustment proved very difficult, given the prevailing circumstances. 
Yet even if the budgetary targets for 2018 are met, public finances, as projected in the draft 
Budget, will still be in deficit to the tune of 2.2% of GDP, while public debt will be standing 
 7/9 
 at around 97% of GDP. Given that the Spanish economy is regaining, according to most 
analysts, a neutral or slightly positive cyclical position, this will entail, for 2018, a structural 
deficit – i.e. the cyclically adjusted total deficit – higher than the budgeted figure of 2.2%. 
Against this background, the Stability Programme Update considers a continuation of the 
fiscal adjustment which, in any event, would still entail in 2021, eight years after the start of 
the economic expansion, a structural deficit of over 1 pp of GDP and public debt of almost 
90% of output.  
Maintaining levels of public debt around those currently prevailing in the Spanish economy 
involves significant costs that need to be taken into account. It entails the deviation of major 
resources  for  interest  payments  and,  above  all,  vulnerability  in  the  face  of  episodes  of 
tightening  financing  conditions  on  international  markets,  restricting  the  possibilities  of 
pursuing a countercyclical fiscal policy at times of economic recession. 
In sum, it is most important to harness the current favourable circumstances of the Spanish 
economy  to  redress,  as  soon  as  possible,  our  structural  deficit  and  public  debt  levels, 
bringing them in line with the standards set by our legislation and European regulations.  
I would underscore, too, the challenge posed by the ageing of our population, in particular 
for our pension system. This is essentially a medium and long-term challenge; but for that 
very reason, tackling it appropriately is more difficult than other, shorter-term challenges. 
The  latest  Social  Security  reform,  in  2013,  introduced  two  automatic  adjustment 
mechanisms (the Sustainability Factor and the Revaluation Index) which sought to ensure a 
balance between the system’s revenue and expenditure. The draft Budget and the Stability 
Programme  Update  have  introduced  measures  to  increase  pensions  above  the  level 
established by the Revaluation Index, in 2018 and 2019, and to delay the entry into force of 
the Sustainability Factor, from 2019 to 2023. 
Allow  me  to  reiterate  what  I  have  said in  various addresses  regarding  this matter:  it  is  a 
priority that we define, in accordance with social preferences, the substitution rates for the 
pension system that it is sought to ensure; and then, that we adjust revenue accordingly, so 
that  sustainability  is  ensured.  I  believe  this  is  a  structural  issue,  requiring  a  debate  not 
confined to the habitual discussions of an annual budget. 
Conclusions 
 
To conclude, I wish to highlight the fact that the Spanish economy is in its fifth consecutive 
year of growth, with the prospect that this trend will continue in the coming years, albeit at 
progressively more moderate rates. Set against this baseline scenario are a series of risks, 
which  might  shorten  or  moderate  the  current  upturn.  Accordingly,  efforts  to  continue 
improving the Spanish general government budgetary position should not be delayed, so 
as  to  be  able  to  effectively  withstand  potentially  negative  future  developments.  In  this 
respect, fulfilment of the objectives set in the draft State Budget for 2018 and in the recent 
Stability  Programme  Update  is  crucial.  Success  will  require  strict  implementation  of 
spending policies and the continuous monitoring of revenue.  
8/9 
 As this is my last appearance before the Senate as Governor of the Banco de España, and 
to conclude, I should like to express my gratitude for the consideration that has always been 
extended to the Bank and to me in this chamber, and for the quality of the interventions and 
questions raised on which I have had to comment. I have always thought, and have said so 
on different occasions, that the lower and upper houses are the “natural fora” in which an 
institution such as the Banco de España should preferentially express itself, cooperating 
and contributing, as best it can, to parliamentary functions.  
 Thank you for your attention. 
  9/9 
