Jens Weidmann: Central bank communication as an instrument of
monetary policy
Lecture  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Centre  for  European
Economic Research, Mannheim, 2 May 2018.
 1 Introductory remarks
Professor Wambach,
ladies and gentlemen
I would first like to thank you very much for inviting me to speak here at the Centre for European
Economic  Research  as  part  of  the  “First-Hand  Information  on  Economic  Policy”  series  of
lectures.
When I hear the phrases “economic policy” and “hand”, I can’t help but think of Harry Truman’s
famous demand for a one-handed economist. By always assessing everything “on the one hand
... on the other hand”, the economists clearly got on the then US president’s nerves.
In this case, it goes without saying that “First-Hand Information on Economic Policy” has little to
do with “one-handed” economists.
No, “first-hand” in this sense means “directly from decision-makers”. With that definition in mind,
as Bundesbank President and member of the ECB Governing Council, I should obviously talk
about monetary policy.
It has now been seven years since I delivered my first speech as Bundesbank President, and I
have given a few more in the meantime. I haven’t been keeping count, but the database of public
speeches on the Bundesbank website now contains more than 150 entries.
Not all of my speeches, but a large number of them, are partially or even primarily about matters
of monetary policy. Speeches have become a vital means of communication for monetary policy
decision-makers. The six members  of  the  ECB  Executive  Board  alone  have  given  150  public
speeches  over  the  past  year.  And  speeches  are  just  one  means  of  communication.  Other
channels  of  central  bank  communication  are  interviews,  press  conferences,  and  regular
publications of reports.
Close  attention  is  paid,  in  particular,  to  the  ECB  President’s  introductory  statement  at  the
beginning of the press conferences following ECB Governing Council monetary policy meetings.
ECB watchers scrutinise every word. Changes in communication are very keenly noticed and
analysed. And it is not only what is said but also what is left unsaid that can send a message.
“One cannot not communicate.” From that perspective, this well-known quote by communication
theorist Paul Watzlawick also applies to monetary policy.
In my speech today, I would like to discuss the significance of communication as an instrument
of monetary policy in greater detail and provide some insight into what makes good central bank
communication  and  how  important  good  central  bank  communication  is  for  the  success  of
monetary policy.
I  will  cover  these  topics  in  three  steps,  starting  with  the  development  of  central  bank
communication  and  its  significance  in  general.  I  will  then  outline  the  particular  challenges  in
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
communicating a monetary policy operating at the zero lower bound. And finally, I would like to
give an outlook on how communication can help renormalise monetary policy without causing
any market disruptions in the process.
2 The significance of communication in monetary policy
Just  a  few  decades  ago,  central  banks  were  still  somewhat  tight-lipped  when  it  came  to
communication – you could almost say non-transparent. Up until the early 1990s, central banks
were still shrouded in secrecy. Economist and influential monetary theorist Karl Brunner decried
central banking as an esoteric art known only to a few select elites; incidentally, in his opinion,
this esotericism was also manifest in their inherent inability to express themselves clearly.
In this vein, the warning from former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Alan Greenspan is almost
legendary: “If I seem unduly clear to you, you must have misunderstood what I said.” And it was
not without reason that a book about the Federal Reserve, which topped US bestseller lists 30
years ago, was titled Secrets of the Temple.
The example of the Fed also vividly illustrates how the communication of monetary policy has
been in constant flux. Before 1994, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) provided no
information on the federal funds target rate – the Fed’s key interest rate. From 1994 onwards,
statements were published for each change in the target rate.
From the end of 1999, the FOMC issued a statement after every meeting, which also revealed
voting results from 2002 onwards. From 2003, the statements also contained explicit information,
or forward guidance, on the likely course of inflation.
Since  2007,  the  FOMC  has  published  individual  projections  for  its  members’  growth,
unemployment, inflation and interest rates four times per year. And, in 2011, a press conference
was held for the first time following an FOMC meeting; this now also takes place four times each
year.
The  aim  of  more  intensive  central  bank  communication  is  to  ensure  a  greater  degree  of
transparency.
First,  this  allows  central  banks  to  be  more  accountable  to  the  public. An  independent  central
banks is not a state within a state and, in a democracy, it needs to explain its monetary policy. By
explaining its decisions in an understandable way, it strengthens public confidence in its ability to
fulfil its task of ensuring price stability. This trust is the most valuable asset that a central bank
has.
Second,  communication  can  also  make  monetary  policy.  If  people  are  economically  active  –
whether as an entrepreneur,  employee,  consumer  or  however  –  they  act  in  a  forward-looking
way.  They  form  expectations  and  can  influence  central  banks  via  communication.  Or,  as
American economist Michael Woodford put it:
“Because the key decision-makers in an economy are forward-looking, central banks affect the
economy  as  much  through  their  influence  on  expectations  as  through  any  direct,  mechanical
1
effects of central bank trading in the market for overnight cash.”
In this context, the impact of monetary policy relies even less on short-term money market rates
and much more on expectations regarding the future course of key interest rates and, above all,
long-term interest rates. The entrepreneurs and banks among you will be able to confirm that
decisions  regarding  savings  and  investments  do  not  depend  on  three-month  money  market
rates, but on five-year or ten-year interest rates. However, monetary policy normally only affects
them indirectly.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, communication serves to steer expectations, and the better expectations are steered in line
with the monetary policy mandate, the better the central bank will stabilise aggregate demand
2
and therefore price developments, too.
But  how  do  central  banks  steer  monetary  policy  expectations  today? Announcing  an  inflation
target plays a key role, as this leads to stability gains.     It  helps  to  anchor  economic  agents’
inflation expectations, which pays off in the form lower inflation volatility, amongst other things. In
this  respect,  it  is  no  coincidence  that  the  expansion  of  central  banks’  communication  was
accompanied by the emergence of an inflation targeting strategy.
3
Even before the introduction of the euro, the ECB Governing Council had already published and
then refined a quantitative definition of price stability. However, the communication activities of
the ECB and the national central banks in the euro area went above and beyond that from the
start.
Alongside the arguments of accountability and steering expectations, the fact that the ECB, as a
new  institution,  did  not  yet  have  a  reputation  in  monetary  policy  also  played  a  role.
Understandable  communication  was  used  as  a  way  of  allaying  any  doubts  regarding  the
Eurosystem’s commitment to stability.
Through the aforementioned press conference, the ECB has a means of communication at its
disposal  that  provides  the  opportunity  to  explain  monetary  policy  decisions  in  a  timely  and
comprehensive manner.
The introductory statements are not designed to provide a comprehensive view of the range of
opinions held by the members of the ECB’s Governing Council. For this purpose, the Governing
Council has, since 2015, published what it calls “accounts” – detailed written summaries of its
monetary policy meetings. These also show the range of arguments put forward.
Certain other central banks also publish the minutes of their meetings, naming who voted for
what;  however,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  avoided  doing  this  from  the  outset,  for  good
reason. This is intended to prevent the decisions made by members of the Governing Council
being judged from a national perspective in their home countries and thus to ward off the risk of
monetary policy becoming politicised.
As it happens, the Bundesbank set great store by communication with the public even at a fairly
early  stage,  back  in  the  days  of  the  Deutsche  Mark.  One  reason  for  this  was  its  marked
independence, which, as I already mentioned, compels it to be accountable. At the same time,
however, the Bundesbank was quick to recognise how much the success of a stability-oriented
monetary policy hinges on a well-informed public understanding the monetary policy strategy and
appreciating the value of a stable currency.
Had the German public been less appreciative of its stable currency, it would have been harder
for the Bundesbank to implement its policy, especially as it was not always welcomed by all.
Thus, central bank communication in the days of the Deutsche Mark was not so much aimed at
steering expectations. This would have put the Bundesbank far ahead of its time; after all, the
importance of steering expectations as a monetary policy strategy was only recognised in the
mid-1990s.  On  the  contrary:  until  well  into  the  1990s,  central  bankers  did  not  shy  away  from
springing a surprise interest rate decision on the markets now and then.
Nowadays, preparations for monetary policy decisions are communicated so far in advance that
often the decision itself barely comes as a surprise.
Good  central  bank  communication  is  also  characterised  by  its  emphasis  on  the  state
contingency of monetary policy decisions – in other words, it clarifies that the monetary policy
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
stance is contingent on the economic setting, and specifies how.
The  communication  should  explain  and  convey,  as  clearly  and  precisely  as  possible,  the
objective and how it will react to any deviations from that objective. Put simply, it should convey
monetary policy’s reaction function, so as to avoid unnecessary uncertainty.
This  should  give  economic  participants  a  better  understanding  of  how  monetary  policy  will
respond to new information. Thus, they can adjust their expectations about interest rates and
inflation  of  their  own  accord,  and  hence  their  response  to  new  information,  such  as  an
unexpected oil price hike. And because they do this, the central bank itself does not have to react
as much to the changed economic setting.
But what exactly does good central bank communication look like? How extensive and detailed
does it have to be?
It  goes  without  saying  that  more  communication  is  not  necessarily  better  communication.
Complete transparency could also cause confusion more than it helps to shed light on things,
4
simply because of the sheer amount of information.
Nonetheless,  central  banks  should  communicate  as  precisely  as  possible,  because  if  their
signals are not clear enough, the result can be unwanted volatility in the markets, which can also
spread to developments in the real economy.
Precise communication is especially important in times of great uncertainty, for example if, in
response to a crisis, unconventional measures are introduced, used and finally terminated. By
having a broad communication approach which uses various channels, the central bank can also
prevent  specific  means  of  communication,  such  as  the  press  conference,  from  receiving  too
5
much attention.
The press conference, in particular, shows that the financial markets react very sensitively to
central bank communication. At the same time, however, monetary policymakers also keep a
close  eye  on  financial  market  indicators  as  key  factors  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission
process. This mutual dependence between monetary policy and the financial markets can cause
6
a problem.
This problem has already been vividly described by Nobel Prize winner Paul Samuelson, who
once compared monetary policy to a monkey seeing its reflection in the mirror for the first time:
the monkey thinks that by looking at that other monkey it is getting new information, when really it
7
is just looking at its own reflection.
When the financial markets largely reflect central bank communication, the informative value of
market signals is limited – and this increases the risk of incorrect monetary policy decisions if a
blind eye is turned to these interdependencies.
The  BIS’s  economic  adviser,  Hyun  Song  Shin,  has  also  addressed  the  interplay  between
financial markets and monetary policy communication, and rightly points out that – despite the
undisputed importance of the financial markets for monetary policy – the central banks should
not end up like a rabbit caught in headlights.
If central banks use communication as a monetary policy instrument, they cannot shy away from
giving the necessary guidance simply because they fear a counter-reaction from the markets.
Otherwise, communication could become an infinite loop, he noted. Mr Shin’s warning was this:
“The more the central bank whispers in order not to upset markets, the more market participants
8
lean in to hear better.”
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
3 Monetary policy communication at the zero lower bound
Reaching the effective zero lower bound on interest rates presents monetary policymakers with
particular  communication  challenges.  Since  this  situation  is  very  exceptional,  it  is  harder  than
usual for economic players to predict how the central bank will act. The central bank therefore
has to explain its monetary policy reaction function even more clearly.
Since July 2013, before the effective zero lower bound was even reached, the ECB Governing
Council  has  been  issuing  forward  guidance  to  provide  information  on  the  future  path  of  key
interest rates. It communicated that it “expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or
lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time”.  In  actual  fact,  the  key  interest  rates  were
subsequently lowered in multiple small increments.
Using forward guidance, the central banks did more than just make it easier to understand their
decisions.  It  was  also  possible  to  generate  additional  downward  pressure  on  the  long-term
interest rates at the zero lower bound. Forward guidance is by no means limited to information
about the future path of key interest rates, as I will explain. Rather, it encompasses all information
about future monetary policy decisions.
Forward guidance was new to the Eurosystem, but a number of other central banks had already
been  using  it  for  some  time  as  part  of  their  standard  monetary  policy  toolkit.  New  Zealand’s
central  bank  has  been  publishing  projections  of  future  interest  rate  developments  for  two
decades, while Norway and Sweden were the pioneers in Europe.
Thus, forward guidance should not be mistaken for an instrument that can only be used in times
of crisis – even though it only became known to a broader public after the 2007–08 crisis. And
there  is  a  certain  disparity  between  forward  guidance  and  the  state  contingency  of  monetary
policy decisions, which I mentioned just before.
The literature is keen to make a distinction between Delphic and Odyssean forward guidance.
The first alludes to the Oracle of Delphi, who made predictions but no promises. The second
refers to Odysseus, who had himself tied to the mast of his ship and plugged his sailors’ ears
with wax so they would not succumb to the lure of the Sirens’ song.
A central bank that uses Odyssean forward guidance would not let itself stray from its path, once
announced, under any circumstances. It follows its announcement without fail – hence why this
is also referred to as “unconditional” forward guidance.
The  forward  guidance  issued  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  on  the  other  hand,  was  always
conditional. The announcement was based on the assessment of the overall subdued outlook for
inflation  extending  into  the  medium  term.  If  inflation  had  picked  up  faster  than  expected,  the
Eurosystem would have been able to deviate from its announced path, albeit with certain efforts
9
to justify this. Anything else would have been incompatible with the ECB’s mandate.
To further loosen monetary policy despite the limited scope for action at the zero lower bound,
the central banks ultimately opted for unconventional measures; an extensive asset purchase
programme was adopted in the Eurosystem.
When the asset purchases began, the forward guidance was expanded to include a pledge that
the net purchases would continue until a certain point in time or beyond, if necessary. In any
case, they were to continue “until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path
of inflation consistent with its inflation aim”.
In due course, a statement was added to the forward guidance which raised the prospect that
the Governing Council would increase the size and/or duration of the programme if the outlook
became less favourable.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
This sentence is referred to as “easing bias”: by only stating that it could further loosen the reins
if need be, it underlined the expansionary monetary policy stance. I alluded to the dropping of this
sentence in March 2018 at the start of my speech, when I said that central bank communication
can also send a message when something is not said, or no longer mentioned.
Regardless  of  what  one  may  think  of  the  purchase  programme  –  and  you  know  that  I  take  a
critical view of government bond purchases in the context of monetary union, especially – it is
safe to assume that  the  forward  guidance  reinforced  the  expansionary  effect  of  the  purchase
programme. However, expert estimates of the exact scale on which this occurred vary widely.
4 Communicating the normalisation process
To  sum  up,  central  banks’  communication,  especially  around  the  effective  zero  lower  bound,
explains  not  only  their  monetary  policy  but  also  a  considerable  number  of  separate  monetary
policy stimuli.
In the last part of my speech, I would like to give an outlook on how communication can help
renormalise monetary policy without causing any market disruptions in the process.
According to the latest ECB staff projections, the euro area inflation rate will rise to around 1.7%
by  2020  –  in  other  words,  a  rate  that  is,  on  the  whole,  compatible  with  our  definition  of  price
stability.  “Below,  but  close  to,  2%  in  the  medium  term”  is  the  objective  the  ECB  Governing
Council set itself. It does not, therefore, come as a surprise that financial market participants
have been expecting for some time now that net asset purchases will end before 2018 is out; as
previously announced, the purchases will continue until at least September.
An  end  to  the  net  purchases  would  represent  only  the  beginning  of  monetary  policy
normalisation, which will take some time. It is precisely for this reason that it is so important not
to put it off for much longer. In addition, normalising monetary policy would give policymakers
leeway again to respond to any economic slumps in the future – because the current upswing
won’t last forever.
Some observers have already interpreted the latest economic slowdown as a sign that an end to
the upswing is imminent. But I think this is an exaggeration.
Following extremely high growth last year, which saw euro area growth exceed potential growth
for a number of quarters, the slowdown at the start of this year should not be understood as a
turning point in economic activity but as a dent in an upward trend. And it should be seen as
such, in particular, given the impact of certain one-off effects such as the flu outbreak, which
probably drove up sickness-related absences among your employees too.
Meanwhile, cause for concern is warranted with regard to the protectionist tendencies which can
currently be observed worldwide. These tendencies really do pose an economic risk – and yes,
ultimately also a risk to growth and welfare. It is therefore all the more important that the current
trade dispute does not escalate into a full-blown trade war.
Forward guidance is also proving useful with respect to communicating the approaching end of
the asset purchases.
Very  helpful  in  this  context  are  the  Fed’s  experiences  with  the  process  of  normalisation.  The
comparatively vague announcement of a potential step-down of its asset purchases in May 2015
caused strong reactions in the financial markets, in the context of which the term “taper tantrum”
was coined. The expression is a combination of the term “temper tantrum”, often used when
referring to ill-tempered children, and the word “tapering”, which describes the process of slowly
phasing something out.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The taper tantrum highlighted that it is crucial for central banks to prepare their exit from non-
standard monetary policy measures well in terms of communication. Just over a year later, the
Fed  provided  a  good  example  of  how  this  is  done  by  publishing  its  Policy  Normalization
Principles, based on which all decisions have been made since. This shows how the balancing
act  between  providing  rough  guidelines  while  maintaining  a  sufficient  degree  of  flexibility  for
monetary policy can be successful even in practice.
On the one hand, the ECB Governing Council’s forward guidance contains an announcement
that the principal payments from maturing securities will be reinvested “for an extended period of
time, and in any case for as long as necessary” after the end of the net asset purchases. So,
when  a  security  matures,  the  Eurosystem  reinvests  the  principal  amount  in  another  security
upon repayment.
In  simplified  terms,  by  ending  net  purchases,  the  Eurosystem  is  refraining  from  keeping  the
monetary policy to the floor, but it is not taking its foot off the accelerator either for the time being.
On the other hand, the ECB Governing Council has stated its expectation that key interest rates
will remain at their present levels “for aor n extended period of time, and well past the horizon” of
the net purchases.
In  other  words,  not  only  is  the  Eurosystem  keeping  its  foot  on  the  accelerator,  it  has  also
promised not to put on the brakes on interest rates right away.
When the normalisation process is initiated, the economic state of the euro area will presumably
be  considerably  ahead  of  the  state  in  which  the  United  States  found  itself  when  it  started
tapering.  The  first  interest  rate  increase  could  therefore  happen  much  sooner  after  net
purchases end than was the case in the United States, where more than a year passed between
the end of the asset purchases and the first interest rate hike.
Market participants are expecting the first interest rate rise around the middle of 2019, which is
not wholly unrealistic in my opinion. At the same time, the wording “for an extended period of
time,  and  well  past  the  horizon”  of  net  asset  purchases  is  relatively  vague  and  raises  the
question of if and when the exact point in time should be specified.
Putting an end to the net purchases eliminates the timing element of forward guidance in a way,
as  a  date  has  thus  far  only  been  named  for  the  purchase  programme.  In  addition,  the  link
between the end of the net purchases and a sustainable correction of inflation consistent with the
inflation aim is severed. However, the interest rate path and the point at which reinvestment is to
come to an end will evidently depend on prospective inflation developments.
Moreover,  the  Eurosystem’s  forward  guidance  has  thus  far  not  focused  explicitly  on  the
sequence  of  the  first  interest  rate  hike  and  the  end  of  reinvestment.  If  we  take  the  Fed’s
sequencing as a blueprint, the interest rate hike comes first. In any case, that is the order most
financial market participants are expecting, and the ECB Governing Council has not considered it
necessary to correct this expectation until now. At the same time, the Governing Council has not
committed itself either.
There are, consequently, several options for the Eurosystem to adjust its forward guidance after
the net purchases have been discontinued. The following trade-off should be borne in mind here.
The  more  comprehensively  any  future  steps  are  outlined,  the  more  accurately  market
expectations can be steered. As a result, uncertainty decreases as market participants’ room for
interpretation regarding future interest rates diminishes.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  this  also  increases  the  risk  of  the  Eurosystem  having  to  deviate  from  the
communicated path at a later date due to new information and a revised assessment regarding
future inflation developments.
Here we have it again. In the words of Harry Truman: “On the one hand ... on the other hand."  
Furthermore, the ECB Governing Council is faced with the question of how it can provide the
markets with greater clarity on the trajectory of interest rate increases during the normalisation
process and beyond.
In my view, publishing detailed interest rate paths, as some central banks already do, including
those of Sweden and Norway or the United States, would be taking things too far. While Sweden
and  Norway  create  what  are  known  as  fan  charts  on  changes  in  key  interest  rates,  the  Fed
publishes what it calls dot plots illustrating the interest rate level the individual FOMC members
deem realistic for the next few years and in the long term.
If the forecasting uncertainty is high, publishing point forecasts on the interest rate path could
prove more confusing than beneficial – even scientific studies are unable to paint a clear picture. 
5 Outlook
Ladies and gentlemen
In my speech, I have highlighted the importance of central bank communication as an instrument
of monetary policy. Communication is vital not only to make a central bank more transparent, but
also, and above all, to steer expectations.
The  Eurosystem’s  forward  guidance  meant  that  the  introduction  and  implementation  of  non-
standard policy measures could be flanked by communication. Forward guidance will also prove
valuable when phasing out non-standard monetary policy measures, without the ECB Governing
Council having its hands tied for the future.
Over the next few weeks and months, the Governing Council will have to address the issue of
how to prepare a communication strategy for the normalisation process.
The times when central banks could allow themselves to be shrouded in secrecy are long gone.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to the discussion. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
M Woodford (2005), Central-bank communication and policy effectiveness, presentation at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole.
See R Clarida, J Galí and M Gertler (1999), The science of monetary policy: a new Keynesian perspective,
Journal of Economic Literature 37, No 4, pp 4-1707.
See, for example, C J Erceg and A T Levin (2003), Imperfect credibility and inflation persistence, Journal of
Monetary Economics 50, pp 915–944.
O Issing (2004), Kommunikation, Transparenz, Rechenschaft – Geldpolitik im 21. Jahrhundert, Thünen lecture
at the annual conference of the Verein für Socialpolitik in Dresden.
C A Sims (2005), Rational inattention: a research agenda, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper 34/2005.
S Morris und H S Shin (2018), Central bank forward guidance and the signal value of market prices, BIS Working
Paper 692.
P  Samuelson  (1994),  Panel  remarks,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  conference,  Conference  Series  38,
Jeffrey C Fuhrer (ed), Goals, guidelines and constraints facing monetary policymakers.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
H S Shin (2017), Can central banks talk too much? Speech at the ECB Conference “Communication challenges
for policy effectiveness, accountability and reputation”, Frankfurt, 14 November 2017.
B Cœuré (2017), Central bank communication in a low interest rate environment, Speech at Bruegel, Brussels,
31 March 2017.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
