Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 11 July 2018.
 Good  morning.  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  to  answer  your
questions  about  today’s  interest  rate  announcement  and  our Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).
Before taking your questions, let me offer some insight into Governing Council’s deliberations.
Our discussion began with the big picture: inflation is on target and the economy is operating
close  to  capacity.  Our  outlook  published  today  is  that  this  situation  will  continue.  Governing
Council believes that higher interest rates will be needed to keep inflation on target, and that is
consistent with our actions today.
Monetary policy is, of course, always conditioned on new data, particularly when they do not align
with the Bank’s projections. A few data points over the past few weeks have seemed out of step
with those projections, but when all the data are taken together, the economy seems to be on
track.
Given  the  various  uncertainties  we  face,  the  Bank  is  particularly  data  dependent  at  this  time.
However, that does not mean that monetary policy will react to every data fluctuation. A better
way to think of this is that it takes hundreds of data points to make a complete picture, and each
new one helps the picture come into sharper focus. So, when a data point comes in differently
than what the Bank or other forecasters expect, it matters to the big picture, but it is almost never
decisive on its own.
As we have previously discussed, an important issue we face is to understand how the economy
reacts to higher interest rates, given the high debt loads being carried by Canadian households.
We are monitoring this situation closely. We have seen a moderation in credit growth and the
debt-to-income  ratio  has  begun  to  edge  lower. At  the  same  time,  the  housing  market  is  also
dealing with the revised B-20 Guideline for mortgage lending, and the data do not yet permit a
sharp distinction between the impact of the guideline and the effects of higher interest rates.
Governing Council did take some comfort from an analysis of the renewal process for five-year
mortgages  taken  out  in  2014  and  2015  and  up  for  renewal  in  2019  and  2020.  This  analysis
shows a very modest increase in debt-service ratios compared with the date of origination. Keep
in mind that many households have had some income growth during these past five years, and
these  households  may  have  grown  accustomed  to  higher  income  levels.  They  may  face  an
adjustment as their debt-service ratio rises once again, with consequences for their consumption
spending. Of course, this issue is most important for highly indebted households. We also know
that the jump in payments will be greatest for those who took out mortgages when interest rates
were at their lowest levels, in 2015 and 2016, so the mortgage renewal process is likely to weigh
on the economy more in 2020 and 2021. All that being said, Governing Council concluded that
the economy should be resilient to higher interest rates, provided that labour income continues to
grow.
The biggest issue on the table was trade tensions. As discussed before, uncertainty around the
future  of  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement  has  caused  some  companies  to  delay
investment  spending  or  to  move  their  investments  to  the  United  States.  This  channel  was
identified  and  captured  in  our  projection  some  time  ago.  The  recent  imposition  by  the  US
government of actual tariffs on Canadian exports has made the situation more concrete. In the
projections we are presenting today, we have added more negative judgment to our business
investment forecast in recognition of this. We have also incorporated the effects of the US tariffs
on steel and aluminum, and the various countermeasures implemented around the world. Box 2
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
in the MPR gives a flavour of the complex effects such actions will have on the economy. Let me
summarize briefly.
A US company importing Canadian steel must now pay a 25 per cent tariff. They may instead
buy steel made in the United States or in some other country. Or, if no obvious substitutes are
available, they may just pay the higher price. Or, the Canadian company may offer to reduce its
price in order to absorb some of the tariff’s impact. Or, it may look to other markets to sell its
products. The response of companies will depend on how long they think the tariffs might be in
place—for example, it appears that if NAFTA is successfully renegotiated, those tariffs would no
longer be in effect. The point is, the outcome depends on individual reactions, which depend on
the circumstances.
And then there are countermeasures. Canada has imposed a 25 per cent tariff on steel imported
from  the  United  States.  This  would  seem  to  level  the  playing  field,  but  many  of  the  same
complexities  enter  the  analysis.  All  things  considered,  our  analysis  suggests  that  Canadian
exports would fall, as would Canadian imports. Prices would rise at a time when the economy is
already  operating  at  capacity,  so  inflation  would  rise  at  least  temporarily,  but  the  effect  could
persist. Consumers would have less purchasing power, so demand would slow. Meanwhile, the
potential  of  the  economy  would  be  eroded  as  companies  invest  less  and  become  less
competitive. So, the economy would see shocks to both demand and supply, resulting in two-
sided risks to future inflation. Furthermore, the net effect on the economy might be buffered by
any fiscal actions that governments might take.
Now, as we said in the MPR, these various effects are likely to be small for the measures already
taken. In contrast, a large tariff on Canadian-made automobiles and parts would have a much
greater  effect  on  trade  and  the  economy  through  these  same  channels.  People  are
understandably concerned about this sort of escalation and want to know how monetary policy
might react to it. Indeed, there was speculation that the Bank would not move interest rates today
because of the possibility of further trade measures.
The Bank cannot make policy on the basis of hypothetical scenarios. We felt it appropriate to set
aside this risk and make policy on the basis of what has been announced. Given the multiple
channels  through  which  protectionist  measures  affect  economies,  it  should  be  clear  that
monetary policy is ill-suited to counteract all of their effects. It may, of course, play a supporting
role, in conjunction with other policies. But, to put it bluntly, the economy would slow, inflation
would rise, and the exchange rate would depreciate, adding further to near-term price pressures
in the Canadian economy. Therefore, the implications for interest rates of an escalation in trade
actions would depend on the circumstances. Let me emphasize that monetary policy by itself
could  not  undo  the  long-term  damage  to  jobs  and  income  that  could  result  from  rising
protectionism.
All  this  being  said,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  our  economy  is  in  a  good  place.  We  are
operating near capacity, companies are investing even if some are hesitating, the labour market
has been strong, and, most importantly, inflation is on target. In this context, higher interest rates
will be warranted to keep inflation near target. Governing Council will continue to take a gradual
approach to adjusting rates, guided by incoming data.
With that, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I would be happy to answer your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
