    
 
 
The Bank of England – Open to Fintech 
 
Remarks given by 
Dave Ramsden, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking, Bank of England 
   HMT’s International Fintech Conference, London 
22 March 2018 
              
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
    
 
Thank you for the opportunity to be here this afternoon at this important conference, speaking on behalf of 
the Bank of England as Deputy Governor with responsibility for the UK’s RTGS1 and the CHAPS high value 
payment systems.   
 
We are discussing the latest stage in the evolution of the UK’s financial services sector and London’s role as 
a global financial centre.  Different infrastructures supported this evolution at different stages.   My focus will 
be on the technological infrastructure to support fintech, where both private and public sectors have a role to 
play. 
 
These are not new themes.  At the time of the Big Bang, new technology was required to support electronic 
trading. The Bank of England contributed to the infrastructure development, setting up the Central Gilts 
Office in 1986 - which permitted delivery versus payment for Gilts2. In 1996 the same was enabled for 
equities and corporate bonds via CREST, and later that year the launch of RTGS eliminated intraday 
settlement risk between banks, delivering real time settlement finality of sterling transactions.  
 The need for the Bank of England to continue to play its part in contributing to the infrastructure of the 
financial sector is more relevant today than ever.  
 Access to payments and infrastructure has changed for consumers – contactless payments are a daily reality 
for many now, and smartphone payments are sharply on the rise.  But the fundamental role of banks as 
intermediaries, and the structure of the UK retail banking industry, has remained much the same.  There are 
signs of evolution – such as the entry of 36 new banks3 over the past 4 years.  But arguably, finance has yet 
to face its “Uber” moment. 
 It is important that the Bank of England is attuned to the needs and challenges of a changing financial sector 
so that it can translate that to facilitating the infrastructure changes needed to support the UK’s financial 
sector and fintech development. 
 But how to do this? In my view, by being open.  More specifically, by the Bank of England being open 
minded, keeping an open door, and being open to change. 
 Open minded 
 To react appropriately to an evolving financial sector, the Bank of England needs to make sure it is open 
minded to the opportunities and potential for change that fintech offers.   
                                                       
1 The UK’s Real-Time Gross Settlement infrastructure, operated by the Bank. 
2 George, E (1996)  
3 36 legal entities have received deposit-taking permissions since April 2013 which includes overseas firms setting up subsidiaries. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
As a member of the Monetary Policy Committee, I need to be open minded about the way fintech could 
impact the economy of the UK. The defining trend of the last ten years has been the weakness of 
productivity.  Given the size of the financial sector in the UK, I can see fintech driving competition and a  
pick-up in productivity in the medium term4.   
 
And as a member of the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee, in line with our remit5, I need to be 
open minded about, not just the risks, but the opportunities fintech could pose to the financial system.  The 
FPC recently discussed the current risks posed by crypto-assets and judged that they do not pose a material 
risk to UK financial stability6.   
 We judge that crypto-assets themselves may have limited utility, particularly as money. They are too volatile 
to be a store of value, and with high transaction costs and slow settlement times, they are an inefficient 
medium of exchange7.  However, we also recognise the opportunities in the technologies that underpin 
crypto-assets.  
 Adapting these technologies for the demands of the financial system poses significant challenges. Balancing 
the resilience, performance and privacy features of distributed ledger technology is not an easy problem to 
solve – and many developments are currently focusing on performance and privacy, at the potential cost of 
resilience.  But the distributed ledger and cryptographic technologies used by crypto-assets have the future 
potential to deliver benefits both to the financial system and to the economy it serves, including increasing 
efficiency and resilience and contributing to a more distributed and diverse payments system.    
 It is clear that the developments taking place in the financial sector now could impact how the Bank of 
England meets our mission to promote the good of the people by maintaining monetary and financial 
stability.  But to assess this properly, we cannot operate in isolation. We welcome the Government’s Fintech 
Sector Strategy, including the announcement of a Treasury/FCA/Bank of England taskforce 8 – a key 
element of this Strategy, which will explore further the risks of crypto-assets and the potential benefits of the 
underlying distributed ledger technology.  The Bank of England also needs to make sure its door remains 
open to engagement with the experts and innovators in the private sector too.  
 Open doors 
 
We have been doing this.  Over the past two years the Bank of England’s award-winning9 Fintech 
Accelerator has worked with industry, experimenting with new technology and developing our understanding 
                                                      
4Ramsden, D (2018) 
5 HM Treasury (2017) 
6 Bank of England  (2018) 
7 Carney, M  (2018) 
8 HM Treasury (2018 ) 
9 Central Banking Magazine ‘s Initiative of the Year (2018)  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   
 
in the process.  We have carried out a number of proofs of concepts including those using distributed ledger 
technology, RegTech, machine learning and cyber security10.   
 The Accelerator-run proofs of concepts allowed us to change our mind-set to be less bound by convention in 
terms of how we run the Bank of England, as an infrastructure provider, a payment systems operator and a 
regulator. 
 We are now looking to build on the success of the Accelerator by integrating its key approaches into our 
business as usual activities.  So today I can announce that we have set up a new Fintech Hub that will sit at 
the heart of the Bank, to consider both how the Bank understands and how it applies fintech, relevant to its 
mission. 
 It is important that we continue to do this with our doors firmly open.  So the Hub will be a central point of 
contact for the fintech sector to engage with the Bank, and will play an active role in the new HMT/FCA/Bank 
taskforce.  And it will engage with you to understand and apply these developments to support the next wave 
of innovation in finance, and ensure that the UK has the right infrastructure to support that into the future.   
 Being open in our minds and approach are important steps in embracing and supporting new technology.  
But we also need to be open to change to fulfil our mission and keep pace with an evolving financial sector. 
 Open to change 
 
Change is already afoot.  The Open Banking standard and PSD211 introduce changes to access of account 
information and initiation of payments, requiring banks to make customer data available to authorised third 
parties if customers so choose. This may change the way that customers access and operate their bank 
accounts, such as by making them accessible via a single smartphone app developed by a third party12.  As 
the prudential regulator of UK financial services firms, the Bank of England needs to be open in how it 
considers and responds to changes arising in retail banking from this reform.  In fact, increasing competitive 
pressures in retail banking, enabled in part by an increase in the use of fintech, formed part of the biennial 
exploratory scenario in our 2017 stress test13.   
 As well as looking at these infrastructure changes impacting the firms we regulate, we are also opening 
ourselves to change by experimenting with new technologies when we think about enhancing how we work – 
including for the infrastructure we are responsible for.   
                                                       
10 Hauser, A (2017) 
11Europe’s second Payment Services Directive  
12Cunliffe, J (2018)   
13Bank of England (2017a) 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
   
 
The Bank of England is currently investing in its RTGS service14, a critical piece of national infrastructure, 
renewing the heart of the UK’s overall payment system to meet the challenges posed by a rapidly changing 
landscape. The Bank has already established arrangements under which non-bank payment service 
providers could access RTGS directly. We are now using the Fintech Accelerator’s proof-of-concept 
approach when considering how new technologies can plug into the renewed RTGS. We recognise the 
potential for new technologies to create a more distributed and diverse payments system. So we are doing a 
proof-of-concept with a small cohort of firms to consider how our renewed service could interface with 
innovative settlement systems15, such as those built on distributed ledger technology.  
 The proof of concept is designed to assess the demands that would be placed on central RTGS 
infrastructure by a range of fintech firms’ settlement models, rather than assessing the specific offering 
provided by a particular firm.  By allowing a range of system structures to access the new RTGS system, the 
Bank can support innovation in the private sector. 
 And the Bank of England is continuing to investigate ways in which fintech could help to improve regulation, 
building on existing work internally and in collaboration with the FCA.  We have initiated work to understand 
how machine readable technology could be applied to the next iteration of the PRA rulebook, and will 
continue to work closely with the FCA to understand the potential for machine readable regulation.  We are 
also investigating if machine learning could be deployed to support judgement based supervision, via its 
application to both structured and unstructured data. 
 Investment in the UK’s financial technology is going to be an important factor in sustaining the UK’s global 
position. With its open approach of considering, adapting to, and applying fintech across the breadth of its 
mission, including through its own investments, the Bank will play its part.  
                                                          
14 Bank of England (2017b) 
15 The proof of concept connects firms to a specifically built, offline version of RTGS so that the live RTGS system is protected. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
   
 
References 
 Bank of England (2018), Financial Policy Committee statement from tis meeting, 12 March 2018, available 
at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statement/fpc/2018/financial-policy-committee-statement-march-2018  
 Bank of England (2017a), Stress testing the UK banking system: 2017 results, 28 November 2017, 
available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/stress-testing/2017/stress-testing-the-uk-banking-system-
2017-results  
 Bank of England (2017b), A blueprint for a new RTGS service for the United Kingdom, 9 May 2017, 
available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2017/a-blueprint-for-a-new-rtgs-service-for-the-uk  
 Carney, M (2018), The Future of Money, 02 March 2018, available at: 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2018/mark-carney-speech-to-the-inaugural-scottish-economics-
conference     
 Central Banking (2018), Initiative of the Year, 23 Jan 2018, available at: 
https://www.centralbanking.com/awards/3333176/initiative-of-the-year-bank-of-englands-fintech-accelerator  
 Cunliffe, J (2018), Looking After our Money, 26 February 2018, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/news/2018/february/looking-after-our-money-speech-by-
jon-cunliffe.pdf 
 George, E (1996), Risk Reduction in Payment and Settlement Systems’ a Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 
article, 9 December 1996, available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/quarterly-
bulletin/1996/risk-reduction-in-the-payment-and-settlement-systems.pdf 
 Hauser, A (2017) The Bank of England’s FinTech Accelerator: what have we done and what have we 
learned?, 6 October 2017, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2017/the-boes-fintech-
accelerator-what-have-we-done-and-what-have-we-learned  
 HM Treasury (2018), Fintech Sector Strategy, 22 March 2018, available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fintech-sector-strategy 
 HM Treasury (2017), Remit and recommendations for the Financial Policy Committee, 8 March 2017,  
available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/letter/2017/chancellor-letter-080317-
fpc.pdf?la=en&hash=7B99B9B412E160F79FB2411F26A10F282FDC7BB6  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
   
 
Ramsden, D (2018), ‘The UK’s productivity growth challenge’, 23 February 2018, available at:  
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2018/dave-ramsden-panel-remarks-cbi-event  
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
 