“Thai Economy: The Current State and the Way Forward” 
Keynote Address by Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob 
Governor of the Ban of Thailand 
Nomura Investment Forum Asia 2018 
5 June 2018 / Singapore  
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
A very good morning to you all. 
I would like to thank Nomura for inviting me here to share my thoughts on the 
current state and outlook of the Thai economy.  
For today’s talk, I have two main agendas. First, I will talk about the current 
state of the Thai economy where I will discuss recent developments and its prospect 
ahead. Second, I will talk about Bank of Thailand’s roles to help transform the Thai 
economy into one with greater productivity, better economic prospect, and more 
inclusivity. 
As many of you know, the Thai economy has weathered several storms over 
the past few years. On the external front, changes in the political landscape and 
macroeconomic policies of major economies have brought about not only financial 
market volatility throughout the region but also greater uncertainty to global trade. 
On the domestic front, Thailand experienced major droughts and floods that affected 
agricultural prices and output, and most significantly the passing of His Majesty the 
late King Bhumibol a year and a half ago that caused the greatest grief and sorrow 
among  all  Thais.  Yet  the  Thai  economy  stood  firm  and  was  able  to  continue 
expanding  steadily,  thanks  to  both  sound  economic  fundamentals  and  a  well-
diversified economy which underpinned Thailand’s resilience against shocks. In 2017, 
the Thai economy recovered markedly and achieved an annual GDP growth of 3.9 
percent. Merchandise exports grew 9.7 percent in USD terms, highest in the past 6 
years, and was one of the main drivers of growth. The tourism sector continued to 
perform well, with the number of tourists reaching new highs of over 35 million. The 
economy is expected to continue a strong momentum this year, with GDP growth in 
  1/10 
 the first quarter registering an impressive rate of 4.8 % year on year, the highest in 5 
years, with private investment growth recording a 3-year high.  
Nevertheless, this recent economic upturn is different from the other episodes. 
Indeed, the GDP outturn and macroeconomic numbers showed strong improvements 
over the previous years, but a closer look revealed that growth was uneven across 
different  segments  of  the  economy.  At  the  same  time  indicators  such  as  the 
unemployment rate and NPL ratios were rising slightly between 2015 and 2017. This 
is contrary to what you would expect to see  when the macroeconomy performs 
better. Although both unemployment rate and NPL ratios have recently stabilized, 
their developments reveal that some segments of the economy did not benefit much 
from the economic recovery. In my view, there are at least three reasons behind 
these developments.  
First,  the  recovery  has  primarily  been  driven  by  external  demand.  Hence 
growth benefits are felt mostly by those associated with the external sectors. The 
robust recovery momentum on the global scale has resulted in a strong expansion 
of Thai exports across product categories and export destinations. In addition, the 
Thai tourism sector has grown consistently with steady increases in the number and 
quality of tourists. Therefore, it is not surprising to see businesses associated with 
exports  of  goods  and  services  enjoying  the  benefits  from  the  improved  external 
demand. Domestic demand growth, however, is still proceeding at a gradual pace. 
Despite a continuous recovery, private consumption growth remains well below that 
of GDP, registering within the 3 percent range. And until recently, private investment 
growth  had  concentrated  mainly  in  the  export  sector.  Overall,  the  large  current 
account surplus of 10.5 percent to GDP last year summarizes the pattern of economic 
recovery and reflects the imbalance between the external and domestic demand.  
Second, the rural economy has been exposed to more adverse shocks than its 
urban counterpart. Specifically, several populist measures including the controversial 
rice  pledging scheme were withdrawn, together with adverse weather conditions 
such as severe droughts in 2016 and floods in 2017 as well as declines in global prices 
of key export crops especially rubber and rice, all constituted negative income shocks 
to farmers. In addition, rural entrepreneurs, which are mostly SMEs, tend to be less 
  2/10 
 productive  and  might  not  be  able  to  compete  with  larger  firms  who  are  better 
equipped with capital and technologies. Thus, larger and productive firms are able to 
reap the benefits of economic recovery and adapt to changes in the new business 
environment. Indeed, the difference in business performance between medium-sized 
and large firms in the stock market has been widening. This is evidenced by several 
financial indicators including the return on assets and the net profit margin. These 
developments partly explains why the NPL situation has yet to improve for SMEs 
across the board, while we see improvement in loan quality among large corporates 
in the same sectors.  
The third reason for the uneven economic recovery is the impaired function 
of  the  spending  multiplier.  Usually,  when  recovery  starts  to  emerge  in  certain 
segments of the economy, the multiplier effect of spending should create positive 
spillovers to the other parts of the economy, thereby securing a more broad-based 
recovery over time. However, export-oriented firms which currently spearhead the 
ongoing economic recovery are capital-intensive. They utilize more machinery rather 
than relying on labor. Thus, positive spillovers to employment are less prevailing. This 
partly explains why the manufacturing employment growth has been rather moderate 
despite strong export growth and pickup in the manufacturing production index.  
Furthermore, having a high level of household debt, especially during the debt 
deleveraging period, dampens this multiplier mechanism. This is because households 
have to use additional income to service their debt obligations rather than spending 
on goods and services. While there are signs of household debt being deleveraged, 
as reflected by a continuous decline in the ratio of household debt to GDP which fell 
from 79.0  percent in  2016  to 77.5  percent by the end  of last year, debt burden 
remains high especially for lower-income households. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I have been talking about factors behind the uneven economic performance 
of the last few years. Going forward, the economic recovery is expected to be more 
broad-based and I want to highlight a few of these positive developments.  
First, export growth, our main growth driver, is becoming more broad-based as 
growth has now extended beyond larger players. In fact, export growth rate of SMEs 
  3/10 
 has become more or less on par with that of larger firms. Domestic demand is also 
gaining traction with a steady growth in private consumption, and a pickup in private 
investment  since  the third  quarter of  last year especially  from imports of  capital 
goods. 
Second, the government has directly stepped up various stimulus measures to 
support the rural economy. Last year, the government introduced the supplementary 
budget with a particular focus on local infrastructure development, and the Welfare 
Card Scheme which aimed to support daily expenditures among poorer households. 
This year, the new supplementary budget is allocated to vocational training as part 
of the second phase of the Welfare Card Scheme, development of local community 
enterprises, as well as water resource development to improve productivity within 
the agricultural sector. This, together with the increase in the minimum wage in April, 
will support the rural economy and the well-being of the lower-income group.   
Third, the multiplier effects should improve on the back of increasing public 
and private investment. While some of the government infrastructure projects were 
deferred from last year partly due to the new government procurement system. This 
year progress should have a better outlook since many projects have gone through 
the  bidding  and  procurement  processes,  with  material  progress  underway.  These 
projects include, among others, 4 of the 5 dual-track railway projects that would 
greatly improve upon the logistics network between major cities and industrial estates 
in central and northeastern Thailand. We can expect to see these dual-track railways 
up and running from 2019 and 2020 onwards. Our Mass Transit System is also being 
upgraded with 3 new metro lines in Bangkok that will extend from key stations in the 
cities to residential areas in outer Bangkok. Two of these projects, particularly the 
Green and Orange lines, are under construction and should be completed by 2021 
and  2023,  respectively.  Other  infrastructure  projects  in  construction  include  the 
Bangkok-Korat high speed train and the expansion of the Suvarnabhumi Airport which 
are  also  expected  to  be  completed  in  a  few  years.  On  the  private  side,  private 
investment is expected to gain further momentum as evidenced by growing imports 
of capital goods as well as investment spending in machinery and equipment. This is 
in line with private credit growth which has picked up since the beginning of 2017.  
  4/10 
 Given these outlooks, we expect the growth momentum to be more balanced 
with a stronger contribution from domestic demand. In our March forecast, the GDP 
growth for both 2018 and 2019 was projected at 4.1 percent. These figures are likely 
to be revised up given better-than-expected growth outturns in the first quarter this 
year. Headline inflation in April and May has turned up above the lower bound of our 
target, which is set at 2.5±1.5%, mainly due to the recent pickup in energy prices. Yet 
inflationary pressure remains soft overall and we must continue to closely monitor 
inflation  developments  once  these  supply-driven  fluctuations  fade.  Over  time, 
improvement in domestic demand and rising  energy prices are expected to bring 
about higher inflation, although it is likely that headline inflation would still remain 
below  the  midpoint  of  the  target  over  the  year.  For  now,  an  accommodative 
monetary policy stance would be maintained to foster a strong economic growth and 
facilitate the return of inflation to the target. Going forward, the Monetary Policy 
Committee  will  closely  monitor  the  strength  of  growth  momentum,  inflationary 
pressure as well as underpricing of risks in the financial system that could lead to 
financial fragility and financial stability concerns.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
So far, I have given you an overall near-term summary of the Thai economy. 
Let me now move on to the second part of my talk which looks further into the 
backbone of Thailand’s economic growth engine over a longer horizon. In particular, 
I want to focus on Bank of Thailand’s roles to help transform the Thai economy into 
one that is more efficient, more productive, and more inclusive.  
But before doing so, let me give you a quick summary on a broader perspective 
regarding the new economic platforms in Thailand which have emerged over the past 
few years. Chief among them is the new investment platform in the Eastern Economic 
Corridor or the EEC in short. The EEC, as many of you know, is an economic zone 
specifically  designed  to  bring  about  large  infrastructure  upgrades  and  provide 
extensive investment incentives for high value-added industries.  The continuity of 
this investment platform is ensured regardless of any political changes now that the 
EEC Act has come into effect since May. Last year, we have seen the value of net 
investment applications under the Thailand Board of Investment privilege program 
  5/10 
 grew by 23 percent, almost half of which are investment in the EEC. The high speed 
train project to connect U-Tapao Airport with major cities within the EEC and two 
main  airports  in  Bangkok  has  been  announced  with  the  TOR  of  this  project  now 
available for potential bidders. The TOR for Laem Chabang seaport upgrade will also 
be announced in a few months’ time.  
In  addition  to  the  EEC  Act,  various  legal  amendments  and  process 
improvements were implemented over the past couple of years to improve the ease 
of doing business in Thailand and ensure that laws can be adjusted to accommodate 
new business practices in a timely manner. With these reforms, Thailand’s position in 
the World Bank’s Doing Business Ranking improved from 46th in 2017 to 26th in 2018, 
and we should continue to see further improvements in the ease of doing business 
in Thailand going forward. 
Another important development, which provides a strong foundation for digital 
economy, is the nationwide broadband internet project. Over the past years, the 
project has brought fiber optics network to almost 25,000 villages in remote parts of 
the country, enabling access to free-WiFi hotspots as well as home broadband at 
affordable prices. As such, human capital development can improve greatly through 
better  access  to  online  information,  remote  education,  and  online  healthcare 
services. Business opportunity can also be greatly expanded with greater access to 
online marketing platforms and more cost-effective communication tools. This new 
and expanded online connectivity is a critical milestone which will bring economic 
opportunity and productivity to people in the rural area whose potential has been 
limited by the previous lack of supportive infrastructure to connect with the modern 
world.   
Ladies and gentleman,  
Let me now turn to Bank of Thailand’s initiatives to help uplift Thailand’s long-
term competitiveness. Thailand is transitioning to a new era of digital payment system 
and financial technology in which the Bank of Thailand is fully committed to foster.  
First and foremost, electronic payment infrastructures must be put in place to 
realize  the  full  potential  of  digital  economy.  Under  the  National  e-Payment 
Masterplan, last year the Bank of Thailand together with the Ministry of Finance and 
  6/10 
 the Thai Bankers’ Association launched our new faster payment system – PromptPay 
– which propelled the wider adoption of e-payment in Thailand. PromptPay is an 
instant payment platform that links bank accounts to various forms of identification 
including national ID numbers and mobile phone numbers. With PromptPay, funds 
can be transferred to a recipient’s preferred bank account in real time and at virtually 
no cost. This new technology has significantly boosted the usage of mobile banking, 
and has potential to lead to significant growth in e-commerce in Thailand as well as 
to radically change the way government welfare payments are distributed. In just 
over a year since the launch of PromptPay, there are over 40 million IDs registered 
on the platform and more than 2.7 million transactions a day. The increasing usage 
of PromptPay also served as a catalyst that eventually led to the announcements of 
most commercial banks two months ago, to eliminate transfer fees for all transfers 
through mobile and online banking.  All in all, PromptPay provides a crucial payment 
infrastructure which opens the door to many other digital payment services. 
Another initiative of the Bank of Thailand to promote digital payment services 
is the Thai  standard QR code for payment. The  Standardized QR Code  makes  e-
payment seamless across platforms regardless of which bank or non-bank service 
provider  merchants  and  consumers  are  using.  In  just  eight  months  since  its 
implementations,  more  than  two  million  merchants  in  Thailand  now  accept  e-
payment through QR code, and this figure will continue to grow. Having a common 
standard for QR code will indeed generate benefits beyond payment convenience. 
The common standard will help ensure that no incumbent service providers has an 
advantage of locking merchants with their QR formats, and allow new and innovative 
payment service providers to easily enter the market. The standard will also help 
facilitate the move towards information-based lending for SMEs as their payment 
transaction information can be consolidated. Given that the payment standard was 
developed together with five global credit card companies using EMVCo, it could 
serve as a platform to enhance financial connectivity in the region. Thai banks and 
payment  service  providers  have  begun  to  work  with  partners  in  our  neighboring 
countries to facilitate cross-border payments using the standardized QR code.   
This  standardized  QR  code  was  a  product  that  went  through  the  Bank  of 
Thailand’s  regulatory  sandbox.  Going  forward,  there  are  a  few  high-impact 
  7/10 
 technologies or applications which are being developed and tested in the Bank of 
Thailand’s regulatory sandbox. The first one is an extension of our standardized QR 
code to include other means of payment, including credit card. This could bring down 
the number of fraudulent transactions, and markedly reduce the merchant discount 
fees for credit card payments. 
The second one is the blockchain technology which we are working closely 
with the financial industry to apply them to various banking applications. ‘Thailand 
Blockchain Community Initiative’ was officially announced at the Bangkok FinTech 
Fair in March of this year. This initiative is a collaboration between 14 Thai banks and 
7 leading businesses and state-owned enterprises to utilize blockchain technology in 
financial services, starting with a pilot project to offer blockchain-based letters of 
guarantee. This project is expected to become operational in the second half of this 
year. On a longer horizon, the blockchain technology is also planned to be applied 
to supply chain finance to improve authentication efficiency which would facilitate 
real  sector  activities.  Other  blockchain  related  projects  in  the  pipeline  include 
scriptless bond issuance which would significantly speed up saving bond allocation 
to retail investors from 15 days to 2 days, as well as granting more flexibility for bond 
issuers. The proof-of-concept of this project is almost complete, and production is 
expected to begin in the  very near future. Another project  in the pipeline  is the 
“Project Inthanon” in which the Bank of Thailand and banks will co-develop a new 
way of conducting interbank settlement using wholesale central bank digital currency 
or CBDCs. Like other central banks, our goal is not to immediately bring CBDC into 
use, but rather to explore its potential and implications for back office operations. 
These efforts should pave way for faster and cheaper transaction and validation due 
to less intermediation process needed compared to the current systems.  
So far, I have discussed the Bank of Thailand’s role as a catalyst for digital 
infrastructure development and as a facilitator of innovation. One should not forget 
that our core mandate is being a regulator to safeguard financial stability. To this end, 
we proposed the new Payment Systems Act which became effective earlier this April. 
The Act unifies previously fragmented payment laws and regulations under a single 
Act, and empowers the Bank of Thailand with the authority to both regulate and 
oversee  development  of  Thai  payment  systems  in  a  manner  conducive  to  new 
  8/10 
 payment innovations. Beside the Payment Systems Act, supervisory practices are also 
being updated to improve and safeguard cyber security risks. The updated guidelines 
on management of information technology risks of financial institutions were released 
in December last year to ensure that banks have appropriate governance structure in 
place and can swiftly respond in the event of cyberattacks. Our efforts also extend 
to  ensuring  safety  of  the  payment  system,  and  awareness  among  both  financial 
service providers and consumers. 
Let me now turn to another area that is important for our region, which is the 
promotion of regional financial connectivity. Over the years, the Bank of Thailand has 
made multiple arrangements with regional central banks to support the use of local 
and regional currencies in trade and investment. This will reduce transaction costs 
and mitigate exchange rate risks under today’s volatile financial market conditions. In 
addition, direct exchange rate quotations for currency pairs involving the Thai baht 
are now available including the Chinese Yuan, the Malaysian Ringgit, the Indonesian 
Rupiah, and, most recently, the Japanese Yen.  
On top of promoting local currency usage, the Foreign Exchange Regulation 
Reform  implemented  last  year  would  further  complement  regional  financial 
connectivity  by  making  foreign  exchange-related  transactions  more  flexible  and 
accessible.  To  give  a  few  examples,  foreign  exchange  transaction  form  was 
completely  abolished;  qualified  companies  are  now  allowed  to  conduct  foreign 
exchange transactions and hedging based on their own risk management practices 
without having to request for approval on a transactional basis; commercial banks 
are also allowed to provide loans in Thai baht to non-residents investing in the region; 
and the coverage of qualified investors allowed to directly invest abroad has been 
expanded to include retail investors within a wider range of wealth.  
All  in  all,  the  outlook  and  prospect  of  digitalization  and  regional  financial 
integration look very promising and the Bank of Thailand will continue to facilitate 
timely development of new financial innovations while also safeguarding financial 
stability  in  an  efficient  and  business-friendly  manner  to  ensure  a  smooth  and 
successful transition of the Thai economy.  
    9/10 
 Ladies and gentleman,  
I have now come to the end of my talk and let me give you a brief summary 
of what I have said today. The Thai economy continues to expand at a good pace 
with  merchandise  exports  and  tourism  so  far  being  the  main  drivers  of  growth. 
Although growth benefits have not spilled over to other segments of the economy 
as much as we would like to see, domestic demand is improving and we expect a 
more robust and more balanced GDP growth this year. On a longer horizon, Thailand 
is  undergoing  major  transformation  with  the  emergence  of  several  promising 
economic platforms and the ongoing transition towards a new era of digital financial 
and payment services, all of which will unlock Thailand’s economic potential, uplift 
productivity, and bring about more inclusive growth. The Thai government and the 
Bank  of  Thailand,  in  its  various  capacities,  are  committed  to  making  these 
achievements possible.  
Thank you very much for your attention.         
   10/10 
 