Arthur Yuen: Regional approaches to global AML challenges
Speech by Mr Arthur Yuen, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the
Association  of  Certified Anti-Money  Laundering  Specialists  (ACAMS)  10th Annual AML  &amp;
Financial Crime Conference, Hong Kong, 23 April 2018.
Good Morning Ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  I am very honoured to be here today addressing such a distinguished audience. I would like
to  in  particular  thank ACAMS  for  your  kind  invitation,  and  for  arranging  this  great  event  in
Hong  Kong.  The  topic  for  this  event  is  very  dear  to  my  heart,  since  I  have  been  closely
involved in work that aims at enhancing the framework for countering money laundering and
the  financing  of  terrorism  for  almost  20  years  as  a  banking  supervisor.  Indeed,  tackling
ML/TF is a core supervisory priority for the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) in recent
years, and so I am very delighted to have this opportunity to open the conference and meet
so  many  professionals  here  to  discuss  how  best  to  respond  to  some  of  the  challenges
posed to us by those who seek to abuse our highly efficient and international banking and
payment systems.
2.  From my perspective as a banking supervisor, everyone here - irrespective of your sector,
experience and the jurisdiction that you work in - we all have an important role in combatting
financial crime. Governments need your support in so many ways - in implementing relevant
policies, in submitting suspicious transaction reports and sharing intelligence, to name just a
few. And these are all important elements in achieving our objectives.
3.  And talking about objectives, this is definitely something worth reiterating and reinforcing at
the start of this conference. This is because there’s always a danger, when we’re up to our
neck in discussions around compliance, policy developments and technology, so much so
that  we  may  tend  to  forget  what AML  is  all  about  basically.  So  let’s  be  clear  about  this
upfront.  ML  and  TF  are  crimes.  And  they  facilitate  other  crimes  -  fraud,  tax  evasion,
trafficking in drugs and people, and of course, terrorism. These crimes have economic and
social effects that are far-reaching and often very nasty ones. They also generate financial
flows – in fact significant financial flows - that divert resources away from economically and
socially-productive uses. But more importantly, people get hurt. Victims, who are often from
the more vulnerable segments in our societies, have their life savings stolen by fraudsters,
our youth are damaged by drugs, or, in the case of terrorism, we see terrible acts of violence
which kill and injure indiscriminately. Of course, investigating and prosecuting these crimes
is the job of law enforcement agencies. But financial institutions do have a key role to play in
helping to stop bad people doing bad things, and getting away with the proceeds from doing
such bad things. This is the BASIC OBJECTIVE that one should remember next time when
you are working on the details of CDD policy or calibrating the settings on your transaction
monitoring and sanctions screening systems.
4.  So the core message that I would like to highlight upfront is that we are all indeed fighting a
good fight.
5.  But  good  fight  or  not,  we  should  also  recognize  that  the  issues  involved  are  extremely
complex.  The  complexity  comes  from,  to  start  with,  the  fact  that  those  issues  involve
multiple parties, including the Government, financial regulators, international standard setters
and of course banks and the private sector more generally. Complexity also comes from the
fact that those issues interact at the local, regional and global levels.
6.  Secondly, complexity also exists because, while we know, more than ever before, about the
social  and  economic  consequences  of  financial  crime  today,  we  also  know  much  more
about the consequences of some of the actions that we take to fight financial crime. The
resources  required,  for  example.  The  costs  involved  is  another  one. And  sometimes  the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
unintended, though may not be unexpected, consequences that came from the actions that
we took. More specifically, the balance which is required to ensure, on the one hand, that
controls are effective in detecting and deterring money launderers, while on the other hand,
that  bona-fide  businesses  would  still  have  access  to  the  financial  services  which  are  so
important to their livelihood, is really a delicate balance that is often difficult to strike.
7.  This then brings me to an important question: how effective are we in our AML work? Or if I
may put this another way, do we even have a consistent view on what “success” in AML
work would or should look like? Before I even try to address that, let’s be clear that I do not
proclaim to have all the answers here, and I do believe that many of you are better qualified
that I am in analysing and addressing these questions about effectiveness of AML efforts.
8.  Furthermore,  while  we  work  to  the  same  standards  in  the  region,  our  systems  are  all
evolving,  and  we  have  to  admit  that  this  evolution  is  happening  at  different  pace  in  our
respective  markets  and  to  address  differing  risks. And  therefore  the  priorities  in  different
markets  will  understandably  differ,  thereby  making  arriving  at  a  consistent  view  on  the
question of “effectiveness” extremely challenging. I would also note that the Financial Action
Task  Force  will  do  that  job  for  Hong  Kong  later  this  year  when  they  conduct  the  mutual
evaluation exercise, while in roughly the same period, they and the IMF also assess other
jurisdictions in the region.
9.  Despite the fact that I do not have all the answers to the “effectiveness” questions, I think
that it may be helpful to talk about some of the issues that arise out of those questions and
try  to  relate  them  to  the  agenda  for  the  conference.  I  hope  this  would  help  you  to  start
thinking  about  some  of  the  complex  issues  that  you  would  be  debating  throughout  this
Conference.
10.  Hong Kong, as an international financial centre with a highly externally-oriented economy,
does  face  high  ML/TF  risks.  Our  competitive  advantages  here  –  namely,  free  flows  of
capital, people, goods and information; well-established legal system; sophisticated market
infrastructure;  and  advanced  professional  services  –  also  make  our  market  attractive  for
criminals  seeking  to  hide  or  move  funds  or  evade  financial  sanctions.  With  such  a  risk
profile, Hong Kong has a key role in that fight against attempts to abuse our systems, along
with our regional partners who share many of these characteristics and fund flows. So this
Conference – focusing on the regional response - is timely and very relevant.
11.  Over the years, the regulatory landscape has changed. Since we started this line of work in
the 90’s, we have seen a steady increase in the regulatory requirements and expectations
we place on our financial institutions to combat ML/TF. More recently, the number of sectors
and institutions which come within the regulatory remit also continues to grow. These are far
from  simple  requirements  however  you  look  at  them,  particularly  given  the  risk-based
approach, a view which is supported by the experience of many financial institutions who
have struggled getting it right.
12.  The world of banking and finance has also changed significantly in the same period we have
been applying these requirements. For example, technology has created new and significant
opportunities  for  the  development  of  the  global  economy,  which  has  been  good  news  for
financial centres such as Hong Kong. But there have also been downsides and one of these
has been the new  and  increased  opportunities  for  financial  crime,  particularly  in  a  cross-
border sense.
13.  In particular, the externally orientated economy of Hong Kong means that geopolitical events,
and  the  increasing  complex  global  sanctions  as  a  response  to  those  events,  continue  to
challenge the sanctions screening and compliance programmes of banks. The HKMA has
identified sanctions compliance – in particular the risks emanating from DPRK – as a core
supervisory  priority  in  the  year  ahead,  and  I  am  glad  that  there  is  an  opportunity  for  my
colleague to share some of our work in this area in one of the panel discussions later today.
14.  Now to be clear : the developments I mentioned have actually driven changes for good. And I
can  say  without  hesitation  that  financial  institutions  are  undoubtedly  more  capable  of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
combatting ML/TF risks than they were 10 or 15 years ago. Let me illustrate. Over the past
few  years  all  of  our  banks  have  put  in  place  an  assessment  of  ML/TF  risk  across  the
institution which informs the design of AML/CFT controls – this helps to ensure resources
are  targeted  towards  areas  of  higher  risk.  The  banking  sector  also  continues  to  pull  its
weight in reporting suspicious transactions - last year we saw a 25% increase from 2016 in
terms of STRs. This is a reflection of the increased ability of upgraded monitoring systems
to detect suspicious transactions on the one hand, and the willingness of banks to report
suspicion where they see it as well as to take robust actions to mitigate the risk on the other
hand. But these same developments have also resulted in “casualties” – a clear example of
which is the “de-risking” phenomenon – and this has led to financial inclusion being one of
the priorities for the current FATF Presidency. This is also something that we in Hong Kong
are very committed to addressing. 
15.  The reality is that we often see institutions implementing more capable AML systems, and in
that process collecting a lot more information on customers or including more scenarios in
transaction  monitoring.  This  is  all  good,  but  this  may  not  always  translate  into  greater
effectiveness, and too often there is not a sufficient focus on answering the questions of :
“Does  it  deliver  the  right  results  or  outcomes?”  And  “Is  the  system  more  effective  in
detecting and preventing criminals from abusing the institution?”
16.  So I would highlight in particular three issues as having the potential to significantly change
how effective we are in this work and which are being discussed at this event.
17.  The  first  issue  is  technological  innovation  -  both  in  the  form  of  financial  technology  and
regulatory  technology.  Regionally,  technology  is  making  our  financial  institutions  and  their
customers more connected than ever. Technology is an enabler, while it also brings risks
along with rewards. Easier access to financial services benefits us all, but there is a risk that
it may also create more opportunities for criminals - if it’s convenient for us to move money
in real time using our smart phones, it would also be convenient for money launderers as
well.  And  there  is  no  shortage  of  smart  people  looking  for  ways  to  exploit  such  new
developments.
18.  But technology, especially the fast-growing field of data analytics, has the potential to offer
more  effective  and  efficient  ways  to  undertake  our  AML  work.  In  particular,  recent
developments in artificial intelligence and data analytics, while still at an early stage, appear
promising.  For  example, AI  is  already  being  used  to  –  apologies  for  the  jargon  –  “triage”
alerts  generated  by  monitoring  systems  to  make  subsequent  case  investigations  by  old-
fashioned  human  beings  more  focused  and  efficient. And  data  analytics  is  being  used  to
identify  what  normal  behaviour  looks  like  for  particular  segments  or  types  of  customer,
thereby  making  it  easier  to  spot  behaviour  that  departs  from  the  norm  and  which  may
therefore need to be scrutinised further. This has the potential to make monitoring less “ex-
post” and allow potential problems to be spotted in real time to a greater extent. And I would
once again stress the word “efficient” here: the HKMA is a banking regulator and we have an
interest  in  seeing  the  banking  sector’s  cost-to-income  ratios  kept  down,  while  without
compromising effective controls.
19.  The second issue I would like to highlight is a emerging focus internationally on the sharing
of information between the public and private sectors, which I believe offers great potential in
enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  our AML  efforts.  Increasingly,  law  enforcement  agencies,
regulators and the financial sector are cooperating in ways that go beyond the filing of STRs
and assistance with investigations although these, of course, remain essential. The focus is
now more on two-way sharing of information on trends and typologies.
20.  In Hong Kong, the Fraud and Money Laundering Intelligence Taskforce, led by the Police and
with participation by the HKMA and the banking sector, was established as a pilot scheme in
2017. This is a public-private platform along similar lines to initiatives overseas, notably in
Australia  and  Singapore,  and  while  it  is  at  an  early  stage,  it  has  already  shown  concrete
results, not least in the freezing or restraint of some $2.8 million as well as 71 arrests over a
10-month period. I believe that this kind of cooperation shows real promise for sustainable
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
enhancement  to  the  effectiveness  of  our  framework,  and  the  HKMA  strongly  supports  its
continuation and development.
21.  The third issue is that we all need to keep under constant review whether we are getting the
risk-based approach right. To implement AML efforts using an approach based on risk is the
cornerstone of the FATF Recommendations. No one – neither institutions nor regulators –
can be watching all risk areas all the time. Even if it were physically possible, in a world of
limited  resources,  it  just  isn’t  practical.  So  it  is  essential  that  we  all  focus  our  inherently
limited efforts and resources on those risks that are assessed to be the greatest. And this
has to be done at the level of the jurisdiction, different sectors within the financial industry,
individual  institutions  and  customers.  Fundamental  to  getting  that  right  is  a  thorough
understanding  of  the  risks  that  we  face.  Many  of  you  will  be  aware  that  Hong  Kong  will
shortly publish its first ML/TF risk assessment, and the HKMA will be holding briefings for the
banking and SVF sectors in the coming weeks to communicate the risks identified in that
assessment process in order to help institutions reflect such in their own risk assessments.
The  Hong  Kong  ML/TF  risk  assessment  is  the  first  comprehensive,  jurisdiction-wide
exercise  with  input  from  Government,  law  enforcement  agencies,  the  financial  regulators
and other sectors and will inform both institutional and customer risk assessments.
22.  And that brings me to something that is very important when we consider the risk-based
approach: risks are never static. Developments in business, the economy and technology,
and – most of all – the fraudsters and terrorists trying to move and hide money, mean that
new risks are emerging, and old ones are changing, all the time. No risk assessment is ever
really complete and it is essential for all of us to keep up with what is going on to ensure that
we are employing our resources as effectively and efficiently as possible, while achieving the
dual  objectives  of  risk-based AML/CFT  efforts  as  well  as  ensuring  legitimate  customers
have access to services.
23.  So those are the three issues that I would like to highlight and which would be explored in the
various  sessions  of  this  Conference.  All  in  all,  I  would  emphasise  that  the  global  AML
landscape is an evolving one - geopolitical developments will continue to affect sanctions
risks, criminals will come up with new ways of stealing money and of hiding and moving
those money. Technology can hinder or help us in our AML efforts, and I have to say that
although  we  are  already  doing  a  lot,  we  are  far  from  having  the  perfect  solution.  The
challenge that we face collectively, in the region, is to develop responses to existing and new
risks that:
Are agile and adaptable, while providing a framework of principles and rules that that we
can all agree to and follow;
Recognise  innovation  and  make  the  best  use  of  technology;  and  perhaps  more
importantly
Challenge  our  established  ways  of  meeting  some  expectations,  and  ensure  the
response always relates to effectiveness.
24.  I note that you have a very full agenda the coming days covering these and other topics. And
I hope very much that my remarks will offer you some food for thought about the issues and
challenges  that  we  all  face.  I  wish  you  all  fruitful  discussions  on  these  issues. And  once
again, thank you very much to ACAMS for inviting me here today.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
