Jens Weidmann: Monetary and economic policies on both sides of
the Atlantic
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the GIC/SUERF/Deutsche
Bundesbank  Conference  "Monetary  and  economic  policies  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic",
Frankfurt am Main, 8 February 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Alfred  Nobel  once  said,  “One  can  state,  without  exaggeration,  that  the  observation  of  and  the
search for similarities and differences are the basis of all human knowledge.”
A  conference  that  discusses  “monetary  and  economic  policies  on  both  sides  of  the Atlantic”
naturally takes that perspective of seeking out similarities and differences. This, together with the
impressive  cast  of  eminent  academics,  policymakers  and  financial  market  participants
assembled today, further strengthens my belief that this conference is a true font of knowledge. It
is therefore a great pleasure to have you all here at the Bundesbank’s regional headquarters in
Frankfurt.
In my remarks today, I will try to take Nobel’s wisdom to heart as well. What can be learned by
discerning the similarities and the differences in monetary policy on either side of the Atlantic?
Specifically,  what  insights  does  the American  experience  provide  for  the  European  monetary
union? And what idiosyncrasies of the euro area might require it to chart its own course? 
To me, the comparison might prove instructive with regard to three dimensions in particular. 
First, the US is further along in its business cycle, and therefore its monetary policy cycle, than
the  euro  area.  But  while  this  is  a  difference,  it  may  actually  allow  us  to  look  out  for  possible
similarities – similarities in terms of the appropriate point in time to normalise monetary policy.
Second,  the  institutional  set-ups  of  the  US  and  European  currency  areas  differ.  The  Federal
Reserve  System  is  the  central  bank  of  one  country  with  only  one  central  government.  In  the
European  monetary  union,  a  common  monetary  policy  is  combined  with  19  different  national
fiscal  and  economic  policies.  This  institutional  difference  makes  for  a  difference  in  the  cost-
benefit analysis of the policy options.
Third, the euro area economy is more heterogeneous than the US economy. This makes the job
of the Eurosystem more complicated. Are there lessons to be learned from the US that would
allow for a more even economic development in the euro area? I am confident that the answer is
yes – but it might not be the answer that would readily suggest itself.
2 Current monetary policy
But let me start by looking at the current economic developments in the euro area. 
The euro area has so far enjoyed four and a half years of continuous economic growth. As Mario
Draghi pointed out recently, what started out as a recovery is now a fully-fledged expansion. It is
robust and broad-based, with most countries and sectors posting positive growth figures.
As  a  result,  the  euro  area  grew  even  faster  than  the  US  economy  last  year. After  years  of
challenges, the euro area is now driving global growth, not dragging it down. And indicators show
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
no sign of growth abating anytime soon.
In many respects, the euro area economy might be further along now than the US economy at
the time the Fed ended its net asset purchases. The euro area output gap of 0.5 % for 2017, as
estimated  by  the  OECD,  is  considerably  smaller  than  the  US  output  gap  of  2.5  %  in
October 2014. And at that time, the OECD believed the output gap to be even higher, at 3.1 %.
This suggests that the euro area economy might utilise its resources more fully now than the US
economy did when the Fed ceased its net asset purchases.
Inflation,  however,  has  not  kept  pace  with  economic  expansion.  Domestic  price  pressure,
measured by core inflation (excluding energy and unprocessed food), stands at 1.2 % in the euro
area today. By contrast, when the Fed ceased its net asset purchases, US core inflation was
1.8 %.
What is behind the sluggish price developments? Multiple factors seem to be at play here. The
euro  area  recovery  has  certainly  been  aided  by  countries  strengthening  their  competitiveness
and  turning  their  current  account  deficits  into  surpluses.  But  improving  price  competitiveness
through wage restraint is, naturally enough, also dampening domestic price pressures.
In parts of the euro area, migration from EU member states not participating in the euro might
have played a role as well. In Germany, for example, migration from the non-euro-area member
states  has  eased  labour  market  tensions.  This  has  dampened  wage  pressures  and,  in  turn,
inflation dynamics.
But the euro area is by no means unique in having an inflation rate that is lower than indicators of
economic slack suggest. It seems to be a rather widespread phenomenon, characteristic of the
current situation in the US, the UK, Japan and Sweden, for example. In the US, unemployment is
the lowest it has been since the year 2000, but core inflation stands at 1.8 %, and the Fed’s
preferred measure of inflation, the index of personal consumption expenditure, stands at 1.5 %.
This  suggests  that  the  factors  responsible  for  holding  back  wage  growth  are  not  only
idiosyncratic, but international as well. Recent research by the Bank for International Settlements,
for example, suggests that the increased contestability of labour markets via the proliferation of
1
global value chains puts a lid on wages and, thus, on prices.
Given the rather subdued inflationary pressure at present, an accommodative monetary policy
stance remains appropriate in the euro area. And even after the net purchases have ended, the
monetary  policy  stance  will  remain  loose.  However,  the  favourable  economic  outlook  lends
credence  to  the  expectation  that  wage  growth  and  therefore  domestic  price  pressures  will
gradually  increase  in  keeping  with  a  path  towards  the  Governing  Council’s  definition  of  price
stability.
The recent pay agreement in the metalworking and electrical engineering industries in Germany
is  consistent  with  this  picture.  Not  only  is  it  in  keeping  with  the  expectations  we  based  our
forecast on: in my opinion, it also demonstrates that the Phillips curve does by all means have
informative value where Germany is concerned. 
To  cut  a  long  story  short:  If  the  expansion  progresses  as  currently  expected,  substantial  net
purchases beyond the announced amount do not seem to be required. 
The recent appreciation of the euro seems unlikely to jeopardise the expansion, by the way. In
fact, it is – at least in part – rather a reaction to the brighter growth prospects of the euro area.
Besides,  recent  research  suggests  that  the  exchange  rate  pass-through,  which  is  to  say  the
impact of exchange rate movements on inflation, has declined. But, of course, we will monitor
closely any impact foreign exchange rate movements might have on our primary target of price
stability.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Nor should we allow ourselves to become unsettled by the decline in equity prices we have just
witnessed. US equity prices rose over a prolonged period without any notable corrections, which
was unusual given that valuations have been high overall.
Large-scale purchases of sovereign bonds are not the only unconventional monetary policy tool
used. Communication in general, and forward guidance in particular, is now a monetary policy
tool in itself, geared towards the evolution of long-term rates.
In this regard, BIS Chief Economist Hyun Shin recently recommended central banks that when
trying  to  shape  rates  through  communication,  they  should  avoid  reading  too  much  into  the
development of market rates. Otherwise, “they could find themselves in an echo chamber of their
own making, acting on market signals that are echoes of their own pronouncements.”
If  central  banks  are  to  use  communication  as  a  policy  tool,  they  must  not  shy  away  from
necessary  guidance  for  fear  of  market  backlash.  Otherwise,  communication  can  become
circular. He added: “The more the central bank whispers in order not to upset markets, the more
market participants lean in to hear better.”
3 Monetary policy and EMU’s institutional set-up
Ladies and gentlemen
While communicative independence is important, it is not the only form of independence crucial
for  monetary  policy  –  especially  for  a  monetary  policy  combined  with  19  different  national
economic and fiscal policies.
When the ECB presented its OMT programme geared towards eliminating redenomination risk in
the euro area, commentators like Paul Krugman applauded the decision, stating that by acting in
effect as a lender of last resort to governments, the “ECB is finally doing its  job  as  a  central
bank”. The decision on the PSPP, the Eurosystem’s large-scale purchases of sovereign debt,
has been met with similar approval as well.
Nevertheless, some in the euro area have also been sceptical of sovereign bond purchases. As
you may have heard, I would count myself as one of them.
Are the sceptics exaggerating the risks involved? Are they perhaps victims of what Freud has
called the “narcissism of small differences”, seeing differences for the sake of being different? Or
are the differences indeed substantial with regard to our capability to fulfil our primary target: to
maintain price stability?
I  would  argue  that  yes,  they  are  substantial.  Government  bond  purchases  by  central  banks
involve  the  fundamental  risk  of  mutualising  sovereign  liability  risks  through  the  central  banks’
balance sheets.
While  this  risk  can  be  safely  ignored  for  countries  with  their  own  currency,  it  can  be  a  major
problem for a monetary union – especially for one which, like the European monetary union, is
not a fiscal union.
At  the  end  of  the  day,  it  could  introduce  common  liability  through  the  back  door. And  in  this
regard, it’s up to elected governments and parliaments to make such far-reaching decisions.
In contrast to the OMT programme, the large-scale sovereign bond purchases currently being
conducted take into account some of these concerns.
Only a small part of the programme is subject to risk sharing among the central banks of the
Eurosystem.  Additionally,  the  Governing  Council  decided  on  limits  for  the  Eurosystem’s
purchases  of  individual  bond  issues  and  for  its  overall  purchases  of  debt  of  any  individual
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
country. This is designed to ensure that governments continue to rely on the capital markets for
their funding.
These  measures  make  the  QE  programme  less  problematic  than  earlier  sovereign  bond
purchase programmes that aimed to reduce the risk premiums of individual countries.
Nonetheless,  one  important  risk  of  sovereign  bond  purchases  remains.  The  national  central
banks have become the most important creditors to their governments, which might ultimately
put the independence of monetary policy at risk.
Exiting its ultra-loose monetary policy would influence governments’ financing conditions much
more directly than our conventional monetary policy instruments. And the pressure might rise on
the Eurosystem to keep funding costs low in order to ensure the sustainability of public finances.
If one adjusts the recent deficit figures for the currently favourable business cycle, one cannot fail
but see that consolidation has in effect stalled in the euro area member states. The European
Commission expects practically no improvement in the structural balance this year and next. And
there is the risk that the current low interest rates might make public finances appear to be in
better shape than they actually are. High public debt ratios can become a burden when interest
rates begin to rise again.
In the European monetary union, however, fiscal discipline is absolutely essential.The set-up of
the monetary union can further compound the tendency of governments to finance their spending
through  debt,  as  the  consequences  of  bad  policy  choices  can  more  easily  be  externalised  to
neighbouring countries.
4 Monetary policy and heterogeneity
Ladies and gentlemen
When  comparing  US  and  European  monetary  policy,  the  institutional  set-up  is  not  the  only
difference  that  springs  to  mind.  In  the  euro  area,  monetary  policy  is  complicated  by  a  higher
degree of heterogeneity compared to the US.
Let’s take unemployment: in the euro area, the weighted standard deviation of member states’
unemployment  rates  from  2009  to  2017  is  5.7  percentage  points.  In  the  US,  the  weighted
standard deviation is only 1.2 percentage points for the same period.
Heterogeneity  was  higher  pre-crisis  as  well,  at  2.2  percentage  points  from  1999  to  2008,
compared to 0.8 percentage point in the US.
A common monetary policy in a currency union means that one size has to fit all – the greater
the  heterogeneity,  the  less  well  it  will  fit  the  respective  member  states.  This  reduces  overall
economic welfare. How, then, might heterogeneity be lowered?
Macro-prudential  policies  are  one  option.  They  can  be  deployed  against  regional  and  sectoral
pockets  of  exuberance,  in  case  they  are  suspected  to  pose  a  systemic  risk.  Possible
instruments  include  higher  risk  weights  for  certain  asset  classes,  or  loan-to-value  ratios  that
raise equity requirements for a mortgage. Some euro-area countries have indeed taken macro-
prudential measures to counter a strong increase in mortgage loans fuelling the ongoing rise in
housing prices. And preventing certain sectors or regions from running hot will help to reduce
overall economic volatility as well.
First and foremost, however, national economic and fiscal policies need to be tailored adequately
to  ensure  that  economic  developments  do  not  diverge  too  much.  Countries  experiencing  a
cyclical  boom  should  run  a  tighter  fiscal  policy,  and  countries  experiencing  a  slump  should
loosen  it.  But  for  this  to  happen,  countries  need  the  requisite  fiscal  space.  This  is  why  it’s
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
imperative to adhere to the fiscal rules over the cycle.
Structurally, flexible labour markets are another prerequisite of a well-functioning monetary union.
The  higher  the  labour  mobility  within  and  across  member  states,  the  better  fit  a  common
monetary  policy  will  be.  Robert  Mundell  was  awarded  the  Nobel  Prize  for  this  insight,  aptly
enough on the occasion of the launch of European monetary union in 1999.
His  first  theory  of  optimum  currency  areas  emphasised  the  necessity  of  capital  and  labour
mobility. Economists like Peter Kenen later expanded on his work. In particular, they stressed the
importance of risk sharing via fiscal and other means for a currency to work smoothly.
And it is here, in my opinion, that the differences between the United States and the euro area are
instructive as well.
In the United States, shocks are spread through the distribution of business profits and losses
throughout the currency area, because company owners are often residents in other states.
Another channel of private economic risk sharing is through saving and lending. Enterprises and
households take out loans in different US states during an economic downturn to bridge a slump
in earnings. Risk sharing through fiscal policy takes a back seat by comparison. Only 10 % to
25 % of risks are shared by a common fiscal policy in federations like the US or Canada.  It is
private means of risk sharing that bring the overall risk-sharing level to about 80 %. 
2
It is important to note that the rainy day funds in place in many US states do not constitute a
fiscal  risk  sharing  scheme  between  the  individual  states,  either.  Many  US  states  are  strictly
forbidden to incur debt. Thus, they set budget surpluses aside in a rainy day fund to be used
during an economic downturn. And every state is using only its own fund.
In the euro area, the fiscal rules permit individual member states with sound public finances to
take effective fiscal measures against cyclical downturns or crises, without breaching the fiscal
rules or having to resort to outside assistance. This makes the potential benefits of a rainy day
fund less relevant for us.
Clearly, much could be achieved in the euro area by strengthening cross-border corporate equity
funding. To tear down the walls in European capital markets by standardising national insolvency
regimes is, in my view, just one particularly important step. Investors need to be able to count on
a level playing field existing throughout Europe. Not only would that promote private risk sharing; it
would  also  reduce  capital  flows  to  less  productive  businesses  and  stimulate  flows  to  more
3
productive ones. That would boost economic momentum, as OECD research confirms.
What  is  more,  the  development  of  equity  markets,  including  in  Europe,  is  suffering  from  the
4
preferential tax treatment given to debt over equity capital.
Interest payments can be deducted from taxable income; equity costs cannot. Eliminating this
bias, which I admit would not be trivial in political terms, would encourage businesses to make
greater use of equity capital as a funding instrument. And that, in turn, would facilitate greater
private risk sharing whilst at the same time reducing the debt bias.
I  mentioned  earlier  that  another  way  in  which  risk  could  potentially  be  shared  might  be  for
enterprises and households to take out cross-border loans in times of crisis. Yet this mechanism
hardly worked at all during the crisis in the euro area.
One of the steps taken in Europe to prevent the repetition of a financial crisis was to create the
Banking Union. With its Single Supervisory Mechanism and rules on bailing-in creditors in the
event of bank failures, the Banking Union bolsters the banking sector’s resilience. This makes a
loss  of  confidence  in  national  banking  systems  less  likely. And  less  danger  of  a  fragmented
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial system stabilises lending, particularly in turbulent times.
A common European deposit guarantee scheme could, in theory, even heighten this confidence.
However, as with any insurance policy, one would have to make sure in this case, too, that the
insurance does not cover losses which have already occurred, like bad loans already on banks’
books, and that the insurance does not encourage careless behaviour in the future.
Unlike  banks  in  the  United  States,  banks  in  the  euro  area  have  a  sizable  share  of  sovereign
bonds on their books. To insure euro-area bank risks in such a situation would be tantamount to
insuring fiscal risks.
Given that the member states themselves still decide freely and independently on the level of
government expenditure and taxes, this ultimately sets the wrong incentives: finance ministers
would see less of a need to pay adequate attention to the sustainability of public finances.
One precondition for a European deposit insurance scheme, then, is that the size of government
bond portfolios that banks hold on their books is limited.
Doing away with concentration risks of sovereign bonds in banks would be a boon to monetary
policy as well. During the crisis, monetary policy transmission was hampered by these large and
undiversified sovereign bond portfolios. Potential losses on these portfolios were draining banks’
equity buffers. The banks in question were therefore unwilling to lend and to pass on the low
policy rates to companies and households.
56
In order to shield an economy from a sovereign in trouble, banks must be restrained in taking on
government debt.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Alfred Nobel never envisioned a Nobel Prize for Economics. On the contrary, he once wrote in a
letter  that  he  did  not  have  an  economic  education,  and  that  he  hated  it  with  all  his  heart.  No
wonder economics is dubbed the “dismal science”.
Obviously, I do not share Nobel’s sentiment. On the contrary, I am firmly convinced that a social
science  that  is  based  on  transparent  assumptions  and  is  thoroughly  steeped  in  data  is  of
immense benefit to all of us.
But I am equally convinced that a conference like today’s, that sets out to discern similarities and
differences, would have met with approval, even in the eyes of Alfred Nobel.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Auer R, C Borio and A Filardo (2017), “The globalisation of inflation: the growing importance of global value
chains”, BIS Working Papers 602, Bank for International Settlements.
Allard, C, P K Brooks, J C Bluedorn, F Bornhorst, K Christopherson, F Ohnsorge, T Poghosyan and an IMF staff
team (2013), IMF Staff Discussion Note, 13/09.
Adalet McGowan M and D Andrews (2016), “Insolvency Regimes And Productivity Growth: A Framework For
Analysis”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers No 1309.
German Council of Economic Experts (2017), “Towards a future-oriented economic policy”.
Panetta, F. et al. (2009), “The impact of sovereign credit risk on bank funding conditions”, CGFS Papers, No. 43,
July 2011.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
Albertazzi U, T Ropele, G Sene and F M. Signoretti (2012), “The Impact of the sovereign Debt Crisis on the Activity
of Italian banks,” Bank of Italy Occasional paper, No. 133.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
