Gent Sejko: Main challenges facing statistics
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  to  the  Joint  Bank  of
Albania-European Central Bank Regional Statistical Seminar, Tirana, 13 June 2018.
Dear participants!
 It is a pleasure for me to be here today and open the regional seminar on central bank statistics.
On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  European  Central  Bank  for  co-
organising  this  seminar  in  Tirana. Also,  I  would  like  to  welcome  all  representatives  of  central
banks from the region and beyond, and all the participants in this seminar.
The series of regional statistical seminars, organised by the ECB, provides an important forum
for  exchanging  views  on  statistical  requirements,  formulating  policies  and  discussing  most
recent developments on central bank statistics-related issues.
We are all aware that having reliable, adequate, and timely data is a key element for decision
making.
Ten  years  on,  after  the  latest  financial  crisis,  the  fundamentals  of  the  global  economy,  the
architecture  of  the  global  financial  system  and  the  decision-making  process  are  set  on  a
constant  restructuring  process.  The  statistical  function  faces  similar  challenges.  While  the
economies, markets and institutions develop, pressures mount on statistics to “follow the trend
and pace” of such development. The emergence of the so-called “information gap” is inevitable in
a fast-changing world, but our duty as statistical agencies is to increase speed up efforts to close
this gap as soon as possible.
 In the following, I would like to focus on the main challenges facing statistics, especially those
that  are  pivotal  for  the  successful  realisation  of  the  central  bank  functions.  Overall,  the  crisis
revealed the need for richer and more effective statistics, to serve both the monetary policy and
the macro-prudential policy.
Like never before, it is necessary for us to be informed and analyse economic data on several
dimensions and at a granular extent.
The financial sector’s growth and complexity highlight the importance of safeguarding financial
system  stability,  as  an  essential  element  of  central  bank  functions.  The  objective  of  financial
stability has existed since the very establishment of the central bank institution. But, in the last
decade, there is a clear focus on identifying potential threats to financial system stability, and
constant attention on minimising them.
Likewise,  achieving  and  maintaining  price  stability  through  monetary  policy  has  changed.
Economic and financial analyses realised in central banks are becoming increasingly dependent
on  complex  models,  which  enable  a  simultaneous  analysis  of  the  real  economy,  financial
markets  and  interaction  with  foreign  trading  and  financial  partners.  Therefore,  the  quality  and
reliability of the statistical information becomes particularly important.
In  response,  in  recent  years,  the  Bank  of Albania  has  worked  across  several  dimensions  to
enrich and enhance the statistical information.
Since  June  2017,  Albania  has  been  implementing  the  IMF’s  Enhanced  General  Data
Dissemination  e-GDDS)  and  is  committed  to  fulfilling  a  series  of  strict  requirements  for  the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
production, dissemination and documentation of statistical data.
Moreover,  in  the  framework  of  the  European  integration  process,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has
intensified its work on methodological aligning of statistics with the international standards and
their  harmonization  by  acquis  communitare.  Thus,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  adopted  the
regulation  on  the  reporting  of  interest  rate  statistics,  approved  for  the  first  time  the  “Code  of
Practice  on  Statistics  at  the  Bank  of Albania”,  and  has  started  its  work  for  the  alignment  of
monetary and financial statistics reporting.
Modern statistics may not be perceived without the strong support of the information technology,
regarding collection, compilation and dissemination of statistics. In this regard, in 2017, the Bank
of Albania finalised the inclusion of all reporting entities to the Bank of Albania in the Electronic
Regulatory Reporting System. We have also initiated a project on “Automated compilation and
dissemination of external sector statistics”. This project is an important cornerstone to build a
solid architecture for the further development of other statistical blocks.
Dear participants!
 Economic data are becoming increasingly subject to research and analysis by policymakers and
financial  market  participants.  The  mechanisms  established  by  the  European  Commission  are
adding pressures on statistics to provide high-quality data.
On  the  other  hand,  inter-institutional  coordination  is  the  key  to  success  for  producing  multi-
dimensional statistical data. In this context, I would like to underline the importance of cooperation
between  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  INSTAT,  which  has  been  very  fruitful  until  now  and  I  am
confident it will continue to be successful in the future.
Concluding, I would like to extend my most sincere appreciation to the lecturers and contributors
to  the  seminar,  who  will  share  their  experiences  with  us.  I  hope  that  everyone  will  be  able  to
benefit from the constructive discussions and contributions during this two-day seminar.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
