Gent  Sejko:  Overview  of  economic  and  financial  developments  in
Albania
Address  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  2nd  Conference  of  the
Albanian Association of Banks, Tirana, 14 November 2017.
 Your Excellency Prime Minister,
Honourable Minister Ahmetaj,
Dear Chairman of the Albanian Association of Banks,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a special pleasure for me to participate in the second conference organised by the Albanian
Association  of  Banks  (AAB).  I  take  this  opportunity  to  compliment  the  AAB  for  the  selected
theme, as economic growth in Albania is cross-cutting topic of interest to all of us.
This conference takes place at an interesting moment from the perspective of the performance
of  economic  activity  in Albania.  The  most  recent  assessments  show  that  our  economy  has
entered  into  a  long-term  recovery  trajectory.  As  mentioned  in  the  last  Statement  of  the
Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  the Albanian  economy  grew  4.1%  in  the  second
quarter,  driven  mainly  by  the  recovery  of  private  domestic  demand,  improvement  of  the
international trade balance, and increase in public spending and high foreign direct investments
during this period.
The  accommodative  monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of Albania  has  been  one  of  the  key  driving
factors  for  the  recovery  of  domestic  demand.  It  has  constantly  guaranteed  a  financial
environment  with  low  interest  rates  and  ample  liquidity.  It  has  also  been  aided  by  the
consolidatory fiscal policy, which, in addition to reducing risk premia, has increased the space for
financing the private sector.
Our  expectations  for  the  short  and  medium-term  economic  developments  in Albania  remain
positive. We aim at having sustainable growth rates in the course of the years. In this context, the
banking sector represents a key industry for supporting economic recovery. The instruments it
avails have a substantial contribution in this regard, with lending being among the most important
ones.
Notwithstanding  occasional  volatilities,  the  banking  industry  has  played  a  significant  role  in
supporting  economic  activity.  That  was  notably  the  case  at  the  early  2000s,  following  the
privatisation  of  the  then  Savings  Bank.  During  that  period,  the  outstanding  credit  increased  at
considerable annual growth rates.
Anyhow,  such  high  growth  rates  and  the  outburst  of  the  global  crisis  revealed  a  number  of
inconveniences, and led to the perpetual increase in the level of non-performing loans. Thus, the
ratio  of  non-performing  loans  to  total  loans  peaked  25%,  extremely  deteriorating  the  system's
lending capacities. The reasons that led up to this point have been discussed extensively in the
past and I would rather not focus on them, again.
What I would like to emphasise is the fact that the current situation is very different from what it
used to be a few years ago. The ratio of non-performing loans is constantly reducing, standing 10
percentage points lower than its peak in 2014. Thanks to joint efforts, the balance sheets of the
banking  system  are  healthier,  the  liquidity  situation  is  optimal,  and  its  prices  have  fallen  to
historical low levels.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a result, I think that the banking industry should adopt a more active approach in deepening
financial intermediation, which ultimately means strengthening the credit activity.
According to the last Financial Stability Report, in 2017 H1, the banking system was financially
healthier. This fact leads us to believe that its actors, who unquestionably contribute to the supply
side of credit to the economy, should tend to be more active.
On the other hand, regarding credit demand, assessments are also positive. More specifically,
survey results on the financial and borrowing situation of enterprises in 2017 H1, show that the
financial situation has improved and the optimism characterises both the short and the medium
term.
In recent years, the Bank of Albania, in cooperation with the Parliament and the Government has
undertaken a series of actions, including legal amendments, to address concerns that had been
previously raised by the industry. Aware of their usefulness, we undertook these changes and I
believe we have achieved concrete results. Your balance sheets are cleaned and the financial
situation appears healthier.
For these reasons, we, the central bank, would invite you to utilise, within reasonable levels of
prudence, every possibility and space for identifying business plans and projects that deserve to
be supported. It is time now for lending to assume its place in supporting the economy, and this
requires professionalism, energy, integrity, and commitment.
The  banking  industry  has  a  series  of  instruments  at  its  disposal.  In  addition  to  the  need  for
reviving  credit,  as  one  of  the  most  important  instruments,  I  would  like  to  focus  now  on  some
other indicators, such as the level of the financial system development and financial inclusion
and education. These are some very important additional elements that contribute to economic
activity.
Underdeveloped  financial  systems  are  exposed  to  systemic  risks  and  create  distress  and
challenges  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  in  Albania.
Fortunately,  we  live  in  an  age  when  financial  innovation  has  introduced  many  new  business
models, both in processes and in products. We should also embrace them in Albania. The great
technological  revolution  has  eliminated  physical  barriers,  making  it  easier  for  the  people  to
access the financial market, regardless of the geographical location, age, qualification, cultural
formation, or tradition. In addition to easier access, the costs and speed of obtaining services
have improved notably. Our banking system should not only make use of all these elements, but
it should also develop them further.
Financial inclusion and education are two challenges that I think should be an integral part of our
agenda  in  the  years  ahead.  World  Development  Indicators  show  financial  inclusion  of  the
population continues to be low.
In  2014,  only  38%  of  the  population  had  an  account  with  licenced  institutions  of  the  financial
system, while 22% of adults had a debit card and only 6% of them had a credit card. This shows
a  large  gap  between  us  and  OECD  countries,  where  92%  of  the  population  has  a  financial
account, whereas 80% of adults own a debit card and 40% a credit card.
The role of banks in concerning financial education is very important and I would say unique. The
deepening and expansion of your clients’ financial literacy has a high social impact and, at the
same  time,  banks  will  reap  benefits,  because,  in  turn,  the  clients  are  consumers  of  banking
products and services.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  contribution  by  the  banking  sector  to  the  fight  against
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
informality,  a  very  harmful  and,  unfortunately,  still  wide-spread  phenomenon  in  the  Albanian
economy, to the extent that it may be considered a serious risk to the economic and financial
stability of the country.
Even in this aspect, the role of the banking system is very important. Using information certified
by  authorities,  concerning  the  balance  sheet  of  the  companies,  as  well  as  other  economic
actors, has become a necessity. Above all, they are prudential measures, which enhance the
level of security and stability, especially in lending.
The reform against informality amongst the priorities for the Albanian authorities, and the banking
sector - with its network, expertise and know-how, which many of you bring along from the home
country of the respective banking group - should offer its assistance for the common goal.
Based on the above, I invite you to focus the debate and analysis in this one-day conference on
these  lines,  hoping  that  this  meeting  will  create  a  convergence  of  ideas  and  conclusions  in
relation to the further recovery of the economic activity.
The support of the Bank of Albania will be unconditional in this regard. As in the past, we will be
constantly in search to adopt strategies and rules that aim at having a financially sound banking
sector capable of supporting economic development in Albania.
I am fully confident that the future cooperation among all the stakeholders: the banking industry,
the government and the Banking will be strengthened, for the economic and financial prosperity
of the country.
I thank you for your attention and I wish the conference all success!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
