 Speech of the CBBH Governor Senad Softić, Ph.D. at the first Europe-wide 
International Monetary Fund Regional Economic Outlook entitled „Regional Economic 
Perspectives for Europe“. 
Sarajevo, November, 13, 2017 
 Honorable guests 
Dear Mr. Decressin,  
Panelists, Coleagues,  
Ladies and gentlemen. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  premises  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina  today  for  presentation  of  the  First  Europe-wide  IMF  Regional  Economic 
Outlook. Thank the IMF for choosing Bosnia and Herzegovina for such event.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
 We are meeting today at a good time for Europe and Bosnia and Herzegovina.  Economic 
growth is gaining strength.  In the Euro area, growth is expected to remain about 2 percent 
in 2018. Inflation, big concern for us central bankers, is expected to remain stable in 2018.  
 In Bosnia and Herzegovina, growth was 3.1 percent in 2016.  We expect the recovery  to 
continue.  
 The  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  continues  to  maintain  monetary  stability 
through strict implementation of the currency board arrangement, as defined in the law. 
Inflation remains firmly anchored to price developments in the Euro area.  
We expect prices not to increase by more than 1.5 percent in 2018. 
It is very important for us in Bosnia and Herzegovina that growth in the European Union is 
sustained over the medium term.  
The EU is our largest trading partner and foreign investor. A large Bosnian diaspora sends 
remittances close to 12 percent of GDP per year.  
These are very strong economic links that should be considered together with our diaspora 
as important resource for economic development of the country.  
   However, policy makers in Europe, and also here in Bosnia and Herzegovina, should take 
advantage  of  the  recovery  to  implement  ambitious  economic  measures  and  structural 
reforms.  
 For Bosnia and Herzegovina, we should focus on three broad areas: 
 1.  First, we need to improve the composition of the budgets at all levels of government. 
The general governments of Bosnia and Herzegovina are on track to achieve a combined 
overall  fiscal  surplus  for the  second  year  in  a  row.  However, there  needs  to  be  a  re-
orientation  of  spending  towards  infrastructure,  to  help  catch  up  with  European 
standards, and to improve connectivity and competitiveness of our economy. 
 2.  Second,  we  need to  continue  to  strengthen  the  single  financial  system  of  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina. The banking system in Bosnia and Herzegovina is strong and stable. There 
is enough liquidity and sufficient capital. Progress was made since 2015 in putting in 
place  new  banking  legislation  that  brings  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  banking  system 
closer to European standards.  
 
Still, there is a lot of work to be done to resolve issues from the past financial crisis. At 
more  than  11  percent  of  total  loans,  NPLs  continue  to  burden  the  balance  sheets  of 
banks.  In  this  respect,  adoption  of  new  bankruptcy  legislation  at the  entity  level  and 
clarification  of  tax-treatment  of  NPL  sales  will  help  address  this  issue  in  the  period 
ahead. 
3.  Third,  we  should  redouble  our  efforts  to  improve  our  institutions  and  address 
governance shortcomings. Foreign Direct Investment is stuck at around two percent of 
GDP  per  year.  This  is  too  low  to  support  higher  growth  rates  that  will  reduce 
unemployment and emigration.  
 Improvements  in  regulatory  quality,  fair  and  transparent  ‘rules  of  the  game’,  and 
transparent  and  accountable  institutions  will  help  attract  higher  levels  of  foreign 
investment.  
   Therefore,  we  have  to  send  clear  message  about  positive  outcomes  of  our reforms,  increase 
reputation of  Bosnia and Herzegovina,  improve our competitiveness to increase  investments 
and growth, and at the same time strengthen the single economic space to finally pave the way 
to our European future. 
 Thank you very much for your time, and I hope that you have a wonderful event. 
   