Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  Reflections  on  Malaysia's  advancing
Islamic finance industry
Welcoming remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Shariah Advisory  Council  (SAC)  20-Year Anniversary  Dinner,
Kuala Lumpur, 12 December 2017.
 Welcome  to  the  20th  Anniversary  Dinner  of  the  Shariah  Advisory  Council  of  Bank  Negara
Malaysia, or in short the SAC. On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia and the audience here, we
would like to express our utmost gratitude to His Royal Highness Sultan of Perak Darul Ridzuan
and Her Royal Highness for gracing tonight’s dinner.
This event is a special occasion. Gathered here tonight are a coterie of intellectuals who help
shape  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia.  The  SAC,  in  its  20-year  history,  has
established itself as the foremost institution in developing and expanding the tenets of Shariah for
Islamic  finance.  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  express  our  heartfelt  thanks  to  the
distinguished  members  of  the  SAC  –  past  and  present  –  for  their  contributions  to  the
advancement of the Islamic Finance industry in Malaysia.
As we reflect on the journey of the SAC, I reminisce of the great Shariah scholars from the glory
days  of  Islam.  Islamic  civilisation  during  this  era  flourished  upon  a  strong  foundation  of
knowledge, wisdom and tolerance by its leaders and scholars. While consensus building was a
key  part  of  the  culture,  differing  views,  conclusions  and  preferences  helped  unite,  rather  than
divide. Critical thinking and independent reasoning – or ijtihad – was geared towards fostering
harmony and was celebrated as it enriched the body of knowledge.
Today, the SAC continues this tradition, applying its collective wisdom, diligence and inquisitive
minds in the contemporary setting of Islamic finance. Many practical and contemporary issues
confronting the Islamic finance industry were resolved through more than 500 rulings. We have
grown stronger, wiser and more inclusive over the years.
Looking back at history, the Golden Age of Islam was replete with polymaths who helped build
Islamic  civilisation,  turning  it  into  one  of  the  world’s  greatest.  Scholars  such  as  Ibn  Sina,  Ibn
Rushd and Ibn Al Haytham have left behind a legacy not only in the area of theology, but also in
other modern disciplines, including medicine, astronomy and mathematics.
Drawing  from  these  inspiring  examples,  we  can  play  an  even  bigger  role  in  ensuring  Islamic
finance is able to deliver a lasting and metamorphic impact to the world we live in. This calls for
the reinvention and reimagination of the Shariah profession in a number of ways.
First, enlarging our worldview. No doubt, theology is core to ascertaining the integrity of Islamic
finance transactions, rooted in the principles of the Quran and Sunnah. However, Islam offers so
much freedom for intellectual and cultural explorations. Such explorations – to experiment with
new ideas and critically assess existing norms – are in fact, highly encouraged.
It  is  this  intellectual  and  cultural  freedom  that  has  characterised  the  long  line  of  great  Islamic
traditions throughout history; from Ibn Battutta who traveled the world and eventually produced
his famous work the “Rihlah”, to Ibn Khaldun who challenged the existing traditions and wrote the
acclaimed  “Muqaddimah”.  Hundreds  of  years  after  they  were  written,  these  works  are  still
revered and widely used as a reference today.
Speaking of freedom allowed in Islam, I am reminded of a famous episode in the early days of
Islam during the Battle of Khandak. It was during the eve of the battle when the Prophet received
a suggestion from one of his companions  to employ a novel battle strategy – one that is, as
1
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
many  of  you  know,  based  on  digging  trenches  around  the  city.  This  new  strategy,  generally
unheard of among the Muslims and Arabs at the time, was in fact, borrowed and imitated from
the Persians . Regardless, the Prophet agreed to and pushed for the unconventional strategy
and as a result, secured an emphatic victory.
2
In line with the significant flexibility afforded in Islam, I believe that Shariah must not be confined to
a  rigid  framework.  The  way  I  see  it,  Shariah  should  not  and  cannot,  be  applied  in  a  vacuum.
Rather,  it  has  to  be  contextualised  and  applied  into  business  realities.  We  can  learn  valuable
lessons from the practices of great Muslim thinkers of the past such as Al-Farabi and Ibn Sina
who  drew  strong  influences  from  the  writings  of  Greek  philosophers  such  as  Aristotle,  but
revolutionised and updated the knowledge into the context of Islam and their contemporary times.
The benefits are immense.
It allows knowledge to thrive and develop further as it becomes more applicable and easier to
grasp.
It is therefore wise for us to widen our "peripheral vision" to encompass business considerations
in interpreting and applying the principles of Shariah. This is essential, if we aspire to break away
from a compliance-based mentality into an outcome-based worldview. The mental shift would
position  Shariah  scholars  as  not  merely  the  leaders  in  Shariah  knowledge,  but  also  as  the
catalyst for business innovations. 
It is in this spirit that Bank Negara Malaysia is enhancing the Shariah Governance Framework for
Islamic financial institutions. The new framework calls upon the Shariah Committees to integrate
relevant  business  and  risk  considerations  in  Shariah  decisions.  Our  aim  is  to  position  these
committees as an enabler and catalyst in supporting the board and senior management. One
that  drives  innovation  by  providing  practical,  actionable  and  impactful  Shariah  advice.  By
capturing  multifaceted  challenges  faced  by  the  industry,  this  framework  ensures  an  ongoing
support to Shariah advice amid the fast-changing business environment.
Second is the pursuit of lifelong learning. It is through the relentless quest for knowledge that the
great scholars of the past have left a lasting impact on our world. This ought to be no different
today. Modern day Shariah scholars, as with all of us here, must likewise continuously up-skill
ourselves. After all, as the Islamic finance industry grows and evolves, so will the complexity of
Shariah  issues.  A  sound  understanding  of  other  domains  –  such  as  of  accounting,  law,
economics  and  technology  –  is  necessary  to  strengthen  and  bolster  comprehensive  and
practical ijtihad.
This  pursuit  of  various  spectrums  of  knowledge  was  the  basis  for  the  great  achievements  of
Islamic  scholars  in  the  past.  It  is  hard  to  think  of  a  scholar  who  was  the  master  of  only  one
discipline, be it Ibn Sina, Ibn Rushd or Ibn Khaldun. In fact, their mastery of knowledge crossed
multiple subject matters, from theology to philosophy, mathematics and the sciences. With an
expanded  breadth  of  capabilities  and  knowledge,  the  Shariah  fraternity  will  be  in  a  credible
position to influence and shape the future direction of the industry.
The  recent  launch  of  the  Certified  Shariah Advisors  (CSA)  and  Certified  Shariah  Practitioner
(CSP) programmes demonstrates our commitment towards shaping and nurturing high quality
Shariah talent locally and internationally. The professional certification programmes will raise the
bar  for  the  industry  by  elevating  the  professionalism  of  Shariah  advisors  and  upskilling
competencies in the community.
To support the noble initiative by the Association of Shariah Advisors in Islamic Finance, and to
further deepen talent capacity, Bank Negara Malaysia will make the certification a pre-requisite
for the appointment and re-appointment of Shariah Committee members. This applies as well for
key Shariah personnel in Islamic financial institutions, including Islamic windows. The aim is to
ensure  Shariah  advisors  and  personnel  are  equipped  with  the  necessary  knowledge  that
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
transcends across various disciplines including legal, finance and taxation matters. The timeline
for compliance will be decided later.
My final point is to engage the world more openly. Issues of Shariah are complex and sometimes
difficult to discern. But they are important, and matter very much to a wide range of stakeholders.
As  Imam  Ash-Shafi’i  reportedly  said,  “Knowledge  is  that  which  benefits,  not  that  which  is
3
memorised” .
Hence,  in  keeping  with  the  changing  landscape  of  the  industry,  engaging  more  openly  and
transparently about views and decisions will enhance understanding and acceptance. Views and
opinions  are  man-made  and  should  be  challenged,  questioned  and  debated  through  civil  and
intellectual discourse.
During the Islamic Golden Age, such discourses and challenging of ideas were commonplace to
assess the veracity of knowledge. Al Haytham, who wrote the influential ‘Book of Optics’, once
said: “The duty of the man who investigates the writings of scientists, if learning the truth is his
goal, is to make himself an enemy of all that he reads.... He should also suspect himself as he
performs his critical examination of it..”
The  goal  for  us  today  should  be  to  forge  greater  understanding  and  acceptance.  Contentious
differences  in  Shariah  opinion  is  a  given  but  it  must  not  hold  us  back,  but  rather  be  resolved
through debate and discussion with a view to find truth and justice.
In  setting  an  example  to  inspire  such  exchanges,  beginning  January  2018,  Bank  Negara
Malaysia’s  website  will  feature  an  enhanced  version  of  the  SAC  microsite,  starting  with  the
Bahasa version to provide more detailed disclosure of the SAC’s works. Over the years, the SAC
has  accumulated  a  treasure  trove  of  knowledge  which  has  been  shared  through  various
publications.  In  this  digital  age,  it  is  high  time  that  this  be  made  even  more  accessible  to  the
whole world. This new microsite will among others, serve as a repository for key discussions on
fiqh matters and underlying reasoning of Shariah rulings. This is expected to promote greater
understanding and appreciation of the thought process and rationale in arriving at a ruling by our
learned scholars.
I trust that this repository of knowledge will encourage more open and transparent conversations
on  Shariah  issues.  Our  hope  is  that  this  will  build  greater  mutual  respect  and  understanding
within  the  Shariah  fraternity  and  the  wider  financial  communities,  and  in  turn,  pave  the  way
towards greater harmonisation of Shariah interpretation globally.
Conclusion
Let me conclude by quoting the words of Imam Al-Ghazali: "Knowledge without action is insanity,
action without knowledge is vanity.”
Let’s ponder that point.
1
2
3
This companion refers to Salman al-Farisi.
Sayyed Abul Hassan Ali Nadwi, Muhammad the Last Prophet: A Model For All Time
Imam Al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam Al-Nubala’.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
