Italian Banking Association
Annual Meeting
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Rome, 10 July 2018
Cyclical conditions and the economic outlook 
In  Italy,  as  in  the  other  main  advanced  economies,  economic  activity  slowed  in  the 
early months of 2018, with the signs of deceleration continuing in the spring. The confidence 
of households and firms has nonetheless remained high, with positive indications also coming 
from  the  expansion  of  bank  lending  and  improvements  in  the  labour  market.  Although 
unemployment is still above 10 per cent, employment has surpassed the peaks observed prior 
to the double-dip recession. In more recent months, both the fixed-term and, to a lesser extent, 
permanent components have recorded increases. 
In most of the forecasts made by national and international institutions, Italy’s growth is 
expected to exceed 1 per cent on average in the three years 2018-20. This scenario assumes 
monetary policy will continue to be accommodative and financial conditions relaxed, and that 
there will be a favourable economic environment worldwide. In recent months, however, there 
has been a notable increase in the risks connected with the United States’ protectionist policies 
and with disagreements on various fronts in relations between  EU countries.  
Last June the Governing Council of the European Central Bank recognized the progress 
that had been made towards a sustained increase in inflation rates in the euro area – progress 
associated with increased employment, greater use of productive capacity, accelerating wage 
growth, and the recovery in inflation expectations. Though acknowledging that there are still 
ample margins of uncertainty, it was decided to recalibrate the asset purchase programme and 
in any event to maintain an ample degree of monetary accommodation in order to achieve the 
objective of price stability.  
If  cyclical  conditions  in  the  area  remain  consistent  with  the  current  medium-term 
outlook, from October net asset purchases of securities will be reduced from the current €30 
billion a month to €15 billion and will cease at the end of the year. The principal payments 
from maturing securities will continue to be reinvested for an extended period of time after the 
end of the net asset purchases. The Governing Council also said that it expects to keep interest 
rates at their present low levels at least through the summer of 2019. This prudent approach is 
also necessary to counter the risk of sudden surges in long-term yields and of volatility in the 
financial markets. 
Given the prospects of growth and of a steady rise in inflation, Italy is in a position to 
weather the gradual changes in the tone of monetary policy. The high average residual maturity 
of  the  public  debt,  low  household  debt,  reduced  business  debt,  and  the  fact  that  banks  are 
sounder and have only limited exposure to the effects of any interest rate rises, will make it 
possible to contain the risks connected with the structural fragilities of Italy’s economy. 
The  achievement  of  a  satisfactory  and  stable  growth  rate  is,  however,  hampered  by 
continued  weak  productivity  growth,  the  inefficiencies  and  rigidities  of  the  business 
environment  and  the  high  debt-to-GDP  ratio.  Addressing  these  vulnerabilities  means 
continuing  to  implement  systematic  reforms  and  balanced  fiscal  policies,  which  are  also 
necessary to maintain the confidence of households, firms and investors. 
 Recent tensions in the Italian financial market demonstrate the importance of a prudent 
and balanced economic policy stance. Between mid-May and early June, with very low market 
liquidity,  yields  on  government  securities  increased  across  all  maturities.  Yields  on  ten-year 
bonds surpassed 3 per cent for a few days and the spread with respect to the equivalent German 
bond  rose  above  300  basis  points,  while  the  spreads  vis-à-vis  the  government  bonds  of  the 
other euro-area countries also widened. The performance of premiums on credit default swaps 
on government securities shows there were moments when fears of a redenomination of Italy’s 
debt grew among financial operators. Contrary to what happened at the height of the sovereign 
debt crisis in 2011-12, the markets did not perceive this to be associated with an increase in the 
risk of a euro break-up.  
Pressures  eased  in  the  following  weeks,  when  the  sharp  rise  in  volatility  partially 
subsided and short-term yields declined, restoring the more usual, positive slope of the term 
structure.  The  spread  between  yields  on  ten-year  Italian  and  German  government  bonds  has 
fallen  to  around  240  basis  points;  however,  it  is  still  more  than  100  points  higher  than  the 
levels prevailing in the first half of May. 
Maintaining orderly conditions on the government bond market is essential to defend 
the stability of the financial system and effectively protect the savings of Italians. During the 
tensions at the end of May, share prices in the banking sector declined sharply. The financial 
situation  of  the  public  sector  can  influence  that  of  the  banking  sector  through  multiple 
channels. The reduction in the value of government securities held by banks directly affects 
their  assets;  it  also  diminishes  the  amount  of  collateral  that  banks  can  use  in  Eurosystem 
refinancing  operations.  The  challenges  for  the  public  finances  can  lead  to  an  overall 
deterioration in the creditworthiness of firms, impairing the quality of bank loans. 
It would be illusory to think that the link between sovereign risk and banking risk can 
be  broken  with  measures  that  push  banks  to  drastically  reduce  their  direct  exposures. 
Moreover, in the most difficult years of the crisis, Italian banks, like those of other countries, 
swam against the tide, and made a profit, buying government bonds when tensions rose and 
yields  increased.  When  the  conditions  changed,  they  began  to  sell  them.  Last  May,  Italian 
banks  held  slightly  more  than  €300  billion  worth  of  domestic  government  bonds  in  their 
portfolios, compared with the €400 billion reached at the beginning of 2015.  
 Loan quality 
The  continued  economic  growth  has  led  to  a  gradual  improvement  in  the  quality  of 
bank  credit.  The  ratio  of  non-performing  loans,  net  of  loan-loss  provisions,  to  total  loans 
system-wide, which had fallen by about 4 percentage points between the peak of 2015 and the 
end of last year, decreased by almost 1 percentage point more in the first quarter of this year, to 
stand at 5.3 per cent. The total amount of net NPLs fell to just over €110 billion, down from 
€200 billion at the end of 2015. About half of the amount comprises exposures classified as 
unlikely-to-pay, some of which could become performing again. For the less significant banks 
 the  share  of  all  NPLs  (7.1  per  cent)  remains  higher  than  that  recorded  by  the  significant 
banking groups (5.1 per cent). 
The  development  of  the  secondary  market  is  making  an  important  contribution  to 
reducing the number of NPLs. This market in turn benefits from the state guarantee on senior 
debt issues deriving from the securitization of bad loans (GACS). The gross value of the bad 
loans securitized under the GACS system was approximately €32 billion and it is expected to 
increase considerably in the months to come. In the last few days, the Government has asked 
the European Commission to extend the possibility of using GACS beyond the current deadline 
of September. 
The improvements made thus far should be consolidated and strengthened. More active 
NPL  management  on  the  part  of  banks  remains  fundamental,  including  in  the  light  of  the 
regulatory  changes  proposed  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  new  supervisory 
expectations  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  supplementing  the  guidelines  on  NPL 
management published in March 2017. The strategies proposed by the banks will be assessed 
on a case-by-case basis as part of ordinary supervisory activity and the measures best suited to 
reduce  the  level  of  NPLs  further  and  to  gradually  and  sustainably  adjust  the  level  of 
provisioning will be adopted. Account will be taken of the fact that the containment of a credit 
portfolio’s inherent risk must be compatible with the ability to absorb any potential losses from 
sales. 
The number and size of firms specialized in credit recovery are increasing, but the level 
of  competition  in  this  sector  remains  unsatisfactory.  Some  banks  have  set  up  ad  hoc  units. 
Progress in developing  a liquid secondary market for NPLs  and advances in the efficacy of 
recovery procedures depend on a marked improvement in the quality of the information needed 
for  due  diligence  purposes  and  the  timely  monitoring  of  the  status  of  the  procedures.  The 
analytical  reporting  on  bad  loans  launched  two  years  ago  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  is  making 
significant  strides  in  this  direction.  There  is  still  ample  room  for  improvement,  however, 
especially for small banks and with regard to data on real estate appraisals. Every effort must 
be made to catch up. 
Measures to increase the probability that likely-to-fail exposures return to performing 
status  must  be  stepped  up.  Their  success  requires  different  technical  skills  and  operating 
procedures  from  those  used  to  manage  bad  exposures.  A  market  for  this  type  of  exposure 
should also be established and banks should actively seek agreements with turn-around funds 
to offer firms the managerial and financial resources needed for a re-launch.   
In recent years there have been improvements in the length of judicial credit recovery 
proceedings  as  well.  Data  on  the  initial  phases  of  foreclosure  proceedings  indicate  that  the 
2015-16 reforms are working towards reducing their duration: the length of the pre-sale phase 
has fallen by about a tenth (from 27.5 to 24.5 months), while that of the sale phase has been 
nearly  halved  (from  41.5  to  23.5  months).  Nonetheless,  overall  recovery  times  remain  long. 
Additional regulatory reforms may be needed to prevent the accumulation of NPLs on banks’ 
balance sheets and to ensure the necessary flow of loans to households and firms. 
 The enabling law reforming the regulations on corporate crisis and insolvency approved 
by Parliament redistributes the competencies of judicial offices in the context of bankruptcy 
proceedings in order to increase the level of specialization of judges.  It overhauls the court-
based liquidation procedure: priority must be given to significantly reducing the length of the 
proceedings  by  simplifying  the  process  and  offering  appropriate  incentives  to  the  parties 
involved.  
The judicial system can also be improved by introducing organizational changes, as the 
wide  variations  in  the  duration  of  foreclosure  proceedings  in  different  courts  suggest.  The 
guidelines  approved  last  October  by  the  Superior  Council  of  the  Judiciary,  designed  to 
encourage the spread of best practices, could make an important  contribution in this regard. 
Additional  benefits  may  come  from  the  imminent  launch  of  the  electronic  register  for 
foreclosure and insolvency proceedings and crisis management tools. These projects, to which 
the Bank of Italy is contributing, are at an advanced stage.  
In  addition,  the  value  of  extrajudicial  credit  recovery  instruments  should  not  be 
underestimated.  In  2016  the  Marciano  Pact  was  introduced  in  Italy,  which  provides  for  the 
transfer of ownership of real property serving as a guarantee to a business loan in the event of 
default. However, recourse to this instrument remains limited. The agreement entered into by 
ABI and Confindustria at the start of this year may encourage its use. The Pact’s importance 
has  been  confirmed  by  the  initiatives  under  way  at  European  level  as  well.  The  European 
Commission recently  presented  a draft directive which,  among other things, provides for  an 
expedited procedure for the out-of-court enforcement of real property guarantees in the context 
of business loans that is similar to the Marciano Pact.  
 Recent reforms 
In recent years, the difficulties faced by some small banks have been resolved through 
acquisitions  by  other  banks,  with  Italian  or  foreign  financial  intermediaries  and  investors 
participating in the capital and with the contribution of the voluntary scheme of the Interbank 
Deposit Protection Fund.  In a market in which technological innovations make bank branch 
networks  less  attractive  to  potential  investors,  crisis  resolution  has  become  more  difficult. 
European regulations preclude the use of the resolution tool for small banks, on the assumption 
that it is not in the public interest to do so. Therefore, in the absence of interested purchasers, 
there would be no alternative but to liquidate these banks. The impact, even reputational, on the 
entire category of small banks would be significant. 
Good  corporate  governance  and  access  to  the  capital  markets  are  indispensable  for 
avoiding a crisis. In turn, adequate skills and rigorous monitoring of conflicts of interest are 
needed for high-quality governance. It is a short step from being a bank that ‘supports local 
interests’ to being a bank that is ‘trapped by the region’. Virtuous examples of local banks are 
possible,  but  they  call  for  high-quality  organizational  structures  and  thorough  and  prudent 
credit assessments. Recent experience has shown that these operational models can be achieved 
 if local expertise is accompanied by the use of adequate quantitative instruments (such as credit 
scoring systems) and if high levels of productivity are maintained. 
Different forms of integration can help in strengthening small and medium-sized banks: 
outsourcing  and  sharing  certain  functions  and  services,  creating  specialized  purchasing 
consortiums, and using institutional protection schemes. For small banks, however, the merger 
or  creation  of  a  banking  group  remain  the  most  effective  tool  for  improving  efficiency  and 
guaranteeing market access for recapitalization purposes. 
In recent years, the governance structure of cooperative banks has been the subject of 
major  reform  measures.  The  reform  of  the  popolari  banks  has  allowed  institutions  that  had 
grown  significantly  in  size  –  some  of  which  listed  –  to  take  on  the  legal  form  that  best 
represents their actual business structure. The governance problems inherent in the cooperative 
model would have continued to hamper their access to the financial market, especially when it 
is  necessary  to  rapidly  strengthen  capital.  The  transition  to  joint  stock  company  makes  it 
possible to carry out mergers that would otherwise be difficult to execute, with benefits for the 
entire banking system. The reform must be seen through to the end so that the remaining large 
popolari  banks  can  make  the  necessary  improvements  regarding  the  transparency  of  their 
governance  structure,  the  ability  to  access  the  market,  and  the  possibility  to  participate  in 
mergers.  
Italy’s  smaller  popolari  banks,  whose  transformation  into  joint-stock  companies  was 
not mandatory under the reform, could also benefit from increased integration in some areas 
such as the pooling of production processes and marketing of their products. Some headway is 
being made in this direction and must continue. In this year’s Concluding Remarks I also raised 
the possibility that these banks could take advantage of special institutional protection schemes 
based  on  agreements  to  provide  reciprocal  guarantees  on  the  solvency  and  liquidity  of  their 
members, along the lines of similar schemes in other European countries, with benefits when it 
came  to  calculating  capital  requirements.  This  is  an  opportunity  that  merits  serious 
consideration.   
The reform of the mutual banking sector (BCC banks) is proceeding as the law requires. 
In the next few weeks, the supervisory authorities will adopt measures authorizing the creation 
of  the  new  cooperative  banking  groups.  Within  ninety  days  of  obtaining  authorization,  the 
shareholders of the BCCs must approve the amendments to their by-laws and sign the cohesion 
contract regulating the degree of business  autonomy of each individual  bank by means of  a 
system of risk assessment. The process of drafting the reform, which garnered broad consensus 
throughout  the  sector,  took  almost  two  years  to  complete.  The  discussions  between  the 
supervisory authorities and future parent banks on preparing the applications to create the new 
banking  groups  have  been  intensive.  The  reform  preserves  the  banks’  cooperative  and 
mutualistic spirit, even within the new regulatory and market environment. Precisely in order 
to pursue these objectives the law envisages that the BCCs will be majority stakeholders of the 
new parent banks. 
As  members  of  a  banking  group,  BCCs  can  tap  capital  markets  in  times  of  need, 
warding  off  potential  crises.  They  can  share  best  practices  and  centralize  key  oversight  and 
 production  functions,  with  cost  and  revenue  synergies  that  individual  members  can  exploit 
while maintaining a relatively small scale of operations. The pooling of horizontal functions 
means  BCCs  could  focus  on  developing  their  regional  presence,  with  benefits  for  local 
economies  and  customer  bases.  Even  the  most  ‘virtuous’  of  these  banks  could  raise  their 
current efficiency levels; businesses and shareholder/customers could gain access to a broader 
range of products and services.  The system of joint and several  guarantees would  allow the 
weakest BCCs to take effective and timely action to overhaul their business models, both in 
terms of their capital positions and the range of services offered to firms and households. 
 Capital adequacy and profitability 
During  the  crisis,  even  when  market  conditions  were  especially  harsh,  Italy’s  banks 
undertook significant capital strengthening. The CET1 ratio, which today stands on average at 
just  below  14  per  cent,  has  almost  doubled  since  2008.  The  increase  was  achieved  together 
with  the  introduction  of  stricter  rules  on  minimum  capital  requirements  (Pillar  1)  and 
supplementary  requirements  by  supervisors  (Pillar  2)  to  counter  risks  not  covered  under  the 
first pillar.     
The conclusion, to all intents and purposes, of the Basel III agreement at the end of last 
year reduced the regulatory uncertainty surrounding the long and complex process of drafting 
the measures that were first announced and then gradually adopted by the Basel Committee. 
The progressive application of the rules over a period of five years, from 2022 to 2027, allows 
banks to plan the necessary changes well ahead of time. The transposition into European law of 
the agreement finalized a few months ago in Basel has just begun. The Commission has called 
for  the  EBA’s  technical  advice  in  setting  out  the  procedures  for  implementing  the  new 
international  rules,  taking  account  of  European  specificities  and  of  the  need  to  uphold  the 
principle of proportionality in their application to small banks.  
The impact of the new rules on Italy’s banks appears modest overall. Recent estimates 
on a sample of the largest banks suggest that once fully implemented, the CET1 ratio will be 
lower by around 70 basis points, as against the EBA’s estimate of 140 points for the leading 
European banks. The impact would mostly derive from the treatment of operational risk; the 
rule  on  the  minimum  requirement  for  banks  that  use  internal  models  (known  as  the  ‘output 
floor’) is expected to have a very limited impact in Italy. This could be reduced further by the 
steps that the banks will certainly take to adapt to the new rules during the long transitional 
period prior to full implementation. Banks must make good use of the time available before the 
introduction  of  the  new  rules.  Measures  to  strengthen  their  balance  sheets  and  improve 
profitability are fundamental, continuing the action undertaken in recent years. 
In the first three months of this year, the profitability of Italy’s largest banks improved, 
continuing the trend observed in 2017. For the significant institutions, annualized ROE rose to 
8.4 per cent, from the 5.1 per cent recorded in the first quarter of last year; the cost-to-income 
ratio fell by around 5 percentage points, to 65 per cent. The average profitability of the less 
 significant institutions is lower: in 2017, the last period for which complete data are available, 
their ROE amounted to 1.3 per cent, against 4.7 per cent for the significant institutions. 
For all the banks, and especially for small banks, successfully meeting the challenges 
posed  by  stronger  competition,  regulatory  pressures  and  new  technologies,  requires  incisive 
action  to  increase  operational  efficiency.  The  reform  of  the  mutual  banking  sector,  which  I 
mentioned earlier, is one of the responses to these challenges. But undoubtedly more must be 
done, especially in relation to technological change.  
With the advent of Fintech, marking the marriage of high tech  and high finance, the 
framework  of  reference  is  changing  rapidly.  New  players  are  creating  alternative  and  more 
efficient business models, often superseding functions traditionally carried out by banks, such 
as the provision of payment, asset management and securities investment services. Based on 
market  analyses,  traditional  banks  believe  that,  over  a  five-year  horizon,  a  number  of  their 
activities, corresponding to around a quarter of profits, are at risk.      
Compared  with  the  new  entrants,  incumbent  banks  enjoy  advantages  stemming  from 
stable  relationships  with  customers  and  the  wealth  of  data  collected  over  the  years.  By 
exploiting these advantages better through the use of new technologies, they can expand the 
range of services offered, improve the quality of relationships with customers and manage risks 
more effectively. Investment in this area remains low and is mostly made by the largest banks. 
This is due to  difficulties in adapting organizational arrangements and operational processes, 
identifying  the  necessary  skillsets  and  integrating  systems  with  pre-existing  technological 
infrastructures. If the potential of Fintech is not exploited in full, banks run the risk of rapidly 
losing  ground  with  respect  to  new  operators  that  are  often  subject  to  lower  regulatory 
requirements and to the technology giants that have already emerged in the fields of banking 
and finance.     
Against  this  background,  the  banks  now  have  to  restore  efficiency  ratios  and  bolster 
profits by diversifying their sources of revenue and reducing administrative and labour costs, 
particularly  those  associated  with  a  widespread  network  of  branches  located  around  the 
country. In what is now a mature market, in Italy as in the other European countries, a new 
phase  of  banking  concentration  could  help  to  exploit  economies  of  scale  and  absorb  excess 
capacity.  
Efforts to realign the structure of the market have been under way for some time: in the 
last two years the number of banking groups and independent banks has diminished by about 
100, to a total of just over 400, and it will fall further with the creation of cooperative banking 
groups. By the end of last year, the number of bank branches was down to 27,000, from 29,000 
in  2016  and  35,000  at  the  end  of  2008.  Between  2008  and  2017,  employee  numbers  have 
dropped from 338,000 to 282,000. The process of restructuring the market must go on; in 2017 
the number of bank branches per 10,000 inhabitants averaged 4.2 in the Eurozone and 4.5 in 
Italy  and  their  productivity,  measured  by  the  ratio  of  balance  sheet  assets  to  number  of 
employees, was €15.2 and €13.2 million respectively. 
 Efficiency  and  profitability  also  need  to  be  restored  in  order  to  meet  the  new 
requirements for loss-absorbing liabilities in case of failure (MREL), as these could lead to a 
sharp increase in the cost of wholesale funding at a time when the size of renewals could be 
significant. Indeed, about half of the present stock of outstanding bonds, amounting to almost 
€150 billion, will mature before the end of 2020. It is important to take into account, as well, 
the  implications  of  the  on-going  review  of  internal  models  for  measuring  solvency  capital 
within the Single Supervisory Mechanism, which could lead to higher requirements.  
Sufficient profit margins and suitable capital cushions have also become necessary in 
view of the periodical stress tests that the banks are required to run and that the supervisory 
authorities use to assess the institutions’ ability to withstand adverse macroeconomic scenarios. 
A new stress test is now being conducted in Europe on the leading banks, coordinated by the 
EBA and run by the SSM in the countries of the banking union. The results will be published at 
the beginning of November. 
The other measures that banks should take to improve efficiency and diversify sources 
of  revenue  –  and  which  include  offering  a  broader  and  better  defined  selection  of  asset 
management services – cannot be governed by opportunistic considerations or shaped by the 
temptation to exploit privileged positions. Customer centrality, which underpins EU legislation 
on  financial  investments  (MiFID  II)  and  the  guidelines  issued  by  the  European  regulatory 
authorities,  is  key  to  ensuring  the  sustainable  development  of  the  banking  industry.  Banks 
should be encouraged to create and market products and services geared to meeting customers’ 
new demands or improving the response to existing needs, taking advantage of the possibilities 
offered  by  new  technologies.  Compliance  with  the  rules  introduced  to  promote  customer 
relations  based  on  transparency  and  probity,  on  the  one  hand,  and  constant  monitoring  of 
potential conflicts of interest, on the other, continue to underpin the protection of savings. 
   The  reforms  launched  in  Italy  and  in  the  rest  of  the  EU  to  reduce  the  elements  of 
fragility  exposed  by  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  have  yet  to  be 
completed.  Willingness  to  pursue  the  path  taken  has  gradually  weakened;  in  Europe,  some 
countries  have  become  concerned  about  the  distribution  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of  the 
measures  needed  to  improve  the  EU’s  economic  governance;  in  Italy,  the  reforms  have  lost 
impetus owing to fears about their cost, often borne in the short term, and doubts about their 
benefits, which will emerge gradually and only in the fairly long term. In such conditions, if 
faced with a new crisis, we will be far more vulnerable now than we were ten years ago. 
There remain some fundamental aspects of the banking union that need to be finalized, 
such  as  the  resolution  fund  –  still  without  sufficient  coverage  –  and  the  deposit  insurance 
scheme – yet to be instituted. The new rules have eliminated the national tools for managing 
banking crises, but they have not replaced them with effective common mechanisms. A similar 
 situation overshadows the public finances: individual countries saw their scope for manoeuvre 
further reduced when their debt increased after the recession, but no start has been made on 
creating a pan-European macroeconomic stabilization capacity. 
Europe needs to overcome the division between those who believe the risks should be 
reduced and those who maintain they should be shared more equally, a division that has a poor 
analytical background  and serves little political purpose. We can in  fact reduce the risks by 
sharing  them:  the  completion  of  the  banking  union  and  the  introduction  of  a  real  union  of 
capital markets are a precondition for eliminating financial fragmentation and allowing private 
capital to act as  a shock absorber as it does elsewhere, for  example in the United States.  A 
European  budgetary  capacity  would  limit  the  impact  of  recessions  in  single  member  states 
without weighing on national public finances, thus reducing the risk of sovereign debt crises 
and the need for rescue measures, which, as experience has taught, are extremely costly.  
At the same time, it is essential to continue resolutely and visibly reducing the risks in 
each country in order to win the trust of savers and markets alike. This process needs to be 
carried  out  carefully  and  gradually,  however,  to  avoid  creating  a  breeding  ground  for  new 
crises,  particularly  given  the  lack  of  a  common  safety  net,  and  so  oblige  the  countries 
concerned to adopt overly restrictive budgetary measures while making it impossible for the 
banks to adequately support the economy. 
We  must  not  cease  our  efforts  to  strengthen  Italy’s  banking  system,  particularly  the 
smallest  institutes,  and  to  eliminate  the  structural  impediments  to  realizing  our  economic 
growth potential. The banks should provide the financial services that will allow firms to grow 
and innovate, but a system that is able to grant credit justly and efficiently, even in adverse 
economic conditions, needs its residual competitive disadvantages to be removed. This is one 
of  the  objectives  of  the  action  being  taken  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  judicial  and 
administrative procedures; we must not stop now.  
The obstacles to business, innovation and the correct allocation of resources caused by 
rigidities and delays in public services should also be eliminated. And there is clearly a need 
for public investment, chosen and carried out with the utmost efficiency, just as there is also 
need for sweeping and balanced fiscal reform to increase employment and promote economic 
growth.  
In such a situation, demand-side policies should be carefully gauged, focusing on public 
accounts  balance  and  the  importance  of  monitoring  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio.  It  would  be 
dangerous to rely on such policies alone to help Italy escape the trap of low growth in which it 
has been confined for so long and resume a path of strong and lasting development. Caution 
and  farsightedness  are  essential  to  avoid  tensions  or  potential  crises  and  to  prevent  Italy’s 
future generations from inheriting higher debt and lower income. 
  Designed and printed  
by the Printing and Publishing Division
of the Bank of Italy
