 SPEECH 
SPEECH BY GOVERNOR LARS ROHDE AT THE 
ANNUAL MEETING OF FINANCE DENMARK 2017 
 
 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
 
  
  
 
4 December 2017 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
I will be delivering three key messages: 
  Optimism and large lending capacity are boosting the banks' risk ap-
petite. 
  Danmarks Nationalbank is not planning to issue central bank digital 
currency to the public. 
  And last but not least: the risky ties between the government and the 
financial sector should be broken. 
 Slide 2: Full steam ahead for the financial sector 
First, I would like to talk about developments in the financial sector. We 
have put the financial crisis behind us. The sector is now better capital-
ised than before the crisis. Danmarks Nationalbank's most recent stress 
test shows that all SIFIs are able to meet the minimum capital require-
ments in a severe recession. 
There is a sentiment of optimism in the financial sector, both in Denmark 
and abroad. The banks and their customers have regained their risk ap-
petite and at the same time there is plenty of liquidity in the global finan-
cial markets. 
In other words – there is a basis for a general increase in risk-taking. And 
indeed, we are seeing signs of this. 
Fortunately, the economy is picking up steam again. That is clearly visible 
from the bottom lines of the banks and mortgage banks.  
Page 1 of 7 
  These institutions now have considerable capacity to increase lending, 
and many have stated that they are easing their credit standards. 
Lending fluctuates with the business cycle, so it is only natural that lend-
ing grows in an economic upswing.  
In some respects, current developments are similar to the period leading 
up to the financial crisis in 2008. But there is one major difference, and 
that relates to credit growth, which is still well below the strong level 
seen in the pre-crisis period. 
All the same, it is worth noting that total lending remains at a very high 
level and that it did not fall at any time in the years of economic down-
turn. 
Slide 3: Financial risks 
If we zoom in on the trend in lending, there are signs of risks building up. 
Banks and mortgage banks are increasing lending to vulnerable house-
holds with high debt ratios and the medium-sized banks have increased 
lending to cyclical industries. 
So no, credit growth is not soaring at the moment. But yes, risks are 
building up. The level of interest rates is low and risk appetite is high. 
Combined with the economic upswing, rising asset prices and potentially 
strong credit growth, this is a toxic cocktail that could cause a hangover 
if we are not careful. 
That is why Danmarks Nationalbank assesses that the conditions for acti-
vating the countercyclical capital buffer are in place. 
The purpose of this buffer is to reduce the economic downturn in the 
event that households' and firms' access to credit is tightened dispropor-
tionally in periods of stress in the financial system. When the buffer is re-
leased, the institutions gain access to capital which they can use to keep 
up their lending capacity.  
To increase the probability that the buffer has been built up before a pe-
riod of financial stress occurs, it must be built up in good times like the 
present – while it is easy to do so. 
The Systemic Risk Council can submit a recommendation to change the 
buffer rate to the Minister for Industry, Business and Financial Affairs. At 
its December meeting, the Council will consider whether to activate the 
buffer.  
Page 2 of 7 
   Exactly one year ago, we launched the shared vision that the Danish fi-
nancial sector is to be "best in class" in Europe in terms of combating cy-
bercrime. 
That work is now well underway, and I would like to express my apprecia-
tion of the good cooperation we have had the first year. A couple of 
weeks ago, Danmarks Nationalbank held the first Nordic cyber confer-
ence in Copenhagen. There was widespread agreement that Denmark is 
among the most digitised countries, but also that Denmark may not be in 
the top league when it comes to the degree of cybersecurity.  
We must continue our journey towards increased cybersecurity. So in 
2018 Danmarks Nationalbank will conduct a survey similar to that carried 
out in 2016 to see whether cyber resilience has increased, and we will al-
so establish an "intelligence-led red-team testing programme" for the fi-
nancial sector. I think this programme will be useful for the individual ac-
tors and for the sector overall. I also see it as a necessary step towards 
realising our vision of being best in class. 
Slide 4: CBDC 
Denmark is one of the most digitised countries in the world. Does that 
mean that we should also have central bank digital currency as a sup-
plement to cash and deposits in commercial banks?  
In the near future we will publish an analysis of this topic, but I can al-
ready today disclose some of the conclusions. The short answer is no, 
Danmarks Nationalbank should not offer retail banking services to all 
Danes.  
An important thing to keep in mind when discussing central bank digital 
currency is that it has very little to do with the so-called crypto curren-
cies, of which bitcoin is probably the best known one. 
Whereas central bank digital currency would represent a claim on Dan-
marks Nationalbank – like cash – a crypto currency does not represent a 
claim on anybody, so it has no underlying value. Another significant dif-
ference is that money issued by Danmarks Nationalbank is stable in value. 
In contrast, the value of crypto currencies can fluctuate strongly, which 
makes them very poorly suited as means of payment or stores of value.  
One argument used in favour of central bank digital currency is that it 
promotes a more secure and efficient payment system. In my opinion, 
Page 3 of 7 
  that argument is not particularly relevant in a Danish context. In Denmark 
we already have a secure and efficient payment system in which pay-
ments are settled fast, smoothly and securely. It is possible to transfer 
funds from an account to any other account, and instant payments allow 
funds to be transferred in seconds.  
Another argument used is that households and firms should be entitled to 
a secure asset. I can only say that it is already possible today to invest 
assets securely by holding cash, buying Danish government bonds or 
making deposits in commercial banks up to the guaranteed limit of ap-
proximately kr. 750,000. Full coverage of larger deposits can be obtained 
by spreading deposits on several banks so that the limit of kr. 750,000 is 
not exceeded in any one bank.  
A third argument is to establish a back-up system that can take over if the 
current payments infrastructure is disrupted. Establishing a payment sys-
tem that is completely independent of the existing system would require 
considerable resources. And a new system would still be subject to some 
of the same dependencies as the current system, such as the electricity 
grid. In my view, it makes more sense to spend that money on enhancing 
the robustness of the existing systems, e.g. in relation to cyber risks.  
I acknowledge that the above arguments may be valid in other countries 
where e.g. the payment systems are more fragmented. But in a Danish 
context I find it difficult to see what central bank digital currency would 
contribute with that our existing payment solutions do not already offer. 
We already have digital money in the form of bank deposits. 
In our assessment, the potential gains from introducing central bank digi-
tal currency do not match the considerable challenges that its introduc-
tion might create. 
If Danmarks Nationalbank were to issue central bank digital currency, our 
role in the financial system would change. Danmarks Nationalbank would 
go from being banker to the banks to being banker to the general public. 
In that way we would be competing directly with the commercial banks, 
e.g. by offering deposit accounts and payment services, a role not tradi-
tionally assumed by central banks. 
The introduction of central bank digital currency would also create a risk 
of financial instability by increasing the risk of systemic bank runs. Today 
it is difficult to carry out a run on the Danish banking system overall un-
less deposits are moved to abroad. But in practice it is not possible to 
exchange all bank deposits for cash. But with central bank digital curren-
Page 4 of 7 
  cy, bank runs can take place rapidly and become systemic. In periods of 
loss of confidence in the Danish banking sector, this is possible despite 
the deposit guarantee scheme and any higher interest on bank deposits.  
So I can set your minds at ease: Danmarks Nationalbank has no plans to 
compete directly with the banks. As you know, Danmarks Nationalbank's 
objectives are to contribute to ensuring financial stability, stable prices 
and safe payments. 
 I will now turn to the issue of how to resolve large banks and mortgage 
banks in a crisis situation. 
A precondition for preparing credible resolution plans for the largest 
Danish financial institutions – the SIFIs – is that a group can be resolved 
as a single corporation.  
The resolution authorities should apply a single point of entry resolution 
strategy aimed at recapitalising and continuing the whole group. This is 
because the SIFIs are deeply integrated, both commercially and opera-
tionally.  
Since the plan is to recapitalise the whole group, own funds and eligible 
liabilities must, of course, be issued for recapitalisation of all parts of the 
group. To ensure the necessary credibility of the resolution plans, the 
minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities, MREL, must 
observe three principles. 
Slide 5: 3 Key principles 
Firstly, the MREL must reflect the current risks of the specific SIFI. The re-
quirement cannot be capped as is the case for the current debt buffer. 
For high-risk institutions, a cap on the MREL would mean insufficient lia-
bilities eligible for writing-down and hence for covering the losses that 
may occur. For currently low-risk institutions, the requirement will be too 
low if the risks increase. As a result, the MREL will be too low precisely at 
the time when own funds and eligible liabilities are required for absorb-
ing losses. That may have implications for financial stability and for the 
government finances.  
It is a sound principle that the requirements for financial institutions are 
risk-based. I suppose we all agree on that. This helps to ensure sound 
incentives. So the Basel output floors that remove sensitivity to risk is not 
Page 5 of 7 
  an idea that we have nurtured. The MREL should be risk-based like the 
capital requirements.  
Secondly, the MREL should be the same, no matter how risk is distributed 
across the group. This means that there is no incentive to move risks to 
the entity subject to the least stringent requirements. 
Thirdly, the MREL should be neutral from a competition perspective. The 
MREL to cover loans of the same nature which are to be treated equally 
in a resolution solution must be the same, irrespective of whether the 
loan has been granted by a bank or a mortgage bank. 
If these principles are to be observed, a consolidated MREL must be set, 
comprising all entities of a SIFI. This will also bring us in line with Europe-
an standards. 
We suggest that the MREL is, as a main rule, set at twice the capital re-
quirement plus the combined buffer requirement for all SIFIs. We also 
suggest that a reduction is granted for, inter alia, the Basel floors if they 
are introduced so that the requirement does not become unreasonably 
severe in relation to the actual risks of the groups.  
However, 8 per cent of the total balance sheet assets is a relevant mini-
mum requirement so that it is possible to top up with funds from the 
Resolution Fund if necessary. 
Legislation says that mortgage banks must be resolved without use of 
bail-in. That is why mortgage banks are exempt from the MREL. Since this 
legislation was adopted, we have been putting much effort into finding 
out how to resolve SIFIs.  
Slid 6: It was a mistake 
We made a mistake when we exempted mortgage banks from bail-in and 
MREL and introduced the debt buffer. The work on SIFI resolution plans 
has now reached a point where it is necessary for us to correct this error 
so that we can proceed.  
Consequently, Danmarks Nationalbank has recommended that the legis-
lator should repeal the exemption of mortgage banks from bail-in and 
MREL. The potential gains are large, while the costs are very limited. 
This will make it possible to adapt resolution plans to the SIFIs' business 
models and not vice versa.  
Page 6 of 7 
  The alternative – to operate with plans to discontinue mortgage banks by 
winding them up –is not credible. The mortgage banks are closely inter-
woven with the rest of the financial system due to the role of mortgage 
bonds in liquidity management. So the discontinuation of a mortgage 
bank would have a knock-on effect on the rest of the financial system. At 
the same time, the sector concentration is so high that much of its lend-
ing capacity would vanish if any one institution ceases to exist.  
If an acceptable resolution scheme for failing SIFIs is not put into place, 
everyone will expect the government to save them. Mortgage banks op-
erate under an implied government guarantee as long as they are ex-
empt from bail-in and MREL.  
When owners and creditors believe that an institution will be saved by 
the government, they will assume greater risks than otherwise. After all, 
the taxpayers will foot the bill if things go wrong. The absence of credible 
resolution plans for SIFI groups and mortgage banks distorts incentives 
and competition within the sector. 
Indeed, the Competition Council's conclusion is that credible resolution 
plans must be prepared for the large mortgage banks and that they must 
be supported by MREL or perhaps by additional capital.  
If the exemption is repealed, this will increase competition to the benefit 
of borrowers. 
Slide 7: Should the government pay? 
The purpose of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive was to en-
sure that banking crises do not jeopardise whole economies. With the 
exemption applying to mortgage banks in Denmark, we have chosen to 
keep up the risky ties between the government and the financial sector. 
We should know better than that. 
A competition-neutral and credible MREL ensures that all credit institu-
tions – irrespective of size and systemic importance – can be resolved 
without the use of taxpayer funds and without devastating effects on the 
economy. Once that is in place, credit institutions can be treated like all 
other private sector corporations:  
Shareholders and creditors risk losing their money and management 
their jobs. 
Page 7 of 7 
DANMARKS 
NATIONALBANK 
 
FINANCE DENMARK'S ANNUAL MEETING 
Lars Rohde, Governor by Royal Appointment, 4 December 2017 
The banks are  
stepping on the 
accelerator 
2 
Build-up of financial risks 
3 
Central bank digital currency 
4 
Three key principles for MREL 
5 
​From: Explanatory note to Act on Restructuring and Resolution of Certain Financial Enterprises, section 24(4). 
 
6 
Who pays the bill? 
Tax payers 
Shareholders  
and creditors 
7 
