  1 
 Welcome Remarks 
 Governor John Rolle 
 Seminar on Exchange Control Liberalisation and Future Developments 
 5 February, 2017 
 
 
The  Central  Bank 
is  pleased  to  welcome  participants  to  today’s  seminar  on  the 
administration  of  Exchange  Controls  (EC)  in  The  Bahamas.    This  event  is  being  held  to 
provide  more  information  on  the  recent  liberalisation  measures.    We  seek  to  promote 
better  awareness  of  the  distinction  between  exchange  controls  current  account  or  trade-
related transactions versus those on capital and financial flows.  This has a bearing on how 
discussions  about  liberalisation  of  international  financial  flows  could  be  approached.  We 
also  expect  to  receive  constructive  feedback  on  how  the  various  administrative  processes 
can be further improved.   
 
Over time the Bank expects that our focus will narrow to just those issues related to capital 
and  financial  flows  and  how  these  can  be  managed  for  the  benefit  of  the  economy.    The 
Bank  anticipates  a  further  rapid  shift  in  delegated  responsibility  to  commercial  banks  to 
process  foreign  currency  applications  for  trade-related  payments.    This  will  leave  more 
space on our work agenda to explore and prepare for relaxation of capital flows. 
 
It  should  be  stressed  though  that  The  Bahamas  is  not  presently  in the position  to  make  a 
large  leap  to  more  liberalised,  unfiltered  financial  flows,  such  that  the  stability  of  our 
exchange rate would be preserved.  This is especially so considering the very liquid nature of 
flows to which some stakeholder groups aspire.  Preparation is still required to strengthen 
our  institutional  capacity  to  function  in  a  transformed  environment,  and  to  improve  the 
structural health of the economy. 
 
Some of our important stakeholder groups do not yet fully acknowledge the trade-offs that 
could  be  involved  between  the  extent  of  liberalisation  introduced,  and  difficulty  it  would 
pose to preserve the fixed exchange rate.  Also, The Bahamas has not built the sufficiently 
informed  national  consensus  on  what  the  final  state  should  look  for  either  liquid  flows  or 
direct  investments.  “Informed  consensus”  means  that  the  positions  adopted  should  be 
based on proficient understanding of how the economy is structured; the nuts and bolts of 
how the economy works; how foreign exchange gets from where it is earned to where it is 
needed; and how, in the absence of capital controls, pricing mechanisms could dictate how 
foreign exchange gets allocated. 
                                                           
As prepared for delivery. 
 2 
 
But  the  messaging  seems  clear:  we  want  less  administrative  involvement  of  the  public 
sector  in  the  commercial  activities  of  the  private  sector,  balanced  with  the  objective  of 
keeping the outcomes stable. 
 
How does the central bank fit into this process? 
 
In  our  Strategic  Plan  for  2016-2020  the  Bank  mapped  out  goals  to  pursue  a  constructive 
approach  with  both  internal  and  external  stakeholders  to  improve  the  administrative 
processes  for  Exchange  Controls.    This  includes  a  focus  on  promoting  more  informed 
dialogue on capital and financial flows and on how these relate to an understanding of the 
way our economy works.  Our Financial Literacy program will support this process.  We also 
believe  that  literacy  will  encourage  more  transparency  and  accountability  on  policies  and 
fundamentals  over  which  we  have  control.    It  will  better  equip  the  private  sector  to  ask 
pointed, relevant questions of policy makers. 
 
Our  dialogue  has  to  draw  out  the  importance  of  holding  policy  makers  accountable  to 
inspire confidence through the outcomes that they produce.   In this regard, the degree of 
success  achieved  with  liberalisation  ought  to  be  gauged  by  the  extent  to  which  private 
sector  decisions  around  the  deployment  of  capital  is  based  on  genuine  pursuit  of  higher 
productive  returns  rather  than  a  fear  of  erosion  of  wealth  from  real  or  perceived  risks  of 
domestic economic ruin. 
 
Fear is still too prominent in the discussion for wanting to go outside.  As such the private 
sector’s decisions could be underweighting the returns that their capital would generate in 
productive  investments  inside  The  Bahamas.    This  point  should  not  be  downplayed  given 
already significant liquid resources that lay idle in local banks.  These resources and others 
are in need of greater deployment in the enterprise sector.  New private sector mechanisms 
ought to be developed to deploy these resources.  
 
The  Central  Bank  does  believe  that  more  benefits  can  be  obtained  from  liberalisation.  
Prudent reforms should continue to be advanced to put these advantages within the reach 
of the economy.  The Bank has stressed though that liberalisation should be gradual.  After 
all, the process of developing the systems and capacity to manage a transformed economy 
is itself gradual. 
 
With  these  points  in  mind,  the  Bank  trusts  that  you  will  find  today’s  seminar  useful.    We 
look forward to your constructive input. 
 
Thank you. 
