Benoît  Cœuré:  Taking  back  control  of  globalisation  -  sovereignty
through European integration
Contribution by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
to the 2018 Schuman Report on Europe, 28 March 2018.
 1
There has been a backlash against globalisation and international cooperation in recent years .
In Europe, Brexit and Euroscepticism have challenged the notion of the European Union (EU) as
a  political  construct  based  on  shared  sovereignty,  freedom  of  movement  across  borders  and
economic integration under a common legislative framework. In the United States, meanwhile,
the benefits of free trade have been openly called into question. Europe was generally believed to
be  under  the  greatest  threat  from  this  trend.  Even  if  the  United  States  were  to  retreat  from
globalisation, that would not undermine the integrity of the country itself. In the case of Europe,
however, the EU and the commitment to shared values and an open society are in many ways
inseparable.
More  recently,  stronger  growth  and  falling  unemployment  have  supported  an  improvement  in
2
  seven  out  of  ten
attitudes  towards  the  EU.  According  to  the  latest  Eurobarometer  survey,
Europeans now regard themselves as citizens of the EU – the highest level ever recorded for
this  indicator.  What  is  more,  three  out  of  four  euro  area  citizens  now  support  the  euro  –  the
highest level since 2004. Meanwhile, an increasing number of Europeans are optimistic about the
future of the EU, and the percentage of respondents who regard the EU as “a place of stability in
a troubled world” now stands at 71% – up 5 percentage points since 2016.
We need to take advantage of this opportunity and help Europe to make further progress. If we
do not, the European project could end up at risk again sooner or later. The reason for acting is
obvious:  people’s  basic  fears  about  the  risks  of  openness  have  not  really  receded.  Improved
economic prospects can help to soothe such worries, but they will resurface in difficult times.
Still, the EU can provide a lasting answer to those fears. Indeed, just as the EU is under threat
from the backlash against globalisation, it can provide a way to manage globalisation. This is,
after all, not the first time that globalisation has been on trial: the period between the First and
Second  World  Wars  showed  that  unregulated  global  markets  are  liable  to  descend  into
protectionism  and  nationalism.  The  lesson  here  is  that  cross-border  integration  is  only
sustainable  if  it  is  regulated  and  organised  by  institutions  that  safeguard  the  stability  of  the
economic  and  financial  system,  ensure  a  level  playing  field,  settle  disputes  and  contribute  to
solidarity  among  members.  This  is  what  the  EU  gives  to  the  people  of  Europe:  a  way  of
sustaining an open international order while also bending its outcomes to their will.
Taking concerns about globalisation seriously
There are four basic reasons why people in Europe and beyond are worried about globalisation
and open markets.
The  first  concern  relates  to stability –  i.e.  the  question  of  whether  globalisation  has  made
countries  more  vulnerable  to  harmful  spillovers  from  abroad  and  to  international  crises.  This
applies in areas such as agriculture, medicines and biotechnology, but it is perhaps much more
visible  in  the  case  of  international  capital  flows  (i.e.  financial  globalisation).  From  the  Asian
financial crisis of the late 1990s to the global financial crisis of the late 2000s and the euro area
sovereign  debt  crisis  of  the  early  2010s,  international  financial  integration  has  consistently
triggered and amplified shocks. Indeed, between 1945 and 1980 an average of one in a hundred
countries  worldwide  experienced  a  banking  crisis  in  any  given  year,  while  between  1980  and
2008 – a period in which international financial integration increased considerably – the equivalent
3
figure was one in five.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second concern is about fairness – i.e. the question of whether all countries abide by the
same rules and standards. This is evident at global level in relation to accusations of currency
manipulation or dumping practices, or in fears of a “race to the bottom” in terms of environmental
and social standards. Similar worries have emerged within Europe in relation to free movement
of people and posted workers.
4
The  third  concern  relates  to inequality.  Many  people  believe  that  open  markets  have  favoured
capitalists and the rich at the expense of workers and the poor. Global value chains (i.e. supply
chains spread across a number of countries) are thought to have reduced workers’ bargaining
power.  There  is  also  empirical  evidence  that  financial  globalisation  has  been  associated  with
increases  in  income  inequality  within  individual  countries.   OECD  data  show  that  the  labour
compensation of the bottom 99% of earners, measured as a fraction of national income, has
declined over the last 20 years in rich countries, while the labour compensation of the top 1%,
measured as a fraction of national income, has increased by 20%.  Likewise, global integration
has  made  it  easier  for  companies  and  individuals  to  avoid  taxation  by  exploiting  international
loopholes. Corporate tax bases have been eroded owing to transfer prices within value chains,
and tax competition between countries has led to a race to the bottom in terms of tax rates.  A
debate is currently raging between economists as to whether all of the unequal gains resulting
from international trade can be addressed using social transfers, or whether changes need to be
made to the rules of the global game.  However, all would agree that the revenue  which  has
been lost as a result of tax avoidance and tax optimisation would have helped governments to at
8
least mitigate the adverse distributional effects of globalisation.
5
6
7
Finally, the fourth concern is about democracy. Many people are concerned as to whether the
open  market  is  truly  subject  to  democratic  control.  As  international  markets  extend  further
beyond the borders of nation states, it becomes less clear who governs them. Some people fear
that openness has resulted in elected authorities ceding sovereignty to international investors or
multinational corporations – e.g. via investor-state dispute settlement mechanisms. International
cooperation between elected governments has been rekindled following the global financial crisis
(particularly in the context of the G20), but beyond efforts to tackle immediate crises, the effective
remit of such cooperation has largely been confined to financial regulation (and, more recently,
tax cooperation). Even in the presence of clear structures allowing democratic control (as in the
case of the EU), some politicians have succeeded in suggesting that those structures are too
remote from the lives of voters and successfully played on the idea of taking back control by
promising to repatriate powers to the national level.
10
Some of these concerns are based more on perception than on fact. For example, increased
sensitivity to financial shocks and widening income gaps could be attributable to a number of
other  factors,  including  technological  change,   and  the  two  processes  are  increasingly
interrelated.
 Still, just as it is important not to overreact to criticism of globalisation, it is equally
important  to  retain  a  sense  of  humility  –  to  acknowledge  that  globalisation  raises  profound
questions  about  fairness,  stability,  equity  and  democracy,  which  need  to  be  properly  debated
and, where necessary, answered by means of effective public policies.
Regaining sovereignty
9
Some suggest that the solution is to withdraw within national borders. This option is destined to
fail  for  two  reasons.  First,  it  deprives  people  of  the  economic  advantages  that  trade  and
integration bring. According to one estimate, the EU’s GDP per capita would be as much as one-
fifth lower if no integration had taken place since 1950. More than 30 million jobs in the EU (i.e. a
total of one in seven) are dependent on exports to the rest of the world.
 Second, the act of
renationalising policies will not allow a country to evade global competition: isolating itself from
global  value  chains  will  raise  input  prices,  make  its  exports  less  competitive  and  make  the
country less attractive to investors, ultimately weakening the economy on both the supply and the
11
12
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
demand  side.  Similarly,  retreating  from  international  cooperation  will  not  allow  a  country  to
escape tax competition and is likely to make it less effective at fighting tax evasion.
History suggests that there is only one solution. Whenever globalisation has led to excesses and
retreated into protectionism in the past, the lesson we have learned is that globalisation is not
sustainable  without  strong  institutions.  The  United  Nations  and  its  offspring  (such  as  the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade) were a direct response to the descent into protectionism that was observed during the
interwar years. Similarly, the G5 was born of the 1970s oil crisis, while the G20 was born of the
Asian  financial  crisis  in  the  1990s  and  was  given  a  new  role  in  safeguarding  world  trade  and
strengthening  the  global  financial  architecture  in  the  aftermath  of  the  collapse  of  Lehman
Brothers.  However,  by  far  the  most  advanced  and  successful  political  construct  in  terms  of
managing globalisation has been the European Union.
The EU’s founding fathers devised a means of collectively managing the challenges thrown up by
open markets without retreating behind national borders. They gave its Member States a unique
platform for recovering some of the state functions that had been eroded by globalisation. Rather
than having to choose between openness and sovereignty, sharing sovereignty within European
  In  other  words,  the  EU  provides  a
institutions  has  allowed  countries  to regain sovereignty.
regional answer to the “political trilemma” popularised by economist Dani Rodrik,
 according to
which  it  is  not  possible  to  pursue  democracy,  national  sovereignty  and  global  economic
integration at the same time.
13
14
This is not to say that the EU is perfect. The multiple crises that it has faced in recent years
highlighted  many  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  in  terms  of  its  effectiveness  and  its
legitimacy.  However,  the  EU  has  sustained  an  open  order  across  the  European  continent  for
over 60 years. Since 1960, cumulative growth in real GDP per capita has been one-third higher in
western Europe than in the United States. Europe has also accumulated greater wealth as a
percentage of annual income than the United States (more than 500%, compared with 400% on
the other side of the Atlantic).
 At the same time, it has also demonstrated greater awareness of
sustainability concerns – e.g. through its leading role in brokering international agreements on
climate change in the context of the UN, from the Kyoto Protocol to the Paris Agreement. Thus,
where  pitfalls  are  encountered,  we  should  not  seek  to  unravel  the  EU  and  its  many
achievements, but strive to build better political institutions at European level that directly address
the concerns of EU citizens and deliver the kind of managed globalisation that they desire, on the
basis of the four considerations detailed above.
Reconciling economic integration with fairness
15
The EU has probably been most successful in its efforts to make economic integration fair – i.e.
ensure that everyone abides by the same rules and standards. Here, the fundamental factor is
the  level  playing  field  established  by  EU  legislation  and  the  EU  institutions  responsible  for  its
enforcement, particularly the Court of Justice of the European Union. This provides the strongest
possible  assurance  that  fair  competition  and  consumer  protection  will  not  be  undermined  by
openness.  Moreover,  the  obligation  for  companies  to  respect  EU  standards  when  exporting
products to the EU, combined with the size of the European market (with the EU representing the
number one trading partner of no fewer than 80 countries), mean that the EU tends to influence
standards elsewhere – the so-called “Brussels Effect”.
 Rather than allowing globalisation to
become an inevitable race to the bottom, the EU can, with its regulatory power, actually trigger a
global race to the top. This can only be good for globalisation in the long run.
16
There has been growing criticism of the fairness of competition in relation to the free movement
of labour. But here, too, the EU has established a framework – on which it can build further –
aimed  at  reconciling  mobility  with  fairness.  Safeguards  central  to  the  European  social  model
have  progressively  been  embedded  in  European  law,  notably  through  the  Charter  of
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fundamental Rights. And where there is more subtle undercutting of wages, the EU framework
allows  national  authorities  to  set  their  own  minimum  wages  and  limits  on  working  hours.
Moreover, where there have been controversies (e.g. regarding posted workers), EU legislation
has been amended following intense political debate.
Fair trade in Europe has also been supported by the single currency, which has reinforced the
framework  governing  fair  competition  by  removing  the  possibility  of  repeated  cycles  of
competitive  devaluations  of  national  currencies.  This  has  eliminated  fears  of  currency
manipulation,  reduced  protectionist  temptations  and  supported  the  Single  Market.  Now  that
devaluation is not an option, euro area countries have to address the real root causes of any
competitiveness problems that they may suffer.
This is sometimes seen as harsh medicine, since such adjustments may require a subtler form
of  devaluation  through  wage  restraint.  Many  euro  area  countries  adopted  this  approach  in
seeking to restore cost competitiveness following the global financial crisis, and most of those
countries have now fully recovered. However, further thought could be given to the question of
how European instruments could be developed in order to ensure that social safety nets prevent
such  adjustments  from  increasing  poverty  and  undermining  long-term  growth.  This  will,
contribute  to  support  for  the  European  project  in  countries  undergoing  such  adjustments  –
particularly in the context of financial assistance programmes. Europe’s crisis-fighting toolbox is
now greatly improved thanks to the establishment of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM),
but significant gaps remain in the absence of a grant instrument supporting social safety nets in
programme countries or an option to redirect substantial funds from the EU budget.
Protecting Europeans from instability
When it comes to goods and services, the EU has contributed hugely to ensuring that economic
integration is perceived as safe, and therefore sustainable. Regulatory convergence in product
and  services  standards,  coupled  with  a  common  approach  for  market  surveillance,  has
underpinned trust in open markets within Europe, as has the ability of the EU to respond quickly
to emerging threats to consumer protection. For example, the internal market for frozen foods
was able to survive the mis-selling scandal of 2013, when horsemeat was sold as beef, in large
part  because  it  was  met  with  an  improved  food  labelling  and  EU-wide  inspection  regime  that
restored trust. By contrast, a perceived lack of regulatory convergence between the EU and third
countries,  especially  regarding  food  safety,  is  one  reason  for  opposition  to  preferential  trade
agreements, such as the TTIP.
When  it  comes  to  finance,  until  recently,  the  EU  had  less  to  offer  in  terms  of  making
integration stable. Indeed, we learned the hard way that an incomplete monetary union, as well
as integrated capital markets without similarly integrated financial regulation and supervision, can
create  their  own  forms  of  instability.  But  Europe  has  made  important  progress  in  this  area  in
recent years. It has established the ESM, which has a lending capacity of €500 billion – not far
short  of  the  IMF’s  lending  capacity  for  the  whole  world  –  and  can  come  to  the  rescue  when
Member States face liquidity constraints. Equally far-reaching has been the decision to establish
a banking union in order to mitigate the risk of systemic banking crises. 80% of all banking assets
in  the  euro  area  are  now  supervised  at  European  level,  and  there  is  a  single  mechanism  for
resolving failing banks. For the first time ever, we have genuinely supranational governance of the
banking sector, based on a single rulebook. This ensures that there will be no regulatory race to
the bottom.
However, there is no room for complacency in this regard. Risks to financial stability, including
new  risks  such  as  cybersecurity  threats,  require  continuous  attention.  The  process  of
establishing a capital markets union remains in its infancy and faces a number of daunting legal
challenges,  which  will  need  to  be  overcome  (e.g.  as  regards  harmonising  –  if  not  unifying  –
national insolvency laws). Moreover, the banking union needs to be completed by ensuring that
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
fully  robust  European  lines  of  defence  are  put  in  place  to  protect  taxpayers,  customers  and
depositors.  There  are  also  discussions  about  giving  the  euro  area  a  budgetary  capacity,  with
varying views as to whether it should primarily act as a backstop and instrument for investment
protection in times of crisis, focus on stabilising the business cycle or finance the provision of
public  goods  on  a  permanent  basis,  as  well  as  a  debate  regarding  the  appropriate  way  of
ensuring  democratic  accountability.  While  it  is  important  to  get  this  right  and  ensure  that  it  is
accompanied by efforts to restore fiscal buffers at national level, progress towards more central
fiscal stabilisation should not be deferred indefinitely.
17
The  robustness  of  our  crisis  resolution  framework  will  not  be  truly  tested  until  the  next  major
crisis,  but  we  have  already  seen  encouraging  signs  in  this  regard.  Europe’s  financial  system
successfully weathered the turbulence that was observed in global financial markets in 2015 and
early  2016,  and  the  shock  of  the  Brexit  vote  came  and  went  without  visible  damage.  More
fundamentally, the path that Europe has embarked on represents the most advanced attempt yet
to  reconcile  the  benefits  of  cross-border  financial  integration  –  in  terms  of  risk sharing  and
access to finance – with its potential pitfalls.
Promoting equitable integration
In the third area – making integration equitable – there has been less emphasis onpolicies at EU
level  thus  far.  To  a  large  extent,  this  is  because  EU  Member  States  already  have  the  most
comprehensive welfare systems in the world at national level. As Chancellor Merkel has often
noted, Europe has 7% of the world’s population, 25% of its GDP and 50% of its welfare spending.
Welfare systems need to be adjusted in many ways if they are to be financially sustainable, but
they provide a strong basis for protecting people who lose out as a result of globalisation. Indeed,
history  shows  that  making  globalisation  sustainable  has  often  depended  on  strengthening  the
welfare state.
The erosion of the tax base and the shifting of corporate profits are severely challenging Member
States’  ability  to  engineer  redistribution,  but  the  EU  has  considerable  latent  potential  in  this
regard, because no large corporation – not even Apple – can threaten to completely turn its back
on the world’s largest market. Indeed, the European Commission is already using competition
tools  to  address  possible  tax  arbitrage  by  multinational  corporations,  while  the  proposed
Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base has the capacity to eliminate opportunities for tax
avoidance through profit shifting within Europe. In both areas, European institutions can establish
leverage over large corporations in a way that individual countries cannot.
A key issue for the EU as time goes by will be the extent to which its direct redistributional role
should increase. The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund, which was established in 2007,
was set up in order to help workers and companies with the transition process, but its resources
remain  far  too  limited  and  its  procedures  too  heavy.  The  European  Social  Fund  has  much
greater resources at its disposal and has proved to be effective at helping people to get back into
employment. There is an argument for expanding these two programmes further, both in scale
and in scope.
Ensuring democratic legitimacy
18
In  many  ways,  the  EU  gives  its  citizens  more  democratic  control  over  globalisation  than  is
afforded to people in other countries. Indeed, it is far more advanced than other trade areas in
terms of its political structure: decisions affecting the EU as a whole are taken jointly by nationally
elected representatives sitting together in the Council of the European Union and by the directly
elected  European  Parliament.  And  through  the  powers  it  has  over  competition  and  financial
regulation, the EU gives its citizens greater control over multinational companies and financial
markets. A united Europe, speaking with one voice at global level, also helps to communicate
European preferences on trade, as well as on financial, tax, social and environmental standards.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, governance and democratic legitimacy need to be strengthened further. For example,
the  ESM  and  decisions  on  financial  assistance  programmes  are  based  on  intergovernmental
arrangements that fall outside the European Parliament’s accountability remit. This may give the
impression that powers have been transferred to the European level, when in fact they continue
to be exercised largely by Member States.
Thus, intergovernmental institutions such as the ESM need, eventually, to be integrated into the
EU’s treaties in order to improve both democratic control and the means and perception of joint
ownership and decision-making. Otherwise, we risk a situation where common challenges are
continually seen through a national lens, which inevitably fragments Europe’s democratic debate
and fuels divisions that undermine efforts to implement effective European policies.
19
All of this is made more challenging by the fact that there is not yet a meaningful European public
space. And yet here, ironically, globalisation could actually come to the EU’s aid. The spread of
digital  technology,  especially  among  younger  people,  could  ultimately  lead  to  a  different,  less
nation-centric debate about the role of Europe.
 The EU’s challenge is to preserve social contracts within countries in the face of globalisation –
which  effectively  requires  a  social  contract across  countries.  This  is  what  the  EU  provides  at
European level, through its  legislative,  executive  and  judicial  powers.  If  those  powers  are  well
used, and if economic, social and legal frameworks are also improved at national level, the EU
can make a decisive contribution to making globalisation sustainable, both in Europe and beyond.
In so doing, the EU could also go a long way towards addressing its own challenges in terms of
popular legitimacy. If it can better advertise its capacity to harness globalisation to the popular
will, and if it can be reformed in order to achieve its full potential, there is no reason why some of
the negative perceptions that surround the EU today cannot rapidly be dispelled. It is encouraging
to see European leaders working to define a vision for further integration with a view to tackling
common  global  challenges.  Despite  everything  we  hear  from  the  various  doomsayers  and
naysayers, this could be Europe’s moment. We need to seize this opportunity – and do it soon.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Chopin, T. and Foucher M. (eds.), Schuman Report on Europe, State of the Union 2018, Lignes de Repères,
2018.I would like to thank Jean-François Jamet, Jonathan Yiangou and Sander Tordoir for their contributions to
this article. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.
See  Standard  Eurobarometer  88,  which  was  carried  out  by  the  European  Commission  between  5  and
19 November 2017.
See  Reinhart,  C.  and  Rogoff,  K.  (2009), This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly,  Princeton
University Press.
See  Jaumotte,  F.  et  al.  (2013),  “Rising 
Globalization?”, IMF Economic Review, Vol. 61(2), pp. 271-309.
Income 
Inequality:  Technology,  or  Trade  and  Financial
See OECD (2012), Employment Outlook 2012.
See  Devereux,  M.  et  al.  (2008),  “Do  countries  compete  over  corporate  tax  rates?”, Journal  of  Public
Economics, Vol. 92(5-6), pp. 1210-1235.
The former represents a textbook view of international trade, whereby gains from trade are unevenly distributed
(e.g. between skilled and unskilled workers) but can be fully equalised by means of lump sum transfers. For an
example of the latter view, see Rodrik, D. (2017), “Too late to compensate free trade’s losers”, Project Syndicate,
11 April.
See also Bourguignon, F. (2016), “Inequality and Globalization”, Foreign Affairs, January/February, pp. 11-15.
See Jaumotte, F. et al. (2013), op. cit.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
See Baldwin, R. (2016), The Great Convergence: Information Technology and the New Globalization, Belknap
Press: An Imprint of Harvard University Press.
See  Badinger,  H.  (2005),  “Growth  Effects  of  Economic  Integration:  Evidence  from  the  EU  Member
States”, Review of World Economics, Vol. 141, No 1, pp. 50-78.
See Rueda-Cantuche, J.M. and Sousa, N. (2016), “EU Exports to the World: Overview of Effects on Employment
and Income”, DG Trade Chief Economist Notes, Issue 1, European Commission, February.
See Chopin, T. (2017), “Defending Europe to defend real sovereignty”, Policy Paper No 194, Notre Europe –
Jacques Delors Institute and Robert Schuman Foundation, 25 April.
See  Rodrik,  D. 
Economy, W.W. Norton.
(2011), The  Globalization  Paradox:  Democracy  and 
the  Future  of 
the  World
Source: World Wealth and Income Database.
See Bradford, A. (2012), “The Brussels Effect”, Northwestern University Law Review, Vol. 107(10), pp. 1-63.
See Cœuré, B. (2016), “A budgetary capacity for the euro area”, introductory remarks at a public hearing before
the European Parliament, Brussels, 2 March.
See Bénassy-Quéré, A. (2017), “Jobs Union”, in Bénassy-Quéré, A. and Giavazzi, F. (eds.), Europe’s Political
Spring: Fixing the Eurozone and Beyond, Vox EU eBook, 31 May.
See Cœuré, B. (2015), “Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro area”, speech in the context of
“Ambassadors’ Week”, Paris, 27 August.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
