  Remarks at the Bankers Association of Trinidad and 
Tobago (BATT) 20th Anniversary Event 
Alvin Hilaire, Governor 
Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago 
November 1, 2017 
 1. 
A  very  warm  welcome  from the  Central  Bank of  Trinidad and  Tobago  to 
our  financial  community  and  to  the  members  of  the  Bankers  Association  of 
Trinidad and Tobago in particular on the occasion of BATT’s 20th anniversary. 
A  double-decade  birthday  marks  a  very  special  time—just  breaking  out  of  the 
teenage years—and provides a great opportunity for both reflection on the past and 
looking forward to the future.  
 2.  For  many  Trinbagonians,  banks  are  our  first  introduction  to  the  financial 
world. When I was a child (not too long ago) it was a serious rite of passage to be 
escorted  by  one’s  parents  to  the  neighborhood  bank  to  open  an  account  and  to 
deposit  a  few  dollars.  With  no  internet,  LINX  or  ATMs,  everything  was  cash, 
personal  visits  to  the  tellers  and  the  little  red  passbook  to  keep  track  of  all  your 
precious transactions. Nowadays, with technology and electronic communications 
 Page 1 of 5 
the form of interaction has changed somewhat—becoming a bit more impersonal at 
times—but the fundamental relations with our bankers remain basically the same. 
From small cash deposits, to salary deposits, car loans, mortgages, credit cards and 
investments,  our  dealings  with  banks  follow  us  over  the  years  and  help  to  define 
key stages of our life cycle. 
 3.  Banks  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  have  a  lot  to  be  proud  of.  Through  thick  and 
thin  they  have  made  important  contributions,  mobilizing  savings  and  channeling 
these to individual, private corporate and public sector borrowers. Taken together, 
banks’  assets  currently  amount  to  TT$137  billion  which  is  equivalent  to  43  per 
cent of the entire financial system’s assets in the country. Of course, as any nation 
we  have  had  our  share  of  bank  failures  and  challenges  but  we  have  always 
weathered  the  storms.  It  is  inevitable  that  fresh  tests  will  emerge,  especially  in  a 
world where we are financially integrated internationally, speed of communication 
and  capital  movements  can  be instantaneous, and domestically  we  are  faced  with 
reengineering an economy away from a long dependence on energy exports. But I 
have  absolutely  no  doubt  that  we  have  the  technical  capacity,  will  and  energy  to 
survive, adapt and thrive in the decades ahead. Now that I have ventured into the 
perspective  of  taking  the  long  view,  I’d  like  to  touch  on  three  related  issues  for 
further active consideration of our bankers gathered here: 
 4.  The  first  involves  further  bolstering  financial  inclusion  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago.  Our  country  became  the  100th  member  of  the  international  body,  the 
Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) in 2013. AFI’s main role is to strengthen the 
ability  of  individuals  across  the  globe—especially  low  income  persons  in  remote 
 Page 2 of 5 
areas—to  safely  and  meaningfully  participate  in  organized  financial  activities.  In 
certain  parts  of  Africa,  East  Asia  and  Latin  America  many  communities  are 
effectively  cut  off  from  the  banking  world—most  transactions  are  by  barter,  or 
cash,  and  few  persons  have  or  even  know  what  a  bank  account  is.  Trinidad  and 
Tobago is somewhat different—we do have a widespread banking presence due to 
the  country’s  income  level,  our  relatively  small  size  and  our  long  history  with 
banks.  Nonetheless,  we  still  need  to  work  more  on  encouraging,  embracing  and 
keeping the participation of several communities in the formal financial sector. In 
this regard, it is important for banks to pay particular attention to the specific needs 
of  the  young,  the  elderly  and  the  differently  abled  among  others  as  you  roll  out 
your  array  of  services  and  outfit  your  facilities.  We  at  the  Central  Bank  are 
boosting  our  National  Financial  Literacy  Program  in  2017/18;  we  are  happy  to 
partner  with  BATT  in  common  areas  so  that  the  man  in  the  street  has  a  better 
understanding of the importance and the options available for savings, investments, 
budgeting, retirement planning as well as the potential risks in the financial world. 
 5. A second issue relates to transparency and fairness in dealing with customers. 
As  we  develop  as  a  society,  financial  transactions  can  tend  to  become  more 
complex and opaque—sometimes you get the impression that you need to enlist a 
Senior Counsel to get you through the fine print of the contract for setting up the 
most  basic  savings  account!  It  is  therefore  imperative  that  banks  and  other 
financial  institutions  commit  to  meaningfully  simplifying  their  agreements  and 
making  every  effort  to  ensure  that  their  customers  understand  the  terms  and 
conditions. We at the Central Bank are encouraged by the relaunch of the Banking 
Code  of  Practice  a  few  days  ago,  but  like  Mr.  Stoddard,  the  Financial  Services 
Ombudsman, we look forward to the principles of transparency and fairness being 
 Page 3 of 5 
applied  fully  in  practice.  One  specific  example  I  would  call  to  mind  is  the 
Guideline  on  the  Mortgage  Market,  jointly  developed  between  the  Central  Bank 
and BATT, to cover information disclosure and predictability in the adjustment of 
interest  rates  on  loans  on  what  for  most  people  represents  their  major  lifetime 
investment—their homes.  
 6.  The  third matter I’d like  to  touch on  involves  banks  using  their  influence  to 
lead  by  example  in  the  corporate  governance  field.  At  present  we  have  8 
institutions that have been licensed as commercial banks in Trinidad and Tobago. 
These licenses offer a privilege and responsibility to operate in a specific financial 
space.    Banks  have  enormous  access  to  private  information,  financial  resources, 
big  and  small  businesses,  public  sector  agencies  and  the  international  network  of 
financiers. As noted earlier, at this juncture in our economic history, the country is 
making significant adjustments to the decline in energy prices. But we have been 
here before and, with appropriate management, the country will adapt to the cycle. 
As bankers committed to the long term, I’m sure that you will continue to analyze 
the  situation  and  options  dispassionately,  put  forward  your  recommendations 
clearly  and  operate  in  a  spirit  of  give-and-take  as  the  country  adapts  to  current 
circumstances.  In the corporate governance field, due to their high visibility, banks 
are  well  placed  to  implement  best  practices  in  how  their  boards  operate  and  in 
demonstrating integrity in the conduct of their affairs. On a related note, I am very 
pleased  to  note  the  participation  and  leadership  shown  by  banks  and  BATT  as  a 
whole  in  (non-financial)  issues  that  affect  many  of  us,  including  seminars  on 
gender-based  violence,  non-communicable  diseases  and  genetic  issues  such  as 
breast and other forms of cancer and Downs’ Syndrome, and sporting and cultural 
events. Well done! At the Central Bank, our staff are busy collecting one cent and 
 Page 4 of 5 
other  coins  over  the  past  few  months;  the  Central  Bank  will  match  those 
contributions and use the proceeds to purchase testing strips and other  equipment 
for the Diabetes Association at the end of the year. We look forward to exploring 
opportunities to partner with BATT on community ventures in the future.  
 7. With these few remarks, I would like to once again congratulate BATT on its 
20th  anniversary.  While  as  regulator  and  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  we 
will certainly not always agree on all issues, we at the Central Bank look forward 
to continuing to  engage  forthrightly  and  honestly  with  the banking  community  in 
further  strengthening  the  contribution  of  the  financial  system  to  our  beloved 
Trinidad and Tobago. 
 Page 5 of 5 
