William C Dudley: The transition to a robust reference rate regime
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Bank of England’s Markets Forum 2018, London, 24 May 2018.
 Thank you, Mark, and thanks to the Bank of England for the opportunity to talk about the important
issue of reference rates.  I will focus my remarks today on reference rate reform in the United
States—where we have been, where we are, and where we are headed.  In short, I will argue
that while much has already been accomplished, we still have a lot more to do—and it must
happen within a compressed time frame.  This is an important point that Andrew Bailey usefully
underscored for us last year.  Because of the great uncertainty over LIBOR’s future and the risks
to financial stability that would likely accompany a disorderly transition to alternative reference
rates, we need aggressive action to move to a more durable and resilient benchmark regime.  As
always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not those of the Federal Open Market
1
Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.
LIBOR Scandal Demonstrated the Imperative for Reform
Although  the  backdrop  to  current  reference  rate  reform  efforts  is  well  known  here,  some
historical context is useful when considering the issues facing us today.  That history highlights
why alternatives to LIBOR are needed.  It also illustrates the importance of continuing to focus on
bank culture and proper incentives in order to support financial stability over the longer term. 
At its core, the problem we face today is that the financial system has built a tremendously large
edifice on a structurally impaired foundation.  While many in the industry cannot recall a time
when LIBOR did not exist, in fact, it was only developed in the 1980s.  Since then, the use of
LIBOR as a reference rate has exploded—with the size of financial contracts referencing U.S.-
dollar LIBOR today estimated at close to $200 trillion.  The vast majority of these exposures are
derivative obligations, such as interest rate swaps.  But, that tally also includes trillions of dollars
of cash products, such as residential and commercial mortgages, corporate bonds and loans,
and  securitized  products.   And,  with  new  contracts  referencing  LIBOR  still  being  written,  this
balance continues to grow significantly. 
2
Broadly speaking, reference rates are vital to efficient market functioning.  They facilitate trading
in  standardized  contracts,  which  lowers  transaction  costs  and  increases  market  liquidity. 
Robust reference rates can also reduce information asymmetries and the risk of misconduct by
providing transparent, independent pricing. 
But, in the case of LIBOR, the foundation had serious flaws.  Most notably, LIBOR was (and is)
based  on  submissions  from  individual  banks—which,  in  turn,  were  based  on  hypothetical
borrowing rates or expert judgments, and not actual transactions.  Moreover, deficiencies existed
in  regulatory  oversight  and  governance  of  the  rate-setting  mechanism.    These  vulnerabilities
enabled the manipulation of the rate for the financial benefit of individuals and institutions.  Amid
profound  breakdowns  in  controls  and  compliance,  individual  traders  conspired  with  rate
submitters at their own institutions or traders at other firms to manipulate the setting of the rate to
improve  their  trading  results.    During  the  global  financial  crisis,  panel  banks  also  reportedly
submitted lower borrowing rates than they could actually obtain in the marketplace.  They did so
to disguise their financial fragility at a time when uncertainty over bank liquidity and solvency was
3
high.   
The resulting scandal was particularly disturbing because of its scale and flagrancy, including
collusion  by  employees  across  firms.    It  led  to  billions  of  dollars  in  fines,  jail  terms  for  some
individuals,  and  severe  reputational  damage  to  the  financial  industry  as  a  whole.    The  global
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial crisis exposed excessive risk-taking and a long series of lapses in judgment, and the
LIBOR scandal further undermined trust in the ethical standards of the banking industry. 
The  scandal  provides  many  cautionary  lessons,  including  the  ways  in  which  poor  technical
design can be exploited, the limitations of self-regulation, the problems that arise when loyalty is
to one’s trading co-conspirators rather than to one’s institution, and the need for robust controls. 
It also underscores the power of incentives to drive individuals and firms to do things that are
imprudent and/or unethical.  And, the governance and control framework that the banks and the
LIBOR  administrator  had  in  place  proved  woefully  insufficient  to  prevent  misconduct  that
stemmed  from  poor  incentives.    In  this  context,  one  could  say  it  was  a  situation  ripe  for
exploitation. 
4
The openness and brazenness of misconduct as captured in the recorded transcripts also point
to serious deficiencies in bank culture.  My New York Fed colleagues and I have commented
frequently on the need for sound culture and incentives as a complement to effective regulation
and supervision.  While there has been some progress on this issue in recent years, the LIBOR
and other rate-rigging scandals—not to mention more recent breakdowns at individual banks—
point to the need for further strengthening of bank culture.    I look forward to the discussion with
Minouche  and  Andrew  on  improving  culture  in  the  fixed  income,  currency,  and  commodity
markets in the following panel. 
5
One  of  the  key  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis  was  that  critical  pieces  of  financial  system
6
infrastructure must be both strong and resilient, and the LIBOR scandal underscored this need.
  The essential problem with LIBOR is the inherent fragility of its “inverted pyramid,” where the
pricing of hundreds of trillions of dollars of financial instruments rests on the expert judgment of
relatively few individuals, informed by a very small base of unsecured interbank transactions. 
Moreover,  that  base  has  contracted  further  in  recent  years,  due  to  many  factors,  including
regulatory reform and the quantitative easing programs initiated by central banks in many of the
major  advanced  economies.    Relative  to  the  vast  sums  of  U.S.-dollar  LIBOR  contracts  I
mentioned  earlier,  the  median  daily  volume  of  unsecured  three-month  U.S.-dollar  wholesale
borrowing  is  minuscule,  at  around  $1  billion,  and  many  days  see  less  than  $500  million  in
volume.    This lack of market liquidity means that these rates cannot be sufficiently transaction-
based to be truly representative, and rates that are not transaction-based are more at risk to be
manipulated. 
7
So,  despite  efforts  to  improve  LIBOR  in  recent  years—and  there  undoubtedly  have  been
important  changes  that  have  strengthened  its  administration  and  governance—the  lack  of
underlying market liquidity for nearly all currencies and maturities remains a problem, and there
is no obvious solution.    The setting of LIBOR still depends heavily on expert judgment.  Even for
U.S.-dollar  LIBOR,  actual  transactions  are  the  basis  for  only  about  one-third  of  the  rate
submissions  for  tenors  of  one  and  three  months.    This  is  noteworthy  because  these  are  the
9
maturities that are referenced by the bulk of financial contracts.
8
In light of the history of LIBOR—and in the context of more than $320 billion in overall misconduct
fines since the crisis—banks are naturally reluctant to assume the legal risks associated with
submitting quotes based on very shallow markets.
   Indeed, that is why some banks have left
individual LIBOR panels in recent years.
   Andrew Bailey drove home this point in his July 2017
speech.  He explained that the Financial Conduct Authority had to press hard to persuade banks
12
  
to  remain  on  the  panels  and  voluntarily  submit  LIBOR  quotes  through  the  end  of  2021.
LIBOR’s potential cessation after 2021 poses a clear risk to financial stability, and prudent risk
management means that all of us must prepare for a world without LIBOR. 
The Official Sector Response
10
11
In recent years, international and domestic authorities alike have actively worked with the private
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
sector to address LIBOR’s shortcomings and to find alternative rates.  One notable development
has been the publication of an international set of principles for financial benchmarks, developed
by  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  in  2013.
      These
principles—which  include  19  specific  standards  across  governance,  benchmark  quality,
methodology,  and  accountability—have  emerged  as  the  international  standard.    IOSCO  has
rightly focused on tying benchmarks more closely to observable, arms-length transactions. This
represents an important step toward eliminating excessive reliance on expert judgment.
13
The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has been a galvanizing force at the international level.  The
FSB and its members have published proposals, plans, and timelines for reference rate reform
and have promoted the strengthening of the major interest rate benchmarks.  The FSB has been
carrying out work on the development and introduction of alternative benchmarks, developing a
plan to accomplish a transition to new benchmarks, encouraging work by the private sector on
contract robustness, and reporting regularly on the progress made.
14
  
15
The Federal Reserve has played a lead role in the development of these recommendations as
applied to U.S.-dollar LIBOR, working closely with the other major financial regulatory agencies in
the United States.  This effort has also involved coordinating with the official sector sponsors of
similar  efforts  around  the  world.
      In  late  2014,  in  response  to  FSB  and  Financial  Stability
Oversight Council recommendations, the Federal Reserve convened the Alternative Reference
Rates Committee (ARRC)—a group of market participants established to identify more robust
alternative U.S.-dollar reference rates that are risk-free or nearly risk-free, fit the needs of the
derivatives market, and are compliant with IOSCO principles.
   This effort paralleled similar
ones  in  other  jurisdictions  to  find  reference  rates  that  are  well-suited  to  local  conditions  and
market needs—including the UK’s Working Group on Sterling Risk-Free Reference Rates.  The
ARRC was also tasked with developing a transition plan to facilitate the adoption of these rates in
a voluntary and orderly manner, and with considering best practices in contract design to prepare
for the possibility that LIBOR ceases to be published. 
Publication of Alternative Reference Rates by the Federal Reserve
16
The ARRC  has  made  important  progress  in  achieving  its  mandate.    Notably,  in  June  2017,  it
selected the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR, as its preferred alternative to U.S.-
dollar LIBOR.  SOFR is a broad measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight using U.S.
Treasury securities as collateral, and is thus relevant to a wide range of market participants.  The
rate is entirely transaction-based, and the underlying market is robust, with current daily volume
of  more  than  $700  billion.    (By  comparison,  unsecured  three-month  U.S.-dollar  wholesale
borrowing totals roughly $1 billion per day, as I mentioned earlier.)  SOFR moves closely with
LIBOR and other money market rates over time, and because it covers multiple segments of the
repo market, it provides scope for future market evolution.
   Besides being more resistant to
manipulation, this nearly risk-free rate should also prove much more resilient during periods of
financial  stress,  because  the  U.S.  Treasury  repo  market  is  likely  to  remain  deep  and  active
during such episodes. 
17
The New York Fed administers and produces SOFR in cooperation with the Office of Financial
Research.  We began publishing this rate on April 3 of this year, along with two other repo rates:
the  Tri-Party  General  Collateral  Rate  and  the  Broad  General  Collateral  Rate.
      This  work
complements  steps  by  the  Federal  Reserve  to  promote  greater  transparency  in  rates  in
unsecured markets through enhancements to the calculation of the effective federal funds rate
(EFFR) and the launching of an entirely new rate, the overnight bank funding rate (OBFR).
19
  
18
I  have  long  been  a  proponent  of  the  idea  that  central  banks  are  well  suited  to  take  on  this
responsibility.  Reference rates have strong public good properties, and the private sector faces
notable coordination challenges in this area.  Central banks have a long history in producing such
measures—recognizing that traditionally this has been for purposes related to monetary policy—
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and are trusted independent parties.  In my view, central banks also ultimately “own” the financial
stability  risks  that  are  present  when  key  reference  rates  are  flawed.    Better  to  recognize  this
responsibility  and  move  proactively  to  mitigate  such  risks  than  to  step  aside  and  hope  that
someone else will take up the mantle of reform. 
20
The Federal Reserve has designed these benchmarks to be compliant with IOSCO principles,
with regular review by oversight bodies and comprehensive ethics and conflict-of-interest policies
for staff.
      Best  practice  also  dictates  that  administrators  periodically  review  the  rates  they
produce to assess whether changes in the underlying markets require changes in how those
rates  are  administered.    We  have  dedicated  significant  resources  to  these  efforts,  and  are
committed to the continued production of rates so that market participants can have confidence
about their long-term viability. 
For  these  reasons,  the  Federal  Reserve  concurs  with  the  ARRC  that  SOFR  represents  a
compelling alternative to U.S.-dollar LIBOR—particularly for most derivatives transactions, where
a  near  risk-free  rate  is  more  appropriate  than  a  rate  that  incorporates  a  bank  credit  risk
premium. 
Nevertheless, market adoption of SOFR faces its own challenges, such as the development of
sufficient liquidity in derivatives that reference SOFR, and the establishment of a term reference
rate, which I will discuss in a moment.  These elements will have to be built over time.  The
ARRC’s Paced Transition Plan lays out a timeline for the milestones that must reached over the
coming  quarters  and  years  for  a  successful  transition.
      I  am  confident  that  the ARRC  will
succeed, but it will take considerable attention and effort.
21
Progress is already evident.  The Chicago Mercantile Exchange began offering SOFR futures
contracts earlier this month, and trading activity has gotten off to a good start.  Development of
SOFR  derivatives,  in  turn,  will  support  the  creation  of  a  term  reference  rate.    Although  the
ARRC’s transition plan anticipates that this will be completed by the end of 2021, it would be
better for this to occur more expeditiously.  The good news is that is broadly appreciated.  In this
vein,  the  Committee’s  second  report  discussed  some  of  the  term  rate  alternatives,  and
development of proposals for a term reference rate was recently added to its mandate.  In this
regard, I would also encourage market participants, academics, and other interested parties to
contribute to the effort to develop a term reference rate.
Another  key  area  of  focus—further  motivated  by  Andrew’s  warning—is  the  development  of
fallback contract language in the event that LIBOR ceases to be published.  The absence of such
language creates the potential for large-scale disorder in global financial markets should LIBOR
go away.  Put simply, this is an unacceptable risk.  The International Swap Dealers Association
(ISDA)  has  been  working  on  this  issue  for  the  derivatives  market  and  is  expected  to  issue  a
consultative  document  soon  that  should  prove  instrumental  in  making  further  progress.    The
ARRC has also been coordinating a similar effort across cash products of all types.  The goal is
to achieve consensus on a consistent approach across markets whenever feasible. 
Looking Ahead
As  I  have  noted  previously,  LIBOR  continues  to  have  significant  shortcomings  despite
strengthened  governance  in  recent  years,  and  uncertainty  about  its  future  will  only  grow  over
time.  This uncertainty reflects the limited liquidity underlying LIBOR and the corresponding legal
risks I discussed earlier.  But, I am also skeptical about whether LIBOR can ever be adequately
transaction-based.  As Andrew highlighted, there is no guarantee that LIBOR will continue to exist
beyond December 2021.  In my view, LIBOR is likely to go away—and it should, because it is not
supported  by  a  sufficiently  robust  regime.    The  LIBOR  countdown  clock  should  provide  an
impetus  for  action,  but  it  should  also  make  market  participants  and  regulators  increasingly
nervous as we approach the deadline—especially if longer-term solutions are not in train or in
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
place.  Time is of the essence, and we must manage it well.  The ARRC and others have laid out
valuable transition plans, and we need to ensure that they are executed expeditiously and well. 
Of course, I do not mean to minimize the costs involved.  This is a monumental and complicated
effort—one  that  the  industry  has  never  undertaken—and  it  will  entail  overcoming  many
obstacles.  It requires collective action by a wide variety of market participants, some of whom
may  not  be  fully  convinced  of  the  need  for  change.   And,  there  may  be  others  with  a  direct
interest in the preservation of LIBOR—such as its administrator—who may not support moving
away from the status quo.  There also undoubtedly will be those who seek a free ride on the
efforts of others.  And, of course, the effort will encounter inertia and wishful thinking.  All of this is
to be expected in such a large undertaking with significant upfront costs.  Nevertheless, delay is
not a viable option. 
This  task  is  borne  out  of  necessity.    Financial  crises  typically  result  when  we  fail  to  identify
vulnerabilities,  and  then  unexpected  triggers  turn  those  vulnerabilities  into  points  of  weakness
that can lead to catastrophic failure.  The discontinuation of LIBOR, however, is different.  We
can see it coming, and we know the impact of a disorderly transition would be huge.  Therefore,
a half-hearted effort or a failure to act would be inexcusable, especially after all we have learned
from the experience of the financial crisis.  Moving this core piece of the global financial system
to a firm and durable foundation is essential and worth the cost. 
This  task  is  admittedly  hard,  but  I  am  optimistic  given  our  past  successes.    We  have
demonstrated  that  effective  collective  action  can  provide  solutions  to  longstanding  structural
vulnerabilities in the financial system.  A key lesson from the crisis is that structural vulnerabilities
must be addressed continually.  If they are ignored, larger problems eventually will result.  For
example,  through  collective  action  over  the  past  decade,  we  have  successfully  addressed
structural weaknesses in the tri-party repo market, the over-the-counter derivatives market, and
money market mutual funds. 
Each of these challenges required a tailored solution that relied on different tools—including a
diverse mix of market, regulatory and supervisory measures—to get the job done.  Everything
isn’t a nail, and the best tool is not always a hammer.  You have to identify the problem that
needs  fixing  and  select  the  right  tool  for  the  job.    This  is  likely  to  require  both  official  sector
engagement and private sector initiative. 
In the case of LIBOR, the official sector has taken a multi-pronged approach: strengthening the
LIBOR  regime,  developing  reference  rate  principles,  using  its  convening  authority  to  marshal
private sector participation, supplying robust alternative reference rates, and using the bully pulpit
to educate and spur action.  International coordination has featured strongly in these efforts, and
should continue to do so.  This approach has achieved a great deal to date, but, in light of the
risks and potential implications, will it be sufficient? 
The transition away from LIBOR represents a significant risk event for firms of all sizes, and they
should  actively  manage  this  transition  through  their  existing  frameworks  for  identification,
management, and mitigation of risk.  Supervisors should continue to support this objective by
ensuring  that  all  firms  are  aware  of  the  transition  and  that  LIBOR-related  issues  are  being
addressed in a way that is commensurate with a firm’s exposures and risks.  More broadly, the
official sector will continue to push market participants to take all necessary steps to mitigate the
risks to financial stability from a disorderly transition. 
In closing, the LIBOR scandal certainly was one low point among many during the financial crisis
and  its  aftermath.    It  highlighted  the  need  for  reform  of  a  critical  area  of  the  global  financial
system.  We have made considerable progress since then, but reform still has a long way to go. 
The  remaining  work,  by  necessity,  will  involve  purposeful  collective  action  and  engagement
across  the  financial  industry  to  address  market-wide  issues.    It  also  will  require  firm-specific
action  to  manage  individual  risks.    The  challenge  is  that  the  window  for  action  is  narrowing. 
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Therefore, we must redouble our efforts to ensure a successful transition from LIBOR to a more
sound and durable regime. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
James Bergin, Raymond Check, Caren Cox, Gerard Dages, Joshua Frost, Matthew Lieber, William Riordan, and
Kevin Stiroh assisted in preparing these remarks.
2 See Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Second Report, March 2018
3 See remarks by William C. Dudley, Restoring Confidence in Reference Rates, October 2, 2014
4 See remarks by William C. Dudley, The Importance of Incentives in Ensuring a Resilient and Robust Financial
System, March 26, 2018
5  See, for example:
William C. Dudley, Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry, October
20, 2014
William  C.  Dudley, Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry:
Expanding the Dialogue, October 20, 2016
William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Culture Imperative – An Interbank Symposium, January 11, 2017
William C. Dudley, Reforming Culture for the Long Term, March 21, 2017
Michael  Held, Reforming Culture and Conduct in the Financial Services Industry: How Can Lawyers Help?,
March 8, 2017
Kevin J. Stiroh, Misconduct Risk, Culture and Supervision, December 7, 2017
6 See remarks by William C. Dudley, Lessons from the Financial Crisis, November 6, 2017
7 See Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Second Report, March 2018
8 The U.K. Wheatley Review led to changes in many areas of LIBOR, including statutory regulation of LIBOR,
selection of a new administrator, new governance and oversight regimes, and a code of conduct for submitters.
See The Wheatley Review of LIBOR: Final Report
9 See ICE LIBOR Quarterly Volume Report – Q1 2018
10 See Boston Consulting Group, Staying the Course in Banking, March 2, 2017
11 See FCA statement on LIBOR panels, November 24, 2017
12 See Andrew Bailey, The Future of LIBOR, July 27, 2017
13  See  The  Board  of  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions, Principles  for  Financial
Benchmarks: Final Report, July 2013
14 See the Financial Stability Board’s publications on financial benchmarks
15 See Remarks by Jerome H. Powell at the ARRC, November 2, 2017
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
