Andreas Dombret: Challenges of regulating the financial markets in
Europe and Brazil
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the FGV/IBRE, Rio de Janeiro, 5 April 2018.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for your kind invitation. As always, it is a pleasure to be in Rio and to keep in touch
with current developments in Brazil.
I  am  well  aware  of  the  hot  economic  and  financial  topics  here  in  Brazil,  such  as  current
international developments and monetary policies with interest rates at record low levels – not to
mention political developments for the upcoming elections. But I must disappoint those of you
who might have expected me to talk about these issues. There is an ongoing and broad upswing
across advanced economies, but in contrast to the US and its interest rate policy, the euro area
is still in another phase.
Instead,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  view  on  the  challenges  of  regulating  the  financial
markets in Europe and Brazil. Obviously I am much more of an expert for the financial sector in
Europe. For this reason, I have decided to focus on those regulatory topics in Europe that are of
special interest to you in Brazil as well, namely
the finalisation of global post-crisis regulation …
… and the regulatory challenges to be met in a digital financial world.
2. Finalising global post-crisis regulation …
Regarding banking regulation after the global financial crisis, we reached a remarkable milestone
not  too  long  ago.  In  December  of  last  year,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision
finalised  Basel  III  –  the  global  minimum  standard  that  imposes  limits  on  the  risks  that
internationally active banks can take. The body had worked since the onset of the financial crisis
to find a global solution to the problems that led to the crisis.
However, good rules are of little value if they’re not implemented properly. Therefore, what counts
in the end is taking the next step and mastering the implementation of Basel III. And we should
not blind ourselves to the fact that we will continue to experience headwinds here: from those
who go against internationally agreed policies and rules, from those who think banking and the
economy would profit from a looser grip, and from those in the financial sector who claim that
they’ve been treated unfairly and that they’ll have a hard time coping with the standards.
In  Europe  and  in  Germany,  some  have  been  expressing  opinions  along  the  lines  of  that  third
argument in particular. While I can see that regulatory reforms are burdensome for the European
banking sector, especially in an already burdensome environment for banking – I’m thinking here
of the low overall profitability, for example, or the assembly of the banking union – those different
challenges, though they happen to coincide, should not be lumped together. They do not count
as arguments against robust global minimum standards.
The standards of the final Basel III package are, overall, manageable for institutions in Europe
and  in  Germany,  and  even  more  so  given  the  generous  implementation  period.  For  example,
what is known as the output floor – a very distinctive feature of the finalisation package – will not
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
come fully into force until 2027.
Moreover, let me stress how valuable a global compromise on banking standards is. Back in
1974, it was a German bank named Herstatt Bank, which had been engaging in forex speculation
far above its risk capacity and at the expense of their international counterparties, which invoked
the Basel Committee and finally led to Basel I in 1988 and Basel II in 2004. We need to keep in
mind  that  each  of  these  sets  of  rules  was  originally  designed  to  level  the  playing  field  for
internationally  active  banks  across  the  globe. And  to  prevent  a  regulatory  race  to  the  bottom
among jurisdictions.
But  the  global  financial  crisis  proved  beyond  question  that  the  international  framework  still
contained major weaknesses. Banks in Europe – and, to my knowledge, across the globe – have
never opposed this reasoning in general. But they must also accept that it is not a shared theory
that will make global banking more reliable in the future, but a workable global compromise. 
That’s why I am a strong supporter of swiftly implementing the standard in the European Union to
make it a binding reality. And I very much expect all the members of the Basel Committee to do
likewise. We all need to focus our energy on the comprehensive and consistent implementation
of the Basel rules and on their rigorous application.
Please note two important qualifications here, however.
The first qualification is that Basel standards are minimum standards. This means that countries
can opt to set stricter requirements if they like. Switzerland, for instance, has a higher leverage
ratio. And as many of you know, the UK has ring-fencing rules in place that separate the vital
basic  functions  of  a  bank  from  the  riskier  ones.  Even  though  this  policy  is  not  of  the  Basel
Committee’s making, the UK is of course free to apply this add-on to the Basel rules in its own
jurisdiction.
The second qualification is that Basel standards are intended for, and tailored to, large, complex,
and internationally active financial institutions. As a result, the rules themselves have become
large and extremely complex, and Basel III is certainly no exception here. Appropriate as they are
for global players, the rules tend to overburden small institutions.
To demonstrate, let me refer to the German banking landscape, because it is a case in point. In
Germany there are roughly 1,700 credit institutions, several of which are “big players” and many
are small institutions. Some have a balance sheet worth no more than a few hundred million
euros.  Some  institutions  have  only  a  handful  of  employees.  These  small  institutions  are  of
course having a hard time with rules that are aimed at large and complex banks.
The  main  problem  is  the  compliance  workload  –  that  is,  the  work  involved  in  meeting  the
requirements and demonstrating that they’ve been met.
This is to say that the rules could act as an additional handicap for small banks that are already
under pressure from many sides. Take the rapid digitalisation of banking, for example, or the low-
interest-rate environment in Europe. One reaction that we are seeing in the European banking
sector is continued consolidation.
As supervisors, it cannot be in our interest to overburden smaller institutions with rules that were
designed  for  their  larger  peers.  This  would  effectively  give  an  advantage  to  larger  financial
institutions and intensify the pressure to consolidate.
The argument becomes even stronger as some requirements developed for large international
banks have proved ineffective for small credit institutions, simply because these enterprises are
less complex, are not active in comparable business fields and are thus exposed to fewer risks.
During the crisis years, small institutions proved to be more robust – not least due to their simple
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
and less risky business models.
This is why jurisdictions are free to apply a different set of rules to smaller banks which operate
solely  within  their  national  market  and  pose  no  threat  to  international  financial  stability.  Most
countries  –  including  Brazil  –  already  have  less  restrictive  rules  in  place  for  smaller  banks  in
order to ease the operational burden on them. And I am a strong proponent of extending this
proportionality further.
In  Europe,  we  are  currently  busy  fine-tuning  our  regulatory  framework  by  providing  some
additional relief for small, low-risk institutions. Importantly, capital and liquidity requirements will
remain untouched. But we are aiming to reduce disclosure requirements, simplify reporting, and
exempt some institutions from recovery and resolution planning, amongst other things.
So what’s the global state of play in matters of banking regulation? One major step forward – the
finalisation of Basel III – has already been taken. The next, equally important step lies directly
ahead of us – full implementation of these rules. During implementation, we should bear in mind
that Basel standards are minimum, not maximum standards. Nevertheless, they are designed
for the global players, and simpler rules are called for where small and regional institutions are
concerned. Importantly, this principle of proportionality must not be mistaken for a loophole that
allows lax implementation or even deregulation.
3. … and setting the route for digitalisation
Ladies and gentlemen 
As regards the road towards a more resilient global financial system after the financial crisis,
we’re in the driving seat – and what’s more, we also know the general direction in which we’re
headed.  But  where  digitalisation  is  concerned,  this  is  not  the  case:  we  still  cannot  know  for
certain where the digitalisation of the financial sector will lead us, even though we are currently
right  in  the  middle  of  it.  And  for  those  of  us  in  the  driving  seat  of  banking  regulation  and
supervision, this makes us feel uneasy. Let me elaborate on that.
It is not that we are unable to cope with changes and uncertainty per se. In fact, change and
sectoral  adjustments  have  been  constants  in  the  banking  sector  in  Germany  and  in  Europe.
Market environment, customer habits and technologies in banks have been evolving constantly.
In  Germany  today,  in  the  middle  of  a  low-interest-rate  environment,  many  are  adjusting  their
business  models.  Since  the  early  1990s,  the  total  number  of  banks  and  savings  banks  in
Germany has more than halved. For regulators and supervisors, those changes in the business
environment mostly haven’t challenged the way we work. With regard to the digitalisation of the
banking sector, we should likewise not get nervous about innovations and new competitors, as
they are welcome as part of a healthy market environment.
Of greater concern for us is that the digitalisation of the banking sector may possibly change the
gameplay as well. Consider, for example, the speed of transformation. In a digital world, it is likely
to increase. For instance, customer fluctuation is expected to rise, as competitors are available
at  their  fingertips.  Worldwide  rivalry  is  likely  to  increase  through  online  competition.  Time  to
market  has  become  crucial  for  some  business,  which  is  again  likely  to  influence  product
development. All of these dynamics may well feed into the risk landscape. There are numerous
consequences that are worth pondering from a stability perspective – think, for instance, of the
threat of a rapid disruption of business models, or systemic operational risks. 
Now I am well aware that the whole digitalisation trend has produced a host of buzzwords and
metaphysical theories, some of which might never materialise. No major disruption has occurred
to date. If you look at the German banking sector, there are segments such as internet payments
where new market entrants have taken incumbent banks by surprise. But these developments
have had limited effects outside of those segments. Also, while new market entrants initially took
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
an aggressive approach towards incumbents, different forms of cooperation are usual today –
we  observe  a  blend  of  competition  and  cooperation  as  well  as  a  widening  of  services.  An
abundance of new business ideas have turned up, from white label banking to digital ecosystem
strategies.  So,  as  a  preliminary  summary  of  digitalisation,  I  can  say  that,  as  of  today,  digital
revolution fantasies have waned.
What is more, if we look at regulation, earlier narratives about the end of banks have ceased. Not
long ago, the so-called fintechs were presented as opponents to classical banks. Today, some
fintechs have even acquired a banking licence, meaning that they have to fulfil exactly the same
requirements as other, age-old institutions. 
But have we seen all that digitalisation has to offer? Not at all, if you ask me. At the present point
in time, the transformation is only gaining momentum. From other sectors of the economy, we
have learned time and again how digitalisation has transformed business. In the music industry,
where selling individual pieces of music on demand online seemed like the end of the narrative of
cut-throat competition, music streaming services suddenly appeared and quickly gained market
shares.  In  banking,  business  changes  and  changes  in  customer  habits  are  likely  to  reinforce
each other. We simply cannot predict where this will lead us. 
But regarding regulation, I guess it’s fair to say that we have already learned a valuable lesson. If
we  want  to  find  good  regulation  for  a  digital  financial  world,  we  cannot  build  it  on  superficial
distinctions: we have to look closely at each and every case. Be it crypto currencies, robo advice
or payment services – whether it constitutes a risky financial business or merely an additional
service  may  depend  on  details.  When  advancing  regulation,  we  should  not  be  blinded  by  the
catchy  terminology  and  the  innovative  technologies  applied,  but  instead  look  for  the  concrete
business models.
Regulating financial business in a digital era has become a topic that engages entire continents –
and  rightly  so.  Because,  simply  speaking,  if  you  create  a  superior  algorithm  once,  you  can
distribute it across the globe and scale its use at virtually no cost. And like good business ideas,
there are various threats out there that may transgress borders all too easily. That is why I’m
convinced that we will benefit greatly from cross-border exchange in these matters. Today, we
are already exchanging experiences and views on regulating and supervising financial technology
in  several  international  bodies,  for  example  in  the  Basel  Committee.  I  am  certain  that  these
interactions will intensify in the months and years ahead. 
It’s  true  that  some  countries  are  more  reluctant  than  others  to  embrace  digital  finance. And
interpretations of an acceptable scope in promoting innovation differ across jurisdictions.
But as with the Basel minimum standards for banks, we need to take the long-term perspective
when  assessing  the  reason  for  rules  for  the  digital  financial  sector.  Because  with  digital
innovations, as with the traditional risks of banking, we all have to unite in ensuring that digital
innovation now will not be the origin of the next crisis. This should motivate us even more to keep
in touch. 
Thank you very much for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
