Philip R Lane: The development of the European and Irish financial
systems
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the European Financial
Forum, Dublin, 31 January 2018.
Speech delivered to the European Financial Forum, Dublin Castle
 Introduction
It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  the  2018  European  Financial  Forum.  The
European economy is currently in a robust expansion phase, which is supported by the ongoing
accommodative  monetary  stance  of  the  ECB  and  the  improvement  in  global  economics
conditions that was highlighted by the IMF last week.
The  Irish  economy  is  also  performing  well,  as  was  outlined  in  the  Quarterly  Bulletin  that  we
published  last  week.  While  the  headline  GDP  data  are  tricky  to  interpret,  our  labour  market
forecasts capture the recovery in the domestic economy: we expect unemployment to fall to just
over 5 percent in 2019, with employment growing by 2.2 percent in 2018a and 1.8 percent in
2019. In turn, the tightening of the labour market will contribute to earnings growth of 3.2 percent
in 2018 and 3.4 percent in 2019.
The  normalisation  of  European  economic  and  financial  conditions  provides  an  opportunity  to
move forward with the further development of the European and Irish financial systems, even if it
remains important to maintain focus on addressing the legacy problems from the crisis (such as
the excessive stock of nonperforming loans). In particular, it is desirable to make progress on
banking  union  and  capital  markets  union,  while  also  further  strengthening  the  institutional
architecture  underpinning  monetary  union. At  the  same  time,  the  financial  integration  agenda
among the EU27 sits side by side with the impending departure of the UK from the European
Union, which will lead to a new configuration of the broader European financial environment. In
particular, the extent and nature of post-Brexit trade in financial services between the EU27 and
UK financial systems will critically depend on the outcome of the current negotiations between
the EU and the UK.
In my remarks today, I will address three topics. First, I aim to provide you with an update on the
impact  of  Brexit  on  Ireland’s  role  as  an  international  hub  for  international  financial  services.
Second,  I  wish  to  outline  an  innovation  –  the  concept  of  sovereign  bond  backed  securities
(SBBS) – that may prove helpful in supporting the development of banking union, capital markets
union and monetary union. Third, I will briefly discuss diversity in financial services, which is the
theme of a panel discussion this afternoon.
Brexit, International Finance Services and Ireland
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  has  been  focused  on  Brexit  since  the  announcement  of  the  UK
referendum. At a macroeconomic level, we monitor the impact of Brexit on the Irish economy
and assess the potential macro-financial risks that may arise as a result of Brexit over different
forecast horizons. So far, the main channel by which Brexit has had a macroeconomic impact
has been through the 15 percent depreciation of Sterling against the euro since the referendum.
This has affected exporters to the UK but also contributed to a decline in good prices in Ireland,
given the important role of imports from the UK in the Irish consumption basket. The buoyancy of
domestic demand and global economic conditions has allowed the Irish economy to expand at a
robust level, despite Brexit. Still, we remain of the view that Brexit will have a long-term negative
impact on the Irish economy, to the extent that it leads to trading frictions between the UK and the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
EU27 and affects long-term UK economic performance. 
Turning  to  the  financial  sector,  one  part  of  our  work  has  been  to  ensure  that  Irish-resident
financial firms with UK exposures are making adequate preparations for Brexit. Even if firms may
hope  for  a  soft  type  of  Brexit,  it  is  essential  that  all  entities  with  significant  exposures  are
prepared for downside risks.
In addition, Brexit is driving an expansion in both the size and complexity of the internationally-
orientated section of the Irish financial services industry.
In engaging with firms, it is clear that there is considerable uncertainty and complexity for firms in
dealing with Brexit. Among the issues raised by firms are: risk transfer; appropriate governance
structures; contract continuity; and the treatment of third country branches by both the home and
host  regulators.  This  uncertain  environment  is  a  complicating  factor,  since  applicants  for
authorisation need to prepare robust plans that deal with a range of scenarios.
The European regulatory system is hard at work in formulating the supervisory guidance on the
many thorny issues raised by Brexit: the Central Bank of Ireland is heavily involved in the design
of these policies through our participation in the SSM and the European Supervisory Authorities.
At the same time, the final impact of Brexit on the financial services industry depends on the
outcome of the negotiations between the EU and UK: it is too early to tell.
Many types of entities – including banks; insurance companies; asset management firms; and
payments  and  electronic  money  institutions  –  have  made  applications  to  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland.  We  have  received  applications  both  for  new  legal  entities  and  from  existing  entities
seeking  to  extend  their  current  authorisation.  The  applicants  intend  to  sell  directly  to  Irish
customers  or  sell  from  Ireland  into  the  European  Union.  The  potential  activities  range  from:
broker dealers; trading venues; electronic money institutions; commercial insurance; and retail
insurance. 
We  expect  the  current  levels  of  authorisation  and  supervisory  engagements  with  firms  to
increase further. We have put in place authorisation processes that are transparent, predictable
and consistent. Firms that are engaging with us will find us open, engaged and pragmatic. At the
same time, firms will find that we are insistent that governance and control arrangements should
be commensurate with the size, scale and complexity of operations.
Our approach in assessing the plans of existing firms and new authorisations is straightforward.
We seek to ensure that a regulated firm: has sufficient financial resources; is well governed, with
effective  risk  management  and  control  frameworks  and  appropriate  cultures;  has  a  profitable
business  model  over  the  long  term;  and  can  recover  if  it  gets  into  difficulties  or  be  resolved
without  significant  externalities  or  recourse  to  the  taxpayer  if  it  cannot.  These  principles  are
shared across the EU regulatory community: in seeking host locations in the EU27, firms know
that attempts at regulatory arbitrage will not succeed.
To  ensure  that  we  are  equipped  to  respond  to  the  increased  Brexit-related  activity,  we  have
implemented a number of measures. These include: dedicating our most senior and experienced
supervisory  and  regulatory  experts  to  work  on  Brexit,  in  terms  of  assessing  the  potential
prudential and consumer impacts; establishing dedicated Brexit authorisation teams across all
sectors; approving recruitment of additional regulatory staff to ensure we have resources with
appropriate  skillsets  to  authorise  and  supervise  new  entrants  or  changes  to  existing  firms;
engaging in cross-sectoral collaboration to leverage expertise across the Central Bank; working
with external experts to assist and support the assessment of new risk areas where we have
less  experience;  and  conducting  regular  monitoring  of  the  pre-application  pipeline  for  early
identification of specialist resource requirements.
While many firms are moving forward with Brexit preparation plans, the final impact of Brexit on
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ireland has a host for international trade in financial services will depend on the outcome of the
EU27-UK  negotiations,  with  the  nature  and  duration  of  transition  arrangements  an  important
factor in determining the speed of adjustment. As the negotiations move forward in the coming
months, the Central Bank (in tandem with the wider European System of Financial Supervision)
will be agile in responding to the regulatory implications of the new EU27-UK trading relationship.
Sovereign Bond Backed Securities (SBBS)
As I indicated earlier, it is desirable that Europe makes progress in deepening banking union,
capital markets union and monetary union. Earlier this week, the report of the ESRB High-Level
Task Force on Safe Assets (which I chaired) was published. This report examines the feasibility
of a new asset class: sovereign bond backed securities (SBBS). An intriguing potential feature of
SBBS is that the development of this asset class could contribute to all three types of union:
banking, capital markets and monetary.
The SBBS asset class would consist of re-packaged bundles of national sovereign bonds that
are  split  into  three  tranches  with  different  risk  characteristics.  The  lowest-risk  (senior)  SBBS
would  provide  banks  across  Europe  with  access  to  a  common  safe  asset,  in  contrast  to  the
current  configuration  by  which  banks  in  each  country  tend  to  hold  disproportionately  national
sovereign debt. The higher-risk (mezzanine and junior) SBBS would be held by other types of
investors,  in  line  with  different  capacities  to  bear  the  risk  of  some  European  government
defaulting in an extreme scenario. Importantly, the creation of SBBS would not require countries
to share fiscal risks: each national government would remain fully responsible for its public debt.
The bundles of national sovereign bonds would be assembled from all member countries that
are able to issue debt to market investors, in proportion to capital key.
Although  simple  in  concept,  the  design  of  this  new  asset  class  throws  up  many  issues  and
challenges. The task force report runs to two volumes and 300 pages in its attempt to provide
strong analytical foundations for a wider discussion of this concept among finance ministries,
investors and market analysts. In terms of policy issues, a core finding of the task force is that a
necessary condition for the development of SBBS markets is for European regulation to treat the
senior SBBS securities no more severely than national sovereign bonds, while the regulations
covering the riskier mezzanine and junior SBBS securities should reflect their greater exposures
to  sovereign  risk.  To  this  end,  the  European  Commission  is  currently  examining  an  enabling
regulatory framework that would remove such barriers to the issuance of SBBS.
In  relation  to  the  wider  regulatory  agenda,  it  is  clear  that  demand  for  senior  SBBS  would  be
enhanced by more extensive reforms that would encourage banks to adjust their current holdings
of government debt. Still, there is a diversity of opinion among taskforce members as to whether
such banking regulation reforms are needed for success (especially in relation to the fostering of
banking union), while taking into account the important role for non-bank investors in sovereign
debt markets.
After the necessary regulatory adjustments have been implemented, market development should
be led by demand from investors. Over time, a deep and liquid market could develop. The senior
security could become a benchmark low-risk asset, which the euro area as a whole currently
lacks. With such an asset, banks would be safer and capital markets more efficient.
Accordingly,  the  SBBS  asset  class  could  support  the  completion  of  banking  union,  capital
markets union and monetary union, without weakening market discipline and without taking steps
towards fiscal risk sharing. At the same time, there are many other factors at work in driving the
dynamics  of  European  integration  on  all  three  fronts  and  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  the
interactions between SBBS and these myriad other influences. As discussions on the nature and
extent of European integration continue to unfold in the coming months, the taskforce report may
be  helpful  in  providing  guidance  on  the  potential  role  of  SBBS  in  the  broader  design  of  the
European monetary and financial architecture.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Diversity
Let  me  turn  to  my  third  topic:  diversity  in  the  financial  services  industry.  The  inclusion  of  this
issue  as  part  of  this  year’s  European  Financial  Forum  is  indicative  of  the  welcome  and
necessary  recognition  of  the  importance  of  improving  diversity  across  the  financial  services
industry.
At the Central Bank of Ireland, we have increased our focus on diversity over the last couple of
years, in relation both to the firms that we regulate and also ourselves.
We have focused on diversity from a regulatory perspective because there is strong research to
show that diversity at senior levels of regulated entities can help to reduce the likelihood of group
think, increase the level of challenge and improve decision making and risk management. There
is also a clear connection between the diversity in an organisation and its culture. These are all
attributes  that  as  a  regulator  we  care  about.  Group  think,  in  particular,  was  identified  in  the
Nyberg  Report  as  a  contributing  factor  to  the  financial  crisis  in  Ireland.  The  financial  services
industry can certainly expect to see a continued increase in the intensity and intrusiveness of our
engagement on diversity.
As an employer, we see the importance of all these aspects in the running of the Central Bank.
We also see diversity and inclusion as vital to ensuring we have the right mix of people to deliver
our  complex  and  diverse  mandate  and  that  all  our  people  have  the  chance  to  reach  their
potential.
Conclusions
Let me conclude. In these remarks, I have pointed out that the development of the European and
Irish financial system in the coming years turns critically on major policy decisions. For the EU27,
the  potential  gains  from  the  deepening  of  banking  union,  capital  markets  union  and  monetary
union  require  policy  makers  to  move  forward  in  taking  the  steps  required  to  facilitate  further
cross-border integration. At the same time, the extent and nature of international trade in financial
services  between  the  EU27  and  UK  financial  systems  (and  vis-à-vis  other  parts  of  the  global
financial system) will depend on the outcome of the current negotiations. 
Under all scenarios, the Central Bank of Ireland stands ready to fulfill our mandate to safeguard
stability and protect consumers. The consistent application of a core set of principles will guide
our regulatory and supervisory work, such that firms know that we will maintain our focus on
ensuring  that  regulated  entities  meet  our  expectations  and  are  subject  to  robust  supervisory
engagement.
Finally, let me congratulate the organisers of the European Financial Forum on putting together
an excellent programme: it will be a fascinating and stimulating day for all participants.
Acknowledgements: I thank Eoin Battigan, Lorna Bowles, Sean Fitzpatrick and Siobhan Kirrane
for their assistance in preparing this speech.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
