Grant  Spencer:  Low  inflation  and  its  implications  for  monetary
policy
Speech  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the
Institute of Directors, Auckland, 5 December 2017.
 Thank  you  to  the  Institute  of  Directors  for  inviting  me  to  speak  here  in Auckland.  Today  I  will
discuss  the  low  inflation  environment  we  are  experiencing  here  in  New  Zealand  and  in  many
other countries.
To start, I would like you to think about the mobile phone in your pocket, because it represents
some of the global trends I will refer to. It is a symbol of how manufacturing has become global,
how  costs  of  production  have  been  lowered,  particularly  for  technology-based  goods  and
services,  and  how  we  are  now  connected  to  global  markets  through  digital  devices  and  the
internet. These are themes I will return to.
Since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  in  2008  we  have  seen  persistently  low  inflation  both
internationally and at home. Inflation has surprised on the downside relative to forecasts from
economic models (figure 1). And it has persisted in recent years despite falling unemployment
rates here and in most of the advanced economies. This global pattern is depicted in figure 2.
 1 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
Source: OECD, RBNZ calculations. Scatter plot shows 2017 data
In response to very weak activity and low inflation following the GFC, many central banks allowed
their  policy  interest  rates  to  fall  to  zero  and  below,  and  injected  significant  stimulus  through
quantitative  easing.  Despite  the  persistent  application  of  very  easy  monetary  policy  and  a
recovery of demand in the major economies, inflation has been slow to move up towards central
bank targets (typically 2 percent p.a.) In New Zealand we avoided zero policy interest rates and
quantitative easing, but have also maintained a very easy monetary policy stance since the GFC.
If this low inflation is a global phenomenon, we need to consider global factors to understand the
potential causes. In the initial post-GFC period, the clear common driver was weak demand as
households and firms restricted spending and consolidated their positions in the wake of severe
financial  stress.  However,  with  the  persistence  of  low  inflation  as  activity  recovered,  we  also
need to consider broader supply-side factors, such as the changing pattern of production across
the world and the impact of digital technology. We need to consider how these global factors and
also domestic developments might be affecting the shape of the New Zealand economy and the
pricing behaviour of individuals and firms.
I  will  first  talk  about  some  of  the  key  global  supply-side  trends  that  have  contributed  to  low
inflation internationally. I will then discuss how the domestic inflation process may be changing
and how the Phillips curve may be flattening (more on that later). Finally I will discuss the policy
implications of these developments and some of the associated risks.
Global factors and low inflation
The  increasing  globalisation  of  the  world  economy  –  the  breaking  down  of  barriers  between
product  and  factor  markets  –  has  been  a  major  contributor  to  low  inflation  in  advanced
economies.   Globalisation  over  the  past  ten  years  has  had  many  aspects.  Significant  among
these have been the expansion of global supply chains, the rapid growth of China, and the growth
of the digital economy.
2
The expansion of global supply chains has led to the outsourcing of labour-intensive stages of
production to cheaper locations in emerging economies. To follow my earlier phone example,
 2 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Apple has close to 123,000 employees in the US, but over 700,000 world-wide. The iPhone is
designed  in  the  United  States;  it  uses  components  sourced  from  several  countries  including
South  Korea,  Taiwan,  and  Japan;  and  is  assembled  in  China.  Outsourcing  and  supply  chain
integration of this sort has lowered the price of a wide range of manufactures sold across the
world  (figure  3).  It  has  also  placed  downward  pressure  on  the  wages  of  lower  skilled  jobs  in
advanced  economies.  Both  have  translated  to  less  inflationary  pressure  in  the  advanced
economies.
 A number of emerging economies have participated in the expansion of global supply chains.
However,  the  huge  scale  and  growth  of  China’s  economy  has  had  a  profound  effect.  Since
joining  the  World  Trade  Organisation  (WTO)  in  2001,  China  has  quickly  become  the  largest
exporting nation in the world, with around 13 percent of merchandise exports and 18 per cent of
manufacturing  exports  (figure  4).   Apart  from  exports,  China’s  other  main  growth  engine  has
been its high levels of investment which has contributed to excess capacity in some key sectors
such  as  steel  (figure  5).  This  capacity  expansion  has  had  a  restraining  effect  on  prices  of
industrial materials and, in turn, a wide range of manufactured goods.  
 3 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
  A third factor contributing to low global inflation is the rise of the digital economy. Prices of ICT
goods and services (Information, Communications and Technology) have fallen world-wide, as
unit  costs  have  fallen  and  supply  has  expanded.    The  falling  price  of  ICT  globally  has  been
reflected  in  New  Zealand  CPI  components  (figure  6),  where  prices  of  computing  and
telecommunication equipment and services have largely been falling since 2000. Advancements
in technology also mean that consumers get more for less. Since the first commercialised 8-bit
 4 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
microprocessor was introduced in 1974 there has been 20 doublings of technology for the same
price, according to Moore’s Law, generating a growth factor of 1,048,576. This brings me back to
the  iPhone,  which  has  240,000  times  as  much  power  as  the  computer  used  to  power  the
Voyager deep space probe launched in 1977. In short, these tremendous advances in computing
power are bringing down the price of technology and related services.
Perhaps more significantly, the new digital distribution channels and falling price of computers
and phones have lowered barriers to entry across a whole range of markets. Companies utilising
digital channels are growing rapidly as they challenge incumbent firms.  Online sales are growing
market  share  in  general  retailing,  financial  services,  travel  services,  education  and  health
services. The result is increased competition to meet the needs of consumers and producers
and  downward  pressure  on  both  input  and  output  prices.  The  new  digital  channels  are
significantly  altering  the  competitive  landscape  in  some  sectors,  particularly  in  traditional
sheltered  markets  where  producers  are  being  newly  exposed  to  competition  from  online
providers.
These three significant global factors have contributed to a negative inflation trend for the prices
of imports and other tradable goods in New Zealand over the past decade.  Commodity prices
have  added  a  cyclical  component  to  the  trend  (figure  7).    These  global  factors  have  also
contributed to reduced inflation in “non-traded” sectors which have become increasingly exposed
to competitive pressures.
 5 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
The Phillips Curve and domestic pricing behaviour
 The Phillips Curve underpins how central banks think about inflation.  Devised by New Zealander
Bill Phillips while teaching at the London School of Economics, the Phillips Curve relates inflation
to measures of economic slack such as unemployment. The greater the degree of economic
slack, the lower the inflationary pressure.
3
Currently,  many  advanced  economies  are  experiencing  unemployment  rates  below  perceived
“neutral” levels but are not seeing the expected inflation response (figure 2).  This has led central
banks to re-evaluate their models. Has there been a breakdown in how we measure economic
activity and capacity? Is there a breakdown in the relationship between inflation and economic
slack?  Or  have  low  inflation  expectations  been  a  more  dominant  driver? All  of  these  issues
appear to be relevant.
4
In New Zealand, the link between measures of domestic slack and inflation has proved elusive in
recent years. Simply plotting the unemployment and inflation data (figure 8), it can be observed
that  there  is  now  less  inflation  for  a  given  level  of  unemployment  and  less  apparent
responsiveness of inflation to changes in unemployment. However, it is also clear that the overall
relationship  between  unemployment  and  inflation  has  been  quite  weak  and  that  other  causal
5
factors, both international and domestic, have been playing an important role.
  6 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ. Chart excludes volatile CPI observations affected by the New Zealand
GST increase in 2010.
The  measurement  of  economic  slack  is  becoming  more  difficult.  Total  potential  output  –  or
capacity – is not directly observable and it may be that the increasing flexibility and mobility of
labour is causing us to understate our measures of capacity. We will increasingly need to refer to
a range of labour market indicators in addition to unemployment when assessing the extent of
slack in the labour market.  
There is not much doubt that an increase in international labour mobility has also affected wage
inflation in New Zealand. In some of the traditional non-traded sectors like construction there is
now greater scope for employers to meet skill shortages through international hires, even though
recent  stretch  in  the  construction  industry  has  seen  wage  costs  increasing  for  certain
occupations and skills.  On a national scale, we have experienced ongoing high levels of inward
migration. Over the past 3 years, the population has grown by around 6 percent, of which less
than a third is from natural growth.  An increasing share of the inward migration has been on
work  visas  (figure  9),  thus  contributing  to  higher  productive  capacity.    In  this  way,  emerging
excess  demand  for  labour  has  been  moderated  on  the  supply  side  as  a  result  of  increased
international labour mobility.
 7 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
With the New Zealand economy becoming generally more integrated with the global economy,
we are likely to see less variability in measures of economic slack and also less variability in
labour costs, consistent with a flattening of the Philips Curve.  New Zealand has always been a
price taker for goods traded in the international markets. It now appears that, with labour mobility
and globalisation effects, we are increasingly a price taker in “non-traded” goods and services
(figure  10).  For  example,  suppliers  of  education  and  tourism  services  are  now  operating  in
increasingly competitive international markets. They are facing international competition for their
services and also for their labour inputs. Both sectors have been growing as a share of GDP.
 8 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
A crucial factor in the Phillips Curve relationship is inflation expectations. If firms and workers
expect higher inflation to result from current capacity pressures then they will more quickly bid up
prices and wages. Given the absence of such behaviour, we have looked closely at the role of
expectations in price-setting behaviour.     This  research  shows  that,  in  an  environment  where
inflation  has  been  low  for  some  time,  businesses  have  been  placing  greater  weight  on  past
inflation  in  setting  prices.  That  is,  in  a  low  inflation  world,  businesses  tend  to  use  last  year’s
inflation outcome as a reasonable estimate of next year’s inflation. This adds further momentum
to  low  inflation  and  reinforces  the  role  of  inflation  expectations  in  the  flattening  of  the  Phillips
curve.
6
In summary, the global trends discussed earlier, together with an increasingly open New Zealand
economy and low inflation expectations, appear to be changing the nature of the price formation
process in New Zealand. Traded goods prices have been affected directly by the global trends,
particularly for manufactures. Non-traded prices have also been affected as a result of a more
globally integrated economy and by the momentum of low inflation expectations. The result has
been  lower  average  inflation  and  a  flatter  Phillips  curve.  While  the  scale  and  permanence  of
these changes remain very uncertain, they do have implications for how we approach monetary
policy.
Policy implications of low inflation
How might these developments impact monetary policy? Do we need to tweak our approach, or
rethink our framework?  The first thing to say is that these changes to the inflation process are
uncertain  and  it  is  unclear  how  long  lasting  they  will  be.    Also,  with  long-term  inflation
expectations anchored at 2%, there remains broad confidence in the effectiveness of the current
framework. We should therefore be cautious about making any recommendations for change.
I have talked today about the main developments affecting the low inflation record:  a favourable
 9 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
and long-lasting global supply shock arising from supply-chains, the rise of China and the digital
economy; and a domestic economy that is now more integrated with the global economy.  Both
are important but have somewhat different implications for monetary policy. 
Lower world inflation
The  positive  global  supply  shock  has  increased  global  production  while  dampening  world
inflation.    From  New  Zealand’s  perspective  the  shock  has  lowered  import  price  inflation,
particularly  for  manufacturers,  and  increased  national  income  as  import  prices  have  fallen
relative  to  export  prices.  However,  while  the  higher  terms  of  trade  have  supported  aggregate
demand, the dominant effect on CPI inflation has been the lower import price inflation.
Our policy approach to this weakness in imported inflation has been to less than fully offset. The
weakness  was  not  expected  to  be  so  persistent  and  it  has  been  overlaid  with  uncertain  and
cyclical  commodity  price  movements.  Also,  the  existing  easy  monetary  policy  stance  and
positive  terms  of  trade  effects  were  expected  to  add  to  domestic  inflation  pressures.  The
persistence of the shock has resulted in CPI inflation running below the 2% target mid-point for a
considerable period.  Such a policy response to external supply shocks is consistent with our
flexible inflation targeting framework. More recently we have been assuming greater persistence
in low global inflation and this is contributing to our current flat track for future OCR levels.
In  our  recent  November  Monetary  policy  statement,  we  assume  that  weak  global  inflation  will
persist in line with the forecasts of the international institutions. This now puts some risk on the
upside for inflation and interest rates. If the assumption proves incorrect and global inflation picks
up in response to increased global growth, then we would likely see higher international interest
rates, a lower NZ dollar exchange rate and higher traded goods inflation. This would put upward
pressure  on  domestic  interest  rates,  as  portrayed  in  “Scenario  1”  of  our  November  policy
statement.
Flatter Phillips curve
The policy response to the second development – a more globally integrated domestic economy
and a potentially flatter Phillips curve – is less clear.  We have insufficient evidence to say that
the  flattening  of  the  Phillips  curve  is  permanent  rather  than  temporary. And  we  have  not  yet
observed how wages and prices respond to a very tight capacity situation.
However, if this change is long lasting and New Zealand firms are increasingly integrated with
global markets, then domestic ‘non-traded’ inflation may become less responsive to monetary
policy changes. In the extreme case, New Zealand would be a fully open economy with all prices
and wages set in international markets. The exchange rate would become the main conduit for
monetary policy to achieve its price stability objective.
The other potential cause of the “flattening effect” is the strength and persistence of low inflation
expectations,  making  it  more  difficult  for  monetary  policy  to  affect  actual  inflation  through
changes in aggregate demand and economic slack.
While the extreme case of a flat Phillips curve is more expositional than real, it may be the case
that deviations from the 2% CPI inflation target will be harder to close, in the sense of requiring
larger policy changes and larger movements in economic slack, as measured by unemployment
and the output gap.  Given that the PTA says we must avoid unnecessary instability in output,
interest rates and the exchange rate, and also have regard to the efficiency and soundness of the
financial system, this suggests that we should be patient in bringing CPI inflation back to the 2
percent target. This indeed is the approach we have been taking in recent years.
In the context of the November Monetary Policy Statement, non-traded inflation is forecast to pick
up  from  late  2018  in  response  to  increasing  capacity  pressures.  If  this  response  does  not
 10 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
eventuate  then  we  would  have  to  consider  a  further  easing  of  policy  to  generate  additional
domestic demand pressure, particularly if global inflation remains low in line with our forecasts.
However,  we  would  need  to  be  careful  not  to  generate  unwarranted  instability  in  output,  the
exchange rate or indeed household debt.   
It is fair to say that our flexible inflation targeting approach is becoming more flexible.  In pursuing
our long term price stability objective, relatively more weight is being attached to the stabilisation
of  output  and  employment  in  the  short  to  medium  term.    In  this  respect  the  Reserve  Bank’s
direction is consistent with the Government’s initiative to introduce a dual mandate for monetary
policy. However, we should recognise that such an approach can only be sustained if inflation
expectations remain low and stable. Monetary policy will only have greater scope to stabilise the
real economy if its long term commitment to price stability is maintained. 
Conclusion
Inflation has been persistently low since the GFC, both in New Zealand and globally.  Initially this
was related to a long period of weak demand as firms and households repaired their balance
sheets. However the low inflation has persisted as activity has recovered and unemployment has
fallen. A consistent pattern across many countries suggests that global supply-side factors have
been at work.  I spoke of three such factors: global supply chains, the rise of China and the digital
economy. These developments have contributed positively to the global economy and have been
evident locally in low traded goods inflation and a rising terms of trade.   
The domestic economy and inflation process have also been affected by the trend towards a
more globally integrated economy, increased labour mobility and the momentum of low inflation
expectations – which have likely flattened the New Zealand Phillips curve. While the degree and
perseverance of this effect are very uncertain, they appear to have reduced the responsiveness
of inflation to changes in economic slack.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible inflation targeting approach to monetary policy has tended to look
through  the  positive  global  supply  shock,  although  persistent  low  global  inflation  is  now
incorporated in the Bank’s future policy track.  Monetary policy has also been patient in light of the
apparent Phillips curve flattening. The combined effect of these developments has seen inflation
running below the 2% target mid-point for some time. 
To the extent that the leverage of monetary policy over domestic inflation may have reduced, this
suggests a cautious approach when responding to inflation deviations from target and careful
attention to our assessment of economic slack. It may be appropriate for monetary policy to put
relatively more weight on output, employment and financial stability relative to inflation. However,
this  can  only  be  sustained  if  monetary  policy’s  long  term  price  stability  credentials  are
maintained.
References
Auer, R., Borio, C., & Filardo, A. (2017). The globalisation of inflation: the growing importance of
global value chains. Globalisation and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper no. 300. Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Armstrong, J., & Karagedikli, O. (2017). The role of non-participants in labour market dynamics.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2017/01. RBNZ.
Armstrong, J. & McDonald, C. (2016). Why the drivers of migration matter for the labour market.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2016/02. RBNZ
Culling, J. (forthcoming). Low global wage growth. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note.
 11 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Duhigg,  C.,  &  Bradsher,  K.  (2012).  How  the  U.S.  Lost  Out  on  iPhone  Work.  The  New  York
Times.
Jacob,  P.  (forthcoming).  The  flattening  of  the  New  Zealand  Phillips  curve:  Rounding  up  the
suspects. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note.
Karagedikli, O. & McDermott, J. (2016). Inflation expectations and low inflation in New Zealand.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper, DP2016/09. RBNZ.
McDonald,  C.  (2017).  Does  past  inflation  predict  the  future?.  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand
Analytical Note, AN2017/04. RBNZ.
Phillips, A. (1958). The relation between unemployment and the rate of change of money wage
rates in the United Kingdom, 1861–1957. Economica, 25(100), 283–299.
Vehbi, T. (2016). The macroeconomic impact of the age and composition of migration. Reserve
Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, AN2016/03. RBNZ.
Williams, R. (2017a). Business cycle review: 2008 to present day. Reserve Bank of New Zealand
Bulletin, 80, 3. RBNZ.
Williams,  R.  (2017b).  Characterising  the  current  economic  expansion:  2009  to  present  day.
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 80, 3. RBNZ.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Unemployment gaps are calculated as the difference between unemployment and the OECD’s NAIRU estimate.
Core inflation gaps are calculated as the difference between core inflation and target inflation. Core measures
used are consumer price inflation excluding food and energy, while the US measure is the personal consumer
expenditure (PCE) measure excluding food and energy.
Auer et al. (2017) discuss the globalisation of inflation in more depth.
Phillips (1958).
Culling  (forthcoming)  &  Box  C  in  the  November  2017  MPS  discuss  factors  associated  with  the  apparent
disconnect between inflation and unemployment.
See Armstrong  et  al.,  (2017). A  number  of  explanations  exist.  It  could  be  that  the  level  of  unemployment
consistent with stable inflation has fallen. Alternatively, that central bankers have been successful in anchoring
inflation  expectations.  Jacob  (forthcoming)  finds  that  increases  in  the  volatility  of  supply  shocks  may  have
contributed to an apparent flattening of the Phillips curve.  
See Karagedikli & McDermott (2016) for research on Phillips curve specifications and the time-varying nature of
price setting. McDonald (2017) shows real-time forecasts of non-tradables inflation using various Phillips curve
specifications. Also, Box B in the August 2017 MPS discusses the implications of inflation expectations for
monetary policy.
 12 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
