relationship  between  monetary  and
Jens  Weidmann:  The 
macroprudential policies - black and white or shades of grey?
Dinner speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the Annual  Meeting  of  the
Central Bank Research Association, Frankfurt am Main, 20 August 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
The Bundesbank is honoured to have organised this evening’s dinner. And for me, it’s a great
pleasure to be here with you at the Annual Meeting of the Central Bank Research Association, or
CEBRA for short.
CEBRA is a fine example of the art of the acronym. If you think about central bankers, I dare say
creativity won’t exactly be the first quality that springs to mind. But coining new acronyms does
appear  to  be  one  discipline  that  really  gets  central  bankers’  creative  juices  flowing.  We  also
came  up  with  CAMELS,  which  stands  for  capital  adequacy,  asset  quality,  management,
earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity to market risk. However, our acronyms are not just confined to
hoofed animals. There is TARGET, of course. And we have ART, for alternative risk transfer;
CAR,  for  capital  adequacy  ratio;  and  CEIOPS,  which  is  short  for  Committee  of  European
Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisors and has a certain pyramid ring to it.
Examples  of  contrived  acronyms  abound:  they  have  been  intentionally  designed  to  convey  a
positive connotation or double meaning. In the case of CEBRA, one naturally thinks of those wild
animals that are closely related to horses and populate Africa’s grasslands and savannahs. With
their distinctive black and white stripes, zebra are a snappy image for the academic dialogue and
discourse which we cherish at conferences such as this. But zebra are also known for forming
large herds and intermingling with other mammals, especially with wildebeest, which are also
known as gnus. Both species subsist on grasses, and you might think that they compete for
food.  So  how  come  they  graze  peacefully  in  mixed  herds?  What’s  behind  their  special
relationship?
This  was  a  long  run-up,  but  it  does  lead  to  one  of  the  key  issues  addressed  at  this  year’s
meeting:  What’s  behind  the  special  relationship  between  monetary  and  macroprudential
policies? What are the linkages between monetary policy and financial stability, and what follows
from there?
 
2 Monetary policy and financial stability
Questions  like  these  are  a  focal  point  of  the  Bundesbank’s  research.  Under  the  patronage  of
Markus  Brunnermeier  and  Eric  Leeper,  and  in  tandem  with  Sweden’s  Riksbank,  the  Bank  of
Canada  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  the  Bundesbank  established  the  Trinity
research  network,  as  it  is  known,  to  investigate  issues  surrounding  the  interplay  between
macroeconomic policies.
When  it  comes  to  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  there  is  now  a  substantial  body  of
evidence which suggests that monetary policy affects economic agents’ willingness to take on
risk.   By  lowering  risk-free  interest  rates,  monetary  policymakers  raise  the  attractiveness  of
riskier financial assets. With investors searching for yield or simply rebalancing their portfolios,
1
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
prices of risky assets then also increase.
This shows up in the data on investment decisions. Even German households – typically rather
conservative in their choice of financial assets – have been seeking out potentially more lucrative,
but also riskier options such as shares and mutual funds. According to Bundesbank data, equity
and  investment  fund  purchases  by  households  made  up  more  than  25%  of  all  their  financial
investments in 2017; four years earlier, this share had been a meagre 6%.
Equities and investment fund shares did indeed still contribute to a positive real portfolio return for
German households in recent years. However, due to the weak performance of capital markets
in the first quarter of this year, their contribution has virtually vanished. Consequently, the total
real return of households turned negative, as the Bundesbank has just highlighted in its August
2
Monthly Report published today.
Moreover, mutual fund managers have been increasing the duration and credit risk of their bond
portfolios  in  response  to  low  rates.  In  a  recent  paper,  Emanuel  Mönch  and  his  co-authors
examine bond holdings of more than 4,500 German retail and institutional investment funds. They
find  reach  for  yield  in  response  to  low  rates  to  be  pervasive  and  also  document  a  persistent
3
feedback of funds’ buying pressures to bond prices.
Given such evidence, it seems plausible that the comparatively high valuations in some asset
markets in the euro area are being driven, in part, by the low level of policy rates.
To some extent, the impact of monetary policy on risk taking is not a mere side-effect. In their
efforts to stimulate the economy, central bankers are also pinning their hopes on the portfolio
rebalancing channel.
But monetary policy also affects the propensity of banks to assume risks in another, unintended
way: the more protection is provided against potential risks, and the clearer the prospect of easy
funding  if  push  comes  to  shove,  the  less  wary  banks  might  be  of  taking  on  excessive  risk.
Economists like Raghuram Rajan and Jean Tirole,  to name but two, argue compellingly that the
prospect of readily provided central bank funding in case of a financial downturn constitutes a
5
powerful incentive for banks to take on greater risks.
4
There can be little doubt, then, that monetary policy is able to influence financial stability. What
follows from that? Should financial stability become an additional objective of monetary policy?
Maybe even on a par with price stability? To me, this would be a perilous proposition. For one
thing,  aiming  for  more  than  one  objective  risks  complicating  communication  with  the  general
public, thereby jeopardising accountability.
Financial stability poses even greater challenges in this regard, as it is a multi-faceted concept.
Price stability is typically specified in terms of changes in a consumer price index and a time
frame.  But  financial  stability  cannot  be  boiled  down  into  a  single  indicator  in  the  same  way.
Financial  stability  is  therefore  often  described,  very  broadly,  as  a  state  in  which  the  financial
system performs its functions for the real economy properly. As Otmar Issing once observed:
6
"Defining financial stability is as difficult as it is important."
But  if  an  objective  cannot  be  effectively  measured,  confidence  in  actions  taken  towards  this
objective  will  naturally  be  limited.  In  other  words,  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  could  be
undermined if tasked with financial stability.
What is more, a multitude of objectives might force monetary policy into unfavourable trade-offs.
It risks exposing monetary policy to greater political pressure, and more besides.
By  generating  higher  inflation,  monetary  policy  could  lower  the  real  level  of  debt  and  thereby
mitigate financial imbalances after their build-up. Thus, if monetary policy has been tasked with
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
aiming for both price stability and financial stability, a time-inconsistency problem can arise. As
Kenichi Ueda and Fabían Valencia have highlighted, such a central bank may have an incentive
7
to deviate from the socially optimal inflation ex post.
 
3 The role of macroprudential policy and monetary analysis
Taking on financial stability as an additional objective for monetary policy would likely do more
harm than good. Nevertheless, central banks can play a productive role in safeguarding financial
stability. It certainly makes sense to harness central banks’ high level of expertise with regard to
financial  stability  risks.  However,  the  "weapon  of  choice"  for  combatting  these  risks  is  not
monetary policy – it is macroprudential policy. In his first speech as a Governor at the Federal
8
Reserve Board, Ben Bernanke demanded: "Use the right tool for the job."
To stretch the analogy with the African fauna further, this is something we could compare to the
feeding habits of zebra and wildebeest. They graze alongside each other, of course, but they
actually  feed  from  different  grass  heights,  with  zebra  preferring  taller  grass  and  wildebeest
focusing on short grass. Researchers have attributed this selection to anatomic differences in
9
mouth dimensions.
In  a  similar  vein,  macroprudential  instruments  can  be  used  in  a  far  more  targeted  way  than
monetary policy. They cut the grass at a different level, so to speak. This is of particular use with
respect  to  the  euro  area.  Macroprudential  tools  can  be  employed  at  the  level  of  member
countries to combat problematic developments in national financial systems – developments that
cannot be counteracted by the single monetary policy.
One of the instruments to address exuberance in the financial system are countercyclical capital
buffers. Moreover, as real estate markets have underscored their destabilising potential during
the last crisis, many tools are geared explicitly towards this market. Caps on the loan-to-value or
debt-to-income ratios are two examples of instruments that allow for a tempering of the demand
for mortgages.
However,  if  we  are  to  deploy  these  new  policy  instruments,  we  need  to  gain  a  better
understanding  of  how  they  affect  macroeconomic  performance  and  interact  with  monetary
policy.  A  forthcoming  Bundesbank  discussion  paper  points  out  the  danger  of  "financial
dominance".  Within  a  DSGE  model,  Vivien  Lewis  and  Markus  Roth  demonstrate  that,  if
macroprudential policy is too lax, monetary policy may be forced to do the job by driving inflation
above its price stability target and reducing the real burden of private debt.
 Thus a stringent
macroprudential reaction to financial stability risks is also a means to protect monetary policy. To
ascertain when we should adjust macroprudential tools, and by how much, we need to know
how effective these tools are, and whether the transmission channel is subject to lags. So far,
there is limited empirical evidence to guide us.
10
11
Although  it  is  certainly  reasonable  to  harness  central  bank  information  in  assessing  financial
stability risks, the final decision on the use of macroprudential instruments does not need to be
made by central banks as well. Germany is a case in point here. While the Bundesbank provides
an assessment, it is the government that ultimately decides whether and how macroprudential
measures  are  employed.  Central  bank  analysis  is  brought  to  fruition,  but  a  different  decision-
making body provides an extra layer of insurance that monetary policy does not get mired in a
potential conflict between price stability and financial stability goals.
But  given  the  uncertainty  about  the  effectiveness  of  macroprudential  tools,  should  monetary
policy remain completely passive if financial imbalances were to build up? In my view, this would
be  a  mistake.  As  we  have  witnessed,  financial  crises  have  a  considerable  impact  on
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
macroeconomic outcomes and, ultimately, central banks’ ability to guarantee price stability.
During the recession of 2008-09, real GDP in the US decreased by 4%. The unemployment rate
peaked at 10% in October 2009 after a cyclical low of just 4.4% in May 2007. In other words, the
number  of  unemployed  persons  surged  by  8.6  million  to  more  than  15  million.  Finally,  annual
inflation, as measured by the PCE deflator (the Federal Reserve’s preferred gauge), averaged
just 1.3% between 2009 and 2017, compared to 2.4% in the preceding nine years.
In the long term, price stability and financial stability can complement each other. Thus, taking a
longer-term perspective on inflation, central banks might be compelled to act on the build-up of
financial imbalances despite having a single objective.
Let  us  again  consider  the  mixed  herds  of  zebra  and  wildebeest  in Africa.  Their  selection  of
different grass heights may account for the lack of food competition, but it cannot explain their
intermingling. However, both species face common predators, especially lions. In this context,
evidence suggests that zebra benefit from the presence of wildebeest: they spend considerably
less time keeping watch for predators in a mixed herd than in a zebra-only herd of the same size.
This finding could be due to the wildebeest’s superior ability to detect predators, as they may
have better – and complementary – senses of smell and hearing.
12
In a similar vein, developments in the financial system can provide central banks with valuable
information. In general, there is ample evidence that financial conditions do contain information
about future economic activity. For instance, Tobias Adrian and his co-authors have shown that
downside risks to GDP growth increase as financial conditions tighten.
 More to the point, the
source  of  financial  crises  is  often  related  to  excessive  credit  growth.  Although  not  every
extraordinary credit boom results in a full-blown financial crisis, Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor
warn that policymakers ignore credit at their peril.
 This pattern held up in the last crisis as well.
In the euro area, growth of credit to the private non-financial sector surged from 6% in 2003 to
more than 11% in 2007. Broad money growth increased at a similar clip over this period.
13
14
The  ability  of  credit  quantity  to  help  predict  future  crises  therefore  shows  that  the  second,
monetary,  pillar  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  still  very  relevant  today.
Moreover, as Volker Wieland and others have demonstrated, cross-checking economic analysis
with monetary analysis can be helpful in the context of data uncertainty.
15
 
4 Microprudential supervision and regulation
A final lesson of the crisis should not be forgotten. Ten years ago almost to the day, and just a
few weeks before the collapse of Lehman Brothers, Chairman Ben Bernanke gave a speech at
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Annual Economic Symposium in Jackson Hole. In
his comments, he explored ways to reduce systemic risk and suggested a broader, system-wide
approach  for  supervisors  and  regulators.
  The  establishment  of  such  a  macroprudential
approach  in  recent  years  is  a  major  achievement.  In  interconnected  systems,  risks  can  be
propagated and amplified – this is the famous domino effect.
16
17
However, this does not mean that traditional microprudential regulation and supervision have lost
any of their importance. Quite the opposite is the case, in fact. As Edward Lazear has pointed
out,  not  only  the  domino  effect  was  at  work  during  the  crisis,  but  also  the  "popcorn
theory".
  When  popcorn  is  heated  in  a  pan,  every  kernel  will  eventually  pop,  irrespective  of
whether the other kernels have already popped or not. The heat affects each kernel equally and
causes each of them to eventually pop. There is no chain reaction taking place. The reason they
pop can be found in the design of the popcorn kernel. The kernel is protected by a hard outer
shell or hull. Within, water is enclosed. Under sufficiently high heat, the water turns into steam,
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
raising the pressure inside the kernel. At a temperature of approximately 180 degrees Celsius,
the pressure becomes strong enough to burst the shell.
18
We could compare the pressure inside the kernel to financial problems building up inside banks,
while banks’ capital may be thought to resemble the protective hull. Undercapitalised banks were
a  salient  feature  of  the  pre-crisis  financial  system.  Ultimately,  they  were  unable  to  sufficiently
withstand  financial  stress.  Fortunately,  much  has  already  been  done  in  this  regard,  thanks  to
Basel III. A rollback of these reforms would therefore make the financial system decidedly less
safe, in my view.
Nevertheless, we should evaluate the measures agreed upon and consider how they interact if
we  are  to  achieve  the  objective  of  financial  stability  as  efficiently  as  possible.  The  G20  post-
implementation  evaluation,  which  is  being  discussed  in  a  plenary  session  at  this  conference
tomorrow,  is  therefore  a  necessary  exercise.  Streamlining  regulation  is  important.  But  at  the
same time, we must not forget to examine the question of whether we are all the way there yet in
terms of financial stability, particularly with regard to the crucial issue of too-big-too-fail.
 
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Africa’s large herds of wildebeest and zebra have been monitored for a considerable time. In the
late 1950s, the long-time director of Frankfurt Zoo, Bernhard Grzimek, and his son used a small
aircraft to follow and count the migrating animals in Serengeti. Fittingly, their plane was painted in
black and white stripes; it was called "Flying Zebra". To this day, the relationships within these
herds remain a subject of academic publications.
The  recent  rise  of  the  macroprudential  policy  domain  only  dates  back  to  the  crisis.  Not
surprisingly, we have to learn more about the interactions with monetary policy. This relationship
is a natural topic for CEBRA – though it is certainly not a question of black and white. Between
acknowledging  financial  stability  as  an  explicit  objective  of  monetary  policy  and  disregarding  it
altogether, there is an intriguing range of shades of grey.
I have left plenty of other issues – and acronyms – for us to discuss this evening. For now, I
suggest we devote our undivided attention to "Document Encoding and Structuring Specification
for Electronic Recipe Transfer", otherwise known as DESSERT.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
See, for example, C M Buch, S Eickmeier and E Prieto (2014), In search for yield? Survey-based evidence on
bank risk taking, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 43, 12–30; and G Jiménez, S Ongena, J L Peydró
and J Saurina (2014), Hazardous times for monetary policy: what do twenty-three million bank loans say about
the effects of monetary policy on credit risk-taking?, Econometrica, 82, 463–505, for evidence on the effects of
monetary policy on risk taking. 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Zur  Entwicklung  der  realen  Portfoliorenditen  privater  Haushalte  in  Deutschland,
Monatsbericht, August 2018.
A Barbu, C Fricke and E Moench (2017), Procyclical asset management, reach for yield, and bond risk premia,
mimeo.
D W Diamond and R G Rajan (2012), Illiquid banks, financial stability, and interest rate policy, Journal of Political
Economy, 120, 552–591; E Farhi and J Tirole (2012), Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and systemic
bailouts, American Economic Review, 102, 60–93.
See also M Gertler, N Kiyotaki and A Queralto (2012), Financial crises, bank risk exposure and government
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, 59,, 17–34, for a macroeconomic model in which the possibility
of asset purchases increases banks’ incentives to take more risk.
O Issing (2003), Monetary and financial stability – is there a trade-off?, speech at the Conference on “Monetary
Stability, Financial Stability and the Business Cycle", Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
K  Ueda  and  F  Valencia 
Economics Letters, 125, 327–330.
(2014),  Central  bank 
independence  and  macro-prudential 
regulation,
B S Bernanke (2002), Asset-price “bubbles” and monetary policy, remarks before the New York Chapter of the
National Association for Business Economics, New York.
See R Arsenault and N Owen-Smith (2008), Resource partitioning by grass height among grazing ungulates
does not follow body size relation, Oikos, 117, 1711–1717.
V  Lewis  and  M  Roth  (2018),  Interest  Rate  Rules  Under  Financial  Dominance,  Deutsche  Bundesbank,
Discussion Paper, forthcoming.
See R Bachmann and S Rüth (2018), Systematic monetary policy and the macroeconomic effects of shifts in
residential loan-to-value ratios, CEPR Discussion Paper, 12024; and S Eickmeier, B Kolb and E Prieto (2018),
The  macroeconomic  effects  of  bank  capital  requirement  tightenings:  evidence  from  a  narrative  approach,
mimeo, for recent attempts to quantify the macroeconomic effects of macroprudential policies, mimeo.
See M H Schmitt, K Stears, C C Wilmers and A M Shrader (2014), Determining the relative importance of dilution
and detection for zebra foraging in mixed-species herds, Animal Behaviour, 96, 151–158.
T Adrian, N Boyarchenko and D Giannone, Vulnerable growth, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
M Schularick and A M Taylor. (2012). Credit booms gone bust: monetary policy, leverage cycles, and financial
crises, 1870–2008. American Economic Review, 102, 1029–61.
G Coenen, A Levin and V Wieland (2005), Data uncertainty and the role of money as an information variable for
monetary policy, European Economic Review, 49, 975–1006.
B S Bernanke, Reducing systemic risk, speech given at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Annual
Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, 22 August 2008.
E Lazear (2011), www.chicagobooth.edu/news/2011–10-25-lazear.aspx
E Virot and A Ponomarenko (2015), Popcorn: critical temperature, jump and sound, Journal of the Royal Society
Interface, 12, 20141247.
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
