Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Thrive not just survive
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  39th  National  Conference  of  Employers  "The  Future  is  Now:
Survive,  Compete  and  Grow  Amidst  Radical  Changes  in  Labor  and  Employment  Policies",
Manila, 18 April 2018.
 Atty. Antonio H. Abad Jr., Governor of the Employers’ Confederation of the Philippines, Former
Director-General  of  National  Economic  and  Development  Authority  Dr.  Dante
Canlas, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
I am glad to be part of the 39th National Conference of Employers, especially given your theme
which is quite compelling. It is bristling with a sense of urgency!  Yes indeed, “the future” as we
envisioned it (even as we could not then imagine it!)  — as it only existed in sci-fi movies — is
happening.  It arrived yesterday and the days, and the weeks, months and years before that!  It
keeps arriving and growing at an exponential rate. 
The  swift,  sweeping  and  continuously  unfolding  changes  redefining  how  businesses  are
conducted  and  how  we  relate  to  each  other  are  both  precursors  and  products  of  the  fourth
industrial revolution. 
Every  day,  technical  advances,  digital  innovations  and  artificial  intelligence  redefine  our  needs
and wants... our way of doing things...  what was before considered as “hi-tech” are becoming
mundane, ordinary, usual...  Disruptions to the economic and financial landscape are the new
normal.
And  I  refer  not  only  to  disruptions  caused  by  digital  technologies.    There  are  also  challenges
presented  by  regionalization  and  globalization. 
increasing
interconnectedness of markets. 
faced  with 
  We  are 
the 
There are the demographic demands of a growing millennial population and other dynamics. And
we – local industries, businesses and regulators — must constantly keep up.  But is survival the
goal?  Or shall we endeavour to thrive?
Concern is raised that these disruptions will aggrevate inequalities among nations. Will we be
able to cope?  To compete?  I believe we will. 
Technological innovations and the finance industry
Significant technological innovations are currently shaping the Philippine finance industry. These
translate  to  improvements  in  speed,  convenience,  efficiency  and  accessibility  of  value
transfers. Technological innovations in the finance industry [commonly referred to as financial
technology (fintech)], such as cloud-based solutions and application programming interfaces, are
flexible  and  cost-effective.  These  allow  for  interaction  between  two  or  more  online  connected
services. Mobile smartphones are game changers. They have led to important changes in the
payments system as well as in the behavior of market agents. 
An industry report puts the number of fintech startups in the country at 60 players in 2017. Mobile
payment  and  alternative  finance  firms  dominate  with  26  and  17  players,  respectively.  The
transaction value of the fintech market in the Philippines is estimated to amount to US$5.7 billion
in 2018.  It is expected to grow at an annual rate of 16.4 percent.  By 2022, the fintech market in
the country is projected to amount to US$10.5 billion.  Digital payments account for the largest
share of the market at 98.9 percent. This translated to an estimated total transaction value of
US$4.6  billion  in  2017.    Most  of  these  digital  payments  are  in  the  form  of  digital  commerce.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Meanwhile, the alternative finance market is estimated to have raised a total amount of US$0.2
million in 2016 and US$0.7 million in 2017.
Start-up businesses are adopting financial technological innovations to improve their customers’
payments  experience.  These  fintech  businesses  lower  costs  by  employing  different  business
models that involve fewer entities. 
Leveraging on fintech innovations
How can we take advantage of these fintech innovations to promote more inclusive growth in the
Philippines? For one, the Philippine government recognizes the huge potential of fintech services
to lower remittance costs for the country’s over 10 million migrant workers. Transaction costs for
remitting US$200 currently average at 7.1 percent of transaction amount globally. This can drop
to  as  low  as  2  percent.  Aside  from  lower  remittance  charges,  the  Philippine  government  is
likewise seeking to facilitate for overseas Filipinos (OFs) other online-based banking and financial
management services.
Fintech  innovations  can  also  help  drive  financial  inclusion  as  access  and  usage  of  financial
services continue to be limited. The World Bank estimates that only 31.3 percent of the Philippine
adult population has bank accounts. Estimates show that the country’s GDP could increase by
more than 14 percent if the financial inclusion gap was closed. An important part of this solution
is digital enablement. Digital applications and related regulatory initiatives are expected to boost
Philippine  GDP  by  about  3  percent.  They  may  yield  an  increase  of  about  11  percent  in  the
incomes of the population segment earning less than US$2 per day. 
The  widespread  use  of  mobile  phones  can  provide  for  a  broader  reach  of  these  financial
services. Additionally,  rapid  development  of  peer-to-peer  (P2P)  lending  could  complement  the
role performed by traditional finance.  Provided such lending platforms are properly managed and
regulated,  this  could  lead  to  a  more  resilient  network  and  positively  contribute  to  the
diversification of risk across the financial system.
BSP’s response to fintech
On  its  part,  the  BSP  has  established  a  regulatory  environment  that  fosters  innovations  while
ensuring that risks are effectively managed. It has continuously monitored fintech developments.
It has developed a balanced regulatory approach anchored on three pillars: 1) risk-based and
proportionate regulation; 2) active multi-stakeholder collaboration; and 3) consumer protection.
These  principles  are  pragmatically  implemented  through  the  BSP’s  flexible  “test  and  learn”
approach to financial innovations. This is also referred to as “regulatory sandbox” which provides
an opportunity for innovators to participate in the financial system as players in their own right or
as partners of more traditional players like banks. This approach has been proven useful since it
enables  the  BSP  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  innovation  and  safety  while  providing
economic benefits to the banking public.
The  BSP  also  continues  its  market  surveillance  on  crowd  funding  activities  in  the  country  to
determine  if  regulatory  action  is  warranted.  We  are  likewise  regulating  transactions  in  digital
currencies. On 9 February 2017, we issued a circular that established a regulatory framework for
virtual currency (VC)-based payments and remittance transactions. Under this framework, VC
exchanges  are  classified  as  remittance  and  transfer  companies  (RTCs).   As  such,  they  are
subject to the basic requirements for RTCs. Hence, this promotes a level regulatory playing field
for financial service providers performing similar services.
We have launched a major initiative called the National Retail Payment System or the NRPS, a
policy and regulatory framework for institutionalizing retail digital payments in the country. Our
goal is to drive the usage of electronic payments from around 1 percent to at least 20 percent by
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
2020.    We  are  working  hand-in-hand  with  the  industry  to  realize  this.  Already  we  launched
PESONET  last  November  2017.    We  will  soon  launch  INSTAPAY  on  April  23,  2018.    Both
PESONET and INSTAPAY are inter-operable payment systems that enable safe, efficient and
affordable  account-to-account  payments 
transactions  between  and  among  businesses,
consumers, and government.
Moreover, to allow us to regulate more effectively, we will also coordinate and cooperate with
other regulators here and abroad. This is because fintech market players include non-financial
firms that operate across borders. We are specifically exploring a possible information sharing
and referral system specifically focused on fintechs.
The  BSP  is  also  piloting  RegTech  solutions  to  strengthen  our  own  risk-based  regulatory  and
supervisory  activities.  The  BSP  partnered  with  RegTech  for  Regulators Accelerator  (R2A),  a
pioneering  project  that  provides  technical  assistance  for  financial  sector  regulators  to  develop
and test the next generation of digital supervision tools and techniques.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we,  in  the  Bangko  Sentral,  encourage  you,  distinguished  members  of
ECOP, not only to adjust to financial technnology, but to leverage on its opportunities. Our goal is
not just to survive but to thrive.
The democratization of technology enables efficiencies and scale in financial service delivery. 
Mobile devices are cheaper and now within many’s reach. Social media is pervasive. Rather than
a hindrance, digital technology is fast becoming a strategy enabler. Moreover, with rapid digital
innovation,  new  business  models  and  market  players  will  continue  to  emerge,  changing  the
nature of competition.
Digital innovations may also be applied to organizational strategy to improve culture and human
resource  skills.  The  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  has  the  potential  to  empower  individuals  and
communities and bring about new opportunities for economic and social development.
While leveraging on technology will involve financial and investment commitment, cost-effective
approaches such as outsourcing and cloud-based services may be explored. To drive down the
cost of IT requirements, strategic industry partnerships, and market utility arrangements can also
be considered.
We  in  the  Bangko  Sentral  assure  that  we  shall  remain  committed  to  fostering  an  enabling
macroeconomic environment, so that you, our stakeholders – industry players can make the first
and necessary steps in our shared digital transformation journey so we will not only survive but
thrive and enjoy sustained economic growth over the medium to long term.
Thank you and mabuhay ang Pilipinas!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
