Luis  de  Guindos:  The  euro  area  -  current  status  and  challenges
ahead
Speech  by  Mr  Luis  de  Guindos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  La  Granda
courses, Asturias, 31 August 2018.
 It is a pleasure to be here at La Granda courses in Asturias. In my remarks today, I would like to
review  the  economic  developments  in  the  euro  area,  explain  our  recent  monetary  policy
decisions and reflect on the necessary reforms of Economic and Monetary Union, or EMU.
Recent economic developments
Economic growth in the euro area remains solid and broad-based, as confirmed by the latest
data. Preliminary figures show that real GDP grew by 0.4% quarter-on-quarter during the second
quarter of 2018.
In the first half of 2018, growth weakened from its very high rates of last year, partly reflecting
lower exports, compounded by temporary supply-side constraints at national and global level.
Although growth has slowed earlier than anticipated, we expect the expansion to continue. In fact,
the  current  expansion  is  shorter  in  length  and  smaller  in  size  than  historical  averages.  It  has
lasted just five years and real GDP is now 10% above the trough in the first quarter of 2013.  In
the past, growth phases lasted, on average, seven and a half years from trough to peak, with
GDP increasing 21% over the same period.
1
While  risks  surrounding  the  euro  area  growth  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced,  uncertainties
emerging  from  increased  global  protectionism,  the  finalisation  of  the  Brexit  negotiations  and
vulnerabilities in emerging markets have become more visible than a few months ago.
The ongoing expansion has led to strong employment gains. Since the beginning of the recovery,
around 8.4 million jobs have been created. Euro area unemployment declined to 8.2% in July, the
lowest  level  in  almost  ten  years.  This  is  particularly  relevant  in  Spain,  where  unemployment
declined by almost 11 percentage points from the peak of the crisis, to 15.4% currently. Almost
two million jobs (1.9) have been created since the start of the recovery.
Thanks to the recovery in labour markets, consumer spending is still robust. The steady rise in
compensation  per  employee  has 
income.  Moreover,
consumption  benefits  from  an  easier  transition  from  unemployment  to  employment  and
increased job security. Lower unemployment not only pushes up the disposable income of those
who find a job, but also reduces the perceived risk of job loss, giving workers less incentive to
hold precautionary savings.
increased  household  disposable 
The  investment  outlook  remains  solid  on  the  back  of  improving  profitability  and  favourable
financing  conditions. According  to  the  July  bank  lending  survey,  credit  standards  for  loans  to
enterprises and households have loosened further. Moreover, net demand for all types of loans
has increased and is expected to grow in the next quarter too, supporting loan growth. In Spain,
credit  standards  for  new  loans  eased  across  all  segments.  While  net  demand  for  loans  to
enterprises remained unchanged, it increased for loans to households.
We are therefore confident that the underlying strength of the euro area economy will continue to
support the sustained convergence of inflation to our aim in the medium term.
According to the flash estimates, HICP inflation edged down to 2.0% in August from 2.1% in July,
mainly  reflecting  higher  energy  prices.  On  the  basis  of  the  latest  oil  futures  prices,  headline
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation is expected to hover around the current level for the rest of the year.
Although measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted, they have risen from previous
lows. Looking ahead, underlying inflation is expected to pick up towards the end of the summer,
supported by our monetary policy measures and strengthening domestic price pressures, which
are sufficiently robust to counter the downward pressure from the euro’s appreciation in 2017.
Domestic price pressures have gradually risen on the back of the ongoing economic expansion,
the resulting absorption of economic slack and rising wage growth. In particular, the tightening in
labour markets supports the pick-up in nominal wage growth both across countries and sectors.
Non-wage domestic cost pressures and the stronger pricing power of domestic firms are further
contributing to higher prices. Moreover, domestic producer price inflation for non-food consumer
goods increased further in June, with the year-on-year growth rate at its highest level since late
2012.  Services  producer  price  inflation  has  been  on  an  upward  trajectory  since  the  second
quarter of 2016.
Against this backdrop, the ECB’s Governing Council carried out a thorough assessment of price
and wage pressures and the inflation outlook at its meeting in June of this year.
Monetary policy stance
The  Governing  Council  carefully  reviewed  the  progress  achieved  towards  a  sustained
adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation,  guided  by  three  criteria:  convergence,  confidence  and
resilience.
For  convergence,  headline  inflation  should  be  on  track  to  reach  levels  consistent  with  the
Governing Council’s inflation aim of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. In line with
this criterion, the June Eurosystem staff projections see headline inflation reaching 1.7% in each
of  the  next  three  years.  These  are  the  latest  in  a  series  of  projections  that  have  pointed  to  a
convergence of headline inflation towards the Governing Council’s inflation aim.
Regarding  confidence,  uncertainty  around  the  projected  path  of  inflation  has  diminished.
Moreover, underlying inflation has increased from the very low levels observed in 2016 and is
expected  to  rise  amid  an  expanding  economy,  high  levels  of  capacity  utilisation  and  labour
market  tightening.  Stronger  underlying  inflation  pressures,  in  turn,  should  pass  through  to
headline inflation.
In terms of resilience, the projected path of inflation is expected to be maintained even after a
gradual ending of net asset purchases.
On the basis of this assessment, the Governing Council concluded that substantial progress has
been  made  towards  a  sustained  adjustment.  Given  the  underlying  strength  of  the  euro  area
economy, together with well-anchored longer-term inflation expectations, we are confident that
the sustained convergence of inflation towards our aim will continue in the period ahead, even
after a gradual winding-down of our net asset purchases.
As a result, we took a number of decisions in June.
First  –  subject  to  incoming  data  confirming  our  medium-term  inflation  outlook  –  we  anticipate
reducing the monthly net asset purchases from €30 billion to €15 billion at the end of September
2018 and ending net asset purchases at the end of December 2018.
Second,  we  intend  to  continue  reinvesting  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities
purchased under the asset purchase programme for an extended period of time after the end of
net  purchases,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity
conditions and an ample degree of monetary policy accommodation.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, we expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present levels at least through the
summer  of  2019,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  evolution  of
inflation remains aligned with our current expectations of a sustained adjustment path.
Together,  these  measures  will  continue  to  provide  the  necessary  degree  of  monetary  policy
accommodation to bring inflation back towards a level that is below, but close to, 2%. Looking
ahead, monetary policy will continue to be firmly guided by the outlook for price stability and our
stance will evolve in a data-dependent and time-consistent manner.
Having  reflected  on  the  current  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  and  the  corresponding
monetary policy stance, let me now turn to the future, notably to governance of EMU.
EMU governance
The ECB’s monetary policy measures introduced since 2014 have been essential in supporting
the robust recovery and paving the way for inflation to return towards our objective. Similarly, the
removal of some of the institutional and structural factors that contributed to the crisis helped
maintain that recovery. Nonetheless, the architecture of EMU is still incomplete in many ways.
Further reforms are needed to make the financial sector more stable. As the euro area’s financial
system is predominantly bank-based, completing the banking union remains a key priority. We
gladly welcome the agreement on the European Stability Mechanism, or ESM, as the backstop
for  the  Single  Resolution  Fund.  If  implemented  swiftly,  it  will  create  confidence  in  the
effectiveness of resolution and make the sector as a whole more stable.
Most importantly, we need to make headway in establishing the third pillar of the banking union,
the European Deposit Insurance Scheme, or EDIS. Ongoing discussions have been held up on
the premise that risk reduction must come before risk-sharing.
However,  substantial  risk  reduction  has  already  taken  place.  The  significant  banks’  Common
Equity Tier 1 ratios – a key indicator of bank health – are now 67% higher than they were ten
years  ago. And  further  reduction  of  non-performing  loans  and  toxic  assets  in  the  portfolios  of
some large banks is under way.
Moreover, risk-sharing can help reduce risks. In its envisaged steady state as a fully mutualised
fund, EDIS would reduce the risk of bank runs and allow full fungibility of deposits across the
euro area, thereby mitigating the risk of financial fragmentation. EDIS would hence help contain
market panic when crises hit and reduce the fallout for taxpayers, as costs can be borne by the
banks themselves . Risk-sharing and risk reduction are thus mutually reinforcing.
2
At  the  same  time,  we  need  to  make  progress  in  developing  a  genuine  capital  markets  union.
Deep  and  well-integrated  cross-border  funding  would  improve  the  private  sector’s  capacity  to
absorb  local  shocks,  reducing  the  burden  on  fiscal  policies.  A  capital  markets  union  would
provide  various  additional  benefits.  For  example,  harmonised  insolvency  frameworks  would
make  it  easier  for  banks  to  deal  with  non-performing  assets,  thereby  facilitating  orderly  risk
reduction.
Beyond these necessary reforms in the financial sector, more economic convergence is needed
to make EMU resilient.
At the national level, structural reforms remain a priority in order to increase the growth potential
and resilience of local economies. While a full, transparent and consistent implementation of the
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  essential,  country-specific  recommendations,  or  CSRs  –  issued
under the European Semester – should be given similar importance.
CSRs  provide  guidance  to  Member  States  on  how  to  address  reforms  and  macroeconomic
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
imbalances.  They  have  a  broad  focus  on  fiscal-structural  policies,  framework  conditions,  and
labour  and  product  markets.  In  light  of  persistent  imbalances,  the  track  record  in  CSR
implementation remains poor. Over the past five years, most CSRs were, at best, only partly
addressed  by  Member  States.  This  is  unsatisfactory,  especially  as  the  economic  recovery
provides a favourable environment for reform.
At  the  same  time,  Member  States  should  agree  on  broad-based  and  balanced  institutional
reforms to facilitate better collective outcomes. These dimensions – action at the national and
supranational level – should be seen as complementary.
Improving the crisis management framework at the supranational level would make EMU more
resilient. In this regard, the ECB welcomes the commitment to strengthen the ESM made at the
recent Euro Summit.
Moreover, the euro area would benefit from a common stabilisation function. Such an instrument
could  provide  macroeconomic  support  in  the  event  of  euro  area-wide  recessions,  thereby
maintaining convergence and reducing the burden on monetary policy. However, such a fiscal
instrument should not undermine incentives for Member States to pursue sound policies at the
national level.
Conclusion
Growth  in  the  euro  area  economy  is  solid  and  broad-based.  The  underlying  strength  of  the
economy continues to support the sustained adjustment of inflation towards our objective.
Following strong growth rates in 2017, the recovery in the euro area has slowed down in 2018,
however. The duration of the current expansion, which began in 2013, is still below the historical
average. Its amplitude, the percentage gain in GDP relative to the trough, is also low by historical
standards.
At the same time, downside risks to growth, notably related to the threat of protectionism and the
rise  in  trade  tensions,  remain  prominent.  The  outlook  for  US  monetary  policy  moves  and
vulnerabilities in emerging markets add to the overall uncertainty, as does the limited progress on
the Brexit discussion.
Solidifying the institutional architecture of EMU is essential in order to foster cohesive economic
performance without fragmentation or excessive imbalances. Monetary policy has played the key
role since the financial crisis but cannot remain the only game in town. We now need action in
other policy areas – notably fiscal policy and structural reforms. There is a need for responsible
fiscal  policy,  given  the  levels  of  public  debt.  Some  countries  should  take  advantage  of  the
ongoing recovery and favourable financial conditions to reduce debt burdens, whereas countries
with fiscal space should increase their public investment. Likewise, significant steps should be
taken on the structural policy side, with a view to increasing potential growth in the medium term.
Measures  to  improve  the  functioning  of  labour  and  product  markets  and  to  strengthen
procedures for the correction of macroeconomic imbalances take prominence here.
A robust economy relies on sound economic governance. Reforms at the national and EU level
are  needed  to  uphold  a  stable  financial  system  and  a  resilient  monetary  union.  A  common
stabilisation  function,  which  −  in  the  spirit  of  a  true  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policy  instrument  –
would maintain convergence in the event of large shocks, is an overriding priority. Completing the
banking  union  with  the  establishment  of  EDIS,  its  third  pillar,  and  firm  moves  towards  capital
markets union, promoting deep and liquid bond and equity markets, are necessary reforms of the
financial sector. Attaining these goals is highly relevant for financial stability, further integration,
private risk-sharing and economic growth.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
See also Camba-Mendez, G. and Forsells, M., “The recent slowdown in euro area output growth reflects both
cyclical and temporary factors”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 2018.
Carmassi, J., Dobkowitz, S., Evrard, J., Parisi, L., Silva, A. and Wedow, M. (2008), “Completing the Banking Union
with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme: who is afraid of cross-subsidisation?”, Occasional Paper Series,
No 208, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, April.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
