Carolyn Wilkins: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening statement by Ms Carolyn A Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at
the press conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 17
January 2018.
 Good  morning.  Governor  Poloz  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  to  answer  your  questions  about
today’s interest rate announcement and our Monetary Policy Report (MPR).
The Canadian economy is operating close to its potential level of activity, and inflation is close to
the 2 per cent target. In this context, Governing Council decided to raise the policy interest rate by
one quarter of a percentage point to 1.25 per cent. 
The data we have received since October have been generally stronger than expected. Growth
around the world continues to strengthen and broaden, supporting the expansion here at home.
We have upgraded the outlook for the US economy due to greater momentum and the new tax
legislation passed late last year.
In Canada, economic growth is expected to average around 2 1/2 per cent in the short term,
before  slowing  to  a  more  sustainable  pace  over  the  projection  horizon.  This  outlook  remains
clouded  by  uncertainty  related  to  the  future  of  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement
(NAFTA).
In coming to our decision, there were three issues that Governing Council spent a lot of time
discussing. Let me walk you through them.
The first issue was related to how much slack remains in the economy, and how that will evolve.
Obviously, this is always an important question for an inflation-targeting central bank, but it is
particularly so at this point in the economic cycle. Back in October, we said there were still signs
of  slack  in  the  labour  market.  We  also  said  that,  even  though  we  judged  the  economy  was
operating close to capacity, there was the possibility that more capacity would be created over
time through business investment and an increase in labour market engagement.
The  data  we  have  seen  suggest  that  labour  market  slack  has  indeed  been  narrowing,  and
somewhat more quickly than we had been expecting. The national unemployment rate has fallen
to historic lows, average hours worked are recovering and our Business Outlook Survey points
to  signs  of  more  intense  labour  shortages.  That  said,  wage  pressures  remain  modest.  This
could indicate that some capacity remains in the labour market. It could also indicate that wages
have  become  less  sensitive  to  pressure  in  the  labour  market,  given  the  impact  of  global
competition. Either way, wages do not appear to be a source of inflation pressure at this point.
We published a staff analytical note today about wages, and will continue to monitor this issue.
In terms of new capacity creation, we have also seen positive signs. Business investment has
continued  to  grow,  our Business  Outlook  Survey  shows  that  intentions  remain  positive,  and
historical  data  revisions  imply  that  capacity  is  greater  than  we  previously  thought.  New
companies are typically a key source of capacity growth, and while it is still too early to determine
the trend, recent data on firm creation have been encouraging.
We will update our views on the economy’s potential in the April MPR.
The second issue was how the evolution of capacity pressures will affect the outlook for inflation.
As the Governor noted in a speech last November, a number of economists and policy-makers
have been struggling to explain weaker-than-expected inflation in many jurisdictions. This has not
been  the  case  here  in  Canada,  where  core  inflation  measures  have  been  increasing  and
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
behaving largely as we would have expected.
Inflation was actually a bit stronger than we projected in October, rising to just above our 2 per
cent target near the end of last year. This was due to the temporary impact of higher energy
prices. We expect a bit of a dip in inflation in the near term, largely because of the base-year
effects of gasoline prices. The big picture is that we project inflation to fluctuate relatively close to
target throughout the projection horizon.
That  said,  there  is  still  the  risk  of  a  drag  on  inflation  coming  from  global  trends,  such  as
digitalization in the economy. This will continue to be something that we watch closely.
The  final  key  issue  we  discussed  is  how  best  to  account  for  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the
renegotiation of NAFTA in our policy decisions.
Where trade policy decisions have already been taken, such as in the case of softwood lumber,
we have built in their expected effects. In addition, while the results from the Business Outlook
Survey  were  positive,  an  increasing  number  of  firms  told  us  that  uncertainty  surrounding  the
outcome  of  the  talks  is  weighing  on  their  investment  decisions  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  trade.
Because  of  this,  we  added  some  more  negative  judgement  to  our  profile  for  both  business
investment and exports.
Consistent  with  this  approach,  our  outlook  is  based  on  the  premise  that  current  trade
agreements  will  remain  in  place  over  the  projection  horizon.  There  are  still  a  wide  range  of
possible outcomes, which could play out over many different timelines. We do not know how the
talks  will  conclude,  and  we  do  not  know  how  governments  will  react  to  whatever  outcome  is
reached. This means that trying to quantify any particular scenario would not be useful at this
point for monetary policy purposes. 
However, Bank staff have been working to determine the channels through which our economy
could be affected by changes to trade policy. It is a subtle exercise. Economic theory tells us that
there can be both upward and downward pressure on inflation. That is because changes to trade
policy can work through multiple channels that affect both demand and supply in the economy
over  time.  Such  changes  can  also  affect  asset  prices  and  the  exchange  rate.  Whatever  the
outcome, we will be ready to assess the impact as it unfolds, and adjust monetary policy in a
timely way, if required.
Taking  all  of  these  issues  into  account,  Governing  Council  judges  that  while  the  economic
outlook is expected to warrant higher interest rates over time, some continued monetary policy
accommodation  will  likely  be  needed  to  keep  the  economy  operating  close  to  potential  and
inflation on target.
Continued stimulus is likely to be required for a time to take into account a number of factors.
These  include  the  effects  of  uncertainty  related  to  trade  negotiations,  the  expected  effects  of
recent adjustments to mortgage lending policies, and the greater sensitivity of the economy to
interest  rates  given  high  household  indebtedness.  In  this  context,  raising  the  policy  rate  too
quickly  would  risk  stalling  the  expansion,  and  cause  inflation  to  fall  back  below  target. At  the
same time, raising the policy rate too slowly would risk a buildup of inflation pressures. Governing
Council  will  therefore  remain  cautious  in  considering  future  policy  adjustments,  guided  by
incoming data in assessing the economy’s sensitivity to interest rates, the evolution of economic
capacity, and the dynamics of both wage growth and inflation.
With that, Governor Poloz and I would now be happy to answer your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
