Benoît  Cœuré:  The  importance  of  euro  interest  rate  benchmark
reforms
Welcome address by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the first meeting of the Working Group on Euro Risk-Free Rates, at the ECB, Frankfurt
am Main, 26 February 2018.
 On behalf of colleagues from the European Commission, the European Securities and Markets
Authority,  Belgium’s  Financial  Services  and  Markets Authority  and  the  European  Central  Bank
(ECB), welcome to this first meeting of the Working Group on Euro Risk-Free Rates. Thank you
for dedicating your time and resources to supporting the working group in successfully delivering
on its mandate.
I would particularly like to thank Koos Timmermans, Chief Financial Officer of ING Group and
Vice-Chairman  of  ING  Bank,  for  agreeing  to  chair  the  working  group.  I  am  convinced  that  the
group will benefit from his extensive experience in European banking and financial markets.
The task at hand is of utmost importance. First and foremost, the working group has a mandate
to identify and develop an adoption plan for a risk-free overnight rate that can serve as a basis for
an alternative to the benchmarks currently used in the euro area. As a second step, the working
group should explore ways to ensure a smooth transition to the preferred new rate.
Both the financial and public sectors have a keen interest in a smooth and successful reform of
the reference interest rate.
For the financial sector, reference rates play a pivotal role because they are widely used in a
broad  range  of  financial  products  and  contracts.  In  the  past,  we  have  seen  banks  become
increasingly  reluctant  to  participate  voluntarily  in  benchmark  panels,  mainly  due  to  potential
litigation  and  compliance  risks  as  well  as  increasing  contribution  costs.  Together  with  the
declining activity in the underlying market, this has undermined confidence in the reliability and
robustness of existing benchmarks.
For  the  public  sector,  a  smooth  and  successful  reform  is  needed  to  underpin  the  good
functioning  of  euro  area  money  markets  and  trust  in  the  related  products.  For  the  ECB  in
particular it is vital as monetary policy is initially transmitted through financial markets.
A more reliable and robust reference interest rate may also enhance financial stability, for three
main reasons:
First, without robust fallback arrangements, a loss of confidence in reference rates may lead
to market functioning being disrupted.
Second,  poorly  designed  reference  rates,  given  their  underlying  role  in  many  financial
contracts, may transfer risks and pricing errors across financial markets, or create greater
and  unnecessary  basis  risk.  Ultimately,  this  might  also  affect  the  financing  conditions  of
households and firms.
And  third,  unreliable  reference  rates  –  for  example,  reference  rates  that  become  highly
volatile  due  to  idiosyncratic  factors  –  may  make  it  difficult  for  the  central  bank  to  assess
general  money  market  conditions  and  prevent  it  from  responding  to  potential  sources  of
1
tension in interbank markets.
With  this  in  mind,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  planning  for  contingencies,  including  considering
alternative rates, is essential to safeguard the sound functioning of our financial markets.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is also reflected in two general recommendations of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) that
2
aim to guide the reform of the reference rate and the transition to alternative benchmarks.
The  first  recommendation  is  to  strengthen  existing  benchmarks  by  underpinning  them  with
transaction data to the greatest extent possible. Attempts to reform existing benchmarks have
shown, however, that the number of transactions involved is often limited, making the search for
robust fallbacks even more difficult. The second recommendation is to develop alternative, nearly
risk-free  rates.  We  anticipate  the  recommendations  of  the  working  group  to  comply  with  the
recommendations  of  the  FSB  and  the  guidance  issued  by  the  International  Organization  of
Securities Commissions (IOSCO).
3
The EU Benchmarks Regulation sets a demanding timeframe for the reform.
It has set 1 January 2020 as a deadline for benchmarks designated as critical to comply with its
provisions.  These  provisions  are  also  relevant  for  contracts  based  on  the  EONIA  benchmark.
While users of such contracts are compelled to provide for a fallback solution, there is currently
no alternative benchmark rate that is suitable for both new and outstanding contracts.
In early February 2018 the EONIA administrator – the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI) –
4
announced that it would no longer pursue a thorough review of the EONIA.
The future use of the EONIA will hence depend on the willingness of both the panel banks and
EMMI  to  support  the  continuity  of  the  benchmark,  as  well  as  on  the  existence  of  viable
alternatives.
In  the  absence  of  a  solution  for  legacy  transactions  –  i.e.  transactions  based  on  the  EONIA
initiated  before  1  January  2018  and  maturing  after  1  January  2020  –  market  participants  are
exposed to legal and operational risks. The issue of the legal transition must be addressed.
In parallel, the ECB has launched an initiative to produce an overnight interest rate based on data
already available to the Eurosystem under the Money Market Statistical Reporting Regulation.
Let  me  elaborate.  The  ECB  rate  is  designed  to  provide  a  backstop  to  the  existing  overnight
benchmark, but the working group can also consider it as a candidate for a fallback rate. The
ECB aims to start releasing a daily rate before 2020.
A summary of responses to the ECB’s first public consultation on developing a euro unsecured
overnight interest rate was published on the ECB’s website in mid-February 2018.  A  second
public  consultation  document  building  on  the  analysis  presented  in  the  first  consultation
document, and the feedback received from market participants, is currently being prepared. It will
explore the methodology to be used for the new rate as well as key operational and technical
parameters. The document is scheduled to be published towards the end of March 2018.
5
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that,  for  the  reform  to  be  successful  and  conducted  in  a  non-
disruptive manner, it is essential that this working group reaches a broad-based consensus on
alternative  risk-free  rates  and  on  the  best  approaches  for  incorporating  their  use  in  financial
contracts.  This  consensus  should  extend  beyond  this  working  group  and  include  the  wider
financial sector community. One way to achieve this is by involving institutions, or financial sub-
sectors, that are not represented in the working group discussions.
Coordination,  cooperation  and  transparency  across  market  segments,  products  and  users  is
therefore  essential  for  the  success  of  the  benchmark  reform  and  the  possible  transition  to
alternative rates. Many users and other involved parties may not yet be aware of the changes to
come, and all of us need to make an effort to reach out to them too.
Thank you.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
BIS Economic Consultative Committee (ECC) report entitled “Towards better reference rate practices: a central
bank perspective” (March 2013).
FSB report “Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks” (July 2014).
Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on indices used as
benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts or to measure the performance of investment funds
and amending Directives 2008/48/EC and 2014/17/EU and Regulation (EU) No 596/2014.
EMMI announcement “State of play of the EONIA Review” (February 2018)
Summary of responses to the ECB’s first public consultation on developing a euro unsecured overnight interest
rate (February 2018)
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
