Mugur Isărescu: Regional economic outlook - Europe
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the
conference "Regional Economic Outlook - Europe", Bucharest, 17 November 2017.
 Your Excellences, Ambassadors,
Members of the diplomatic corps,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Distinguished guests,
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the National Bank of Romania. The Board and I are honored
to  host  the  presentation  of  an  important  IMF  document,  one  of  their  flagship  reports,  namely
“2017 Regional Economic Outlook Report”. It is a tradition for the National Bank of Romania to
host this event and we are pleased to greet the presence of many foreign diplomats – this is a
clear testimony of its importance.
Allow me to extend a warm welcome to Mr. Jeffrey Franks, who has been a long-standing friend
of Romania. Mr. Franks is a veteran of the Fund, who – over the last 25 years – has managed
challenging  assignments,  including  the  resident  offices  in  Ukraine  and  Ecuador,  and  has  led
teams in Pakistan, Romania, France, Belgium, and Paraguay. He was the IMF Mission Chief for
Romania  for  almost  3  years,  from  2009  till  2012. As  many  of  you  may  remember,  during  his
mandate as mission chief, Romania overcame a very difficult period, with the support of the IMF,
WB and EC.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Emil Stavrev, Deputy Division Chief, and Mr. Mariusz Jarmuzek,
Senior  Economist,  both  of  them  from  the  IMF  European  Department,  who  have  contributed
extensively to the report under debate today.
Now, returning to the main topic:
The National Bank of Romania has always valued the Regional Economic Outlook Report as it
gave us a full and unbiased image of where we stand as compared to our peer countries. It has
helped  us  to  better  understand  the  macroeconomic  developments  in  our  region  and  the
interconnectedness/connections between our economies.
The current report marks a turning point in our post-crisis economic history:
We  should  take  advantage  of  the  improved  economic  context  to  focus  on  structural  reforms
needed to accelerate the real convergence and to raise Romania’s economic capacity in the long
run. We need to preserve competitiveness and enhance the quality of public expenditure.
We  are  all  glad  to  see  the  global  economy  back  on  track  and  the  European  recovery
strengthening.
These results are even more encouraging, if we think back to 2010, in the aftermath of the
crisis,  when  economists  and  policymakers  started  to  really  doubt  our  economies  ever
returning to business as usual. At that time it was believed that the new normal would come
with secular stagnation, low interest rates and low inflation.
Romania  has  secured  a  record  growth  of  8.6%  in  2017/Q3.  Nevertheless,  we  need  to
moderate our enthusiasm. I have noticed that although real growth is evident in the region, it
is accompanied by some important risks and vulnerabilities. One of the challenges attached
is  related  to  the  sustainability  of  this  growth.  The  National  Bank  of  Romania  shares  your
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
view.  We  should  not  forget  the  saying  “easy  come,  easy  go”.  Loose  economic  policies,
unbalanced  budgets  and  wage-price  spirals  could  cost  us  much  when  the  economic
downturn check is due. This problem hit us severely in the recent past, but we have hardly
learned the lesson.
Because I have mentioned the economic laws, I will turn now to the legal environment: the
report  covers  extensively  the  rule  of  law,  the  role  of  institutions  and  the  judiciary.  In  the
report, Central and Eastern Europe is presented as an example of effective measures and
progress in this respect, which is of no small importance.
Romania finds itself in an upright moment when economic performance is associated with
strong achievements in the reform of institutions. We should not waste this moment. In the
long run, the economy’s, the institutions’ and the society’s progress goes hand-in-hand, and,
conversely,  so  does  their  regress.  Therefore,  we  have  to  be  careful  not  to  reverse  the
current trend.
Banks  in  Europe  seem  to  ride  better  on  the  economic  tide,  also  thanks  to  wide-ranging
reforms brought by the Banking and Capital markets Union. Credit is still below its potential
and  the  needs  of  the  economy.  With  further  reduction  in  NPLs  and  higher  interest  rates,
there are better prospects for banks’ profitability.
We see demons of the past in our region today and we wish to avoid any doubting of our
European  and  Transatlantic  engagements.  In  order  to  go  further  we  must  prevent  the
demons  of  the  past  from  questioning  the  virtues  of  opening  our  economy  to  foreign
investment.
The  only  way  to  preserve  this  fine  moment  for  Romania  is  to  steer  and  balance  the
economic growth, to advance on our European path and grasp the benefits of this historical
process.
I will now give the floor to Mr. Jeffrey Franks who will deliver an in-depth presentation on the first
chapter  of  the  report  –  “Europe  Hitting  Its  Stride”,  accompanied  by  his  discussant,  Deputy
Governor Liviu Voinea.
I wish you all a fruitful debate today!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
