Peter  Praet:  Economic  and  monetary  policy  in  EMU  -  from
unconventional times to sustainable and balanced growth
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
OECD Chief Economist Talks, Paris, 3 May 2018.
Accompanying slides
 Euro area real GDP has now been expanding for five years.  The latest incoming information
points towards some moderation in the pace of economic growth, in part reflecting a pull-back
from the high growth rates observed at the end of last year. Temporary factors may also be at
work. We will also need to monitor whether, and if so, to what extent, these developments reflect
a more durable softening in demand.
1
The  latest  economic  data  and  survey  results  have  generally  surprised  to  the  downside,
suggesting some loss of momentum in economic activity. This slowdown follows a very strong
2017, with the latest national accounts release showing that quarterly GDP growth in the fourth
quarter of 2017 stood at 0.7% quarter on quarter, the same growth rate as in the two previous
quarters.
A deceleration from the exceptionally high growth rates observed in the second half of 2017 had
been  expected.  However,  the  slowdown  has  come  sooner  than  anticipated.  The  downward
surprise in incoming information has been broad-based, as it can be observed in both hard data
and survey indicators across most sectors and countries.
While the overall slowdown in recent economic indicators has been significant, transitory factors
are likely to have played a role. These exceptional factors include the cold weather conditions,
influenza,  the  timing  of  Easter  and  school  holidays,  and  industrial  strikes  in  some  countries.
These developments may have been particularly relevant for the retail and construction sector. In
addition, concerns about trade protectionism may also have dampened business sentiment and
expectations.
Nevertheless,  the  recent  slowdown  could  also  be  a  sign  that  supply-side  constraints  are
becoming increasingly binding, albeit only in some sectors and in some countries. For instance,
in the capital goods sector, capacity utilisation and backlogs/supply delivery times stand at all-
time highs. Whereas in the construction sector, an increasing number of firms are indicating that
a shortage of labour is limiting their production.
While these factors are likely to hold back economic activity in the near term, recent information
remains  consistent  with  a  solid  and  broad-based  expansion  in  domestic  demand.  Sentiment
indicators remain in expansionary territory and are still well above long-term averages for most
sectors  and  countries.  Moreover,  the  underlying  momentum  is  still  supported  by  favourable
financing conditions, a robust labour market and steady income and profit growth.
Finally, signs that the past euro appreciation is dampening export growth remain limited. Extra-
euro area export growth slowed down in the first two months of the year, albeit from very high
levels.  Moreover,  over  the  same  period,  extra-euro  area  industrial  new  orders  continued  to
expand. At the same time, the sharp decline in some sentiment indicators relating to the export
sector is a source of concern. It lends support to the view that risks relating to global factors –
including the threat of increased protectionism – have become more prominent.
Inflation  developments,  however,  remain  subdued,  and  we  have  not  yet  met  the  Governing
Council’s three criteria – convergence, confidence and resilience – for a sustained adjustment in
the path of inflation, which is our stated condition for ceasing our net asset purchases. Overall,
 1 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
an ample degree of monetary stimulus remains necessary for underlying inflation pressures to
continue to build up and support headline inflation developments over the medium term. Hence,
we must be patient, persistent and prudent in our monetary policy.
The  financial  crisis  that  erupted  in  2008  posed  unprecedented  challenges  for  central  banks
across  the  world  in  the  pursuit  of  their  statutory  mandates. A  main  feature  of  central  banks’
response  to  the  crisis  was  the  deployment  of  additional,  and  in  some  cases  novel,  monetary
policy instruments. One of these instruments was what’s known as “quantitative easing”. In the
case  of  the  euro  area,  this  tool  has  not  been  used  in  isolation,  but  rather  as  part  of  a
comprehensive package of complementary measures taken to combat the disinflationary forces
that  intensified  in  mid-2014.  Our  monetary  policy  has  effectively  contributed  to  euro  area
macroeconomic adjustment through the staunch pursuit of our price stability mandate.
Today I will first look at the impact of our policies on financial conditions and macroeconomic
variables over the past few years, to illustrate their beneficial effect on the euro area economy.
The correct measure of the efficacy of unconventional monetary policy measures has been the
subject  of  some  debate  in  recent  times.  In  particular,  the  durability  of  the  imprint  that  such
unconventional policies have left on financial conditions has been called into question. Overall,
diverse empirical approaches to quantifying the impact of our package of measures support the
same conclusion: the actions we took have had a strong and lasting effect on market conditions,
and  more  importantly,  achieved  a  potent  pattern  of  propagation  to  the  broad  economy.  We
cannot yet declare “mission accomplished” on the inflation front, but we have made substantial
progress on the path towards a sustained adjustment in inflation.
Monetary policy, however, is only one side of the story. Price stability is a necessary, but not a
sufficient condition for sustained and balanced growth in Europe. The run-up to the crisis proved
that macroeconomic imbalances can grow amid price stability (see Charts 1 and 2), highlighting
the need to keep economic policy high on Europe’s agenda.
 2 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the second part of my talk I will therefore concentrate on economic policies and their essential
role in ensuring a smooth functioning of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). I will look back at
the  experience  of  the  euro  area  since  1999  and  illustrate  the  emergence  of  macroeconomic
imbalances by focusing on three countries: Spain, Germany and France.
The crisis acted as a litmus test for Europe’s institutional framework, revealing the need for a
number  of  institutional  reforms.  Lessons  have  been  learned  and  significant  progress  towards
strengthening  EMU  has  been  achieved,  including  elevating  the  responsibility  of  banking
supervision  from  the  national  to  the  European  level,  the  creation  of  the  European  Stability
Mechanism  as  a  permanent  crisis  management  institution,  and  improvements  in  the  EU
surveillance framework for economic policies.  Progress towards completing the banking union
and  the  capital  markets  union  has  rightly  emerged  as  one  of  the  immediate  priorities  in
strengthening EMU, not least as such progress is seen as crucial in supporting macroeconomic
adjustment in a monetary union.
2
3
Today it is fair to say that the euro area has lived up to the challenges posed by the existential
crisis  and  euro  area  countries  have  displayed  a  strong  commitment  to  EMU.  Macroeconomic
adjustment  in  EMU  has  made  significant  progress,  with  countries  implementing  significant
 4 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth-enhancing  reforms  and  correcting  external  imbalances,  but  this  process  has  been
difficult  and  is  not  yet  complete.  Countries  most  affected  by  the  crisis  were  confronted  with
significant hardship, even though financial support provided by the EU and its Member States to
countries  facing  acute  financing  difficulties  prevented  catastrophic  outcomes,  and  cushioned
some  of  its  impact  by  providing  time  for  economic  adjustment.  Looking  forward,  in  order  to
sustain a high level of social welfare in the long term, euro area countries need to ensure that
macroeconomic adjustment occurs smoothly and to prevent the build-up of durable imbalances.
The impact of the ECB’s non-standard measures
By mid-2014, the euro area economy was facing disinflationary pressures that risked spiralling
into  outright  deflation.  With  the  deposit  facility  rate  held  at  zero  since  July  2012,  our  ability  to
provide  the  necessary  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  using  conventional  policy  measures  was
very limited.
Under  these  conditions,  the  focus  of  providing  monetary  accommodation  shifted  from  an
approach based on adjusting key ECB interest rates to one that more directly affects the whole
constellation  of  interest  rates  across  the  yield  curve.  Specifically,  the  instruments  we  have
employed since June 2014 are negative interest rates on the deposit facility; a reinforced form of
forward  guidance  on  the  evolution  of  key  interest  rates  in  the  future;  targeted  longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTROs); and the asset purchase programme (APP).
With policy rates at exceptionally low levels, the APP soon became the primary instrument for
calibrating the monetary policy stance. How effective have our asset purchases been in helping
the ECB to accomplish its statutory objective in the medium term? Answering this question is
inherently difficult because of the complex interaction of our APP with other policy instruments as
well  as  our  evolutionary  communication  about  the  purchase  programme,  through  which  we
signalled our intention to start buying bonds and, later, to recalibrate the size and duration of our
bond-buying programme in advance. Hence, in assessing the impact of the APP, we must also
take  into  account  the  other  policy  tools  used  since  mid-2014,  because  the  instruments  were
designed to be complementary and mutually reinforcing.
The four instruments that have determined the stance of our monetary policy since mid-2014
have been designed to reap the full benefits of their complementarities. Two examples highlight
the role played by complementarities in policy design. First, the negative interest rate policy has
supported the portfolio rebalancing channel of our APP by encouraging banks to lend to the broad
economy instead of hoarding liquidity.  Second, the APP has supported rate forward guidance
through the signalling channel. Generally, asset purchases are thought to provide a strong signal
that  policy  rates  will  remain  low  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  For  the  ECB,  this  effect  is
reinforced by the sequencing of our instruments through which we have indicated that our policy
rates will likely remain at their current levels “well past the horizon of our net asset purchases”.
4
Our overall assessment – and that of a growing body of empirical literature – is that non-standard
measures  have  had  a  sizeable  and  lasting  impact  on  broad  financing  conditions.   These
improvements are not limited to the asset classes included in our APP, but have spilled over to
other market segments (Charts 3 and 4). In addition, easier market funding conditions have been
passed  through  to  bank  lending  rates. Importantly,  these  findings  are  based  on  a  range  of
econometric techniques and are therefore robust to the limitations associated with any individual
methodology.
5
6
 5 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
Sources: ECB, ECB calculations.
Event studies – which measure the impact of central banks’ bond purchases in a narrow interval
 6 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
around the time of the announcement – play a part in informing our view on the efficacy of our
purchases. But we also use model counterfactuals to complement the impact metrics that we
derive from event studies, and to test whether or not the impact of our announcements endures
beyond the very short term. In this context, dynamic term structure models of the type that have
become  standard  in  contemporary  fixed  income  finance,  augmented  with  a  factor  capturing
central  bank  bond  holdings,  have  consistently  confirmed  the  inference  we  draw  from  event
studies. They indicate that our purchases have had a sizeable and durable influence on long-
8
term yields.
At present, the current and anticipated size of our APP portfolio – which has been increased in
various recalibration steps and is expected to be maintained “for an extended period of time” after
the  end  of  net  asset  purchases  –  is  still  putting  downward  pressure  on  euro  area  long-term
yields. The longer the expected period of reinvestment, the stronger the downward pressure on
yields. If one takes current surveys of market participants’ views about the time over which the
ECB is anticipated to roll over its APP securities, and assumes the modal expectation of a two-
year  period,  one  finds  that  the  downward  pressure  that  APP  asset  holdings  –  current  and
expected – are exerting on longer-term interest rates is in the order of 100 basis points (Chart 5).
 7 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
9
Source: Eser, Lemke, Nyholm, Radde, and Vladu (mimeo).
Downward pressure on yields is expected to be very persistent and to decline only gradually, but
consistently, as we move forward in time, because of what is referred to as the “portfolio ageing”
effect. The effects of our purchases of long-dated assets on market yields are principally due to
the  fact  that  we  withdraw  duration  from  private  hands,  and  as  the  securities  we  hold  in  our
portfolio draw closer to maturity and “lose duration” progressively, the overall amount of duration
contained  in  our  portfolio  has  a  tendency  to  melt  away. And  this  gradual  loss  of  duration  will
reduce downward pressure on yields (see Chart 5, Panel B).
10
There has been a strong pass-through of our non-standard measures to financing conditions.
For example, model-based counterfactual simulations attribute more than half of the 126 basis
point decline in lending rates to non-financial corporations since June 2014 directly to our non-
standard measures (see Chart 4). The APP has supported the provision of loans to customers
at better terms and conditions.
 Banks themselves – when asked to assess the effects of our
measures on their intermediation business – have reported that the APP has positively impacted
their market financing conditions.
11
As a consequence of this generalised easing in financing conditions, our measures have had
substantial  macroeconomic  effects.  Taking  into  account  all  of  the  monetary  policy  measures
taken  between  mid-2014  and  October  2017  and  the  March  2018  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections, staff have estimated that the overall impact on both growth and inflation in the euro
area is around 1.9 percentage points in cumulative terms for the period between 2016 and 2020.
 8 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
Importantly, our measures have also been successful in reducing the fragmentation of the euro
area  financial  system  stemming  from  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  They  have  ensured  very
favourable borrowing conditions in the euro area as a whole.
To sum up, the available evidence strongly supports the conclusion that the APP – together with
our  other  non-standard  measures  –  has  been  effective  and  probably  decisive  in  warding  off
troublesome macroeconomic outcomes. It has certainly propelled the economic recovery into a
robust and broad-based expansion. And it has very likely prevented the disinflationary pressures
of 2014 from spiralling into a self-reinforcing deflationary vortex (see Chart 6). We cannot yet
declare “mission accomplished” on the inflation front, but we have made substantial progress on
the path towards a sustained adjustment in inflation.
Sources: Bloomberg, Reuters, ECB calculations.12
 9 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
The emergence of macroeconomic imbalances
Monetary policy has been very successful in supporting domestic demand and inflation, but it
cannot address the structural problems that were at the root of the crisis. Monetary policy was
able to buy time to facilitate the adjustment of macroeconomic imbalances and to address the
deficiencies in the euro area’s institutional framework.
The  crisis  has  demonstrated  how  persistent  losses  in  competitiveness  can  translate  into
macroeconomic  imbalances,  eventually  leading  to  a  painful  adjustment.  Spain’s  experience
during the crisis is instructive in this regard.
With  the  start  of  Monetary  Union,  the  disappearance  of  exchange  rate  risk  premia  and  the
unprecedented  fall  in  interest  rates  facilitated  capital  inflows  and  encouraged  risk-taking
behaviour, resulting in a rapid rise in private debt and a property boom. The expectation of higher
levels of income led to excessive consumption and investment relative to the supply capacity of
the  Spanish  economy.  This  continuous  demand  pressure  generated  a  positive  inflation
differential  vis-à-vis  the  rest  of  the  euro  area,  leading  to  a  strong  appreciation  of  the  real
exchange rate and an erosion of price competitiveness.
13
When the crisis hit, the subsequent adjustment was severe – with unemployment at levels above
25%, a rapid erosion of the fiscal position and a number of bank failures – leading to a significant
contraction  in  both  domestic  demand  and  real  GDP.  Similar  developments  were  observed  in
other current account deficit countries, such as Portugal, Ireland and Greece.
For countries with large current account deficits, the adjustment was painful. The correction of
euro  area  macroeconomic  imbalances  was  particularly  asymmetric,  with  the  bulk  of  the
adjustment falling on current account deficit countries through a strong contraction in domestic
demand, with limited support from a higher demand contribution from current account surplus
 10 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries,  despite  those  countries  being  less  affected  by  the  crisis.  Growth  in  the  surplus
countries, including Germany, became even more export-oriented.
An important lesson from the crisis was that the euro area had insufficient tools at its disposal to,
on  the  one  hand,  prevent  the  build-up  of  unsustainable  asset  price  booms  and,  on  the  other
hand, mitigate their impact if they occured. The answer to such problems lies, ex ante, in better
macroprudential and microprudential policies and better regulation of the financial system and, ex
post, in better resolution institutions. Strengthening Europe’s financial framework, including the
establishment of the banking union, is the right way to address this source of macroeconomic
imbalances. The banking union will make the adjustment process less asymmetrical between
creditors and debtors. It is of the utmost importance to complete the banking union without delay.
Macroeconomic  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  can  also  be  attributed  to  factors  other  than  the
financial  cycle,  such  as  durably  diverging  competitiveness  positions.  The  importance  of  such
economic  factors  already  featured  prominently  in  the  theory  of  optimal  currency  areas,  as
pioneered  by  Mundell  in  1961.  Competitiveness  imbalances  are  one  of  the  most  visible
symptoms  of 
the  euro
area.
 Developments in Germany and France – two countries which together represent nearly
half  of  euro  area  GDP,  and  have  seen  broadly  similar  movements  in  GDP  and  prices  (see
Charts 7 and 8) since the start of Monetary Union – are instructive in this regard.
insufficient  macroeconomic  adjustment  mechanisms 
in 
14
 11 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
 12 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
17
16
15
Germany, at the start of Monetary Union, was considered the “sick man of Europe”. At the time,
the  country  was  still  recovering  from  the  high  costs  associated  with  its  reunification,  and  its
conversion rate was widely considered to be overvalued.
 The national policy response was a
prolonged period of union-backed wage moderation  together with a significant labour market
overhaul  which  aimed,  among  other  things,  to  improve  job  search  efficiency  and  employment
flexibility. The result was striking: from 1999 to 2008, nominal unit labour costs were virtually
unchanged for the economy as a whole (see Chart 9) and were thus growing significantly below
the level that the so-called “golden wage rule” would suggest. This resulted in a strong export
performance, but weak domestic demand. The economic policies Germany pursued before the
crisis  largely  explain  why  it  emerged  relatively  unscathed  from  the  Great  Recession.  Exports
recovered swiftly and currently stand at an all-time high, roughly equalling half of the country’s
GDP. Exports to countries outside the euro area recovered particularly strongly. Meanwhile, the
contribution of domestic demand to GDP continued on its downward path, in part on account of
subdued wage growth and a tight fiscal policy (see Chart 12).
18
 13 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
 14 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
19
In  contrast  to  Germany,  France  entered  Monetary  Union  in  much  better  shape.  Growth  in  the
initial  years  was  strong  and  unemployment  declined  by  more  than  a  fourth  within  five
years.
 Wage increases remained moderate, even below euro area averages, and unit labour
costs moved according to the golden wage rule, i.e. at an average annual rate below, but close
to, 2% (see Chart 9). However, with German unit labour costs remaining virtually unchanged over
the period, a significant competitiveness gap built up. This was further aggravated by the crisis,
during  which  French  wages  remained  relatively  sticky,  in  spite  of  the  sharp  fall  in
productivity. The consequences were especially detrimental for the French export sector, which
suffered significant losses in market share (see Chart 10), despite the substantial squeeze in
profit  margins.  At  the  same  time,  the  contribution  of  domestic  demand  to  growth  became
increasingly important, supported by fiscal policy (see Chart 11) and sticky wage developments.
20
 15 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
  16 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a result, there is now a striking divergence between France and Germany on a number of
macroeconomic dimensions: in Germany, the domestic demand-to-GDP ratio is now among the
lowest across advanced economies, whereas in France, it is among the highest. The opposite is
true for exports (see Charts 13 and 14).
 17 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
 18 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
The recent economic policy orientations and plans set out by the German and French authorities
are steps in the right direction. France has already, in recent years, made important progress in
addressing  these  challenges.  For  example,  the  European  Commission  considers  that  the
country  has  made  at  least  some  progress  in  addressing  72%  of  its  country-specific
recommendations since 2011. Substantial progress has been achieved in decreasing the cost of
labour  and  reforming  labour  laws.  There  has  also  been  significant  progress  in  implementing
reform  recommendations  related  to  the  long-term  sustainability  of  public  finances,  skills  and
lifelong learning, and the business environment.
 These reforms, together with those that are
still  planned,  could  yield  sizeable  growth  benefits  and  improve  competitiveness.  These  recent
developments give reason to hope that cross-country interdependencies within Monetary Union
will be better internalised in national decision-making processes.
Some lessons for the future
21
Our monetary policy measures are bearing fruit, and the growth outlook confirms our confidence
 19 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
that inflation will converge towards our aim of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Monetary policy alone cannot prevent the build-up of divergences in a monetary union. The nature
of  EMU  makes  macroeconomic  adjustment  in  the  euro  area  more  complex  than  in  a  federal
state. Monetary policy is a competence assigned at EU level. The European Central Bank’s price
stability objective is enshrined in the Treaty.
 By contrast, economic policy remains in the remit
of  Member  States.
  It  is,  however,  a  Treaty  obligation  for  Member  States  to  regard  their
economic policies as a matter of common concern and to coordinate them.
22
23
Our framework for the coordination of economic policies was clearly not effective in preventing
the  emergence  of  lasting  imbalances  in  the  euro  area  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis.  Protracted
losses in competitiveness eventually led to unsustainable external positions and even “sudden
stops” in the financing of external deficits. This is not new. Unfortunately, we can point to several
episodes  in  history  when  governments  and  social  partners  failed  to  internalise  external
constraints, resulting in widening imbalances. This typically led to currency crises and exchange
rate  realignments  in  Europe.  Monetary  instability  prevented  Europeans  from  reaping  the  full
benefit  of  the  internal  market  and  limited  Europe’s  growth  potential  and  its  role  as  a  global
economic actor.
In our institutional framework for economic policies, it is primarily up to the Member States to
respond to the economic challenges they are faced with, thereby ensuring that their economic
structures  are  compatible  with  participation  in  Monetary  Union.  To  reap  the  full  benefit  of
Monetary  Union,  it  is  essential  to  ensure  that  national  economic  policies  lead  to  sustainable
growth.  Preventing  the  emergence  of  economic  imbalances  and  creating  the  conditions  for  a
thriving  social  market  economy  is  not  only  a  matter  of  national  interest.  It  is  also  a  matter  of
common concern, as a crisis in one country has repercussions for all members of Monetary
Union. Effective surveillance is indispensable at both EU and national level.
Looking  ahead,  we  need  to  further  enhance  the  coordination  of  national  economic  policies.
National economic policies, the effects of which can propagate through the EU, should genuinely
be considered a matter of common concern by national authorities. At the European level, a key
role can be played by the European Semester process for the coordination of economic policies
–  including  the  macroeconomic  imbalance  procedure  –  which  was  introduced  by  the  EU  in
2011.
 However, it should be used to its full potential. Moreover, for reform recommendations to
be implemented at the national level and not be considered as illegitimate external constraints, it
will thus be key going forward for national debates and decision-making processes to more fully
internalise what it means to be part of Monetary Union. If outside recommendations are perceived
as being politically too costly, then we need to find solutions that promote national “ownership” of
reform efforts.
24
Monetary  policy  and  sound  economic  policies  must  be  complemented  with  sound  financial
sector  policies  to  ensure  sustainable  growth.  The  recent  crisis  has  shown  that  the  quality  of
financial integration matters. Risk sharing through the financial system can go into reverse, and
banks can amplify and propagate rather than mitigate economic disturbances. This was a painful
but well-learned lesson for the euro area. It is the reason that the banking union was established
and the capital markets union was launched.
Substantial  progress  has  already  been  made.  The  EU  moved  in  less  than  five  years  from
decentralised banking supervision and resolution to the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the
Single Resolution Mechanism, based on the single rulebook. This is part of an overarching effort
to create a sound institutional framework for financial integration in Europe.
However, the work needs to be completed so that we can reap the full benefits of the banking
union and the capital markets union. An incomplete banking union may not be able to shield the
euro area from financial re-fragmentation in a renewed crisis situation. Likewise, an incomplete
 20 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital  markets  union  may  impair  the  capacity  of  the  financial  system  to  share  risks  across
Member States through private channels. The missing elements of the banking union, namely the
establishment of a European deposit insurance scheme and a backstop to the Single Resolution
Fund, should be put in place without delay. This should go hand in hand with further progress in
areas  of  key  relevance  for  the  banking  union,  including  progress  towards  harmonising  and
improving national insolvency frameworks, reducing non-performing loans and strengthening the
single rulebook.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
This speech builds on both my speech at the ECB and its Watchers XIX Conferenceand my speech at the NABE
Symposium.
The “two-pack” and “six-pack” legislative packages, which bundle together six regulations and one directive, aim
to more closely coordinate economic policies through (i) a strengthening of budgetary surveillance under the
Stability and Growth Pact, (ii) the introduction of a new procedure in the area of macroeconomic imbalances, (iii)
the establishment of a framework for dealing with countries experiencing difficulties with financial stability and
(iv) the codification in legislation of integrated economic and budgetary surveillance in the form of the European
Semester (see, for instance, eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52014DC0905 ).
See, for instance, ec.europa.eu/commission/news/reducing-risk-banking-union-2018-mar-14_en.
Praet,  P.  (2017),  “Calibrating  unconventional  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  The  ECB  and  its  Watchers  XVIII
Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 6 April.
For a summary of the literature on the effectiveness of non-standard measures, see ECB (2017), “Impact of the
ECB’s non-standard measures on financing conditions: taking stock of recent evidence”, Economic Bulletin,
Issue 2.
See also Praet, P. (2017), “The ECB’s monetary policy: past and present”, speech at the Febelfin Connect event,
Brussels/Londerzeel, 16 March.
The impact of credit easing is estimated on the basis of an event-study methodology which focuses on the
announcement effects of the June-September 2014 package; see the ECB Economic Bulletin article entitled
“The transmission of the ECB’s recent non-standard monetary policy measures” (Issue 7 / 2015). The impact of
the deposit facility rate (DFR) cut rests on the announcement effects of the September 2014 DFR cut, while the
impact  of  the  subsequent  DFR  cuts  is  difficult  to  disentangle  from  the  simultaneous  APP  adjustments.
Therefore,  both  effects  are  shown  jointly. APP  encompasses  the  effects  of  the  asset  purchase  measures
adopted  at  the  January  and  December  2015  Governing  Council  meetings,  the  March  and  December  2016
meetings and the October 2017 meeting. The January 2015 APP impact is estimated on the basis of two event-
study exercises by considering a broad set of events that, starting from September 2014, have affected market
expectations  about  the  programme;  see  Altavilla,  C.  Carboni,  G.  and  Motto,  R.  (2015)  “Asset  purchase
programmes and financial markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 1864, and De Santis,
R. (2016), “Impact of the asset purchase programme on euro area government bond yields using market news”,
ECB Working Paper No 1939. The quantification of the impact of the December 2015 policy package on asset
prices  rests  on  a  broad-based  assessment  comprising  event  studies  and  model-based  counterfactual
exercises. The impact of the March 2016 and December 2016 policy packages is assessed via model-based
counterfactual exercises. The impact of the October 2017 policy package is assessed using two models: a term
structure modelling framework similar to Li, C. and Wei, M. (2013), “Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors
and the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs”, International Journal of Central Banking,
9(1), pp. 3-39 and an ISIN-by-ISIN regression framework akin to D’Amico, S. and King, T. B. (2013), “Flow and
stock  effects  of  large-scale  treasury  purchases:  Evidence  on  the  importance  of  local  supply”,  Journal  of
Financial Economics,108(2), pp. 425–448.
To this end, for instance, an estimated term structure model is used following Li, C. and Wei, M. (2013), “Term
Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs”,
International Journal of Central Banking, 9(1), pp. 3-39. In this framework, yields are driven by three factors: the
level and slope of the yield curve (“yield factors”) as well as a factor related to the central bank’s bond holdings
(“quantity factor”). In quantifying the impact on bond yields, the model thus takes into account the effect of the
central bank’s current and future expected bond holdings, including the impact of reinvestment.
Euro area yields are proxied by the GDP-weighted long-term yield of the four largest euro area jurisdictions. The
10-year yield impacts are obtained from a version of the Li-Wei (2013) model used at the Federal Reserve to
 21 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
convert the SOMA portfolio of securities into yield impacts. Impacts are shown for different APP reinvestment
scenarios,  defined  by  the  horizon  indicated  in  the  legend.  The  marginal  impact  of  each  additional  year  of
reinvestment is given by the distance between the scenario curves. Latest observation: February 2018.
Praet, P. (2017), “Maintaining price stability with unconventional monetary policy measures”, speech at the MMF
Monetary and Financial Policy Conference, London, 2 October.
See the euro area bank lending survey, October 2017.
This  chart  shows  the  risk-neutral  probability  distribution  function  implied  by  two-year  zero-coupon  inflation
options. These risk-neutral probabilities may differ significantly from physical, or true, probabilities. They are
estimated on the basis of call (“caplets”) and put (“floorlets”) options with different strike rates on the (three-
month  lagged)  euro  area  HICP  index  excluding  energy,  food  and  tobacco,  assuming  Black-Scholes  option
pricing and implied volatilities that vary across strike rates (“volatility smile”).
See Estrada, A., Jimeno, J.F. and Malo de Molina, J.L. (2009), “The Spanish economy in EMU: the first ten
years”, Documentos Ocasionales, No 0901, Banco de España.
See Sapir, A. (2016), The Eurozone needs less heterogeneity, VoxEU, 12 February.
See Schrapf, F. (2018), “International Monetary Regimes and the German Model”, Max Planck Institute for the
Study of Societies, Discussion Paper 18/1.
See Bofinger, P. (2015), German wage moderation and the EZ crisis, VoxEU.
See  Engbom,  N.,  Detragiache,  E.  and  Raei,  F.  (2015),  “The  German  Labor  Market  Reforms  and  Post-
Unemployment Earnings”, IMF Working Paper, 15/162.
The golden wage rule states that real wages should grow in line with (medium-run) national productivity and
nominal wages so as to be compatible with price stability. This implies that nominal wages in each country
should  equal  (medium-run)  national  productivity  plus  the  target  inflation  rate  of  the  central  bank  (see,  for
instance, European Commission, 2005). In practice, this would mean that, on average, unit labour cost growth
should approximately equal the target inflation rate of the central bank.
See,  for  instance,  Pisani-Ferry,  J.  (2003),  “The  surprising  French  employment  performance:  what
lessons?”, CESifo Working Paper, No 1078.
See, for instance, Collignon, S. and Esposito, P. (2017), Labour costs and returns on capital in the EMU: a new
measure of competitiveness, mimeo.
See ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/2018-european-semester-country-report-france-en.pdf.
Article 127 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
Articles 120 and 121 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
To reinforce ex ante coordination of EU Member States’ economic and fiscal policies, a new monitoring cycle
was  introduced  in  2011:  the  “European  Semester”  is  a  six-month  period  every  year  during  which  national
budgetary and structural policies are reviewed to detect any inconsistences and emerging imbalances while
major budgetary decisions are still under preparation. The European Semester reinforces the preventive arm of
the Stability and Growth Pact, introduces a new procedure for addressing macroeconomic imbalances, and
places  greater  emphasis  on  monitoring  national  fiscal  frameworks,  identifying  macrostructural  growth
bottlenecks and detecting macrofinancial risks in the Member States (see Köhler-Töglhofer, W. and Part P.
(2011),  “Macro  Coordination  under  the  European  Semester”, Monetary  Policy  and  the  Economy,  Issue  4,
Oesterreichische Nationalbank).
 22 / 22
BIS central bankers' speeches
