Erkki Liikanen: Economics and economic policy
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 10 April 2018.
 The  central  bank  is  an  organisation  of  public  servants.  Public  service  bodies  obtain  their
essential mandate from elected bodies.
Within the Eurosystem, the central banks and their governing bodies have been given a definite
mandate, including independence in monetary policy issues. In recent years, central banks have
also been assigned new responsibilities in the field of macroprudential policy.
As part of the Eurosystem, the Bank of Finland participates in monetary policy decision-making
and implementation. The Bank also has a role to play as part of the Banking Union.
How then should the central bank participate in domestic discourse on economics and economic
policy  formation?  The  Bank  of  Finland’s  statements  relating  to  domestic  economic  policy  are
based on objectives set for the Bank and the Eurosystem. According to the Act on the Bank of
Finland and the EU Treaties the primary objective is price stability. Without prejudice to this
objective, the Bank also supports the achievement of other EU economic policy objectives, such
as balanced economic growth.
The Bank of Finland participates in economic discourse in Finland primarily at those stages of
preparation  and  decision-making  that  are  consistent  with  the  Bank’s  expertise  derived  from
research, international experience, or other publicly justified economic analysis.
There are two such stages: first, identification of the problems related to the current state of the
economy; second, assessment of the potential effects of the alternatives for action.
At the same time, we should bear in mind that decisions on individual items of public spending or
revenue often involve such value judgements as a central bank should refrain from making.
In the past decade, there was a lively debate in the United States on whether Federal Reserve
Chairman Alan Greenspan went too far in supporting President George W. Bush’s tax reforms.
At the Central Bank Symposium in Jackson Hole in Wyoming in 2005, professors Alan Blinder
and Ricardo Reis emphasised that it is highly questionable whether central banks should voice
opinions  on  issues  of  economic  policy  outside  of  the  realm  of  monetary  policy.  The  general
opinion  of  the  meeting  was  that  central  banks  should  refrain  from  making  value-based
statements, in particular. But it is an entirely different matter if economic policy jeopardises the
conditions for price stability or causes disruption on the financial markets.
Example from recent years: the structural problems of the Finnish economy
A  role  that  comes  naturally  to  the  central  bank  in  domestic  economic  discourse  is  to  paint  a
picture  of  the  state  of  the  economy.  A  balanced  picture  of  the  state  of  macroeconomic
developments based on careful analysis serves as an important basis for successful economic
policy.
In  step  with  the  escalation  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  economic  performance
deteriorated across the advanced economies, including Finland. A few years after the onset of
the  crisis,  economic  growth  had  already  gotten  underway  in  many  countries.  However,  in
Finland, the weak performance of the economy turned out to be more protracted, despite the
expansionary fiscal measures adopted to support the economy.
Realising  this  took  some  time  in  Finland.  We  had  to  acknowledge  that  Finland’s  economic
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
difficulties were not short-term and transient problems of the global economic cycle but were of a
longer-lasting  nature.  This  debate  was  launched  in  spring  2013,  largely  at  the  initiative  of  the
Bank of Finland.
Finland did not encounter a domestic financial crisis during the global financial crisis; the Finnish
financial  system  remained  fully  operational.  The  cost  and  availability  of  bank  loans  did  not
constitute an obstacle to economic growth, nor did the costs of Finnish government borrowing
rise.
Finland’s economic hardship was caused by a number of setbacks. Mobile phone manufacture
and the related huge inflows of revenue were exhausted. Demand for printing paper decreased in
Europe, the forest industry was subject to restructuring and export volumes declined. Although
largely unrelated to the global financial crisis, these problems hitting Finnish exports coincided
with the crisis.
Export conditions were also subdued by the increase in the level of costs, which was faster than
for  Finland’s  trading  partners.  Just  before  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  collective
bargaining agreements spanning over two years and providing for sizeable wage rises had been
concluded in Finland. These were introduced at the same time as many other countries started
to adopt cost moderation in response to the economic recession. Finland suffered a major loss
of cost-competitiveness.
An additional factor behind the deteriorating conditions for economic growth in Finland was the
reduction in the size of the working-age population. The turnaround occurred in 2010, when the
members of the baby-boom generation, in large numbers, began to reach retirement age.
The established methods for capturing fluctuations in macroeconomic developments could partly
have  led  policymakers  astray,  as  the  cyclical  fluctuations  witnessed  were  not  of  a  standard
nature; they also reflected profound structural changes. The global economic debate, as such,
did  also  not  deliver  any  comprehensive  tools  for  understanding  economic  developments  in
Finland, as Finland’s economic hardship was different in character to the problems encountered
by many other countries in the wake of the financial crisis. In fact, the Finnish financial sector and
the Finnish government’s credit rating were not exposed to any disruptions or downgrades.
The  most  common  indicators  employed  to  analyse  cost-competitiveness  were  no  longer
adequate due to the developments in the terms of trade. The deterioration in Finland’s terms of
trade was exceptionally strong due to the fall in export prices.
As regards the means available to improve cost-competitiveness, it was necessary to recognize
that  the  usual  measures  of  wage  moderation  did  not  bring  about  any  improvements  in  the
situation, given that the  increase  in  wages  and  prices  was  exceptionally  slow  elsewhere,  too.
Despite  the  very  subdued  increase  in  wages  witnessed  in  Finland  after  2009  compared  with
previous years, this did not differ much from wage developments in other advanced economies.
As the slowdown in economic activity was not cyclical and short-term in nature, it resulted in a
deterioration  in  the  long-term  fiscal  outlook.  Not  only  had  the  fiscal  deficit  begun  to  grow
immediately upon the onset of the global financial crisis; a large fiscal sustainability gap had also
emerged.
Hence, Finland faced a need to consolidate the public finances, improve the long-term outlook for
both economic growth and the public finances, and to adopt swift measures to enhance cost-
competitiveness.  Awareness  of  the  crucial  importance  of  these  economic  policy  objectives
called for an understanding of the current state of the economy. The Bank of Finland presented
its assessments based on these considerations to the social partners in early summer 2013.
In recent years, important decisions have been taken in Finland to enhance cost-competitiveness
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  improve  long-term  fiscal  sustainability,  and  to  adopt  fiscal  consolidation  measures.
Decisions  have  been  taken  on  a  competitiveness  pact  and  pension  reform  and  on
fiscal consolidation measures. This has called for a broad consensus on the current state of the
economy among the political parties and the social partners. The Bank of Finland also later made
its  analyses  available  to  decision-makers,  for  use  as  a  basis  of  decisions.  The  analysis
conducted in 2015 on cost competitiveness played a crucial role for the decisions taken in recent
years.
What is the input of economics in economic policy in general?
In autumn 2017, a significant contribution was brought to the discussion by Nobel laureate Jean
Tirole.
When Tirole won the Nobel Prize in Economics in 2014, he became a well-known figure. Tirole
has told how he suddenly found himself being stopped in the street by people who wanted to
know what economic research is and how it can foster well-being. People were asking whether
economics could resolve the great challenges of our times.
The questions presented to Tirole present an important challenge to the economist community
as  a  whole.  Economists  need  to  produce  a  comprehensive  and  thorough  analysis  of  the  key
economic policy problems, but they also need to share the results of their analysis in an easily
readable form for the intelligent reader who lacks an education in economics.
Jean Tirole turned his reflections into a non-technical book entitled ‘Economics for the Common
Good’. In his book, Tirole emphasises that economics is a science of the means, not of the aims.
Political objectives incorporate values, and setting these objectives is the task of those mandated
to do so by democratic elections. Economics, in turn, can provide an input when the goal is to
find tools for meeting the objectives at the lowest possible cost.
The market and the state
One of the key issues of economics is the role of the market. As Tirole emphasises in his book,
the market is an instrument for economists, not an end itself. The market cannot always function
without  failures.  This  happens,  for  example,  when  buyers  have  insufficient  information  about
products or when consumers only think about their immediate gratification or make decisions
which, over time, involve higher costs than their payment capacity. Market failures also occur if
an economic actor has too much market power.
If the market functions properly it can improve efficiency, but there is no reason to assume that it
will  deliver  equity.  This  is  why  both  the  state  and  the  market  are  needed.  They  are
complementary – not substitutes for one another. The state cannot ensure a decent life for its
citizens without a market. The market, in turn, needs the state to guarantee that the legal system
operates smoothly and that market flaws and failures are addressed.
Increasing  competition  through  regulatory  decisions  has  brought  considerable  advantages  to
consumers.  One  example:  during  my  term  in  the  European  Commission,  we  drew  on  Jean
Tirole’s research and expertise when we proposed the unbundling of the local loop in 2000, thus
opening  up  broadband  services  to  competition.  Broadband  prices  declined  rapidly  and  most
households gained access to broadband. This was an important step in the development of the
information society.
Tirole  writes  a  lot  about  incentives.  Incentives  affect  the  behaviour  of  firms  and  individuals.
However, a financial incentive does not always lead to the intended results. As an example, Tirole
refers to blood donation: when people started to get a financial reward from donating blood, the
number  of  donors  plummeted.  Donors  were  not  motivated  by  money  but  by  the  possibility  to
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
contribute to the common good.
As  the  example  shows,  policy  measures  can  have  unintended  consequences.  This  poses  a
challenge, because economic models used as an aid in analysis are always simplifications –
otherwise they would not be usable. And analyses may not always reveal all the side effects.
In academic literature, peer reviewers often ask researchers to expand their models by changing
the underlying assumptions and testing the robustness of the analysis under different conditions.
This is time-consuming and prolongs the publication process. And yet it is necessary for quality
control when the purpose is to find as universal regularities as possible. In empirical research,
the  corresponding  requirement  means,  for  example,  the  use  of  alternative  data  or  estimation
methods.
Alternative analyses can remain without the attention and impact they deserve if views on the
benefits of the prevailing course of action are too cemented.
Example: predicting the financial crisis
A famous example of this is the discussion held at the Jackson Hole symposium in 2005 when I
had  just  begun  my  second  year  as  governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland.  That  year’s  theme  at
Jackson Hole was the appraisal of Alan Greenspan’s era as chairman of the Federal Reserve.
At the conference, Professor Raghuram Rajan, then director of research at the IMF, spoke on
the topic ‘Has financial development made the world riskier?’[1] Contrary to the accepted wisdom
of the day, Rajan answered three times in the positive: yes, it has made it riskier.
Rajan noted how securitisation, markets for transferring risk and bad incentives were leading to a
dangerous  accumulation  of  risks  in  the  global  financial  system.  He  was  also  worried  about
liquidity. There follows a quote from Rajan’s speech and I have also cited it on some previous
occasions, as it truly is worth reiterating:
‘If banks also face credit losses and there is uncertainty about where those losses are located,
only the very few unimpeachable banks will receive the supply of liquidity fleeing other markets. If
these  banks  also  lose  confidence  in  their  liquidity-short  brethren,  the  inter-bank  market  could
freeze up, and one could well have a full-blown financial crisis.’
Now this is exactly what happened three years later after the failure of Lehman Brothers. Next
autumn will mark the passing of 10 years since that event.
The response from many in the audience was very hostile. Rajan was seen as a spoiler at the
party and an opponent of innovation and progress. His proposals for reform were called ‘non-
starters’.
At that time, the policy community was not in a mood to change course just because of one
conference presentation, even if it was a balanced and well thought-out contribution. It took a
major  international  disaster  for  the  policy  community  and  the  majority  of  academic  opinion  to
adjust its view.
Rajan’s  speech  was  a  great  example  of  not  only  professional  competence,  but  also  of
professional integrity and even courage.
Economics and climate change
When we examine the major societal issues of our time that also have a strong impact on the
economy, we cannot ignore climate change.
Climate change has been described as the largest global market failure, which is due to the fact
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
that a price has not been established for greenhouse gas emissions. The future of our climate is
subject to a considerable degree of uncertainty, but in the scientific community there is broad
consensus on the basic issues: climate change is a fact, it is accelerating and it is a human-
induced phenomenon.
There are many unresolved and difficult issues in the area of climate policy, but in economics
there is a fairly broad consensus on the principles for solving the problem. These principles are
discussed also by Jean Tirole in his book ‘Economics for the Common Good’. Climate policy
should be effective and equitable. The system should be constructed so that all countries have
an incentive to participate in the combat against climate change.
First, I will discuss the issue of effectiveness. Climate change is a global problem that requires
global solutions. One global price should be established for greenhouse gas emissions because
the impact of greenhouse gas emissions on global warming is the same irrespective of where in
the world or in which field of production they are created.
Various country-, region- or industry-specific unilateral solutions may have unwanted effects. For
example, if a country introduces a stricter climate policy, it may provide companies an incentive
for relocating greenhouse gas-emitting production to countries with a laxer climate policy. Due to
this  phenomenon  –  known  as  carbon  leakage  –  global  greenhouse  gas  emissions  would  not
necessarily decrease.
On the other hand, as a result of subsidies on renewable energy, for example, other forms of
low-emission power generation may be replaced. If the price of energy declines due to subsidies,
companies may shut down low-emission power generation plants, and in addition to renewable
forms  of  energy,  we  may  be  left  with  power  generation  that  is  low-cost  but  high-emissions.
Professor Matti Liski has presented interesting views from this perspective.
A common global climate policy would create effective incentives for developing low-emission
technology.
Another key issue in the combat against climate change is equity. The reduction of greenhouse
emissions  involves  costs,  and  poor  countries  do  not  necessarily  have  sufficient  resources  or
interest  to  participate.  Moreover,  advanced  economies  are  responsible  for  the  majority  of
historical greenhouse gas emissions. If one global price is established for emissions, we would
probably need some type of a global system of compensation for poorer countries.
The key is not to try to resolve the issue of effectiveness and equity of climate policy with a single
tool, i.e. country-specific emission targets or country-specific pricing mechanisms. This would
easily lead to unwanted effects, such as carbon leakage.
Another key question is how to create incentives for governments to participate in the combat
against climate change. The problem is due to the fact that the benefits of climate policy are
global, while the costs of reducing greenhouse emissions are usually country-specific or local.
The incentives for free-riding are obvious. To support climate policy, we need global supervision
with sufficiently strong powers. Climate policy-related compensation systems could be part of
the incentives.
On the need to develop economics competence and teaching in Finland
The examples that I have discussed today show that economics, together with other sciences,
can play an important role in resolving key social issues. It is therefore essential that economic
research and education have at their disposal sufficient resources, in terms of both quality and
quantity.
The University of Helsinki, Aalto University and Hanken School of Economics have established
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the Helsinki Graduate School of Economics, a graduate school and research unit for economics.
The  objective  is  to  meet  the  growing  demand  for  economics  competence  and  teaching  in
Finland. The Bank of Finland, together with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education
and  Culture,  support  the  establishment  of  the  unit  and  have  expressed  their  preparedness  to
provide resources for its operation.
The aim of this project is to create in Finland a globally significant research and teaching unit for
economics. The doctoral programmes of the Helsinki Graduate School of Economics will cover
all the key areas of economics. The unit is also responsible for providing a setting for Master’s
degree programmes for students at the Aalto University, the University of Helsinki and Hanken
School of Economics. The new unit will also be responsible for coordinating the establishment of
professorships  in  the  field  of  economics  and  the  recruitment  of  economics  professors  in  the
universities that are part of the Graduate School.
The  unit  will  be  a  centre  for  economics  and  other  quantitative  social  sciences.  It  will  also
cooperate with external stakeholder groups, for example economics researchers and students,
as well as researchers and students of the other social sciences at universities located outside
the Greater Helsinki area. The various branches of social sciences have many joint interests,
and therefore we may witness an increase in research interaction in future.
The sub-disciplines of economics that are in need of reinforcement are macroeconomics, public
economics,  applied  micro-economics  and  data-based  decision-making.  These  produce
competence and research-based knowledge in key policy areas, such as monetary, financial and
EU policies, social and health-care policy, competition policy and pension-related issues.
The input of researchers is also needed in the planning of markets and the impact assessment
of policy measures in various fields. Industrial organisation and structural models can provide the
necessary tools for analysis. A deep understanding of economic growth – ultimately productivity
growth – is also of key importance.
We must also consider what constitutes the optimal amount of resources to be allocated, on one
hand,  to  research  communities  that  produce  the  critical  mass  and  that  have  already  been
established in Finland in some sub-disciplines of economics, and, on the other hand, to ensure a
sufficient degree of multidisciplinary research.
In conclusion
Economics has produced a number of tools for finding the best solutions. Economists play an
important  role  in  societal  debate  by  contributing  to  the  discussion  the  results  of  economics
research and also by informing on the disagreements and interpretational differences in the field
of research. This is not only their right but also their responsibility.
[1]  Rajan,  R.  (2005):  Has  financial  development  made  the  world  riskier? Proceedings  –
Economic Policy Symposium – Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
