Sabine Lautenschläger: Cyber resilience - objectives and tools
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the first meeting
of  the  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-European  Financial  Infrastructures,  Frankfurt  am
Main, 9 March 2018.
 In 1903, the Italian inventor Marconi demonstrated his new invention, a wireless telegraph, to a
large audience. It didn’t go too well for him, though. The machine itself did work in the sense that
it transmitted a message. However, it was not the message the audience – or Marconi – had
expected. The word “rats” was being sent again and again. The system had been hacked. The
culprit in this case was Nevil Maskelyne, a magician. Allegedly, he had been hired by a British
wired-telegraph company which was worried that Marconi’s invention might ruin its business.
Technology has advanced a lot since 1903. And it has created a deeply interconnected world.
The financial system is a case in point. No financial institution can survive, let alone thrive, on its
own. No bank can do without the complex web of financial market infrastructures that underpins
its  day-to-day  business.  No  bank,  therefore,  must  underestimate  the  associated  risks.  In
particular, no bank must underestimate the IT risks, which include cyber risks. In the worst case,
a single hack could compromise the entire system. So cyber resilience is a goal we all share.
And anyone who sees it as just another competitive advantage is mistaken; the whole chain is
only as strong as its weakest link. And in that sense, many actors in the financial system are
parts of the same chain.
ECB  Banking  Supervision  takes  cyber  resilience  very  seriously.  Naturally,  we  focus  on  banks
and on the euro area. In doing so, we take into account that banks are not just connected among
themselves  but  also  with  other  market  participants  and  infrastructures.  This  means  that  our
supervision  of  IT  risks  also  covers  the  end-points  of  payment  systems  and  market
infrastructures in the banks directly supervised by us. In short, we aim to ensure the availability,
confidentiality and integrity of banks’ data and systems.
What have we done so far and what are our plans for the future?
So far, we have conducted thematic reviews on cyber risk and outsourcing. One result is
stating  the  obvious:  there  is  some  concentration  in  terms  of  companies  to  which  banks
outsource IT functions. Apart from concrete bank-specific findings, the reviews have helped
us to get a better idea of the risks. And they have made banks more aware of them.
We have conducted a stocktake on how IT risks are supervised outside the euro area. This
helped  us  to  identify  best  practices;  and  it  will  help  us  to  define  our  own  supervisory
expectations.  Work  is  ongoing  as  part  of  our  contribution  to  the  work  programme  of  the
European Banking Authority, the EBA.
We have conducted quite a few on-site inspections into IT and cyber risks, using state-of-
the-art methods. Looking ahead, our aim would be to have such inspections every three or
four years for large banks.
We  have  set  up  a  reporting  framework  for  cyber  incidents.  Since  mid-2017,  banks  have
been required to report significant cyber incidents. This will help us to quickly react in a crisis
and make us aware of common vulnerabilities.
Drawing  on  guidelines  from  the  EBA,  we  have  developed  comprehensive  IT  risk  self-
assessments  for  the  banks  we  supervise,  including  an  extensive  section  on  IT  and  cyber
security. The results of these assessments will feed into our Supervisory Review and Evaluation
Process, in which we will also challenge the information provided by banks. We will do so as a
result  of  our  insights  from  on-site  inspections  and  from  reports  of  cyber  incidents.  The
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
information collected will then serve as a basis for a thematic review of IT risks. This review will
give us a better idea of the overall IT risk landscape in the banking industry. It will allow us to
identify  blind  spots  early  on  and  define  areas  which  we  need  to  investigate  further;  this  will
eventually feed into our plans for 2019. In addition, the review will also help us to compare banks.
Partially anonymised feedback could then be shared with them.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is one thing we need to keep in mind. Right from the start, hacks
gained a lot of attention, while preventing them did not. In finance, as in many other fields, it is
mostly  just  mundane  work  that  helps  to  keep  things  safe.  I  wonder  whether  cyber  risk  is  as
unique as we are inclined to believe. I have no doubt that we need to take it seriously and that we
need to work towards making banks more resilient. In doing so, we should also welcome new
ways of tackling cyber risk, of course. But this I would like to do within the existing framework of
banks’ risk management. Cyber risk needs to be part of general risk management procedures, of
general  crisis  management,  and  general  business  continuity  planning.  After  all,  it  is  an
operational risk. And our experience in dealing with operational risks can help us to cope with
cyber risk as well.
We must keep in mind that cyber risk does not invariably arise from the technology itself but also
from how we use it. It is people who are behind the hacking. And often, it is people who leave
doors unlocked and gates wide open for cyber criminals to sneak in. People play a big role when
it comes to cyber resilience. Thus, it makes sense to draw on the principles we have established
for risk management and governance, and on the experience we have gained in these areas.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  aware  that  this  kind  of  work  is  unlikely  to  capture  the  public’s
attention  in  the  same  way  as  Mr  Maskelyne  did  in  1903.  But  it  needs  to  be  done.  While
cybercrime may have an aura of mystery and power, cyber resilience is quite the opposite: it
calls for vigilance and diligence, day in, day out.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
