Olli Rehn: Climate change and green finance
Keynote speech by Mr Olli Rehn Governor of the Bank of Finland (at time of speaking Deputy
Governor of the Bank of Finland), at the Finnish Climate Summit, Helsinki, 13 June 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Many thanks for the invitation to this important event, the Finnish Climate Summit. Helsinki is in
fact today fully tuned to the music of the future, i.e. key future policy issues, since the Bank of
Finland is right now running a three-day conference on the subject “Money in the Digital Age” on
the other side of the town. I am glad to “change the club” for a moment, not least as Sitra is
originally a spin-off of the Bank of Finland, some half a century ago.
Already in 1987, the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development – known
as  the  Brundtland  Commission  –  defined  the  need  for  economic  growth  to  be  socially  and
environmentally sustainable. I am a proud owner of the first edition of that report. Already back
then, key questions of sustainable development were much the same as today: how to balance
its three pillars, i.e. economic, social and ecological development.
Today, it is widely recognized that climate change is a significant risk to economic growth and
financial  stability  –  and  to  the  future  of  our  planet.  For  instance,  the  World  Economic  Forum
concluded in its annual Top-10 list of the biggest risks in terms of impact, that no less than eight
of those risks are linked to climate change, one way or another.
That  should  not  have  been  big  news.  The  fundamental  problem  with  climate  change  was
described thus in the Stern Review in 2006: “Climate change is the greatest and widest-ranging
market failure ever seen.” This is because climate change is an economic externality, meaning
that whoever causes the emission does not pay the full costs of the damage.
Despite the significant political achievements, like the Paris Agreement and the Kyoto Protocol,
global policy action still falls short of what is required. The withdrawal of the USA from climate
action is of course detrimental. The EU is leading the global effort also in this field.
Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, has referred to “the tragedy of the horizon”: the
impact of climate change is felt far in the future, while the costs are immediate, and thus we lack
the right incentives to fix the problem. Economists might talk about ‘time inconsistency’.
That compels us to ask some fundamental questions on policy. If carbon is the problem, why not
just ban it or strictly limit its emission?
The reason is that for the past couple of centuries, economic growth has also implied equivalent
growth in the emissions of CO . And historically, economic growth has gone hand in hand with
the increase in welfare.
2
Thus, by limiting carbon emissions without any structural change we would also limit the welfare
of our citizens. Instead, we need to figure out how to continue enabling our economies grow,
while  at  the  same  time  effectively  cutting  down  our  emissions.  Some  countries  have  already
managed to weaken the link between economic growth and emissions, but for the future of our
planet, the link needs to be cut across the world.
The  transition  of  our  economies  to  sustainability  requires  a  lot  of  capital.  The  European
Commission  has  estimated  that,  in  the  EU,  there  is  a  gap  of  180  billion  euros  a  year  in
investments to support the transition.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
And every year when this gap is not closed, it accumulates. Let’s call this the climate debt. And
it needs to be paid back at some point. For us not to become over-indebted, we urgently need to
start filling the gap.
In  the  Commission’s  action  plan,  prudential  regulation  aims  at  providing  incentives  for  green
finance.  This  would  imply  e.g.  that  risk  weights  for  green  investments  in  banks’  capital
requirements would be lower – relative to ‘brown’ or environmentally damaging activities.
However, a word of caution is in order. Green investments are not without normal financial risks
either, and these risks cannot be disregarded without jeopardizing financial stability. The previous
financial crisis pushed climate policy discussions into the political background for a decade. Let’s
not repeat that. So, financial stability needs to be at the heart of environmental finance, because it
also must be economically and socially sustainable – let’s not forget the lasting wisdom of the
Brundtland Commission!
The central banks in the Eurosystem are keenly aware of the problem posed by climate change,
and understand that the environmental goals of the EU belong to the objectives that the treaty
obliges the central banks to support – without compromising the goal of price stability. At the
same time, we understand that it is primarily the responsibility of the political authorities to decide
on the appropriate public policy measures to achieve these goals.
Correct  pricing  and  supervision  of  financial  risks  stemming  from  climate  change  (and  other
environmental hazards) are needed, both for sustainable economic development and for a well-
functioning financial system. The central banks in Europe support the ongoing work in various
international fora for removing the obstacles holding back green finance, for better disclosure of
climate-related risks, and for better integration of risk management and regulatory frameworks to
environmental assessments.
In  concrete  terms,  sustainability  considerations  should  be  better  reflected  in  the  key  tools  for
decision-making by market actors and policymakers, such as benchmarks and credit ratings. At
the same time, we must take care that changes to regulatory frameworks are justified from a
prudential perspective and do not undermine their own original purpose.
In financial regulation, environmental risks are increasingly relevant. Insurance is a case in point.
Insurers have already started paying for climate change. Insurers’ risk models need to adjust to
the increasing frequency and severity of the extreme weather events.
Thus, the insurance industry clearly has incentives to be part of thesolution. But exactly the same
applies for the banking industry as well, and in financial regulation and management we should
take into account not just the risks that the investment projects themselves are vulnerable to, but
also the risks which any ‘brown’ or unsustainable projects may cause to the economy.
Talking about environmental finance, the most direct way to influence the flow of funds is to use
semi-public institutions, like the European Investment Bank, multilateral development banks, and
other similar organizations for the purpose. With them, the right incentive structure for private
money can be created without overburdening the public finances. After all, such institutions are
already active in the field, and further involvement could be encouraged.
The European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) is a prime example. Its extended version,
EFSI  2.0,  has  a  mandate  to  invest  at  least  40%  of  its  500  billion  euros  capacity  in  green
investments. Such investments can be leveraged with private capital for an even bigger impact.
Private money, and more importantly private investment decisions made by private companies,
need to be aligned with the sustainability targets.
Economic  theory  suggests  that  the  first  consideration  of  policy  should  be  to  remove  wrong
incentives and replace them with better ones, which would take into account the environmental
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
externalities of different economic activities. No longer should the polluting companies freeride on
the backs of others – we need to move towards the principle of ‘the polluter pays’.
The International Energy Agency has estimated that global fossil-fuel subsidies exceeded EUR
250 billion in 2016. This is a direct subsidy for fossil fuel consumption at a time when we have
problems in finding out how to pay for the transition to sustainable energy. This balance must be
changed.
Ending fossil fuel subsidies is only the first step. As a second step, we need to incorporate the
costs  of  emissions  into  the  decision-making  processes  of  every  company.  Fixing  the  EU
Emissions Trading System or introducing a global carbon tax should help solve this externality
problem.
The third step is to increase transparency in companies’ business models by requiring them to
disclose their emissions. The Commission and the Financial Stability Board have been working
on  such 
their
recommendations.
investors  have  already  embraced 
reporting.  Many 
institutional 
large 
As I have argued, there is much that can be done in the financial sector to promote sustainable
development.  However,  there  is  no  single  ‘silver  bullet’  that  would  solve  the  problems  of
environmental finance at a stroke. Rather, it will take a lot of careful and detailed work, going
through  our  regulatory  systems  and  financial  management  frameworks,  to  build  a  more
environmentally friendly and solid financial system.
At  the  Bank  of  Finland  we  want  to  play  our  part,  too.  We  have  recently  decided  to  apply
responsible investment standards to the management of our investment portfolio. We will also be
a  member  in  the  newly  created  Central  Banks  and  Supervisors  Network  for  Greening  the
Financial System, which is an important forum to discuss climate action with the financial sector.
Finally, everybody needs to be part of the change. Hence, I call on both private companies and
public institutions to work for sustainable development – and for sustainable finance – with the
economically and socially effective means at their disposal.
Thank you very much for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
