Speech delivered by Dr. Indrajit Coomaraswamy  
at 20th Annual General Meeting of the 
Exporters Association of Sri Lanka 
 Today,  in  addition  to  the  growth  and  employment  objectives,  we 
have this onerous debt problem that we have to address.  We can’t 
really address that without a significant improvement in our export 
performance. 
Now, by way of introduction, before I get into the issues relating to 
the  export  sector,  specifically,  let  me  just  give  by  way  of 
background,  some  remarks  about  the  growth  model  that  the 
government  is  trying  to  put  into  place.    It  is  private  sector  driven 
with exports and FDI as key figures. 
If  I  may  say  a  few  words  about  each  of  those:    I’ve  been  a  public 
servant all my life, so I don’t subscribe to the view that the private 
sector is the panacea for all our ills.  In fact, if you look around the 
world, you get different mixes of the private sector and the State in 
terms  of  delivering  good  development  outcomes.    But  in  our  case, 
the public debt and deficit dynamics are such, that the State simply 
cannot  lead  the  development  process.  It’s  nothing  to  do  with 
ideology.    It  is  a  purely  pragmatic  assertion  that  it  has  to  be  the 
private  sector  that  has  to  drive  the  growth  in  the  regeneration 
process of this country. 
Why  exports  and  FDI  are  key  pillars:  when  you  have  a  domestic 
market  of  twenty-one  million  people  and  purchasing  power  of  now 
                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17 
almost four-thousand US dollars, you simply cannot sustain the 6% 
or  more  growth  that  we  need  to  achieve  by  just  selling  into  this 
domestic market. It’s simply not possible. 
And  why  do  we  need  6%  growth?    We  have  a  very  aspirational 
society  now  or  more.    It’s  an  educated  society  which  is  exposed  to 
all  the  latest  communication  technologies  so  people  know  what  is 
available  around  the  world  and  they  aspire  to  achieve  a  lot  of 
material  benefits  for  their  families.    So  if  one  cannot  deliver  that, 
clearly  there  could  be  tensions  in  terms  of  our  social  and  political 
stability. 
So it has to be growth in exports that drives our growth process to 
the  point  where  we  can  achieve  6%  plus  growth  to  meet  the 
aspirations of our people.   
And  FDI,  if  you  look  around  Asia,  which  has  been  the  most 
successful  continent  in  terms  of  growth  and  export  performance, 
whether  it  is  a  country  as  large  as  China  or  one  as  small  as 
Singapore,  FDI  has  played  a  key  role  in  the  export  transformation 
that has driven those economies. 
So that’s the model that the government is trying to put in place.  It 
is  doing  a  number  of  things  to  sustain  that  model  in  terms  of  the 
macro-economic  policy  making.    There  are  three  frameworks  that 
have  been  put  in  place.    The  government  has  a  revenue 
                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17 
enhancement-based  Fiscal  Consolidation  Program  which 
is 
intended to bring the budget deficit down to 3.5% of GDP by 2020.   
The  Central  Bank  is  putting  in  place  a  Flexible  Inflation  Targeting 
framework  which  is  intended  to  bring  about  monetary  policy 
formulation  which  is  pro-active  and  forward-looking.  Today’s 
interest  rates,  i.e.  when  setting  interest  rates  today,  the  full  pass-
through effects of the transmission does not have full effects in the 
system for about twelve months.  So, in setting interest rates today 
we have to have an educated view of what inflation is going to be in 
twelve months’ time.   
In  the  past,  we  tended  to  do  too  little  too  late.    We  allowed  the 
economy to overheat and then we would move. This is why we have 
had big fluctuations in our interest rates which have made business 
planning  very  difficult.    We  are  trying  to  put  in  place  a  framework 
which  will  now  enable  us  to  set  forward-looking,  pro-active 
monetary policy, which should smooth out these sharp fluctuations 
in interest rates.  They will still go up and down, but you won’t get 
the spikes and troughs that we have had in the past, if we are able 
to implement the flexible inflation targeting regime  properly. That’s 
what we are trying to do. 
Equally,  on  the  exchange  rate,  in  the  past,  we  tried  to  defend  an 
over-valued  exchange  rate.    We  used  depleted  borrowed  foreign 
reserves  to  do  that.   In doing  so,  we  lost a  large  amount  of  foreign 
reserves  and  then  eventually  there  was  an  inevitable  sharp 
                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17 
depreciation in due course.  This doesn’t make any sense, so we are 
trying to follow a more flexible exchange rate policy, which will, we 
hope,  enable  us  to  have  a  competitive  and  stable  exchange  rate.  If 
we get fiscal policy and monetary policy right, then the pressure on 
the exchange  rate  is  reduced.    So  that’s  crucial.    You  have  to  take 
all  three  macro-economic  instruments  together.    If  you  are  able  to 
implement  the  other  two  macro  policies  well,  then  there  won’t  be 
pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  and  it  will  be  possible  to  have  a 
competitive  and  relatively  stable  exchange  rate,  which  is  what  we 
want to try to get to. 
So  that’s  the  micro  side.    In  addition,  the  Government  is  also  very 
much in the forefront in terms of improving the investment climate, 
investment  promotion,  trade  facilitation  and  trade  policy.  So, 
hopefully  we  are  moving  in  the  right  direction  in  terms  of  macro-
economic  stabilization  and  the  framework  is  being  put  in  place  to 
improve the investment climate, as well as the trading environment. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  matters  in  hand  today  and  focus  on  the 
export  sector.    I  must  thank  my  colleagues  in  the  Economic 
Research  Department  of  the  Central  Bank  who  helped  me  to  put 
these remarks together. 
Sustained export growth is crucial for the development of Sri Lanka, 
particularly given the  relatively small size of its domestic economy.  
Relying  on  the  domestic  economy  is  not  sufficient  to  enhance 
growth.  Sri Lanka was ahead of its regional peers in liberalizing its 
                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17 
economy  in  1977.    The  adoption  of  liberal  economic  policies,  such 
as private sector development, export networks and encouragement 
of FDI led to immediate improvements in the foreign trade openness 
of the country. 
Trade Openness which was 36.4% in 1977, nearly doubled to 72.2% 
by 1979 while exports which were 18.7% of GDP in 1977, increased 
significantly  to  29.2%  by  1979,  just  two  years  after  opening  of  the 
economy. 
Despite the turn-around in the immediate aftermath of the adoption 
of  liberal  policies,  Sri  Lanka’s  international  trade  performance  has 
been  lackluster  since  then,  regressing  to  levels  that  were  seen 
during  the  pre-liberalization  era.  In  2015,  Sri  Lanka’s  Trade 
Openness  was  36.5%  -  it  was  36.4%  in  1977.    While  exports, 
relative  to  GDP,  declined  to  12.7%  in  2015,  having  increased  to 
29.2% in 1979, and it rose as high as 32% in 2000. 
So we’ve gone backwards.  And we have gone back to almost where 
we were in 1977, in terms of trade performance.  
Although  the  common  notion  is  that  there  is  a  by-directional 
relationship between export and economic growth, this relationship 
has not been seen  in relation to Sri Lanka.  This was especially  so 
between 2000 and 2016, wherein GDP increased by a compounded 
annual growth rate of 10.4%, while exports grew only 4%. 
                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17 
Sri  Lanka’s  economic  growth  during  the  past  decade  or  so  has 
mainly  been  generated  by  the  expansion  of  domestic  demand, 
rather  than  increased exports.  The  tradable  sector,  that  is  Imports 
and  Exports  as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  declined  from  nearly  80%  to 
45%  from  2005  to  2015.    As  a  Small  Open  Economy  you  simply 
cannot  do  that.  The  problems  were  compounded  by  a  heavy 
recourse  to  foreign  commercial  borrowing  for  projects  with  low 
returns.  That is what has led to the debt problems and many of the 
other difficulties we are having. 
When  compared  with  regional  peers  and  competitors,  Sri  Lanka’s 
export  performance  has  lagged  behind  significantly.  The  Export 
Value  Index  presented  by  the  World  Bank  shows  the  extent  to 
which  Sri  Lanka’s export  sector  has been  lagging  in  comparison  to 
its regional counterparts, during the period from 2000 to 2015.  Sri 
Lanka  has  only  increased  its  exports  by  1.9  times  in  that  period 
2000  to  2015,  while  Vietnam  and  Bangladesh  have  increased  by 
11.2  times  and  5.1  times  respectively.    Even  South  Korea  and 
Thailand  which  have  a  much  higher  base,  increased  their  exports 
by 3.1 times, whereas we, as I said only recorded a 1.9.  
A key weakness as far as Sri Lanka’s exports structure is concerned 
is  a  lack  of  diversity  in  products  and  markets,  as  well  as  low 
complexity 
in  the  export  basket. 
  Exports  continue  to  be 
concentrated on two traditional products, namely garments and tea, 
which account for more than half of total exports.  No major export 
item has been developed since the 1990s.  The Export sector shows 
                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17 
a lack of diversification in terms of markets as well.  Europe and the 
USA  continue  to  account  for  over  half  of  total  exports.    Further, 
approximately  70%  of  tea  exports  are  to  the  Middle  East  and 
Commonwealth of Independent States, where demand is sensitive to 
oil prices which have been transformed by shale technology. 
The  absence  of  effective  trade  finance  also  contributed  to  the 
subdued  promotion  of  exports.    At  present,  despite  the  share  of 
industrial exports being around 77% of total exports, it is estimated 
that high-tech exports account for less than 1% of Sri Lanka’s total 
manufactured exports. 
Improving  this  ratio  entails  investment  in  machinery,  technology 
and skilled  labour.   It  is  necessary  for  our exporters  to  compete  in 
complex  products  that  are  more  technologically  advanced.    We  are 
no longer a low wage economy, therefore we need to invest in, and 
become  competitive  in  fairly  complex  export  products,  if  we  are  to 
meet the aspirations of our people. 
Now, there was, I think, a very legitimate question asked about the 
availability  of  labour.    If  you  get  into  higher  value  exports,  you 
create jobs which will give attractive wages, which will then make it 
much  more  likely  that  people  who  going  to  the  Middle  East,  to 
Korea,  to  Italy,  to  wherever  they  are  going  now,  would  prefer  to 
remain  at  home  rather  than  migrate  temporarily  without  their 
families,  which  will  help  address  a  number  of  social  problems  as 
well.  
                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17 
So it is a question really, of relative wages.  If we can create higher 
paying jobs, and jobs in the export sector tend to be higher paying 
in  other  countries,  particularly  if  they  are  created  by  FDI.    Sri 
Lanka does not have a labour shortage problem.  It is just that the 
labour  is  in  the  wrong  places.    We  have  27%  of  our  workforce  in 
agriculture,  giving  us  7%  of  GDP.    It  is  politically  difficult  to  move 
people  from  low-productivity,  low-income  agriculture  to  higher 
productivity, higher income activities, like the export sector. 
We  have  15%  of  our  work  force  in  the  Public  Sector  Service  –  1.5 
million  people.    It  has  increased  from  700,000  in  2005  to  1.5 
million.  So  there  is  plenty  of  labour.    We  have  to  create  the 
incentives  and  the  types  of  jobs  to  get  people  into  the  competitive 
and  modern  sectors.  And  that’s  to  do  with  relative  wages.    And  so 
we need to get the investment to get higher value employment. 
Penetrating  global  value  chains  and  production  sharing  networks 
will  also  boost  industrial  exports.  Intra-firm  trading  in  Asia  has 
been the most dynamic segment of the international trading system.  
Sri Lanka has a minimal presence in these networks. This has to be 
reversed  for  Sri  Lanka  to  transform  its  export  performance  by 
leveraging its geographical location in Asia. 
I need to say something about location at this point.  A lot of people 
say:  you  are  talking  about  export  led  growth,  FDI  etc.,  when  the 
global  economy  is  rather  subdued.  That  this  is  a  low-growth, 
sluggish  international  trade  environment  era  and  we  are  trying  to 
                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17 
say  that  we  want  to  pursue  an  export  led  growth  model.    The 
answer  to  those  people,  in  my  view,  is  that  our  location,  and  our 
international relations help to overcome the headwinds in the global 
economy.  We are right in the middle of China’s Maritime Silk Road.  
We are twenty-miles from the fastest-growing large economy in the 
world,  India,  and  the  five  Southern  States  of  India,  are  growing  at 
10% plus, and have been for a number of years.  The middle class 
has been increasing dramatically in these States. 
We also have excellent relations with the Capital surplus countries 
of  East  and  South-East  Asia  –  Japan,  China,  Korea,  even  some  of 
the ASEAN countries.  And in Asia, you can leverage government-to-
government  relations  to  bring  investment  into  your  country.    So, 
whatever  is  happening  in  the  global  economy,  we  can  trump  that 
with  the  advantages  of 
location  and  excellent 
international 
relations. 
As  Sri  Lanka’s  per  capita  GDP  continues  to  rise,  the  country  is 
losing  its  competitiveness  in  terms  of  its  labour  costs  as  wages 
increase.    As  a  result,  Sri  Lanka  will  not  be  able  to  compete  in 
exporting labour-intensive, low-value products, since exporters with 
low  wage  structures  such  as  Bangladesh,  Cambodia  and  Vietnam 
will become more competitive. 
At  present,  Sri  Lanka  is  not  able  to  match  the  competitiveness  of 
countries such as Malaysia and Thailand.  So we are in little bit of a 
limbo.  We find it difficult to compete on wages with Bangladesh’s, 
                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17 
Myanmar’s,  Cambodia’s  and  Laos’s,  and  we  find  it  difficult  to 
compete  on  productivity  and  competitiveness  with  Malaysia  and 
Thailand.    So  we  have  to  have  an  absolute  laser-like  focus  on 
increasing  productivity  and  competitiveness.    That  is  how  we  have 
to move to support our export drive. 
The  modernization  of  the  services  sector  is  also  important,  as  the 
production  flow  processes  are  now  largely  dominated  by  services.  
Service exports have increased rapidly since the end of the conflict, 
with  significant  increases  recorded  in  tourism,  transport,  and  ICT.  
By  transport  I  mean  logistics  as  well.    However,  given  the 
competitive  advantages  the  country  enjoys,  particularly  in  relation 
to  its  location,  there  is  great  potential  for  further  increase  in 
services exports. 
Persistent  large  trade  deficits,  which  have  become  a  fundamental 
weakness  in  the  balance  of  payments  of  Sri  Lanka,  are  a  serious 
concern that needs to be addressed in the long-term interests of the 
country.  The substantial trade deficit indicates that comprehensive 
strategies,  which  focus  on  promotion  of  high-value  exports, 
expanding the export base, and diversifying markets by strategically 
planned  trade  in  growing  economies,  particularly  in  Asia,  are 
essential for its reduction.   
We clearly need to protect, consolidate and if possible increase  our 
traditional markets in the US and Europe.  But the real exponential 
increase that we are looking for has to come from Asia - from India, 
                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17 
from China, etc. and as we know incomes and growing markets are 
expanding in these countries - we need to get part of that action.   
Restoring  external  sector  stability  in  a  challenging  environment 
requires  the  building  up  of  external  buffers  with  policies  to  reduce 
spill-over effects from adverse developments in other areas.  In this 
connection,  priority  has  to  be  attached  to  fiscal  sustainability  and 
prudent  monetary  policies  to  ensure  that  excess  demand  is  not 
pumped  into  the  system.    The  generation  of  higher  export  revenue 
will, in turn, increase the capacity to service the large accumulated 
stock of foreign liabilities.  It can also be utilized for the stabilization 
of  the  exchange  rate,  and  the  building  up  of  a  sustainable  level  of 
reserves  which  we  serve  to  increase  the  country’s  economic 
resilience.  
In addition, a renewed focus on exports can help divert investment 
to  more  efficient  segments  sectors  of  the  economy,  thus  raising 
overall productivity.  This is what I was saying – to shift people and 
financial  resources  to  more  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  
Growth  in  exports  also  entails  several  other  benefits,  such  as  the 
creation  of  an  efficient  price  mechanism,  inflow  of  new  technology, 
employment creation, greater economies of  scale, and expansion of 
the productive resource base of the country. 
In  the  last  decade,  increasing  reliance  on  unsustainable  levels  of 
foreign  borrowing  was  an  inevitable  consequence  of  growth  which 
was  dependent  on  non-tradeable  domestic  goods.    If  you  go  for  an 
                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17 
inward  looking  growth  strategy,  as  we  did  in  the  last  10-12  years, 
inevitably you run into the difficulties we now confront because you 
have to borrow to invest and we haven’t created the capacity to earn 
the foreign exchange to service that debt. 
The country requires a growth process which is driven by a surplus 
in the current account of the balance of payments.  In the past, we 
have  experienced  high  growth  supported  by  unsustainable  budget 
deficits. If you look at our growth performance, and you correlate it 
with  the  size  of  the  budget  deficit,  our  high-growth  years  are  also 
characterized  by  high  budget  deficits.  When  growth  is  created  by 
pumping money into the system through excessive fiscal deficits, it 
is just not sustainable, because it is not productive; it is essentially 
driven mainly by consumption.  In the past, we tended to keep our 
interest  rates  low,  and  our  exchange  rate  over-valued,  so  people 
borrowed and imported.  After a couple of years you have balance of 
payment  problems,  and  also  pumping  money  into  the  system 
creates inflation. 
When  you  look  at  the  last  thirty  or  forty  years,  you  see  repeating 
cycles  of  stop-go-policies.    So,  the  trick  is  to  attack  the  budget 
deficit,  which  is  crucial.    If  you  are  able  to  do  that,  then  other 
things will fall into place. 
The  Government  has  taken  several  measures  recently  to  boost 
exports.    By  recognizing  the  need  for  broad-based  institutional 
support,  the  Government  has  already  taken  steps  to  create  an 
                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17 
Agency  for  International  Trade.    The  AFIT  is  taking  the  lead  in 
negotiating a series of trade Agreements.  An early harvest is being 
sought to increase the benefits from the existing FTA in goods with 
India.    These  include  Mutual  Recognition  Agreements  among 
Standard  Institutions  and  relaxing  quotas  on  goods  of  interest  to 
Sri Lanka.  Negotiations are also underway to deepen and broaden 
the  Agreement  in  goods  through  adjustments  to  the  negative  lists.  
The  ETCA  will  also  extend  the  application  of  negotiated  rules  to 
services,  investment,  training  and  technology.  Similar  agreements 
are being negotiated with China and Singapore.  
Now there is a natural concern, natural nervousness about a small 
country  like  Sri  Lanka  negotiating  Partnership  agreements  with 
enormous  countries  like  China  and  India.    We  are  not  the  first 
small  country  to  negotiate  trade  agreements  with  a  large  country.  
Mexico is not a small country, but it is interesting that Mexico has 
benefited most from NAFTA, much more than the US or Canada. So 
it  shows  that  a  smaller  country  can  still  benefit  by  negotiating 
Partnership Agreements with a much larger economy. 
For  that  to  happen,  the  Agreement  has  to  be  based  on  two 
principles. One is the principle of non-reciprocity, that is, the larger 
country  has  to  do  much  more  than  the  smaller  country.  And  two, 
special  and  differential  treatment  in  terms  of  the  phasing  of  the 
trade  liberalization.    So  you  build  in  mechanisms  which  take  into 
account  the  asymmetry  in  the  economies.    Both  China  and  India 
recognize  the  principles  of  non-reciprocity  and  special  and 
                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17 
differential  treatment.    Their  negative  lists  would  be  much  shorter 
than  ours;  their  positive  lists  would  be  much  longer  than  ours.  
They  will  allow  us,  I  am  confident,  o  negotiate  safeguard 
agreements.    These  mean  that  if  you  have  a  sudden  surge  in 
imports,; if say imports go up by say 20-25% over a short period of 
time,  you  can  automatically  put  in  place  safeguards  through 
increased  tariffs.    That’s  a  well-used  practice,  so  that  you  get 
protection  as  a  small  country  against  import  surges  from  larger 
countries.  Equally,  you  can  negotiate  a  good  dispute  resolution 
mechanism,  which  gives  you  a  chance  to  address  your  issues  that 
come up when in dealing with a larger country. So, there are these 
mechanisms, well tried and tested mechanisms, which can be used 
for us to ensure that we get a good deal.  Our trade negotiators are 
well aware of these principles and mechanisms and I am sure they 
will negotiate effectively. 
Now  in  addition  to  all  the  deals  which  that  have  been  negotiated 
with India, China and Singapore, we have the bilateral FTA in goods 
with  Pakistan  which  is  being  invigorated,  and  on  top  of  that,  of 
course we have EU GSP plus.  If you take all this together, if we are 
able  to  conclude  these  Trade  Negotiations  successfully,  Sri  Lanka 
could  have  access,  preferential  access,  to  a  market  of  3  billion 
people,  which  is  a  massive  USP.    Now  I  think  Singapore  has 
preferential  access  to  both  China  and  India.    But  they  don’t  have 
preferential access to EU. So there is no other country in the world 
that  I  know  of,  which  has  preferential  access  to  China,  India  and 
                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17 
Europe.  I know that GSP plus is only for four years.  But four years 
is enough time for us to take advantage of it.  
So  that  is  a  massive  opportunity.    Now,  of  course  this  market  of 
three  billion  people  is  going  to  provide  opportunities  for  our  own 
exporters.    But  on  top  of  that  the  trick  is  to  use  this  preferential 
access 
to 
this  3  billion  person  market 
to 
leverage 
the 
trade/investment  nexus.  We  can  tell  people  you  can  come  and 
locate  here  and  sell  on  a  preferential  basis  to  China,  India  and 
Europe.    That  is  a  massively  attractive  narrative  one  can  offer  for 
potential investors from all over the world. 
Now,  if  I  may  talk  about  some  of  the  policy  support  offered  by  the 
Government.    The  EDB  has  initiated  a  National  Export  Strategy 
which,  as  you  know, 
is  a  collaborative  effort  between  the 
Government  and  the  private  sector  and  it  provides  a  five-year 
action-oriented  frame  work  for  the  development  of  trade  and 
competitiveness. 
Simultaneously, a National Trade Policy has now been drafted.  It is 
a very neat 20-page document, very tightly and coherently drafted, 
and  this  is  the  first  time  we  have  formulated,  in  this  concise  way, 
the  country’s  trade  policy,  which  for  me,  is  actually  very  well 
presented. 
An  Anti-dumping  bill  is  also  in Parliament.   It  is  very  important,  if 
we  are  going  to  open  up  some  sectors  as  part  of  the  trade 
                                                                                                     Page 15 of 17 
agreements.    The  Government  is  also  working  on  a  Trade 
Adjustment  Package      with  the  World  Bank  and  the  International 
Trade  Center,  in  Geneva.    What  that  intends  to  do  is  to  assist 
companies,  which  are  going  to  be  affected  by  liberalization  to 
become  more  competitive,  and  also  to  assist  workers,  whose  jobs 
have been threatened, to re-train.  
Now,  I’ve  talked  on  SMEs,  for  export  promotion.  There  are  four 
areas where they require support.  1. Training; 2. In-puts, including 
technology; 3. Access to finance; and 4. Marketing. 
Invariable  the  biggest  challenge  is  marketing.  To  get  them  to 
produce  output  that  they  can  sell  in  the  domestic  market  and 
abroad.    So  one  challenge  is  really  how  we  link  our  SMEs  into 
International  Supply  Chains,  either  through  larger  companies,  or 
directly.  We really need to think in terms of linking up our SMEs to 
supply chains. 
The  Government  has  already  taken  some  decisive  measures  to 
overcome  the  short-comings  of  the  export  sector.    With  some 
improvement  in  the  performance  in  the  export  sector,  so  far,  there 
are signs that the initiatives are favourable.  Since March, we have 
now  seen  an  improvement  in  export  numbers.    We’ve  got  numbers 
up  to  May  –  in  March  April  and  May  the  numbers  have  shown  an 
up-turn in export revenue.  Hopefully that will gather momentum.  I 
think  with  the  GSP-plus  kicking  in,  and  hopefully,  a  more  stable 
macro-environment, export growth will continues. 
                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17 
As I said, Sri Lanka cannot attain 6-7% growth on a sustained basis 
without  transformation  of  its  export  performance.    Nor  can  we 
overcome the constraints associated with our external debt burden 
without  significantly  enhanced  non-debt  creating  foreign  exchange 
receipts,  generated,  inter  alia,  by  increased  exports.    So,  export 
transformation is crucial for both boosting growth and employment, 
as well as to stabilize our vulnerability stemming from our external 
debt.  The performance of the EASL will be a key determinant of the 
future prosperity of all Sri Lankans.  
Thank you very much. 
                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17 
