Andreas Dombret: Introductory statement - IIF International Capital
Markets and Emerging Markets Roundtable
Introductory statement by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  IIF  International  Capital  Markets  and  Emerging  Markets  Roundtable,
Washington DC, 20 April 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen
 Ever since the ground-breaking work of Solow in the fifties most policy makers and members of
academia – especially in the advanced economies – have inclined to favour free capital flows.
Many crises later, the view has somewhat shifted, in particular, regarding emerging markets and
developing countries, which is the group of countries that I will focus my remarks on.
Not only can capital flow reversals and in the extreme form sudden stops create significant costs
in terms of output losses, financial instability and even political instability. But from all we know
today it is surprisingly  difficult  to  find  empirical  evidence  of  capital  account  liberalization  being
beneficial in terms of output gains, investment, productivity gains, or risk sharing for countries
that have not progressed sufficiently far in their institutional development.
Much  of  the  work  on  this  has  been  carried  out  by  the  IMF  and  indeed  by  Maurice  Obstfeld
himself,  so  Maurice  should  correct  me  if  I  am  wrong,  but  essentially  liberalized  capital  flows
should go hand in hand with functioning judicial systems including well enforced property rights,
developed  and  well  regulated  financial  systems  as  well  as  stability-oriented  macroeconomic
policies. There are even longer lists, but these seem to be the minimum requirements.
So, given that these conditions are not always met fully, should countries resort to capital flow
measures if faced with volatile flows?
By the way, I am using the IMF terminology of capital flow measures. These are basically capital
controls  plus  those  macroprudential  measures  that  aim  to  limit  financial  stability  risks  arising
from cross-border capital flows.
I think we all agree that sound domestic policies should always be the first line of defence and
that capital flow measures should not substitute for warranted macroeconomic or exchange rate
adjustments.
But  it  is  also  useful  to  state  an  obvious  but  often  overlooked  fact:  Unlike  restrictions  on  the
current account, the imposition of capital flow measures is not under the jurisdiction of the IMF,
thus, any country can basically adopt such controls as it deems necessary to regulate capital
movements. However, capital flow policies are part of the Funds surveillance and as such open
to an assessment of their impact on the International Monetary System.
Objectives of capital flow measures usually are to maintain monetary independence, to mitigate
exchange  rate  pressures  and  to  safeguard  financial  stability.  However,  capital  controls  also
come with a cost,  like  impairments  of  financial  markets  and  possible  reductions  of  economic
growth due to their distortions.
Evidence  on  the  effectiveness  of  capital  flow  measures  is  mixed,  or  in  the  words  of  Olivier
Blanchard: "still surprisingly inconclusive". Work on macroprudential measures has only begun in
earnest after 2009, thus, the knowledge about these policies is still limited.
Significant results have been found on the composition of capital flows. There is evidence that
they can lower banking inflows and portfolio inflows. But there is no significant evidence for a
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
clear impact on net or gross flows. While there is solid evidence that capital flow measures help
countries  to  conduct  an  independent  monetary  policy,  there  seems  to  be  little  or  no  effect  of
capital flow measures on the exchange rate.
Although  the  literature  on  the  impact  on  financial  stability  is  relatively  young,  capital  flow
measures have been found to lower credit growth and to curb bank leverage.
Where does that leave policy makers? There is still a lot we do not know. It seems capital flow
measures  can  help  a  country  to  deal  with  volatile  capital  flows  and  reduce  the  likelihood  of  a
financial crisis. But of course one has to consider the costs and distortions.
I  think  the  Institutional  View  of  the  IMF  has  got  it  mostly  right.  To  safeguard  financial  stability
countries should be able to use all tools at their disposal, depending on which are best suited to
the task, but as non-distortionary as possible and not as an excuse to shirk difficult decisions on
macroeconomic policy.
Given that capital movements are not comparable to trade in real goods and given the diversity of
its membership, I see no value in extending the IMF’s mandate beyond the existing arrangements
regarding capital flows. This would necessitate also a change of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement,
which could be opening a can of worms.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
