BANK OF UGANDA 
  Remarks by 
 Louis Kasekende (PhD) 
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 At the 2017 Annual Dinner for the Uganda Bankers’ 
Association (UBA) 
 Pearl of Africa Hotel, Kampala 
 November 24, 2017 
  The Guest of Honour, 
Chairman of Uganda Bankers’ Association, 
Chief Executive Officers of Financial Institutions, 
Executive Director of Uganda Bankers Association, 
Invited Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 Good evening 
 I bring warm greetings from the Governor, who is unable to be here with 
us  this  evening.  I  will  begin  by  commending  the  Uganda  Bankers’ 
Association (UBA) for all of the good work that it has done this year.  
In  particular,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  contribution  of  the  UBA  to 
promoting  informed  public  debate  about  the  financial  services  industry 
and the role that it plays in our economy. In this regard, the first Annual 
Bankers’  Conference,  held  in  Kampala  in  July  of  this  year,  was  a  very 
important initiative of the UBA.  
 Many  of  the  problems  facing  the  banking  industry  today  can  be  more 
effectively  solved  if  banks  cooperate  to  pool  resources  and  realise 
economies of scale and thereby reduce costs.  A good example of this is 
the  project,  spearheaded  by  the  UBA,  to  build  a  joint  technological 
platform for agent banking, which can be shared by all banks. As digital 
financial  services  become  an  increasingly  prominent  feature  of  the 
banking  market,  the  sharing  of  joint  platforms  by  banks  offers  the 
potential to generate significant costs savings, which can be passed on to 
customers.   
 The  UBA  is  also  working  with  its members  to set  up  an  Asset  Recovery 
Corporation, jointly owned by the banks, which can help banks to tackle 
 1 
the problem of bad loans. This is another example where the sharing of 
resources provides potential benefits for all banks. 
 As we approach the end of the year, I would like to take this opportunity 
to reflect on the last 12 months in the banking industry and try to draw 
some lessons.  
 I  will  begin  with  a  brief  word  on  the  macroeconomic  situation.    The 
2016/17  financial  year  was  undoubtedly  difficult,  with  real  GDP  growth 
being  lower  than  potential  not  least  because  of  the  severe  drought  that 
afflicted Uganda in 2016. However, as the Governor noted in the October 
2017 Monetary Policy Statement, the quarterly GDP data for the first half 
of  2017  and  other  high  frequency  economic  indicators  point  to  an 
acceleration of real economic growth in 2017 and we are now reasonably 
confident that we can achieve real GDP growth of at least five percent in 
the current fiscal year.  
 Inflation is firmly under control. With the impact of the drought having 
abated,  headline  inflation  has  fallen  by  2.5  percentage  points  over  the 
last  five  months  to  4.8  percent  in  October  2017,  while  annual  core 
inflation  was  only  3.5  percent  in  October  2017.  The  improving  outlook 
for  inflation  allowed  the  Bank  of  Uganda  to  further  lower  the  policy 
interest rate – the Central bank Rate – to 9.5 percent in October.  
 The  current  year  is  probably  best  characterised  as  a  period  of  financial 
consolidation  for  the  banking  industry.  At  the  end  of  2016,  one  of  the 
largest  banks  in  Uganda  –  Crane  Bank  –  had  been  taken  into  the 
statutory  management  of  the  BoU  and  the  banking  industry  as  a  whole 
was  struggling  with  high  levels  of  non-performing  loans  and  low 
profitability.  
 2 
We were able to resolve Crane Bank successfully, without any loss to its 
depositors, and without any contagion to the rest of the banking system. 
Public confidence in the safety of depositors’ funds has been maintained. 
I believe that this is testimony to both the underlying financial strength 
of the Ugandan banking industry and the efficacy of our bank resolution 
framework.  
 Two  aspects  of  this  resolution  framework  are  especially  worthy  of 
mention.  First,  the  Financial  Institutions  Act,  2004  mandates  the  bank 
regulator  to  undertake  prompt  regulatory  interventions  to  stem  the 
losses of failing banks before depositors’ funds are eroded.  Second, the 
BoU  has  successfully  utilised  purchase  of  assets  and  assumption  of 
liabilities  transactions  to  minimise  the  disruption  to  the depositors  and 
other customers of failed banks.  
 Over the course of the first nine months of 2017, the financial soundness 
indicators  of  the  banking  system  have  improved.  The  non-performing 
loan to total loan ratio has fallen from 10.5 percent in December 2016 to 
7.2  percent  in  September  2017;  and  in  absolute  terms,  NPLs  fell  by  32 
percent.  Over  the  same  period,  the  total  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  the 
banking  system  increased  from  19.8  percent  to  23.8  percent  of  its  risk 
weighted  assets.  Strong  capital  buffers  are  of  particular  importance  in 
bolstering the resilience of banks to adverse shocks. 
 As  I  noted  earlier,  2017  has  been  a  year  of  consolidation,  especially  in 
regard  to  bank  lending,  with  gross  loans  and  advances  increasing  by  a 
mere  1.8  percent  in  the  year  to  September  2017.  I  hope  that  the 
downward  trend  in  NPLs  and  the  reduction  in  the  policy  interest  rate 
will encourage banks to ease their lending policies and thereby enable an 
acceleration of credit growth in 2018. 
  3 
A crucial problem which needs to be addressed if banks are to strengthen 
loan quality is that of the valuation of property. In a recent survey on real 
estate  lending  by  BoU,  the  majority  of  commercial  banks  reported 
concerns  about  valuation  standards  and  some  indicated  that  they  have 
faced  challenges  realizing  the  value  for  collateral  because  of  inflated 
valuation reports. A key gap appears to be the lack of a uniform industry 
standard.  I  think  that  it  would  be  useful  for  the  UBA  to  work  with 
stakeholders to develop common guidelines and standards in this area.   
 Looking ahead; I am confident that the banking industry in Uganda can 
innovate  to  reduce  the  cost  of  financial  services,  broaden  the  range  of 
services available to customers and widen access to financial services, in 
particular through the adoption of digital financial services.  
 Since 2009 we have witnessed the exponential growth of mobile money 
transactions, which is radically transforming the way in which payments 
and  money  transfers  are  made  in  Uganda.  For  instance,  in  the  year  to 
June  2017;  there  were  over  one  billion  transactions  worth  over  Shs.  52 
trillion  (about  half  of  Uganda’s  nominal  GDP)  on  the  mobile  money 
platforms.  The challenge now is to bring about a similar transformation 
in the way in which other types of financial services, such as savings and 
credit products, can be delivered to customers and at lower costs.  
 Finally,  the  advent  of  digital  financial  platforms  such  as  mobile  money 
was  seen  by  some commentators  as  competition  to  the  formal  financial 
services sector. To the contrary, these digital platforms have crowded in 
more users into the formal financial system, with the number of accounts 
in commercial banks increasing from 4.5 million as at June 2015 to 7.4 
million  as  at  June  2017;  while  number  of  accounts  in  financial 
institutions licensed by the BoU (Commercial banks, Credit Institutions 
 4 
and  MDIs)  rose  by  3.3  million  over  a  two  year  period  to  9.3  million 
accounts as at June 2017. 
 Thank you for listening and I wish you a joyous festive season. 
 5 
