   Special Lecture at the Waseda University  
Tokyo, 4 December 2017 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
 “The challenges of the multilateral economic order: 
What European responses?” 
        Press contact: Clémence Choutet (+ 33 1 42 97 74 51; clemence.choutet@banque-france.fr). 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Page 1 sur 6 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in  Tokyo  this  afternoon  and  to  give  this  lecture  at  the  Waseda 
University,  in  this  splendid  auditorium  named  after  your  illustrious  founder,  [Ōkuma 
Shigenobu].  The  Waseda  University  is  well  known  for  the  quality  of  its  teaching  and  its 
founding principles – independence of learning, practical utilization of knowledge, education 
of good citizens – reflect the educational ambition of this place. I would like to warmly thank 
President  Kaoru  Kamata  and  Professor  Kazumi  Shimizu  for  their  kind  welcome  speeches. 
Both of you lived in France and have maintained strong links with our country since then. It is 
thus  no  coincidence  that  the  Waseda  University  under  the  Presidency  of  Mr  Kamata  is  an 
active and remarkable example of the strong ties between Japan and France.  It is therefore 
an  appropriate  place  to talk  about  the  challenges  of  the  multilateral  economic  order,  all  the 
more  so  as  Japan  pays  special  attention  to  international  cooperation.  This  issue  can  be 
considered  on  two  levels:  internationally  and  regionally.  This  afternoon,  I  will  start  by 
elaborating on the international level and the need for active multilateralism to face our global 
challenges.  Then,  I  will  dwell  on  the  regional  response.  I  will  not  elaborate  on  Asia,  but  on 
Europe, and the European Monetary and Economic Union. 
   I. 
The need for active multilateralism to face our global challenges.  
Let  me  start  with  my  first  point:  the  need  for  active  multilateralism  to  face  our  global 
challenges.  We  have  to  strive  to  maintain  the  collective  rules  of  the  game,  at  international 
level  and  with  all  our  partners.  In  the  current  context,  international  cooperation  between 
countries  is  more  important  than  ever:  it  is  essential  to  preserving  the  improvement  
in  the  global  economic  environment.  The  global  recovery  has  indeed  been  gathering  pace 
since 2016: according to the latest IMF forecast, global growth should stand at 3.6% in 2017, 
after  3.2%  in  2016,  while  in  Japan  real  GDP  growth  should  pick  up  to  1.5%  in  2017  after 
1.0%  in  2016.  Moreover,  growth  in  the  euro  area  should  reach  at  least  2.2%  this  year, 
reflecting  a  strong  economic  recovery.  However,  there  are  two  major  risks  threatening 
growth: financial instability and protectionism.  
 Regarding financial instability, the continued rise in global public and private debt since the 
start of the 2000s – from 190% of global GDP in 2001 to 230% in 2016 [slide] – has become 
a subject of concern. The 2008 crisis stemmed from this, but this trend has unfortunately not 
slowed down since; the private debt in emerging countries (namely corporate debt) has risen 
particularly rapidly. Since the G20 summits of London and Pittsburgh in 2009, the regulatory 
Page 2 sur 6 
 effort  that  has  been  undertaken  is  unprecedented,  in  particular  in  the  banking  sector:  
by increasing both the quantity and quality of banking sector own funds, the Basel III reform 
has considerably enhanced the robustness of banks; in addition, it ensures better account is 
now taken of the diverse risks to which banks are exposed, thanks to the introduction of two 
new  liquidity  ratios  for  bank  cash  levels.  I  am  confident  that  we  are  about  to  finalise  a  fair  
and  reasonable  agreement  at  our  GHOS  meeting  next  Thursday.  This  would  be  very 
welcome for our international financial order.  
 But  beyond  Basel  III,  we  should  finalise  measures  that  target  non-banks.  We  must  ensure  
a  balance  between  financing  channels.  The  priority  has  now  shifted  from  the  solvency  
of  banks,  which  has  improved  substantially,  to  the  liquidity  of  the  shadow  banking 
sector,  particularly  funds  and  asset  management  companies  that  are  exposed  to  the  risks  
of sudden panic-driven runs. Moreover, we have to make sure that this internationally agreed 
regulatory  framework  is  implemented  everywhere  with  consistency.  Unilateral  deregulation 
would  be  nothing  less  than  a  lose-lose  scenario with  serious consequences for the  stability  
of the global financial system – we would be paving the way for the next financial crisis – as 
well as the competitive landscape for US, Japanese and European banks.  
 The  second  risk  is  related  to  protectionist  tendencies,  namely  in  the  United  States.  
We,  Europeans  and  Japanese,  shoulder-to-shoulder  with  Canada  and  others  elsewhere, 
must resolutely defend international economic relations based on commonly respected rules 
and  multilateral  institutions:  their  deterioration  would  dampen  world  trade  and  economic 
activity. In a recent speech, the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Haruhiko Kuroda, stressed 
“the  importance  of  multilateral  cooperation”.  He  said:  “Economies  must  overcome  their 
narrowly-defined self-interest so as to cooperate and coordinate from a broader perspective 
[…].  It  requires  a  well-functioning  institutional  framework  such  as  the  IMF,  multilateral 
development  banks  (MDBs),  and  the  G20.” i These  words  are  particularly  relevant  in  the 
current context.  
  II. 
Regional responses: the case of Europe 
Let  me  now  turn  to  my  second  point:  regional  responses,  taking  Europe  as  the  example.  
The  European  Union  is  a  unique  case  of  very  advanced  cooperation  between  countries  at  
a  regional  level.  The  cooperation  is  obviously  multifaceted,  but  today  I  would  like  to  focus  
on three shared economic and social assets of Europe: its single currency, its single market, 
and its unique social model. 
Page 3 sur 6 
 Three  European  assets:  its  single  currency,  its  single  market,  and  its  unique  social 
model. 
First, with the  euro, we share a solid  currency which is recognised worldwide. Let me say  
it  straight  away:  the  Monetary  Union  can  be  considered  as  one  of  Europe’s  greatest 
successes.  As  you  know,  the  single  currency  was  officially  launched  with  the  Maastricht 
Treaty  in  1992  and  introduced  in  1999.  But  Maastricht  and  the  euro  are  naturally  part  of  
a broader history: the history of Europe, and its singular achievement of making the transition 
from  war  to  peace.  The  euro  has  indeed  provided  us  with  a  strong  symbol  of  unity  among 
European  nations.  It  is  true  that  there  is  currently  some  euro-scepticism  and  a  surge  
of populism, but, a clear majority of euro area citizens support the euro today (73% according 
to  the  latest  Eurobarometer) ii  [slide].  From  12  at  the  start,  the  number  of  participating 
countries  has  risen  to  19  today.  Seven  additional  countries  have  decided  to  join  the  euro 
since 1999 –most recently Lithuania in 2015 –, and none has wanted to leave it. The euro is 
not  a  technocratic  utopia:  it  is  a  political  and  democratic  decision,  supported  25  years  on, 
with hindsight, by a clear majority of citizens. 
 The fact is the euro has already delivered material benefits. In line with our mandate, inflation 
has  been  kept  under  control.  This  directly  benefits  household  purchasing  power  and  helps 
build confidence in the value of the currency. Let us take a historical perspective.  In the 18 
years  preceding  the  introduction  of  the  euro  (1981-1998),  inflation  gradually  declined  but 
remained at 4.6% on average, with major disparities across countries. In the 18 years since 
the euro (1999-2016), inflation has been much more stable, averaging 1.7% [slide], and the 
disparities across countries have narrowed. Besides,  better controlled inflation means lower 
financing  costs,  because  it  reduces  risk  premia  [slide].  All  economic  players  benefit  from 
lower  interest  rates:  households,  when  they  purchase  a  property,  companies  when  they 
invest,  but  also  governments  and  hence  taxpayers.  In  addition,  the  euro  has  helped 
consolidate the European single market, by eliminating currency fluctuations for corporates, 
simplifying day-to-day life for citizens and promoting capital market integration.  
 Lastly, the economic size of the euro area and the stability of its currency have enabled the 
euro to play an important international role. Today, the euro accounts for 20% of international 
reserves,  second  only  to  the  US dollar.  An  internationally  recognised  currency  generates 
economic  gains:  financial  markets  are  more  attractive  to  domestic  and  foreign  investors, 
more liquid, and thus more efficient. But it also carries a political weight: when Mario Draghi 
speaks  at the  G7  or  G20,  the  whole  world  listens to  Europe  attentively,  just  as  when  Janet 
Yellen speaks for the United States.  
Page 4 sur 6 
 Overall, this list of benefits is impressive, particularly when you think that the euro is only 19 
years old. More importantly, we have come this far despite the global financial crisis, which 
triggered  the  deepest  recession  in  three  generations  and  despite  the  euro  area  sovereign 
debt crisis a few years later. The robust economic recovery in the euro-area now enables us 
to  pursue  a  path  of  gradual  normalisation  of  our  monetary  policy.  On  26  October,  
the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  dividing  in  half  the  volume  of  our  monthly  net  asset 
purchases, took a decisive step towards possibly ending them, while maintaining with all our 
other instruments an ample degree of monetary accommodation.  
 Second, we in Europe share a large single  market. It removes all internal borders and 
regulatory  obstacles  to  the  free  movement  of  goods,  capital,  services,  and  persons  in  the 
European  Union.  It  is  a  tremendous  asset  which  belongs  to  us  all  –  the  27  –  and  it  is  no 
coincidence that access to the single market lies at the heart of the Brexit debate. We cannot 
foresee  the  outcome  of  the  future  negotiations  and  we  don’t  want  to  “punish”  the  United 
Kingdom  in  any  measure.  But  we  must  respect  one  consistency  principle:  access  to  the 
single market must continue to go hand-in-hand with strict acceptance of all its rules. There 
can  be  no  cherry-picking  or  free-riding.  For  the  financial  services  industry,  this  means  that 
you can hardly expect to obtain a European passport if you do not accept the single market's 
rules.  
 Third,  we  share  a  common  social  model  which  combines  high  standards  of  public 
service,  relatively  low  levels  of  inequality  –  much  lower  than  in  American  society  –  and  a 
good intensity of social dialogue. And this has been achieved in a market economy. At a time 
when globalisation may leave many behind in advanced economies, when the debate about 
inequalities  is  coming  back  to  the  forefront  –  and  these  are  real  challenges  behind  the 
populist wave –, now is not the moment to give up our social model. Europe and Japan are 
quite close in their choices.  
 How to move forward: four accelerators of the Economic Union. 
The  assets  that  I  have  presented  constitute  a  valuable  achievement  for  Europe.  Now,  we 
must  actively  build  on  them,  and  not  lazily  rest  on  our  laurels.  I  will  now  present  some 
avenues of improvement. Indeed, we have clearly succeeded in building a Monetary Union, 
but  this  is  not  sufficient.  It  is  now  time  to  make  concrete  progress  on  Economic  Union,  on 
which  we  have  not  been  very  effective  yet.  We  are  in  agreement  on  the  "why".  Monetary 
policy  cannot  be  the  only  game  in  town,  and  therefore  we  should  not  overburden  it. 
Furthermore  we  aim  at  greater  stability,  to  counter  the  risk  of  a  new  crisis  befalling  an 
unprotected  euro  area,  with  all  its  damaging  political  and  economic  repercussions;  and 
Page 5 sur 6 
 greater  growth,  to  catch  up  our  past  lag  on  the  United  States  and  finally  treat  the  fatal 
disease of mass unemployment in Europe. As for the  “when”, we obviously have a unique 
historic  opportunity:  with  the  economic  recovery;  with  the  new  French  President  and  also 
stable governments in the Netherlands and hopefully in Germany.  
 With  this  objective  in  mind,  how,  concretely,  can  we  make  progress  on  Economic  Union? 
There is an absolute prerequisite: the implementation of national reforms. Let me say, as an 
independent  central  banker,  that  the  new  French  government,  under  Mr.  Macron’s 
presidency,  has  already  made  decisive  steps  in  that  direction  [slide].  A  substantial  labour 
market reform was approved last summer and has already been implemented. A forthcoming 
reform of vocational training and apprenticeship is expected next year. Moreover, measures 
have been taken to keep public deficits below the threshold of 3% of GDP. For the first time 
in 10 years, the government deficit should be below this threshold in 2017 (2.9%). Needless 
to  say,  these  efforts  have  to  be  pursued  in  the  future.  Furthermore,  in  my  view,  we  should 
also trigger four accelerators [slide]:  
    A  macro  accelerator: a collective economic strategy in the euro area. It is premised on 
one simple fact: economic growth and employment would be stronger in the euro area if 
we combined more reforms in countries where they are needed, like France or Italy, and 
more  stimulus  in  countries  with  leeway  for  it,  like  Germany  or  the  Netherlands.  To 
achieve this collective economic strategy, euro area Member States have to seal a deal, 
which could be prepared and adopted as early as 2018. It could be supplemented by the 
creation  of  a  Stabilisation  Lending  Instrument,  aimed  at  supporting,  through  credits, 
Member  States  facing  asymmetric  shocks.  This  could  be  part  of  a  European  Monetary 
Fund, provided that its scope of action is extended beyond the current European Stability 
Mechanism.  
    A micro accelerator: i.e. a Financing Union for Investment and Innovation. The aim is to 
mobilise the EUR 350 billion savings surplus of the euro area, notably to shore up equity 
which  is  the  key  to  an  innovation  economy,  and  also  to  foster  synergies,  thanks  to  an 
integrated  steering  mechanism,  between  the  Juncker  investment  Plan,  the  Capital 
Markets Union and Banking Union. 
     A  fiscal  accelerator, once we have increased trust  between Member  States and made 
headway towards greater economic convergence: the euro area budget could be used to 
finance, for the benefit of all countries, certain “European common goods” such as digital 
technology, energy transition, security, and migration controls.  
Page 6 sur 6 
     An institutional accelerator: The fourth is not an accelerator in substance, but rather a 
“facilitator” for the first three. In terms of institutions, we would need first and foremost a 
euro area Finance Minister, President of the Eurogroup and member of the Commission, 
backed  by  a  European  Treasury;  but  also  a  euro  area  Parliament  group,  in  order  to 
ensure  the  democratic  legitimacy  of  the  institutions  and  decisions.  But  it  only  makes 
sense  if  we  make  progress  on  the  substance:  if  not,  it  would  be  little  more  than  mere 
window dressing.  
 The latter two accelerators, fiscal and institutional, would require Treaty changes, unless they 
were to be very limited. But this must not stop us from making progress straightway on the 
first  two  accelerators,  in  order  to  breathe  new  life  into  the  Economic  Union.  These 
accelerators  would  contribute  to  the  functions  of  economic  policy,  as  described  by 
Musgrave:iii allocation,  stabilisation  and  distribution.  The  allocation  function  would  obviously 
be the role of the micro accelerator, but also of the fiscal one. The stabilisation function could 
be ensured mainly by the macro accelerator, but also by the micro one, thanks to enhanced 
private risk sharing, and possibly by the fiscal one. Finally, a distribution  function  – if any – 
could possibly fall to the fiscal accelerator provided that its implementation does not result in 
a “transfer union” which would be a one-way budget. 
  I would like to conclude my speech by quoting Kazuo Ishiguro, who was awarded the Nobel 
Prize in Literature for 2017 and who was born in Japan: “If you are under the impression you 
have  already  […]  perfected  yourself,  you  will  never  rise  to  the  heights  you  are  no  doubt 
capable  of.” iv  These  words  could  apply  to  our  international  cooperation  since  the  crisis,  
as well as to the European Economic and Monetary Union. Both are undeniable successes 
and  it  is  well  worth  emphasising  it.  But  this  should  not  prevent  us  from  making  progress 
towards a better functioning of the Economic Union. I strongly believe that we could achieve 
something  that  even  today  may  still  be  considered  unbelievable.  Thank  you  for  your 
attention.  
                                                            
i“The Global Economy and the Global Financial System: In an Era of Revival and Metamorphosis”, Speech at the Institute of 
International Finance (IIF) Spring Membership Meeting, Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, 9 May 2017. 
ii European Commission, Standard Eurobarometer 87, Spring 2017.  
iii Musgrave (R.) and Musgrave (P.), Public Finance in Theory and Practice, McGraw Hill, 1989. 
iv Kazuo Ishiguro, The Remains of the Day, 1989. 
