Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Revisiting  the  role  of  rural  banks  in
countryside development and financial inclusion
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 65th Annual Convention and General Membership Meeting of the
Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines (RBAP), Davao City, 21 May 2018.
 Davao  City  Mayor  Sara  “Inday”  Z.  Duterte,  Secretary  of  Finance  Carlos  G.  Dominguez,  PDIC
President Roberto B. Tan, Land Bank President Alex Buenaventura, RBAP President Giovanni D.
Gabriento, RBAP members, colleagues from the Bangko Sentral, fellow workers in government,
esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen, a pleasant good morning to everyone!
 I am honored to visit Davao again, for RBAP’s 65th Annual Convention and General Membership
Meeting.  It is always a pleasure to see and appreciate the city’s beauty.  I also look forward to
sampling some durian.  And as Mayor Sara said, let us support Davao’s Buy Buy Buy to support
the local economy.
I commend the outgoing set of RBAP officers and directors for their commitment and exemplary
performance  to  promote  a  sound  rural  banking  industry.    RBAP’s  milestones  under  your
leadership are vital to promoting broader countryside development through financial inclusion. 
Your consistent service to our farmers, fishermen, and MSMEs has become RBAP’s trademark
of service excellence.
I remember during last year’s charter anniversary symposium in October, we talked about how
rural banks have become customers’ best financial friend or BFF .  Now, we celebrate how rural
banks are #LODIs in bringing necessary financial services to the underserved, unserved, and
unbanked Filipinos.
1
This term “LODI” is Filipino millennial speak for “IDOL” and takes off from your theme, “Leading
onwards  to  development  and  inclusion  #LODI.”    To  me,  this  theme  indicates  the  industry’s
willingness to reposition itself to the growing needs of a new breed of financial customers and to
leverage on digital financial technology to advance economic development and financial inclusion
objectives.  That  you  have  one  of  the  youngest  RBAP  presidents  to  steer  the  rural  banking
industry into this direction is very promising.
Rural Banks as #LODIs for Financial Inclusion
Rural  banks  have  proven  themselves  to  be  LODIs  in  their  own  right  —  exemplary  models  of
customer outreach, demonstrating a genuine commitment to bringing progress to rural areas. 
Rural  banks  may  be  smaller  in  size  compared  to  commercial  and  even  thrift  banks,  but  they
have  proven  their  mettle  and  invaluable  contribution  to  countryside  development  through
financing of rural communities.
With RBAP’s extensive network of 2,745 banking offices nationwide, the industry is strategically
positioned to be a catalyst for greater financial inclusion.  Your close ties and familiarity with the
rural communities you serve make you effective providers of rural financing and other corollary
microfinance  products  and  services.   Almost  97  percent  of  the  industry’s  network  is  spread
across provinces.  In fact, one in every three banking offices located in Davao Region and in
Mindanao is a rural bank.
However, there is much scope for expansion towards countryside development.  554 cities and
municipalities, or almost a third of the total, in the country are still unbanked as of December
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2017. Moreover, the 2017 Global Findex by the World Bank showed that only 34.5 percent of
Filipino adults have formal accounts, ranging from bank deposits to e-money accounts.
Given RBAP’s strategic role and familiarity with rural communities, it is crucial for the industry to
leverage on innovative technologies and liberalized branching rules that BSP has initiated.  This
will  further  expand  market  reach  and  enhance  existing  service  delivery  channels  in  the  rural
areas.
That rural banks enjoy public trust and confidence is evident in your deposit profile.  Accounts
maintaining less than P10,000 make up 87.3 percent of your retail depositors.
As a conduit of rural financing, almost a third of your loans are granted to households.  Most of
them  are  salary  loans  to  the  working  class,  with  farmers  and  fisherfolks  among  the  biggest
recipients of rural bank loans.  No less important, these are quality loans.  Because of this, your
return on equity was solid at 9.0 percent in 2017, when net profit stood at P3.4 billion for the year.
These strengths affirm your status as a dependable partner in helping rural communities and in
building  a  more  dynamic  and  inclusive  financial  system  –  a  system  where  there  is  effective
access to a wide range of financial products and services that are appropriate to the needs of the
local communities.
Consistent with the government’s thrust under the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan
(MTPDP) to spread economic development to the countryside, there are now more opportunities
for rural banks to grow and provide the financing needs of their clientele.
As the economy grew more than six percent for the last six years (6.7 percent in 2017), the latest
GDP data likewise showed that the National Capital Region (NCR), at 6.1 percent, grew less
than the national average.  This certainly means that economic activities in the provinces are
expanding and growing.
In recent years, the Davao Region has consistently posted growth above the national average,
being the second fastest growing region of the country in 2017, at 10.9 percent GDP growth.
We are counting on our rural banks to assist in further bringing about economic progress to the
rural communities.
BSP’s Reform Agenda for an Inclusive Banking System
For  our  part,  the  BSP  remains  strongly  committed  in  providing  an  enabling  regulatory
environment for the overall safety and soundness of the banking system.  We always emphasize
the importance of prudent banking operations, highlighted by strong capitalization and adequate
liquidity position as buffers against unforeseen shocks.  We also continuously encourage banks
to aspire to the highest standards of corporate governance and risk management; to go beyond
just  complying  with  banking  regulations  so  you  can  proactively  respond  to  emerging  banking
developments and challenges.
As  part  of  continuing  reforms,  the  BSP  approved  the  adoption  of  minimum  prudential  liquidity
requirements  (MLR)  for  stand-alone  thrift  banks,  rural  banks,  cooperative  banks,  and  quasi-
banks.  These requirements are designed to enhance covered institutions’ resilience to liquidity
stress events and is a significant step in aligning our supervisory framework with international
standards.  It also illustrates the BSP’s commitment to the application of proportionality in our
approach to supervision.
We  also  wish  to  leave  no  banking  institution  behind.    Together  with  the  Philippine  Deposit
Insurance Corporation (PDIC) and the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), we have re-launched
the  Consolidation  Program  for  Rural  Banks.  This  will  further  strengthen  the  industry  through
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
stronger  financial  condition,  enhanced  management  and  governance,  more  synergies  and
economies of scale, and wider market reach.
The continuing prudential reforms have given us the confidence to further liberalize our rules to
allow more business with operational flexibility.  Towards this end, we allowed banks to utilize
cash agents as cost-efficient service delivery channels.  Rural banks can now establish branch-
lite units to offer a defined set of services with less regulatory requirements.  The framework for
basic deposit account further enhances the smooth onboarding of unbanked clients.
I am happy to share also that the BSP has made significant inroads with the implementation of
the  National  Retail  Payment  System  (NRPS).    The  NRPS  implements  our  commitment  to
upgrade  the  country’s  retail  payment  system  by  promoting  electronic  retail  payments  and
facilitating inter-operability for faster settlement of transactions.
The NRPS will facilitate our transition from being a cash-heavy to a cash-lite economy.  This will
eventually  bring  benefits  to  the  economy  –  in  terms  of  speed  and  efficiency  of  transactions,
reduced  costs,  improved  transparency,  enhanced  security,  and  expanded  access  to  financial
services.
Last  April,  we  launched  Instapay,  the  second  automated  clearing  house  under  the  NRPS
following the launch of PesoNet.  Via InstaPay, Filipinos can enjoy safe and affordable account-
to-account electronic retail payments in real-time.  Transactors may send and receive funds or
make payments in real time of up to P50,000 per transaction.  The transferred funds are instantly
received in full as no fee is charged for the electronic crediting of funds to the receiving party’s
account  in  InstaPay  participating  institutions.    There  is  no  reason  why  rural  banks  should  not
want to be part of PesoNet and Instapay.
Leveraging on Technology and Value Chains
With the digital transformation of the banking system, we, at the BSP, are optimistic that the rural
banking industry can emerge as a strong and dependable delivery channel in the provision of
banking services.  It can do so by taking advantage of available technology. 
Opportunities for growth may be seized should you cater to the needs of the young generation. 
Studies show that fintech has great potential to transform financial services given the country’s
young demographic profile.
According  to  the  World  Bank  Findex,  23.5  percent  of  our  population  are  composed  of  young
adults (between 15 to 24 years old).  The domestic digital money ecosystem certainly needs
players, big and small, to meet the exacting demands of this new breed of clients.
On  this  note,  I  am  happy  to  report  that  one  rural  bank  is  already  pilot-testing  a  cloud-based
banking  solution  in  managing  its  day-to-day  operation  more  effectively  and  serving  its  clients
more efficiently, thereby upgrading its competitiveness.
Meanwhile, several banks, including rural banks, and non-bank financial institutions are already
utilizing the Lendr platform to facilitate credit origination processes.  Still others are hooked up
with a commercial bank on a block chain pilot.
Rural  banks  can  also  certainly  leverage  on  technological  innovations  and  value  chains  to
contribute to the growth of the agricultural sector.  This sector certainly needs a helping hand
from its #LODIs. 
Rural banks have been entrusted by the law with the vital and noble role of serving the financing
needs of farmers, fisherfolks and the people of rural communities to achieve inclusive economic
growth.  We believe that with an increasing recognition of the necessity for innovation, coupled
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
with proximity to and intimate knowledge of the market, rural banks can now, more than ever,
reinvigorate and blaze new trails for agriculture financing in the country. 
Innovations  enabled  by  digital  technology  and  value  chain  approach  can  not  only  make  agri-
financing more viable but also unlock new opportunities for rural banks to deliver a whole range of
financial services catering to the unique needs of farmers and their communities.  Tapping these
opportunities  and  backed  by  a  solid  culture  of  governance,  rural  banks  can  evolve  into  these
valuable full-service community banks – a true pillar of countryside development.
Towards  this  end,  we  have  been  promoting  value  chain  financing  through  guidelines  and
incentives (as contained in Circular No. 908).  The Agricultural Value Chain Financing Framework
provides an opportunity to improve the lives of 10.9 million Filipinos employed in the agriculture
industry,  as  well  as  MSMEs  that  are  engaged  in  production  and  related  activities  such  as
processing, distribution and trading.  Furthermore, we have been supporting programs that build
awareness  and  capacity,  including  last  year’s  2-day  agri-value  chain  conference  and  the
publication  of  an  ongoing  study,  as  funded  by  the Asian  Development  Bank.    This  study  can
serve  as  an  important  reference  and  guide  for  banks  wishing  to  implement  agri-value  chain
financing.
The areas where rural banks can incorporate fintech in their operations are wide open.  Let us
embrace responsible use of technology and innovation to become better bankers. 
Closing Remarks
In closing, I wish to express BSP’s appreciation to RBAP for its enduring commitment to support
its members.  It is this support that helps enable our rural banks to offer quality banking services
to their constituencies. 
With this mission in mind, the next generation of RBAP leaders can further enhance the rural
banking  industry’s  resilience  to  meet  the  challenges  of  a  rapidly  evolving  financial  services
industry.   Congratulations to the new leaders of RBAP!
I  trust  that  RBAP  will  remain  as  the  BSP’s  proactive  and  staunch  partner  in  expanding  touch
points and in digitizing more products and services to onboard more of our countrymen into the
banking and financial system.
Maraming salamat.  Mabuhay ang RBAP! Mabuhay ang rural banking! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
