Michele Bullock: Fast payments in Australia
Address by Ms Michele Bullock, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of
Australia, to Seamless Payments 2018, Sydney, 13 March 2018.
 Thank you to the organisers for the opportunity to speak at this session of Seamless Payments.
There is a lot going on in the payments space at the moment, driven by the burgeoning use of
technology to make consumer and merchant experiences with payments more convenient and
dare I say ‘seamless’. Today I am going to talk about a significant piece of national infrastructure
that will be really important in this context – the New Payments Platform, or NPP as it is known.
But before I talk specifically about the NPP and the future, I want to do a little retrospective –
where have we come from?
Developments in the payments system
Over the past 20 years, the way we pay in Australia has changed dramatically. In particular, the
use of cash and cheques, which were the most common method of payment in the mid 1990s,
has declined and the use of electronic payment instruments has risen very sharply. While we
don’t have data on cash transactions in the mid 1990s, we are confident that cash use was at
least as high, if not higher than the 70 per cent of day-to-day transactions that cash accounted
for in the Reserve Bank’s first survey of consumer payments in 2007. Our most recent survey in
2016 suggests this share has fallen to around 35 per cent. We have better information on non-
cash transactions. In the mid 1990s, there were around 110 non-cash transactions per capita
per year. The most used non-cash payment instrument was the cheque. There were around 45
cheque transactions per person per year, accounting for a little more than one-third of all non-
cash transactions. At that time, the now ubiquitous payment cards accounted for a further third of
non-cash payments – around 40 per person per year, split fairly evenly between debit and credit
cards.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Now the landscape looks completely different. There are now around 500 non-cash payments
per person per year. The number of cheques written is now equivalent to around 4 per person
per year and continuing to fall sharply. Cards, on the other hand, now account for around two-
thirds of all non-cash payments and the use of debit cards, in particular, has grown very strongly.
But direct debits and credits, which go through the direct entry (DE) system, have also grown
steadily over the past two decades. While the growth in direct credits was initially mainly driven
by bulk payments such as payrolls and welfare, more recently they have been increasingly used
to make person-to-person payments directly between bank accounts and to pay invoices.
But  while  tried  and  tested,  and  cheap,  the  DE  system  had  a  number  of  issues  that  became
increasingly  constraining  as  our  e-society  grew.  First,  while  DE  payment  files  are  exchanged
multiple times during a business day, there is usually a considerable delay – often some hours –
between  when  a  payment  is  initiated  and  the  time  the  funds  are  available  in  the  beneficiary
customer’s account. Payments initiated on weekends and public holidays had to wait even longer
until sometime on the next business day. Second, there were only 18 characters of free text to
indicate what the payment was for. This can be a significant limitation, particularly for one-off
payments where the beneficiary requires a material amount of information to ensure the payment
is dealt with appropriately. And finally, payers had to know (and payees had to divulge) the Bank-
State-Branch (BSB) number and the account number and name to make the payment.
These  issues,  among  other  concerns  about  barriers  to  innovation  in  the  payments  system,
ultimately led to the Reserve Bank’s Strategic Review of Innovation in the Payments System, the
conclusions  of  which  were  published  in  2012.  The  strategic  objectives  set  out  in  that  review
included a number of requirements of the payments system of the future:
the ability to make real-time retail payments
the ability to make and receive low-value payments outside normal banking hours
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the ability to send more complete remittance information with payments
the ability to address payments in a relatively simple way.
Sound familiar? These are indeed all the things that the NPP will deliver. So where are we?
The NPP – Australia’s fast payments system
As you know, the NPP launched to the public in mid February. It is the culmination of more than 5
years’  work  from  inception  to  launch.  It  involved  unprecedented  cooperation  between  financial
institutions  to  build  the  capability  to  send  and  receive  individual  payment  messages  between
themselves  in  real  time,  with  settlement  also  occurring  transaction-by-transaction  through  the
Reserve  Bank’s  Fast  Settlement  Service.  But  it  also  required  banks  to  upgrade  their  internal
systems to allow posting to customer accounts within a few seconds. The resources involved in
delivering the system as a whole were substantial.
Australia is obviously not the first country to build a fast payments system. FIS in its 2017 report
on fast retail payment systems noted that there were some retail payment systems with real-
time features as early as the 1970s and 1980s. The report listed 25 countries with live real-time
systems  in  2017.  It  listed  a  further  10  systems  under  development,  at  that  time  including
Australia. FIS also provided a useful taxonomy to compare and contrast the various systems –
its Faster Payment Innovation Index (FPII). The index rates faster payment systems on the basis
of the features they provide. At a basic level, in order to be classified as a fast payment service
the system must provide interbank, account-to-account payments in less than one minute end-
to-end and be irrevocable. But, the more value-added services and openness to innovation, the
higher the rating.
1
The Australian NPP was not rated in this report since it was not live at the time. But it certainly
will offer many of the features that rate highly in the FPII. For example, the taxonomy lists ISO
standard and 24/7 availability as being highly desirable features enhancing customer value – the
NPP offers both these. It lists fast settlement, the ability to include remittance information with
payment  and  the  ability  to  assign  an  alias  to  a  bank  account  as  being  some  of  the  optional
features that maximise customer value. The NPP also delivers these features. There are other
capabilities  that  the  NPP  does  not  currently  provide  –  like  ‘pull  payment’  capability  –  but  the
infrastructure will allow other services to be offered in the future.
One of the things that is unique about our NPP is the architecture. There are three facets to this.
The first is that the infrastructure for exchanging messages is based on a distributed architecture
rather  than  a  centralised  hub.  Participating  institutions  implement  payment  gateways  that
exchange messages with other payment gateways. There is no centralised infrastructure that
processes and switches messages. One key advantage of this architecture is that there is no
central point of failure. It also means that many of the functions that might typically be performed
in  a  hub,  such  as  fraud  monitoring  and  exceptions  processing,  are  done  by  the  individual
participants.  This  might  be  desirable  for  institutions  that  want  to  maintain  control  over  these
processes.
The second facet of the architecture that is quite innovative is the separation of the clearing and
settlement  infrastructure  from  commercial  overlays.  The  infrastructure  has  been  set  up  as  a
utility, and pricing will be on a cost recovery basis. This infrastructure can then be utilised by any
number of commercial ‘overlays’ to deliver services that use the NPP’s real-time clearing and
settlement capabilities. The first of these is Osko – initially offering person-to-person payments
but within a year or so offering payment with document and request to pay. It is also expected
that other innovative services will look to leverage the real-time payment capability of the NPP.
The third relatively unusual facet is the real-time transaction-by-transaction settlement of retail
payments 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Australia has had a real-time gross settlement system
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
for high-value payments for weekday settlements for the past 20 years. And this is indeed best
practice around the world for high-value payments. But not many countries currently provide real-
time  settlement  of  retail  payments,  and  even  fewer  offer  it  24/7.  Many  fast  retail  payments
services, for example, settle payments in batches through the day or only during business hours.
The advantage of utilising real-time settlement in our fast payment service is that it extinguishes
settlement risk and removes the need for other controls over settlement risk, such as caps on
exposures. The fact that these controls are not required removes some limitations that might
otherwise need to be considered by overlay service providers as they design their products.
So now we have this world-class infrastructure, what for the future?
The first point to note is that it is still early days. Given the complexity of the build and the long-
term nature of this important piece of infrastructure, the launch was never intended to be a ‘big
bang’. While there had been extensive testing ahead of launch, including an extended period of
live  proving,  moving  into  production  always  uncovers  some  issues.  A  cautious  approach  to
ramping up volumes was therefore an appropriate way to manage the operational risks.
Second, the experience of fast payment systems around the world suggests that volumes will
increase quite slowly at first. It took the UK Fast Payment Service around 3½ years to get to 10
transactions per person per annum and Swish, the Swedish system, just under 3 years to get to
this  level.  There  are  probably  a  couple  of  reasons  for  the  initially  relatively  slow  growth  in
volumes. It will take some time for people to become familiar with the new system – people are
typically  quite  set  in  their  payment  habits.  Furthermore,  like  all  networks,  there  are  positive
externalities  the  more  participants  there  are.  That  is,  as  more  financial  institutions  offer  fast
payments and the reach of the system grows, it provides greater value to both individuals and
businesses. If none of my family and friends can receive payments through the NPP I am less
likely to sign up for an alias and use it. But the more people I can pay using the system (and the
more people I can receive money from) the higher value I get from the system.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, as noted earlier, the system has been set up to encourage the development of commercial
‘overlays’ using the real-time payment capability to deliver value-added services to consumers
and businesses. Aside from the additional Osko services in prospect, possible overlays might
include  services  for  superannuation,  e-invoicing  and  motor  vehicle  sales.  I  am  sure  there  are
many innovative minds turning to the possibilities.
This brings me to an issue that has caused some concern among potential new players in this
space  –  access  to  the  NPP.  They  observe  that  the  system  has  been  built  by  the  financial
institutions and is governed by a board made up of those institutions, including the four major
banks. They worry that these institutions will either make participation very difficult or costly or,
alternatively,  will  have  the  inside  running  on  developing  and  launching  commercial  overlay
services.
I think there are a few reasons to be optimistic that access will not be an issue. To begin with, as
I noted earlier, the NPP is a utility. It is aiming to cover costs, not make a profit. Further, given that
many  of  its  costs  are  fixed,  it  is  in  the  interests  of  NPP  Australia  (NPPA)  to  get  as  many
payments through the system as possible to lower the per-transaction cost.
The  structure  of  the  board  and  the  constitution  also  provide  some  protection.  The  board  is
comprised  of  eight  participant  financial  institutions  (the  four  major  banks  plus  four  elected
representatives of smaller institutions), two independent non-executive directors (of which one is
chair)  plus  a  director  representing  the  Reserve  Bank.  Each  director  has  one  vote  and  the
constitution notes that an objective of NPPA is to promote the public interest, including through
fair access.
But it is also worth noting that the NPP at its core is an infrastructure that facilitates clearing of
payment  messages  between  financial  institutions  and  settlement  of  those  obligations  across
accounts  at  the  Reserve  Bank.  In  this  sense,  it  is  similar  to  other  clearing  and  settlement
systems  –  cheques,  direct  entry  or  payment  cards,  for  example.  It  is  not  necessary,  or  even
necessarily efficient, for all financial institutions to participate directly in clearing and settlement.
In the NPP, for example, there are three aggregators that provide indirect access to institutions
that do not want to incur the cost of participating directly. Indeed, there are already around 50
smaller banks, credit unions and building societies that are able to offer fast payments to their
customers using the aggregators.
Similarly, it is not necessary for non-financial institutions that want to use the real-time capability
of the NPP to participate directly in clearing and settlement. Just as they use the rails of other
payment systems through a financial institution to offer their services to customers, they will be
able  to  use  the  NPP.  NPPA  is  already  engaging  with  start-ups  on  how  they  might  utilise  the
infrastructure. More generally, if a business doesn’t like the price for fast payments it is getting
from its bank, there are many other institutions that can offer an alternative.
In the end, though, if it looks as though lack of access is stifling competition, the Reserve Bank
has the power to designate and set an access regime. As I said, I am fairly optimistic that we will
not have to. But it is always an option.
Security and real-time payments
Finally,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  fraud.  It  has  been  noted  that  in  a  world  of  real-time
payments, fraud can also be done in real time. Unlike the current system, where there is at least
a few hours to review and halt a fraudulent payment, in a fast payment system the money can be
expected to be gone. The risk isn’t new – it just happens faster. This was an issue that was
thoroughly  considered  in  the  development  of  the  NPP,  drawing  on  experience  from  overseas
systems, particularly the United Kingdom.
There are a few ways in which the NPP and participants are attempting to address fraud risks.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Banks have their own fraud detection systems and controls associated with interbank transfers.
These  include  such  things  as  transaction  limits,  two-factor  authentication  and  algorithms
designed to identify suspicious transactions. These will continue to be in place with the NPP. But
in addition, when making an NPP payment to a PayID, the sender will be shown the name of the
account to which they are paying and have an opportunity to confirm that they wish to make the
payment. This is an extra step that will assist payers to make sure they are paying who they think
they are. There are also verification processes in place for registering PayIDs (the system that
allows customers to assign an alias to their bank account) to ensure people are who they say
they are. Indeed PayID registration can only take place from within a customer’s internet banking
portal or app. The NPP also has a fraud liability framework in place that is consistent with existing
consumer protection frameworks, and allocates liability where fraud is the result of inadequate
verification practices. But like all payment systems, customers need to be alert to the potential
for  fraudsters  to  trick  them  out  of  details  that  would  allow  a  fraud  to  occur  –  like  their
passwords.  Educating consumers on these risks remains an imperative for the regulators and
for the financial institutions.
Conclusion
2
The  NPP  is  an  important  piece  of  payments  system  infrastructure  that  will  pave  the  way  for
further  innovation  in  the  payments  system.  It  has  taken  many  years  of  hard  work  from  the
industry,  undertaken  in  a  great  spirit  of  cooperation.  But  we  now  have  a  world-class  fast
payments system that I encourage the industry to embrace and create valuable services for their
customers.
1
2
FIS (2017), ‘Flavours of Fast’, Final Report, June.
I am using the term ‘fraud’ broadly here, to include not only situations where there is a theft or misuse of account
information, or the compromise or hacking of customer authentication details, but also to cover ‘scams’, where
the victim is tricked or persuaded into making a transfer to the fraudster’s account. These might occur via forged
invoices, from bogus emails from foreign jurisdictions offering a share of a large sum of money, various social
media scams. The ACCC’s Scamwatch’, available at <www.scamwatch.gov.au/>, website provides a range of
information and warnings for consumers.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
