Benoît Cœuré: Asserting Europe's leadership
Panel remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at Rencontres Économiques d’Aix-en-Provence, Aix-en-Provence, 8 July 2018.
 Global  governance  since  World  War  II  has  been  characterised  by  American  leadership.
According to the famous distinction introduced by Thucydides in his History of the Peloponnesian
War , leadership can be exercised in two very distinct ways.
1
“Legitimate” leadership builds on trust and common identities. This is what the ancient Greeks
called hegemonia.  But  leadership  can  also  be  based  on arkhe,  which  can  be  understood  as
exercising  powers  through  command  and  control.  Interpretations  suggest  that  the  move  from
hegemonia to arkhe is what Thucydides saw as the root cause of Athens’ defeat by Sparta.
2
I would argue that American leadership over the past seven decades was of the first, legitimate
type.  In other words, it went largely unchallenged because it was built on shared fundamental
values that brought nations around the globe together – the values of human rights, freedom,
democracy,  equality  and  the  rule  of  law.  These  are  also  the  values  for  which  we  Europeans
stand.
[3]
 
Globalisation and free markets were a natural consequence of American hegemony. Both rested
on the ideological victory of the capitalist system on which the US economy is built. Free and
open markets were seen as a vehicle to sustain and expand this economic model.
Ironically, this system is now being challenged by its most ardent champion.
Putting  one’s  country  first  marks  a  departure  from  the  sort  of  prudent  and  vigilant  policy  that
leadership by a legitimate hegemon would entail. The transactional nature of such an approach
arguably belongs much more to arkhe – hard power – where policies and doctrines are imposed
on others, without their consent and regardless of the consequences. International agreements
are repealed, the international rule of law is questioned and other nations are challenged.
How  Europe  reacts  to  this  dismantling  of  the  current  international  order  will  have  a  profound
impact on the world.
Dismissing  the  current  tensions  as  an  accident  would  be  a  mistake  in  my  view,  not  least
because they are deep-rooted and predate recent political events.
[4]
In  particular,  the  acceleration  of  globalisation  and  technological  progress  in  the  past  30  or  so
years has radically changed the world we live in. While millions of people have been lifted out of
extreme poverty, wealth and income inequality has soared, and countries have become more
vulnerable to foreign spillovers, and to international crises more generally. Many people feel that
not all countries are abiding by the same rules and standards, and that the open market has
weakened our democratic control.
These concerns are real and need to be taken seriously.
[5]
But too often the solutions offered to today’s global challenges are simplistic and short-sighted.
For  example,  raising  tariffs  and  withdrawing  within  national  borders  will  deprive  people  of  the
economic benefits of trade and integration. According to ECB staff estimates, in an hypothetical
scenario where the US raises tariffs on all imports of goods by 10 percentage points, and its
trading partners impose the equivalent on US exports, US GDP could be up to 2½% lower than in
the baseline in the first year alone.
[6]
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Paradoxically, it will also offer people no refuge from the effects of global competition: isolating
oneself from global value chains will raise input prices, make exports less competitive and make
the country less attractive to investors, with adverse effects on employment and growth.
There is therefore a need for sustainable and effective solutions to today’s challenges. But here
lies a dilemma: although globalisation has increased the need for stronger and better domestic
policies, it has also progressively reduced the range and effectiveness of policy tools available to
individual countries to respond to the challenges it creates.
For instance, globalisation makes it harder for policymakers to regulate and supervise financial
markets  and  prevent  recurrent  crises.  And  by  making  the  tax  base  footloose,  it  weakens
governments’  ability  to  support  people’s  incomes  and  retrain  those  displaced  by  global
competition.
More and not less international cooperation must therefore be part of the solution.
This is also consistent with the lessons we have learnt from earlier episodes of globalisation –
that it needs to be governed by strong institutions to prevent recourse to harmful protectionism or
other excessive measures. Already the ancient Greeks were aware that alliances were key in
protecting against arkhe.
In  Europe,  international  cooperation  starts  with  the  European  Union  (EU).  Despite  its
shortcomings, the EU is one of the strongest alliances of sovereign nations in human history. It
provides its Member States with the means to both defend their interests at a global level and to
address the negative effects of globalisation.
[7]
For example, in the EU we have the tools to address tax arbitrage by multinational corporations.
And EU regulation, together with the European Court of Justice, provides the strongest possible
reassurance that openness does not promote rent-seeking and does not harm consumers.
Our response to “America first” can therefore only be “Europe united”, as the German foreign
minister Heiko Maas recently put it.
 In other words, we should foster cooperation on security
and defence, speak with one voice on international affairs, and complete both the Single Market
and the euro area’s architecture.
[8]
Let me stress the importance of the last objective: completing the euro area’s architecture. The
European Central Bank has a fundamental stake in this project, given its mandate to protect the
stability of the euro. But completing the euro area’s architecture is also necessary for Europe to
be  able  to  attain  its  other  objectives.  We  won’t  be  able  to  foster  cooperation  on  security  and
defence, or to speak with one voice on international affairs, or to complete the Single Market if we
repeatedly have to tackle economic crises which are largely of our own making.
A series of crises has already taken its toll on welfare and jobs, and they have sown the seeds of
division in a way that is still holding us back at a time when we need decisive action. A sound and
sustainable euro area institutional architecture will help redirect political capital where it is most
needed.
So, these and other shortcomings need to be overcome, not only to strengthen the workings of
the EU but also to protect and defend our interests abroad.
If we Europeans fail to make further progress, or if Europe remains divided between north and
south and between east and west, then we will be playing into the hands of those who are trying
to divide us and marginalise our actions.
Thank you.
345678
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
345678
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See Lebow, R.N. and R. Kelly (2001), “Thucydides and hegemony: Athens and the United States”, Review of
International Studies, Vol. 27, No 4, pp. 593–609.
Many people in the rest of the world may have seen it differently, of course.
See europa.eu/european-union/about-eu/eu-in-brief_en.
See Pisani-Ferry, J. (2018), “What leadership for tomorrow?”, Introductory note, Les rencontres économiques
d’Aix-en-Provence, 8 July.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “Taking back control of globalisation: Sovereignty through European integration”, in: The
Schuman Report on Europe, the State of the Union 2018, Robert Schuman Foundation, March.
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2018),  “The  consequences  of  protectionism”,  panel  contribution  at  the  29th  edition  of  the
workshop “The outlook for the economy and finance”, Villa d’Este, Cernobbio, 6 April.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “Taking back control of globalisation: Sovereignty through European integration”, op. cit.
See Maas, H. (2018), “Courage to stand up for Europe – #EuropeUnited”, speech at Pulse of Europe and the
Schwarzkopf Foundation Young Europe, 13 June.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
