Andreas  Dombret:  Greener  finance  –  better  finance?  How  green
should the financial world be?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Bundesbank symposium "Banking supervision in dialogue", Frankfurt/Main, 7 March 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
May  I  wish  you  a  very  warm  welcome  to  our Bundesbank  symposium  entitled  "Banking
supervision in dialogue". I am delighted to have the honour to open this, the 20th event of its kind.
Some of you might be wondering what has become of the good old Bundesbank symposium on
its 20th anniversary. Have we really come here to talk about greenhouse gases, melting polar ice
caps  and  dying  species  rather  than  credit  risk,  own  funds  and  the  banking  union?  Has  the
Bundesbank adopted a "devil may care" attitude?
On  the  contrary,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  You  see,  over  the  past  20  years  the Bundesbank
symposium has always made a point of discussing topics which drive the financial community.
And I would like to use the last such symposium during my term of office at the Bundesbank to
shed light on a matter which is – quite literally – of existential importance: climate change and the
role of the financial community.
It’s a topic which is becoming increasingly palpable, not least since the Paris climate agreement,
which  was  endorsed  back  in  2015  and  has  since  been  ratified  by  nearly  every  country  in  the
world.  This  global  commitment  to  take  action  to  curb  climate  change  was  the  culmination  of
decades of effort and an achievement which many thought was scarcely possible. The global
accord was presaged by the sobering and devastating realisation that climate change is man-
made and can only be mitigated if all of humanity works together.
Successful  though  the  agreement  may  have  been,  the  true  significance  of  the  UN  climate
conference in Paris has not yet dawned on everyone, it would appear. For most people, it is still
nothing more than an abstract arrangement to keep global warming below 2 degrees Celsius
compared with pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even
further. But there’s one thing we all need to be aware of: if the global community is even half-way
committed to hitting the ambitious target of 2 degrees Celsius, there will need to be some far-
reaching changes to the economic systems as we know them. And as for the time frame, the
later  we  get  started,  the  deeper  our  intervention  will  have  to  be. And  we  shouldn’t  expect  the
planet to make things any easier for us.
Quite specifically, this means we’ll need to be ambitious – far more ambitious than before. And
we’ll need to take a systemic view of the matter in hand. Every area of the economy will need to
adjust by correctly pricing the externalities of climate change and internalising them. And those
adjustments mean more than simply trimming our CO2 emissions. They will transform the entire
way  in  which  we  do  business  and  affect  the  path  along  which  the  economy  and  society  are
progressing.
Specifically,  I  see  three  control  loops  in  the  economy  which  can  be  used  to  tackle  climate
change. First, the general issue of the green energy of the future – this is an area in which we
have already come a long way. Second, the matter of green transport systems – regrettably,
progress is still very vague here. And the third climate change challenge is sustainable and green
nutrition  –  this  is  a  topic  where  we  still  do  not  have  many  robust  projections  about  how
developments could play out.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
There is no doubt that the financial sector is also affected in every one of these control loops.
Banks and savings banks, in their capacity as providers of credit for the real economy, will not be
left  unscathed  by  the  impending  greening  process  in  the  economy. And  that  brings  us  to  the
subject of our symposium here today and to the topic of my opening speech.
I imagine you will all be more or less familiar with the term "green finance". In essence, it’s about
the way in which the financial sector responds to climate change, and how it can help mitigate its
impact  and  promote  ecological  sustainability  –  for  instance,  by  channelling  funding  into
environmentally  friendly  technologies  and  economic  sectors  –  while  also  capitalising  on  their
growth. For me, green finance is more than anything "patient finance", if you will – a financial
world which looks primarily at the long-term repercussions of its actions. So it’s nothing less than
a  paradigm  shift.  Will  we  succeed  in  overcoming  short-term  thinking?  Will  we  succeed  in
prioritising long-term investment over short-run trading opportunities? Don’t we want to be "buy
and  hold"  shareholders  rather  than  high-frequency  traders?  Today’s  event  aims  to  raise
awareness about all these questions.
But there is at least one other aspect which is of paramount importance, and especially so from
the  perspective  of  banking  supervision.  That  is  the  risk  which  climate  change  and  the
transformation of the economy might present for the financial sector – and the matter of how far
financial institutions will need to adapt to shield themselves from that risk.
And last but not least, we as central bankers and supervisors need to face up to the question of
the role we are able to, and intend to, play in transitioning to a green financial system. These
three topics – the risks facing the financial industry, the opportunities for the financial industry,
and the role of supervisors – are the subject of my speech here today.
2 The risk perspective: what are we talking about, exactly?
Let's begin by taking the risk perspective. Mention climate change and the first thing most people
think  about  is  natural  catastrophes:  storms,  heatwaves,  droughts,  floods  and  hurricanes.  You
might  remember  that  last  year’s Atlantic  hurricane  season  was  one  of  the  worst  on  record.
Catastrophes on that scale mainly inflict widespread human suffering, of course, but they also
present economic risks, or "physical risks", as they are known. And those risks can affect every
one of us: individuals, government budgets, insurers, and other financial institutions.
We are already seeing the costs materialising on the balance sheets of non-life insurers and
reinsurers today. They add up to more than US$200 billion for the 2017 hurricane season. That is
why these costs usually make the headlines. But natural catastrophes can have a direct impact
on banks and savings banks as well if the assets they finance – be they real estate, production
facilities  or  tradables  –  are  affected.  Indirectly,  this  might  disrupt  value  creation  and  delivery
chains, having a knock-on effect on customers. And there is nothing to say that weather and
climate-related  losses  of  this  kind  will  still  be  insurable  if  climate  change  continues  to
dramatically increase the likelihood of natural catastrophes and the expected amount of losses.
But we need to think one step further. Besides the direct impact of climate change, there are yet
more  risks  which  we  need  to  bear  in  mind,  because  the  shift  towards  a  lower-emission,
"greener" economy is itself a source of potential risks, which go under the somewhat unwieldy
name of "transition risks".
The background to this is as follows. To make this transition, potentially disruptive technological
advances  and  far-reaching  changes  in  climate  policy  are  called  for.  These  developments  will
leave hardly any economic sectors unscathed. And it is safe to say that these upheavals will
force market participants to reprice many assets.
Does the term "stranded assets" mean anything to you? To hit the 2 degrees Celsius target, we
will need to curb the amount of carbon dioxide we emit worldwide. At a rough estimate, our CO2
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
emissions are probably not much more than 1,000 gigatonnes away from exhausting our budget.
However, the CO2 content of the known fossil fuel reserves still in the ground is far higher –
something like three times as much. What this means is that much of these reserves will need
to be left untapped. And the problem is that many businesses’ valuations depend to a significant
degree on the future anticipated value of such fossil fuel reserves. But if those reserves are out
of bounds, as it were, they are effectively worthless, making them "stranded assets". The loss in
the value of these assets puts the companies’ very survival on the line. As a case in point, the
market capitalisation of the major US coal businesses has contracted by roughly 60% over the
past five years, and by around 90% over the past ten. And that was against the backdrop of the
US equity market as a whole racing from one record to the next.
And  that’s  just  one  example  of  many  I  could  mention.  Depending  on  how  quickly  and
unexpectedly the transition and the resulting repricing process take place, they may well have a
huge bearing on the stability of entire sectors of the economy. So it will mainly become an issue
whenever businesses and investors are unable to plan for the long term because they need to be
in a position to respond to short-term policy impulses. This poses the risk of cliff effects, which
can trigger disruptions and financial losses that then affect the financial system and its stability.
3 Climate risks in the German banking system
Let’s  now  jump  straight  from  theory  to  practice.  To  what  extent  would  German  banks  and
savings banks be affected by a shift to a lower-emission economy?
At first glance, the amounts lent by German institutions to sectors emitting especially high levels
of CO2 appear insignificant: loans of €1 million or more granted by German banks to coal mining
companies currently amount to no more than just under €1 billion in total. However, loans to coal
mining companies can make up 1-2% of individual institutions’ issued loans of €1 million or more.
So caution is warranted here after all.
Furthermore,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  greening  process  will  have  a  much  wider  knock-on
effect. If we include loans to just those firms involved in the extraction of crude oil and natural gas
and in the processing of coal and mineral oils, this boosts the volume of loans of €1 million or
more granted by banks to almost €20 billion. Individual institutions have issued up to 6% of their
loans of €1 million or more in these sectors.
If we add energy suppliers, this figure goes up once again. Around 60 institutions issue more
than 10% of their loans of €1 million or more to the sectors I have just cited. At some, volumes
even exceed the 20% mark.
You can see what I’m getting at – this is a chain that could keep going for quite some time. The
big question now is, what can we infer from these figures?
Let  me  start  by  saying  that,  even  based  on  this  relatively  rough-and-ready  overview  of  the
situation, there is no way we can rule out significant risks for individual institutions. That said,
there are some caveats.
First, the data that I have provided are of low granularity. This makes many correlations unclear.
And many of the borrowers included in the calculation are conglomerates that make only part of
their profits in energy-intensive industries. 
Second, there is a significant degree of uncertainty with respect to how the greening process will
pan out, and thus with respect to which sectors would be affected and in what way. Just take the
automotive industry, for example. It’s all but impossible to predict the extent to which individual
manufacturers or national automotive sectors will be affected by the economic transition. What
climate  policy  measures  will  be  introduced  –  emission  limits,  bans  on  vehicles,  free  public
transport? Which technical standards will become the norm in the area of sustainable mobility?
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
How far will car manufacturers succeed in playing a leading role in these technologies?
In other words, we find ourselves in uncharted territory. The situation is unclear: searching for
historical  time  series  on  probabilities  of  default  and  losses  given  default  is  pointless,  while
established risk models can only help so much. So we are faced with uncertainty.
4 How banks can deal with risks
So the next question is this: what needs to be done?
If you take only one thing away from my speech, it should be this: it’s not enough to examine the
issue  of  greener  finance  through  the  lens  of  corporate  social  responsibility.  Potential  climate-
related risks need to be taken into account as part of risk management. In other words, banks
and  savings  banks  need  to  know  just  how  much  they  themselves,  their  customers,  and  their
customers’  business  models,  could  be  affected  by  climate-related  risks,  and  they  need  to  be
aware of the risks that this entails for their financial exposures.
We  don’t  need  to  reinvent  the  wheel  to  do  this.  Even  though  the  sources  of  risk  that  we  are
dealing with are new, their effects also fall into the established financial risk categories of credit
risk, market risk and operational risk.
But we shouldn’t oversimplify things either. It isn’t enough to have your risk managers log up the
exposures to a few high-emission sectors and find that they are manageable when looked at in
isolation. Greening is a complex process – it is far from over and will give rise to transmission
mechanisms that we are only now beginning to understand.
Historical data and established statistical procedures cannot be used as they normally would.
Scenario analyses could serve as a useful tool for raising awareness of problems. Furthermore,
we need to start a discussion about best practices in the financial system. By bouncing ideas off
each  other,  we  can  come  up  with  new  risk  measurement  approaches  and  evaluate  them  in
terms of their effectiveness and benefits.
5 How banks can profit from the transition
Ladies and gentlemen, climate change is quite rightly viewed primarily as a challenge. However,
we must not forget that, in addition to the aforementioned risks that the transition to a greener
economy  poses  for  financial  institutions,  there  are  considerable  opportunities.  In  this  context,
green finance can be so much more than the opportunity to present a green image.
That’s because the economic transition will, of course, also open up new business areas for
banks and savings banks. In all of the major social upheavals of the previous centuries, it was
people  from  the  financial  sector  who  supported  change  and  often  helped  shape  it. And  that’s
what is needed once again now.
The  opportunities  are  clear  to  see  if  we  look  at  the  investment  required:  the  level  of  global
investment  needed  to  hit  the  2  degrees  Celsius  target  set  out  in  the  Paris  agreement  is
estimated to run into the tens of trillions. The European Commission anticipates that additional
annual  investment  of  €180  billion  will  be  needed  in  the  European  Economic Area  in  order  to
achieve the Paris climate targets by 2030.
So what we’re talking about here are major projects in fields such as energy supply. But even
everyday  financial  services  such  as  residential  property  financing  could  be  affected  if
sustainability  standards  play  a  greater  role  here.  We’re  also  talking  about  funding  technical
progress  and  innovation.  Think,  say,  of  energy  generation,  transmission  and  storage,  of  e-
mobility or efficient recycling.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finally, we have seen retail demand for green investments increase significantly in recent years.
Between  2006  and  2016,  the  volume  of  sustainable  investment  in  Germany,  Austria  and
Switzerland went up more than twelvefold – from around €20 billion to over €240 billion.
So you see, there’s a wealth of potential here. I believe that the challenge is to guide the transition
in a responsible manner and help shape it.
What do I mean by that? Credit institutions that want to play a role in financing green investment
need to either gain or expand their expertise in relevant areas at an early stage. Because noble
as your intentions may be, you have to make sure that you do not fall victim to typical innovation
risks.  Wherever  technologies  and  innovative  products  are  hyped,  there  is  a  risk  of  distorted
valuations  and  of  sudden  price  corrections.  Only  true  experts  can  keep  an  eye  on  possible
dangers,  on  the  one  hand,  while  catering  for  their  customers’  future  expectations  and
requirements, on the other. Both these skills are necessary for financial institutions if they want
their business to benefit from the economic transition.
6 How green do supervision and regulation need to be?
I have talked at length about what climate change and the economic transition mean for your
work.  But  what  do  they  mean  for  regulation  and  supervision?  In  other  words,  how  green  do
regulation and supervision need to be?
Before I go any further, let me put your minds at ease – just like you do not need to completely
reinvent the wheel in the field of risk management, nor do we banking supervisors when it comes
to prudential requirements. The Minimum Requirements for Risk Management, or MaRisk, and
the  corresponding  European  rules  already  require  institutions  to  take  into  account  all  material
risks to which they are, or could be, exposed. So on this score, we have already covered the new
sources of risk, too.
But there is no doubt in my mind that the onus is very much on supervisory authorities to raise
institutions’ awareness of climate-related risks – especially in the early days. And we are doing
our bit to achieve that by running today’s symposium. What is more, I can well imagine instances
where climate-related risks are also raised at supervisory meetings with credit institutions.
I am a firm advocate of the idea that supervisors and central banks themselves should strive to
perform a special function as a role model and catalyst. This means, for example, helping to
forge  a  deeper  understanding  of  how  the  mechanisms  behind  the  risks  work.  It  was  for  this
reason that the "Network for Greening the Financial System" was established only a short time
ago. This network will serve as a platform for a group of central banks and banking supervisors
from  around  the  world  to  exchange  views  on  climate  risks  for  the  financial  sector,  regulatory
issues  and  green  bonds,  to  name  but  three  topics.  Whatever  supervisors  strive  to  achieve,  I
believe  it  is  particularly  important  for  us  to  establish  a  consistent  taxonomy  and  uniform
definitions as the basis for credible standard setting in the area of green finance. Klaas Knot will
tell you more about this in just a few moments.
So we're not coy about playing our part as supervisors in the decarbonisation of banks’ balance
sheets. Yet there are other demands being placed on banking supervisors and regulators which I
am keeping a very close eye on, because I consider them to be dangerous.
In the debate surrounding the implementation of the Paris climate targets, some have suggested
using  the  prudential  framework  to  actively  steer  financial  flows  away  from  emissions-heavy
sectors  to  more  environmentally  friendly  ones.  More  specifically,  there  have  been  demands
recently  for  banking  regulation  to  include  special  rules  that  tip  the  regulatory  scales  against
environmentally unfriendly "brown" investments or in favour of "green" financial assets on banks’
balance  sheets  –  via  capital  requirements,  for  instance.  This  has  been  dubbed  the  "green
supporting factor".
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, sustainability in the sense of environmental friendliness does not necessarily go hand
in hand with reduced risk – I already mentioned innovation risks earlier on in my speech today.
And that is also why capital requirements should be calculated on the basis of just a single factor
– the riskiness of the exposures in question. Financial market regulation in general and banking
supervision  in  particular  need  to  be  focused  on  their  core  tasks  and  remain  geared  to  risk.
Watering down the regulatory mandate would create conflicts of interest and ultimately lead to
risks to financial stability – and surely that cannot be what we want.
The European Commission today unveils its action plan on sustainable finance. It is important for
us that promoting the greening process does not take place through the back door via financial
market  regulation  and  banking  supervision.  This  is  something  we  will  watch  out  for  when  the
action plan is implemented.
Instead, policymakers can use other, traditional instruments such as tax incentives to foster the
development of green economic sectors. This approach is more effective and limits unwanted
side effects for financial stability.
7 Conclusion
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Paris  agreement  is  a  strong  political  commitment  to  climate
protection.  It  is  now  a  matter  of  ensuring  that  climate  protection  goals  are  integrated  into  the
market  economy.  The  greening  process  will  only  ever  be  successful  if  market  mechanisms
function in the right direction: behaviour that is sustainable needs to pay off; behaviour that harms
the environment and future generations should no longer be worthwhile.
Climate change is first and foremost – but not exclusively – a topic for policymakers. Financial
institutions, too, have a duty to address climate change and climate policy issues as part of their
risk management operations. It is crucial to plan ahead and engage with the topics of climate
change,  climate  policy  and  climate  risks  early  on  –  remember,  I  said  we  find  ourselves  in
uncharted territory. But there are opportunities, too. In their capacity as providers of credit to the
real  economy,  banks  and  savings  banks  can  capitalise  on  the  greening  process  whilst  also
helping to shape it.
Supervisors and regulators need to be aware that they share responsibility and need to set an
example, while at the same time heeding the perimeters of their mandate. Specifically, it would
be wrong to misuse regulation and supervision as a means of promoting economic development.
And so I fail to see any merits in proposals to introduce a green supporting factor that weakens
the  focus  on  risk.  What  I  do  think  might  be  worth  considering,  however,  are  disincentives  for
"brown" finance – but only via traditional instruments such as tax rules.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to use my final words at the last Bundesbank  symposium
during my term of office to make an urgent appeal: climate change affects us all – and the clock
is ticking. The longer we wait, the higher the costs and the more dramatic the consequences will
be. I would encourage you, and all of us, to take action.
With these words, I will now draw my last speech at the Bundesbank symposium to a close.
Over the last four years, I have spoken at this event on the topics "What is good regulation?",
"Digitalisation and what it means for the German banking sector", "European deposit insurance"
and  "Basel  III".  It  was  an  honour  to  speak  here  alongside  such  respected  figures  as  Danièle
Nouy, Stefan Ingves, Sabine Lautenschläger, Felix Hufeld and Klaas Knot.
Of course, it’s too early to bid a proper farewell at this point. I do, after all, still have around seven
more weeks of my tenure left to serve before I leave the Bundesbank. Although it was my own
decision and long-term plan not to extend my term of office, I will be leaving with a heavy heart. I
wish my successor in banking supervision all the very best and will always be on hand to offer
help and advice if they so wish. There will always be a special place in my heart for the German
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
banking  industry,  where  I  have  spent  33  years  of  my  career  since  my  time  as  a  banking
apprentice.
As a departing member of the Bundesbank’s Executive Board, I will not be adopting a "devil may
care" attitude – and nor should we when it comes to taking care of our planet.
Thank you.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
