Ed Sibley: The importance of diversity in financial services
Remarks  by  Mr  Ed  Sibley,  Deputy  Governor  (Prudential  Regulation)  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland, at the "Importance of Diversity in Financial Services" event of the FuSIoN Network (the
Financial Services Inclusion Network), Dublin, 13 February 2018.
 I am delighted to be here this evening and to have the opportunity to speak about diversity and
inclusion in financial services at the first FuSIoN event of 2018. I would like to thank Francesca
1 2
McDonagh for the invitation.  
I strongly believe that diversity in all its forms is important, and that there remains a serious deficit
in diversity of background, experience, and, critically, thinking at senior levels in financial services
in Ireland.  This needs to change.  In my remarks this evening, I will cover: some background on
the roots of my interest in diversity; the business case for improving diversity and inclusion, the
Central  Bank’s  approach  to  diversity  and  inclusion  (from  both  an  internal  and  external
perspective); and outline how we are seeking to drive improvements in diversity across regulated
firms.   It is important to note that the opportunities and benefits that can accrue from increasing
diversity  in  the  workplace  are  dependent  on  creating  an  inclusive  workplace,  where  different
views, background, experiences, cultures, etc., are valued and nurtured.
I will conclude that meaningful and sustained improvements in diversity and inclusion can help to
improve the safety and soundness of financial services firms and contribute to the restoration of
trust in the financial system in Ireland.
My background
I have been working in financial regulation and supervision since the onset of the financial crisis,
firstly, in the UK, and now in Ireland. As Deputy Governor, Prudential Regulation at the Central
Bank, my role spans the entire Irish financial services system.  It is also a very international role. 
I am a member of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the pan
European banking supervisor.  I am on the Board of Supervisors for both the European Banking
Authority (EBA) and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) and
the General Board of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).   
In other words, I occupy an extremely privileged position of being able to see across the financial
services system both here in Ireland, and across Europe.   I also have the privilege of engaging
with,  debating  with  and  disagreeing  with  international  colleagues  with  diverse  opinions,
backgrounds, incentives and views.
I am also privileged in many other ways.  In fact, you might wonder why a middle-aged, white,
able-bodied, English, male, member of the establishment (by role at least) cares about diversity
and  inclusion.    Well,  I  would  argue  that  my  good  fortune  by  birth  and  upbringing  does  not
preclude my desire for change – and, indeed, my strong belief that change is necessary.  
But  I  would  accept  that  it  is,  perhaps,  the  diversity  of  my  family  background,  my  career,  my
experiences and my interests beyond work that increase the resonance with me of the evidence
that I see.  It is for this reason that, within the Central Bank, I am Chair of the Diversity & Inclusion
Steering Group and why, with the support and drive of many others, I am seeking to improve our
approach  to  diversity  and  inclusion  within  the  Bank  and  drive  meaningful  change  across  the
financial services system.
Diversity and inclusion in the Central Bank
 I will start with an example. In July last year, the second event of the Central Bank’s Rainbow
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Network was held. BeLonG To, an organisation, which no doubt is familiar to many of you, and
which does fantastic work with young people who identify as LGBTQ, came to talk about their
work.  I hosted a panel discussion with incredibly inspiring young people who spoke about their
journey in coming out.  I was really proud to have had a role in making this event happen in the
Central Bank, and in sending a very clear message to my colleagues, that our organisation was
supportive of diversity, and wanted to be an inclusive employer. 
3
This is important. Research  shows that many LGBTQ people to not feel fully comfortable about
disclosing their sexuality at work.  There is no obligation for anyone to do so.  But employers
should provide supportive environments to show that all employees are treated equally and fairly
and can bring their whole selves to work.  In the Central Bank we are ensuring that we have such
a  supportive  environment  that  helps  all  of  our  people  to  grow  and  develop  and  reach  their
potential. 
This was one event of many, and through these events, the creation of other D&I networks, and
senior  sponsorship  to  harness  and  support  the  energy  of  employee  led  initiatives,  we  have
demonstrated our commitment to meaningful change and improvement.   I strongly credit our
Women’s  Network,  which  has  been  in  existence  for  a  few  years,  in  being  a  real  driver  of
awareness  and  the  case  for  change,  recognising  that  diversity  goes  far  beyond  gender,
important as that is.
And I am proud of where we are.   From a gender perspective, we strongly outperform both the
financial services sector, the public sector and European peers, in terms of seniority and pay,
from the Board (our Commission) down through our executive and senior leadership levels, there
is  a  very  healthy  balance.    More  than  one  third  of  our  board  are  women,  as  are  40%  of  our
4
executive committee, and 43% of our leadership team (Head of Function and above).
Our ambition is to go further, and there is much more work to be done in the Central Bank.  We
have  dedicated  resources  to  improve  our  approach  to  D&I  across  the  Bank,  and  have
established Parents and Carers, Bankability and the Rainbow Networks running alongside the
Women’s Network. 
Why?
 There is a plethora of research that a more diverse and inclusive workplace can better enable
the Central Bank to fulfil its mission and vision of ‘safeguarding stability, protecting consumers’
and  of  being  ‘trusted  by  the  public,  respected  by  our  peers,  and  a  fulfilling  workplace  for  our
people’.
As stated by Governor Philip Lane during a speech at the European Financial Forum two weeks
ago, “We  see  diversity  and  inclusion  as  vital  to  ensuring  we  have  the  right  mix  of  people  to
deliver our complex and diverse mandate and that all our people have the chance to reach their
5
potential.”
8
6
The  research  has  shown  that  having  diverse  teams  can  improve  the  quality  of  decision-
making  at all organisational levels, reduce groupthink and allow assumptions to be challenged
more effectively . Heterogeneous teams are, on average, better than homogeneous teams on
creative  and  complex  problems .  They  increase  the  number  of  perspectives,  provide  better
understanding of customer needs and flex management approaches. In a diverse and inclusive
workplace, there is greater potential for internal crowd sourcing of ideas, innovation, challenging
10
of ideas, and refining ideas in real time .
7
9
Research based on mathematical models and social experiments, demonstrates how diversity
can trump ability in group decision-making processes .Diversity has been found to reduce the
average error in decisions . It has been found, that the more variation in the pool, the better the
11
12
13
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
selective process , which is key to reducing groupthink. The more diverse a team, the more
14
likely its predictive capability in the face of uncertainty .
13
The 2016 Empowering Productivity Report, which was sponsored by the UK Treasury and the
Bank of England concludes that, “Diverse groups tend to have a well-rounded view on business
issues and risks. It is widely believed that greater diversity of thought results in better decision
making and improved corporate governance and risk management, thus avoiding the perils of
‘groupthink’.”
All  of  this  research  is  very  relevant  to  us  in  our  role  as  regulator,  both  from  an  internal  and
external perspective.
We also recognise that if the Central Bank is not seen to be a diverse workplace, it will lose out
on  the  pool  of  talent.  McKinsey’s  ‘War  for  Talent’  Report
  and  other  more  recent
research  positions  increasing  competition  among  organisations  for  talent  as  a  key  driver  of
organisational success or failure. The reality is that many graduates will actively seek ‘diverse’
17
organisations because they associate them with creativity, innovation and stimulation .
15
16
Once we attract the right people, we recognise that it is equally important to ensure that they feel
included so that they stay in the Bank for the long term. Research indicates that the lack of focus
on diversity and inclusion is likely to be a contributing factor to higher attrition levels .  In order to
operate optimally, we recognise that as well as attracting and retain the best talent, the Central
Bank  needs  everyone  working  to  his  or  her  individual  optimum.  Research  shows  that  if
organisations become both more diverse and more inclusive, employees will perform better, as
19
they can be themselves and the resultant discretionary effort can be harnessed .
18
I am also aware that, particularly as a public sector organisation, the Central Bank has a moral
imperative  to  reach  out  and  include  diverse  talent  that  is  reflective  of  Irish  society  and  not  to
discriminate or create barriers, either real or perceived, against minority groups.
Diversity in financial services
When  Governor  Lane  spoke  at  the  European  Financial  Services  Forum,  he  emphasised  the
focus on diversity in financial services by the Central Bank and said that “The inclusion of this
issue  as  part  of  this  year’s  European  Financial  Forum  is  indicative  of  the  welcome  and
necessary  recognition  of  the  importance  of  improving  diversity  across  the  financial  services
industry“.
20
I have given a number of speeches over the past year, as have other colleagues from the Central
Bank, in which we have spoken about the importance of diversity in financial services.
For many of the same reasons that the Central Bank has prioritised diversity and inclusion within
our own organisation, we are also focused on diversity in the financial services we regulate. As I
have  touched  on,  there  is  strong  evidence  to  show  that  diversity  at  senior  levels  of  regulated
entities  can  help  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  groupthink,  increase  the  level  of  challenge  and
improve decision making and risk management. There is also a clear connection between the
diversity in an organisation and its culture.
These are all attributes that as a regulator we should and do care about. Groupthink, in particular,
was identified in the Nyberg Report as a contributing factor to the financial crisis in Ireland.  In my
own experience, a lack of diversity at senior management and board level in organisations is a
leading  indicator  of  elevated  behaviour  and  culture  risks,  and  consequently  prudential  and
conduct risks.
If we look at the causes of the financial crisis, we can see clear linkages to behaviour, culture
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  diversity.  It  is  clear  that  there  were  multiple  failures  and  multiple  individual  and  collective
decisions leading up to the financial crisis.  For example, collective groupthink, business model
and strategy failures, governance and control issues, financial misconduct, excessive optimism,
regulatory failures, political interference and so on.  There are behavioural and cultural linkages
across all of these failures. 
The  behaviours  and  underlying  cultures  within 
firms  were  wholly
inappropriate. Short termism was incentivised, particularly with respect to shareholder returns. 
Effective  internal  challenge  of  the  prevailing  views  was  not.  While  many  improvements  have
been made, not enough progress has been made with respect to underlying behaviours, cultures
and incentives.
financial  services 
The  culture  in  the  retail  banks  has  led  to  catastrophic  failings  in  the  treatment  of  customers
affected  by  the  tracker  mortgage  scandal,  which  has  done  further  lasting  damage  to  the
reputation of the Irish banking sector. Globally, there is evidence of cultural failings across the
financial services sector, be it Wells Fargo, the LIBOR scandal, RBS, PPI and so on.  Moreover,
at an individual firm level, I have seen too many examples where regulated firms are having to be
pushed too hard by the regulator to address failings and remediate issues, where the focus is on
the letter of the law and not the desirable outcome.  In some cases this has led, ultimately, to the
failure of the firm when earlier acceptance and change would have, perhaps, preserved it. 
21
, during which I highlighted that the consequential breakdown in
I spoke at an event last year
public trust and confidence in financial services, and the need for meaningful cultural change to
repair and restore trust.   As the reputation of financial services firms has been damaged there is
a tendency for a greater degree of commoditisation of services, products and product providers. 
If consumers do not trust providers or their products, they are understandably going to be more
driven by price, when other factors may also be important in terms of suitability.  Concerns are
so  deep  rooted  that  there  is  a  lack  of  trust  regarding  pricing  (e.g.  car  insurance,  mortgage
pricing), and customer treatment (e.g. re mortgage and SME borrowers in distress). Ultimately, I
do not think this is positive from either a financial stability or a consumer protection perspective.
Diversity and inclusion have roles to play in mitigating some of these risks. McKinsey  research
in this area suggests that companies in the top quartile for gender or racial and ethnic diversity
are more likely to have financial returns above their national industry medians. Companies in the
bottom quartile in these dimensions are statistically less likely to achieve above-average returns.
22
In other words, diversity is directly relevant to the key outcomes that we are seeking to achieve
for  regulated  firms  and  the  system  as  a  whole  –  specifically,  that  regulated  firms  are  well
governed,  with  appropriate  cultures  (including  relating  to  challenge)  and  risk  management
arrangements in place; and that they have business models that generate profits over the long
term in a sustainable way. 
Current levels of diversity in financial firms
Given the positive impact that diversity can have on behaviour and culture in financial firms, it is
concerning that a significant imbalance in gender and other diversity aspects remains at senior
levels of most regulated firms in Ireland.
In September 2008, before the bank guarantee, the main retail banks operating in Ireland had no
female executives at Board level; the 18% of female Board members were non-executives. 
Worryingly, the situation is not improving. Approximately 80% of the most senior and influential
appointments in regulated firms in Ireland between 2012 and 2016 were male . Comparisons
are almost certainly worse for any other measure of diversity. 
23
Strikingly, underneath the headline numbers, there is an even greater gender imbalance for roles
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
that are revenue generating. At the board level, women comprised 12% of nominations for Chief
Executive roles, 12% of nominations for Chairman of the Board roles, 15% of nominations for
executive director roles and 18% of nominations for non-executive director roles.
It  is  also  interesting  to  look  at  the  split  across  roles  –  women  are  more  prominent  in  risk,
compliance and audit functions, men even more so in front line / revenue generating roles.
This is not to suggest that diversity is all about gender. There are no studies that I have seen for
the EU or Ireland on racial and ethnic or sexual orientation diversity in business, but I have no
reason to believe that it is any better than the UK – where 78% of UK companies have senior-
leadership teams that fail to reflect the demographic composition of the country’s labour force
and population – or indeed the US, where the figure is 91%.
So the current situation, in Ireland at least, is concerning.  Last year, we reviewed a sample of
diversity policies in regulated firms, which many financial services firms are now required to have
(under the CRD, Solvency II and the Central Bank’s Corporate Governance Codes). These are
not going to turn the dial.
In the main, they were striking for their lack of ambition. In many cases internal targets that are
already  being  met  have  been  set,  many  lack  accountability,  and  there  is  little  evidence  that
progress against them is being monitored. Remarkably, for two large financial services firms,
their diversity policies were exactly the same, word for word, with the exception of the names of
the firms and some of the targets they had.
Notwithstanding  these  issues,  there  are  financial  services  firms  that  have  a  healthy  gender
balance,  with  nominations  among  certain  banks  and  insurance  companies  at  44%  and  45%
female applicants over the past five years. There are financial services firms that have diversity
policies and programmes that demonstrate that diversity is a priority. There are also sector wide
initiatives,  such  as  the  30%  Club,  and  the  work  of  FuSIoN  itself,  which  are  focusing  on
addressing these issues, which the Central Bank is actively participating in.
But more needs to be done.
What actions are we taking
As stated by Governor Lane during his address to the European Financial Forum, “The financial
services  industry  can  certainly  expect  to  see  a  continued  increase  in  the  intensity  and
intrusiveness of our engagement on diversity.”
24
Diversity  is  supervisable.  We  can  legitimately  expect  regulated  firms  to  meaningfully  address
diversity and inclusion in the boardroom, at the executive level and the pipeline of talent needed to
run the organisation in the long-term.  Our supervisory work is, therefore, being enhanced as
follows:
We  can  assess  whether  boards  and  the  executive  are  taking  responsibility  for  actively
promoting diversity and inclusion at all levels of the firm, to improve decision-making and
how this, in turn is impacting on behaviour and culture.
We will review the policies that are put in place to deliver this outcome. We will analyse data
showing the outcomes from a firm and a sector perspective on an annual basis. We expect
to publish data in this regard this coming March.
We are including aspects of diversity in the upcoming Behaviour and Culture Review of the
retail  banks.    This  is  a  major  step  forward  in  our  approach,  which  we  will  apply  in  other
reviews in different sectors. It puts the Central Bank at the forefront, internationally, of the
regulatory work on diversity.
We are reviewing our governance codes and requirements to be more explicit in terms of
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
expectations regarding diversity policies.  
We will also be considering whether our own actions are inhibiting change.  For example, in
our consideration of fitness and probity applications, are we considering exclusively on an
individual basis or a more rounded consideration of the construct and diversity of the board,
executive and so on?  That is not to say that we should lower our standards, but that we will
be enhancing how we consider the effectiveness of the board and the executive as a whole.
Risks and barriers
I would accept that change is not without risk or challenge. There are deeply entrenched issues
that need to be overcome – many of which are societal.    Recent studies of the gender pay gap
affecting Uber drivers  are interesting in highlighting deep rooted issues and behaviours that go
beyond an individual firm’s, no matter how large, ability to change.   
25
There  is  also  more  controversial  research  which  shows  correlation  (and  argues  causation)
between higher levels of diversity and higher levels of societal mistrust
.  Whatever the drivers
for  this  mistrust,  it  is  clear  that  an  organisational  level  and  a  more  macro  level,  a  focus  on
inclusion is critically important too.
26
But  these  risks  and  barriers  are  relatively  small  compared  to  the  potential  benefits  at  both  a
system wide level and an individual firm level if they can be overcome.
Conclusion
 In my role I am focused on ensuring that the Central Bank is safeguarding stability and protecting
consumers, and delivering a vision whereby the financial services system in Ireland delivers for
both the economy and its customers in a sustainable way over the long term.   There is clearly
more  to  be  done  to  have  confidence  in  the  achievement  of  this  vision  for  the  Irish  financial
services system.
Diversity and inclusion has a role to play in achieving this vision. This includes through ensuring
that  regulated  firms  have  appropriate  and  effective  governance,  risk  management  and  control
frameworks in place, that their actual cultures are consistent with their stated aspirations, and
that their business models are sustainable over the longer term. 
In other words, meaningful and sustained improvements in diversity and inclusion can help to
improve the safety and soundness of financial services firms and contribute to the restoration of
trust in the financial system in Ireland. Diversity and inclusion are therefore critically important to
the Central Bank’s mandate of safeguarding stability and protecting consumers, and will continue
to  be  high  on  my  list  of  priorities  both  internally  within  the  Central  Bank,  and  externally  as  a
regulator and supervisor of the financial services sector.
I am also committed to continuing to enhance the Central Bank as a place to work, where all our
people can bring their whole serves to work, and achieve their full potential.  Our diversity and
inclusion work will continue to have a strong part to play in achievement of this vision too.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
With thanks to Siobhán Kirrane for assistance in preparing my remarks.
Speaking at the Importance of Diversity in Financial Services event of the FuSIoN Network, 13 February 2018.
Just a quarter of LGBT staff feel comfortable at work. Karen Higginbottom. Forbes 2016.
Central Bank of Ireland data.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
Central Bank of Ireland - Financial Globalisation and Central Banking in Ireland - Governor Philip R Lane.
Hoogendoorn, S., Oosterbeek, H. and van Praag, M. (2013) The impact of gender diversity on the performance of
business teams: evidence from a field experiment. Management Science, 59, pp. 1514–1528.
Zelechowski, D. and Bilimoria, D. (2004) Characteristics of women and men corporate inside directors in the
US. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 12(3), pp. 337–42.; Maznevski, M. L. (1994) Understanding
our differences: Performance in decision-making groups with diverse members. Human Relations, 47(5), pp.
531–552.
Alexandra Jones, Rising to the Challenge of Diversity, Work Foundation report (2006).
Fons Trompenaars and Charles Hampden Turner, Riding the Waves of Innovation (McGraw Hill, 2012).
Robinson, G. and Dechant, K. (1997) Building a business case for diversity. Academy of Management Executive,
11, pp. 164–177.; Brown, D., Brown, D. and Anastasopoulos, V. (2002)  Women on boards: Not just the right
thing  .  .  .  But  the “bright” thing.Report,  341–02:  The  Conference  Board  of  Canada,  Ottawa.;  See  Procter  &
Gamble’s ‘Connect and develop’ tool which increased Research and Development productivity by 60 per cent.
Scott Page, The Difference (Princeton University Press, 2004).
Scott Page, The Difference (Princeton University Press, 2004).
Scott Page, The Difference (Princeton University Press, 2004).
James Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the many are smarter than the few and how collective wisdom
shapes business, economies, societies and nations (Knopf Doubleday, 2004).
Elizabeth  G.  Chambers,  Mark  Fouldon,  Helen  Handfield-Jones,  Steven  M.  Hankin,  Edward  G.  Michaels  III
1998, The War for Talent,  McKinsey  Quarterly;  Elizabeth  L. Axelrod,  Helen  Handfield-Jones,  and  Timothy A.
Welsh 2001, The War for Talent, Part Two, McKinsey Quarterly .
Ed Michaels, Helen Handfield-Jones, Beth Axelrod, The War for Talent, Harvard Business School Press Boston,
Massachusetts, Copyright 2001 McKinsey & Company, Inc; Edward E. Lawler III 2008, Talent: Making People
Your Competitive Advantage, Jossey-Bass, A Wiley Imprint;  Growth reimagined. The talent race is back on, 14th
Annual Global CEO Survey, PwC.
Stephen Frost, The inclusion imperative: How real inclusion creates better business and builds better societies,
2014.
Executive Survey Finds a Lack of Focus on Diversity and Inclusion Key Factor in Employee Turnover.
Stephen Frost, The inclusion imperative: How real inclusion creates better business and builds better societies,
2014.
Central Bank of Ireland - Financial Globalisation and Central Banking in Ireland - Governor Philip R Lane.
Central Bank of Ireland. Address to the Association of Compliance Officers - Ed Sibley.
Vivian Hunt, Dennis Layton, and Sara Prince, McKinsey & Company, January 2015.
Central Bank of Ireland - Gender breakdown of applications received for certain roles in regulated firms 2012 to
2016.
Central Bank of Ireland - Financial Globalisation and Central Banking in Ireland - Governor Philip R Lane.
The Gender Earnings Gap in the Gig Economy: Evidence from over a Million Rideshare Drivers Cody Cook,
Rebecca Diamond, Jonathan Hall, John A. List, and Paul Oyer – January 2018.
Love Thy Neighbor? Ethnoracial Diversity and Trust Reexamined. American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 121, No. 3
(November 2015), pp. 722–782.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
