Yandraduth Googoolye: Combatting financial crime in Mauritius
Speech  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the
Training Workshop for Senior Management of Law Enforcement Agencies in collaboration with
the Commonwealth Secretariat, Ebene, 6 December 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Good  Morning.  I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  to  address  such  a  distinguished  and  expert
audience. I will try to be short as it is said that it is better that you leave your audience before your
audience leaves you.
The country should be one and unified. We are all servants of the state. Having different factions
within the state inhibit progress. Building fictitious walls arise sometimes out of ego.  Pulling in
different directions does not help.  It is with concerted action and co-ordination that progress can
be achieved. Co-operation within the different organs of the state is therefore imperative.  We
need to put our heads together for our common benefit.
A  piece  of  information  standing  alone  is  like  being  part  of  a  puzzle.  It  is  when  different
organisations  fighting  for  a  common  goal  put  whatever  information  they  have  together  that  a
bigger picture can emerge and better preventive action can be taken.
The Bank of Mauritius has been in the forefront of the war against financial crime for around 15
years now.  It issued its first Guidance Notes on AML/CFT setting out the minimum standards to
be applied by all financial institutions under its purview, on 19 December 2003, thus setting the
stage for a credible banking sector. A strong legal and regulatory framework is the basis of any
effective regime. The Guidance Notes is a dynamic document which over the years, has been
updated  to  reflect  the  latest  global  developments,  as  well  as  to  incorporate  emerging  best
practices  recommended  by  international  standard  setters,  namely  the  FATF  and  the  Bank  for
international settlements.
The Guidance Notes have been revamped in 2017 to include, amongst others, the following, -
(i)   Proliferation Financing regarding the transfer and export of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons.
(ii)   Duty of financial institutions to identify and assess ML/TF risks on an enterprise-
wide level.  
(iii)   Information to be collected by financial institutions for natural, legal person and
legal arrangements with a view to developing an initial customer risk profile.
(iv)   Enhanced due diligence to be performed by financial institutions in respect of
wire  transfer  transactions  to  ensure  that  wire  transfer  systems  are  not  used  by
criminals as a means to break the audit trail.
In the fight against AML/CFT, there is a standing committee since 2004, between the Bank and
Compliance  Officers  of  banks,  which  meets  quite  often  where  issues  of  utmost  importance,
amendments  to  the  Guidance  Notes  and  decisions  are  taken  in  consensus  and  in  a  spirit  of
dialogue with the banking sector.  In addition, there is a Banking Committee which is chaired by
the Governor of the Bank and comprise Senior Management of the Bank and CEO’s of banks
which meets on a quarterly basis where important AML/CFT matters are discussed as and when
necessary.  We also have a trilateral meeting with the FSC and the FIU where AML/CFT issues
are  discussed.  In  June  2015,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  held  a  tripartite  meeting  with  the  FIU  and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
MLRO’s of banks. This meeting provided an opportunity for the Bank, FIU and MLRO’s to share
their views on how to make the existing system of reporting of transactions works better. 
We have set up for some years now a Joint Coordination Committee between the Bank and the
FSC.  Under that Joint Coordination Committee, there is a working Group on AML/CFT to inter-
alia  promote  standardisation  and  harmonisation  of  our  Guidance  Notes  on  AML/CFT  and
encourage information and knowledge sharing on AML/CFT issues.
We already have memoranda of understanding for co-operation and the sharing of information
with the Independent Commission against Corruption, Statistics Mauritius, the Mauritius Revenue
Authority,  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit,  the  Competition  Commission  of  Mauritius  and  the
Financial Services Commission.   These are all testimony that the Bank of Mauritius understood
very  early  the  need  of  cooperation  in  the  fight  against  financial  crime.    While  we  had  those
memoranda of understanding on a bilateral basis, the agenda now is to have a memorandum of
understanding  on  a  multilateral  basis,  for  a  better  and  concerted  approach  against  financial
crime.   We also have signed MoUs with 16 foreign counterparts which set forth a statement of
intent between the Bank of Mauritius and its counterparts to establish a framework for mutual
assistance, cooperation and the exchange of information.
The Bank of Mauritius remains committed in enhancing its network of co-operation with other
counterpart institutions which have regulatory and law enforcement functions in different parts of
the Mauritian economy.
Technology, as you know , is moving at a pace far greater than ever before. For the financial
industry  to  maximise  the  overall  benefit  of  this  progress,  we  must  acknowledge  both  the
advantages and the risks of such rapid technological advancement while keeping abreast with
the  latest  innovations.  New  devices,  software,  applications  and  inventions  will  continue  to
emerge. The challenge for us is to keep pace and ensure that industry players understand the
potential benefits as well as the risk they bear. As the financial industry evolves into digital, it is
inevitable that the industry becomes vulnerable to various new threats and risk factors, especially
in the domain of financial crimes and terrorism financing. It is inevitable therefore that we pool
together to be able to meet the challenges posed by those new technological advancements.
The Bank of Mauritius will continue to strengthen the AML/CFT regime to maintain relevance and
effectiveness  for  the  Banking  Sector.    The  requirement  now  emphasises  on  measures  that
commensurate with risks, an effective risk based approach (RBA) to AML/CFT.   The application
of  RBA  should  have  meaningful  application.    Misinformed  RBA  could  lead  to  unjust  financial
exclusion  and  unnecessary  financial  costs  to  institutions.  Beyond  implementing  robust  risk
management  frameworks  and  systems  the  industry’s  resilience  should  be  strengthened  by
developing stronger risk cultures and mind-sets.  Having a sound risk culture will help institutions
to  be  vigilant  to  financial  crimes,  take  a  questioning  approach  to  unusual  client  requests  or
transactions, and involve the entire organisation.
Institutions’ board and senior management must play a pivotal role in keeping the organisation on
the right and ethical path.  They must set a strong tone from the top that profits do not come at
the expense of unethical behaviour or misconduct.  This must also be translated into real actions
throughout organisations, and not just remain as talk from the top.  Strengthening risk culture,
governance and controls will go a long way towards fortifying our defences, but there is more we
can do.  We can work together and work smarter. 
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not mention that it is up to all of us to prevent financial crimes. 
Institutional  partnerships  or  new  analytical  tools  would  count  for  little  without  the  trained,
dedicated professionals to make effective use of them and exercise sound judgements.  In this
respect, this workshop is timely and commendable.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  by  working  together,  we  can  collectively  be  more  effective  at
combating financial crimes.  Upholding high standards of integrity in the financial industry is an
absolute priority.  Our reputation as a clean and trusted financial centre depends on our ability to
protect it from abuse, and we depend on each other to make it a success.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
