Sabine Lautenschläger: Monetary policy - end of history?
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the Center for
Financial Studies Colloquium, Frankfurt am Main, 29 May 2018.
 In 1992, the political scientist Francis Fukuyama announced the end of history. The cold war had
just  ended,  and  in  Fukuyama’s  view,  this  marked  “the  endpoint  of  mankind’s  ideological
evolution”.  Liberal  democracy  had  prevailed;  the  final  form  of  government  had  been  reached.
There was no need for history to continue.
Similar claims were made about monetary policy. The great moderation, for instance, was traced
back to better monetary policy. With this in mind, some argued that monetary policy had reached
a perfect and final stage. There was no need to evolve further; history had come to an end.
Or had it? Well, it seems that the unexpected always happens. And when it does, it tends to
push the end of history a bit further away. This is true for politics, and it is true for monetary
policy.
The  unexpected  happened  in  2008:  the  global  financial  crisis  struck  and  undid  the  great
moderation. History took a sudden turn and this threw long-held beliefs overboard. Academics as
well  as  policymakers  had  to  adapt  their  thinking  and  their  doing  –  monetary  policy  was  no
exception. Central banks around the world came up with new tools to keep the financial system
and the economy afloat. They became key players; some observers even referred to them as the
only game in town.
Now,  ten  years  later,  there  is  one  thing  that  weighs  on  many  people’s  minds:  When  will
unconventional monetary policy end? When will it return to normal? It seems that many look no
further  than  the  exit  from  our  unconventional  measures.  But  what  will  happen  once  we  have
reached the exit? Will we return to the end of history?
Well, I don’t think so. First, there are still many questions that need to be answered. And second,
the unexpected will happen again at some point. History does not end. But before we discuss
what will happen tomorrow, let’s take a look at today.
Approaching the exit – slowly but surely
For  many  months,  we  have  been  discussing  the  conditions  for  a  gradual  exit  from  our
extraordinarily  loose  monetary  policy.  But  some  might  now  point  to  the  latest  economic  data
indicating that growth has lost some momentum and wonder if this is reason to be concerned, or
even to change plans?
Well, first of all, we need to put the latest developments into perspective. Growth in the euro area
exceeded  potential  growth  for  a  couple  of  quarters.  In  2017,  the  euro  area  economy  grew  by
2.5%, compared with potential growth estimates of 1.5% for the year.  Against  this  backdrop,
one could expect to see it to slow down. And that’s what happened. In the first quarter of 2018,
year-on-year  growth  was  2.5%,  compared  with  2.7%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2017.  We  saw
industrial production, excluding construction, decline in the first two months of the year. And both
the composite output Purchasing Managers’ Index and the European Commission’s Economic
Sentiment  Indicator  eased  in  the  first  quarter.  But  both  are  still  well  above  their  long-term
average.
1
So we are seeing that the pace of growth has become more moderate, but we are not seeing a
turning point. We remain confident in the strength of the economy.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
After all, the things that are currently holding back growth seem to be temporary. There was the
early timing of the Easter break, there was a strong outbreak of flu in some parts of the euro
area,  there  was  cold  weather  and  there  were  strikes  in  some  countries. All  this  weighed  on
growth, but it won’t do so permanently.
We need to keep a close eye on all this, and we will. But for now, there is no need to rewrite the
story. The economic expansion remains solid and broad-based. Financing conditions are good,
the labour market is robust with a historically high increase in jobs, and income and profits are
growing steadily. In short: the real economy is doing well.
By contrast, inflation so far does not seem to be recovering as convincingly. This has left many
observers scratching their heads as to why the current level of low inflation does not match the
current state of the real economy. It seems that inflation is responding less to the slack in the
economy than would be expected. This disconnect between the real and nominal sides of the
economy is the subject of intense debate. In very general terms, there might be two forces at
play.
First, the Phillips curve might have changed. It might, for instance, have flattened, or it might have
shifted downwards. Empirically, it is very hard to determine which – if either – of the two things
has happened.
And  that  brings  me  to  the  second  point,  which  is  that  we  cannot  be  sure  whether  we  are
measuring slack correctly in the first place. The unemployment rate, for instance, is based on a
narrow definition. Just think of people who work part-time. Officially, they are employed, but they
could work more, of course. So, the amount of slack could be larger than we think. If that is the
case, it’s no surprise that inflation has not kicked in.
That said, the economy is still expanding and, at some point, any remaining slack will be used
up. As  a  consequence,  pressure  on  wages  will  increase,  and  we  are  indeed  already  seeing
wages edging up. Wage growth increased from 1.1% in mid-2016 to 1.8% in the fourth quarter of
2017. In Germany, wages even grew at 2.7% in the first quarter of 2018. This, in turn, will prompt
inflation to pick up.
So I believe that all we need is a bit of patience. All the conditions for inflation to kick in are in
place.
So, June might be the month to decide once and for all to gradually end net asset purchases by
the end of this year.
But please do not misunderstand me here: I am just referring to the net purchases. There is still
the  stock  of  assets  we  have  already  bought.  And  we  will  still  reinvest  any  proceeds  from
maturing bonds. Just to put it in perspective: each month we buy assets worth €30 billion. This
compares with a stock of assets worth €2,400 billion.
What  I  want  to  say  is  this:  even  when  we  end  net  purchases,  monetary  policy  will  still  be
extraordinarily  accommodative. And,  at  the  same  time,  other  tools  will  remain  in  place.  The
Eurosystem has, for instance, committed to granting banks unlimited access to liquidity against
a  wider  range  of  collateral.  With  our  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  we  provided
credit institutions with funding for up to four years. Finally, interest rates are still historically low
and will remain so for some months to come. A first hike around the middle of 2019 is not entirely
out of the ballpark.
So, we are slowly but surely moving towards the exit. This is the next big thing to happen. But it
will not be the end of the story, let alone the end of history. Monetary policy will continue to evolve,
new challenges will arise, and many questions still need to be answered.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
I will discuss three of these questions now: First, does monetary policy need to refine its targets
and  update  its  toolbox?  Second,  how  should  it  treat  financial  stability? And  third,  what  is  the
relationship between monetary policy and the distribution of wealth and income?
Tools and targets
As  we  know,  when  the  crisis  hit  in  2008,  central  banks  around  the  world  had  to  rethink  their
approach in more ways than one. And they are still doing so.
What will monetary policy look like in the years to come? Should we put some of the tools we
used in the crisis near the top of our toolbox where we can easily reach them? Or should we
bury them and only dig them out again in the event of a severe crisis? And should we redefine
our target?
The debate on these issues, in academic and policy circles alike, has been lively. So let us weigh
the potential costs and benefits of redefining our toolbox and our strategy.
Let’s  start  from  the  beginning.  The  crisis  called  for  very  loose  monetary  policy,  and  we
responded with our standard tools.
However, despite the ECB’s efforts, inflation remained at historically low levels. In January 2015,
the Eurosystem thus announced that it would start buying government bonds. A year and a half
later, in June 2016, it also began to buy corporate bonds.
So,  the  basic  story  is  simple.  Once  the  Eurosystem  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
standard tools were not sufficient to reach our objective, it turned to non-standard tools.
Asset purchases are one of those tools. And they have made our job as central bankers even
more  complex  than  it  used  to  be.  The  first  challenge  we  faced  was  how  to  go  about
implementing  the  purchase  programme.  Interventions  like  this  can  have  any  number  of
unintended consequences.
First, as a major actor in the markets for public and private bonds, we have to tread carefully. We
have to make sure that the markets continue to work well. We thus placed limits on the share of
a bond issue that we would buy, for instance. This ensures that the Eurosystem does not form a
blocking minority in the event of a debt restructuring involving collective action clauses.
Second, there is a risk that we might become a drag on market liquidity, in particular in some
segments of the corporate bond markets. We have thus tried to minimise this kind of side effect,
and not to worsen existing shortages of certain assets.
Third, we must be aware that our actions might distort prices. The more bonds we buy and the
longer we go on buying them, the greater the risk that prices no longer reflect market conditions.
These are some of the risks we have to bear in mind. Viewed from today, however, it seems that
our non-standard measures did have the desired effects on financial markets and, consequently,
on the real economy.
But what does this mean for the future? Seeing the short-term effects, some observers suggest
making the balance sheet part of the new orthodoxy of monetary policy strategy – or part of the
standard toolbox, as they like to say.
Let me say clearly that I think this should not happen. The short-term benefits should not lead us
to overlook the long-term costs and the severe side effects. These costs and side effects can be
quite high, and they tend to grow over time. Thus, a comprehensive asset purchase programme,
such as the current one, should only be used to fight a real risk of deflation. In my view, that is the
only valid reason for using such tools.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
For  one  thing,  I  wonder  how  it  would  affect  the  incentives  for  various  stakeholders.  Financial
market participants, firms, consumers and also governments have to varying degrees adjusted
to historically low interest rates and ample liquidity. And for some of them, low interest rates have
certainly made life easier. It is therefore crucial to realise that this won’t go on forever – the exit
will come eventually – and to adjust accordingly.
Second, there is the issue of financial stability. When the central bank buys bonds, it might also
fuel asset price bubbles, financed by cheap credit. This risk increases the longer unconventional
monetary policy measures continue to be applied.
And  third,  monetary  policy  can  only  buy  time  –  no  matter  how  loose  or  unconventional  it
becomes. Monetary policy is not a tool meant to alter the long-term viability of economies, and it
would be dangerous to believe otherwise. I will come back to this point in a few minutes.
And it’s not just about the tools, it’s also about the target. A second idea that is often put forward
is that we should change our objective and strive for higher inflation.  Proponents of this idea
claim that we should no longer aim for inflation rates of below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term. They argue that we should aim for inflation rates higher than that. This idea is based on the
observation that higher inflation rates generally lead to higher average nominal interest rates. This
would then give central banks more room for manoeuvre, as they would be less likely to hit the
effective lower bound.
2
In my view, aiming for a higher inflation rate would lead to the same problem as making non-
standard  tools  a  standard  part  of  the  toolbox.  Such  proposals  tend  to  underestimate  the
associated costs.
There is evidence that changing the objective would be too blunt a move. Hitting the effective
lower bound is costly, but so is higher inflation. Research shows that the key benefit of higher
inflation  –  fewer  and  less  severe  zero  lower  bound  events  –  is  easily  offset  by  the  costs  of
positive trend inflation.
What  are  these  costs?  Well,  price  distortions  become  larger,  overall  inflation  becomes  more
3
volatile, and the welfare costs of such volatility increase as well.
And changing our objective could undermine the markets’ confidence in the ECB’s commitment
to price stability. The transition could prove very hard to manage and could take many years. And
during  that  time  uncertainty  would  increase.  We  would  thus  likely  witness  increased
disagreement among forecasters – inflation expectations might become more volatile. And this is
anathema to central bankers. In the end, it is part of our job description to ensure that long-term
inflation expectations are well anchored.
In this context, we must also take into account that changing our objective might in itself hurt our
credibility – the main asset of any central bank. And this would make it much harder to steer
inflation expectations even after the new objective had been met. After all, people might think that
at some point in the future, we could revise our objective again. Central bankers are conservative
for a reason.
To sum up, it seems to me that these proposals have one thing in common. They are a reaction
to the dramatic shifts we have witnessed since the crisis. Hitting the effective lower bound forced
a bout of creativity in the world of monetary policy. But I do not believe that the way forward is to
entirely revolutionise the way we think about the role of central banks.
Still, we should also be realistic. The crisis revealed shortcomings in our thinking, and this is
something we need to work on.
What about financial stability?
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
So the debate about the future does not end here. Another thing to discuss is how monetary
policy and financial stability interact. And this debate also involves our standard tool, the interest
rates. Interest rates have been very low for quite some time now. This has coincided with an
upsurge in asset prices and a compression of spreads on risky securities.
Against this backdrop, some economists argue that monetary policy has an effect on both the
capacity  and  the  appetite  of  investors  to  take  on  risk.   This  has  been  termed  the  risk-taking
channel,  and  it  does  not  play  a  role  in  standard  monetary  policy  frameworks.  These  focus
instead on the interest rate, credit or bank lending channels.
4
Now, how does this risk-taking channel work? Well, it can work in different ways. For a start, low
interest rates mean low returns. Investors might rebalance their portfolios and take on more risk
in order to make up for lost returns. Should we be concerned about this? Well, if the process is
well managed, there is no need for concern.
However,  some  financial  institutions  set  rather  inflexible  target  rates  of  return,  for  example
because investors expect a  certain  minimum  yield.  These  inflexible  targets  may  lead  them  to
take on more risk than appropriate. It is clear that this could lead to trouble further down the road.
Also, the financial system’s behaviour can be procyclical. There is reliable empirical evidence
that loose monetary policy lowers both the measured risk in asset prices and the risk premia
demanded by investors.  But value-at-risk approaches mean that the risk management of banks
relies  on  measured  risks.  This  could  then  lead  to  increased  leverage,  which  would  add  even
more liquidity to the global financial system. So there is a view that the risk-taking channel should
be incorporated into the models that guide monetary policy.
5
 Let’s try to unpick this argument. In my view, there are two conceptual issues here. The first is
the  idea  that  policymakers  should  only  be  concerned  with  risk-taking  if  it  is  excessive.  But
establishing whether or not risk-taking is excessive is quite hard. The second issue is that even if
we conclude that there is excessive risk-taking, it is far from clear whether monetary policy would
be the best tool to deal with it.
Let’s  start  with  the  first  issue.  What  qualifies  as  excessive  risk-taking?  Well,  there  are  two
conditions.  Risks  would  need  to  be  mispriced,  and  investments  would  need  to  have  been
financed  with  a  dangerous  amount  of  debt.  If  these  two  conditions  are  met,  a  financial  crisis
becomes more likely.
Now, where do we stand on these two issues? Well, there is some evidence that banks in the
euro area do indeed provide riskier corporate loans when short-term interest rates are low.  It
seems  that  banks  tend  to  grant  loans  with  fewer  covenants  and  lower  collateral  cover.  Such
loans are riskier in the sense that in case of a default, the impact on the banks might be larger.
6
However, it is hard to tell whether this kind of risk-taking is excessive or not. Many studies rely on
credit register data which do not include loan interest rates. Thus, it is hard to tell whether the
loans are mispriced given the risk they contain. It could just as well be that banks grant loans to
riskier companies but do so at higher interest rates, which compensate fairly for the higher loss
risk.
This  brings  us  to  the  second  issue.  Even  if  we  could  say  with  certainty  that  risk-taking  is
excessive, we would still need to be sure that monetary policy is the right tool to deal with it.
Some think it is; others think it isn’t. The latter believe that central banks would run into trouble if
they tried to deal with financial stability. This is because it would involve a conflict of interest. To
stop a credit-induced bubble, we would need to raise interest rates, and we might need to raise
them by a lot. After all, potential profits are huge when there is a bubble, so investors would not
be deterred by a modest increase in interest rates. But what if a huge increase in interest rates
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
would derail inflation? Which path should monetary policy take in such a situation?
As the economist Jan Tinbergen has observed, you cannot achieve two goals with just one tool.
And attempting to do so would damage the credibility of central banks.
It’s not easy to say who is right. Financial crises are fortunately rare events, and usually there is
no single cause. This means, however, that we do not have a whole lot of data to analyse. Still, in
the past, monetary policy was used at least in part to prevent bubbles from forming. This was
done in the United States in the late 1920s, for instance, and in Japan in the late 1980s. Suffice to
say, these episodes did not end well.
So, it seems wise not to rely on monetary policy when it comes to financial stability. And in this
sense, the reforms of the institutional architecture in the Eurosystem after the crisis were indeed
wise. The ECB’s mandate remains clear: our objective is price stability. But we have also been
given powers for microprudential supervision, as well as some macroprudential competences.
On the microprudential side, European banking supervision contributes to the soundness of the
banking system. A lot of work has already been done, and we will continue to do more.
First  of  all,  banks  are  much  better  capitalised  and  provisioned  than  they  were  in  2014,  which
makes them more resilient to shocks. Second, we are pushing banks to reduce legacy assets
such  as  non-performing  loans.  And  third,  we  are  requiring  banks  to  improve  their  risk
management,  for  instance  with  regard  to  the  internal  models  they  use  to  calculate  the  risks
associated with the assets they hold.
Macroprudential  policy  was  also  developed  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis.  It  still  needs  to  be
refined and tested. Available evidence from the euro area and beyond may not be definitive, but it
is encouraging. Let me give you a few examples.
With the 2010 Basel III agreement, we introduced countercyclical capital buffers. These can help
lean against the build-up of imbalances, and if they cannot fully prevent them, they can at least
make banks more resilient in the event of a downturn.
Borrower-based tools also look promising. In Asia, they have been used for many years now. In
South Korea, loan-to-value and loan-to-income limits have successfully curbed growth in house
prices.  But again, more systematic evidence is not clear-cut. Studies based on cross-country
evidence show that only loan-to-income limits have had a discernible effect on house prices. But
there is still reason to be cautiously optimistic.
7
And the benefit of macroprudential policy remains clear: it is the most direct way to deal with
financial  stability  concerns.  And,  over  time,  we  will  gather  more  evidence  and  gain  more
experience. This will give us plenty of opportunity to fine-tune these new tools.
Beyond monetary policy: wealth, income and structural reforms
But the discussion about the wider effects of monetary policy is not just about financial stability.
Particularly  here  in  Germany,  there  is  a  fierce  debate  about  who  loses  out  as  a  result  of
monetary policy. Many savers feel that they have to bear a huge burden because interest rates
are so low. I understand their frustration. After all, I am a saver myself.
However, we are not just savers. Some of us might have taken out a loan to buy an apartment or
start a business – we benefit from low interest rates. Some of us may have invested in stocks or
bonds  –  we  benefit  from  rising  markets. And  some  of  us  may  have  kept  our  jobs  because
monetary policy propped up the economy.
Monetary policy affects people in different ways. In more technical terms: it has an impact on the
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
distribution of wealth and income. And the important question is whether it makes this distribution
more unequal. Does it make the rich richer and the poor poorer?
Let’s look at wealth first. Here, the most important item for many households is real estate, the
home they live in and any other property they may own. Real estate makes up about 80% of the
total  assets  of  households,  almost  irrespective  of  their  level  of  prosperity.  So,  to  answer  our
question, we need to think about how monetary policy affects house prices.
The answer is that quantitative easing raises house prices and, on average, this boosts the net
wealth of all households, rich and poor alike. In fact, poorer households might even benefit more
because they are more highly leveraged. So their main asset – their house – gains in value, while
the debt they used to finance it becomes cheaper.
Now, what about incomes? Well, loose monetary policy props up the economy and thus raises
employment. And again, this should mean that people with lower incomes benefit most. After all,
unemployment  is  much  higher  among  those  with  low  incomes  than  among  those  with  high
incomes.
So, it seems that loose monetary policy might also reduce income inequality. However, there are
three things that we must keep in mind.
First, the effect of monetary policy on inequality is quite small. In the end, inequality is driven by
many  things  such  as  technological  progress,  globalisation  and  taxes.  Compared  with  these
things, monetary policy seems to play a minor role. Second, the effect is temporary. In the long
run, monetary policy is neutral; it does not affect real variables such as output. And third, the
effect  is  symmetric.  Those  who  benefit  when  monetary  policy  is  loosened  suffer  when  it  is
tightened.
We  have  to  be  aware  of  these  effects,  of  course.  But  should  it  be  up  to  monetary  policy  to
actively  engage  in  redistribution  policy?  Well,  monetary  policy  has  a  very  clear  goal:  price
stability. So, I would argue that monetary policy should focus on this goal and leave other goals to
other policy areas, and that includes redistribution policy.
Imagine inflation were sky-high, for a change. Should monetary policy then refrain from raising
interest rates because it might alter the distribution of income and wealth? Again, there is a clear
conflict of interest as one tool would have to achieve two objectives at once.
That said, the topic of wealth and income distribution is an important one and it should not be
taken  lightly.  I  therefore  welcome  the  fact  that  academia  is  paying  increasing  attention  to  the
matter.  The  ECB  is  contributing  to  the  debate  with  our  household  finance  and  consumption
survey.
And this links to a broader issue. In the crisis, monetary policy has played a key role. However, it
is not the only game in town – it cannot be the only game, and it should not be. Monetary policy is
not a substitute for other policy areas such as social policy, fiscal policy or labour policy.
As  I  and  many  others  have  repeatedly  said,  monetary  policy  cannot  resolve  the  structural
problems of the euro area. All it can do is buy time – at an increasing price. So it is time for
politics to kick into gear, overcome reform fatigue and do what needs to be done. The current
conditions are very favourable.
The  good  news  is  that  many  countries  have  come  a  long  way.  Ireland  was  the  first  success
story, and I am glad to be able to add countries such as Spain and Portugal to the list. These and
other examples show that structural reforms pay off and pave the way for growth to return.
But coming back to inequality, there is one thing we must do. We must ensure that economic
growth benefits everyone. To that end, we should not just rely on redistribution policy. It is rather
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
about creating equal opportunities for everyone. In this context, education and equal access to it
should be at the top of the to-do list of any government.
So, a lot remains to be done, not just on equality but on growth in general. After all, growth also
plays a big role in fighting inequality.
8
And when it comes to long-term growth, research shows that the quality of institutions plays a
major  role.   At the same time, the quality of institutions differs between countries. So, some
countries have scope to improve judicial systems, public administration and insolvency regimes.
This would make their economies more resilient and help them to grow.
And I’m not just referring to institutions at the national level. European institutions are not free of
deficiencies either. They too need to improve. If we want European citizens to trust Europe, we
need to make sure we deliver on our promises.
And  there  is  a  long  way  to  go:  according  to  the  latest  Eurobarometer  survey,  only  41%  of
Europeans tend to trust the EU. And the latest election results show that anti-European parties
are still on the rise – think of Germany, think of Italy. So there is a need for reform and a need to
explain thoroughly how the European Union benefits each and every European citizen.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
History does not end for monetary policy. It did not end with the great moderation, and it will not
end with the exit from our unconventional measures. There are still many questions that need to
be answered, some of which I have discussed in my speech.
But although monetary policy still needs to evolve, it must do so within a certain framework. And
this framework is defined by two things.
First, even though central banks have assumed a key role in the crisis, their objective is very
clearly defined: to ensure price stability.
Second, to achieve this objective, central banks need to be independent.
Within this framework, we need to answer all the questions which remain open. So, there is still
a  lot  of  work  to  be  done  in  terms  of  both  theoretical  and  empirical  research.  That’s  where
universities come into play. They can help us to gain additional insight, and they can help us to
come up with new ideas. From an academic viewpoint, these are certainly interesting times.
Now,  history  might  not  end,  but  you’ll  be  glad  to  hear  that  speeches  do.  I  have  raised  a  few
issues  that  are  currently  being  discussed  in  connection  with  monetary  policy. And  now  I  look
forward to having a discussion with you on these and any other issues you might want to raise.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
European Economic Forecast, European Commission, Autumn 2017.
See Blanchard, O., Dell’Ariccia, G. and Mauro, P. (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, 42, 199–215; and Krugman, P. (2014), “Inflation targets reconsidered”, ECB  Forum  on
Central Banking, May 2014.
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y. and Wieland, J. “The Optimal Inflation Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should
Central  Banks  Raise  Their  Inflation  Targets  in  Light  of  the  Zero  Lower  Bound?”, The  Review  of  Economic
Studies, Volume 79, Issue 4, 1 October 2012, pp. 1371–1406.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
See, for example, Borio, C. and Zhu, H. (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing
link in the transmission mechanism?”, BIS Working Papers, No 268, BIS, and Adrian, T. and Shin, H.-S. (2010),
“Liquidity and leverage”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 19, pp. 418–437.
See, for example, Bekaert, G. , Hoerova, M. and Lo Duca, M. (2013), “Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 60, Issue 7, pp. 771–788, and Heider, F., Saidi, F. and Schepens, G.
(2017), “Life below zero: Bank lending under negative policy rates”, mimeo, available on SSRN.
See Maddaloni, A. and Peydro, J.-L. (2011), “Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision, and Low Interest
Rates: Evidence from the Euro Area and U.S. Lending Standards”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 24, Issue 6,
pp. 2121–65 and Jimenez, G., Ongena, S., Peydro, J.-L. and Saurina, J. (2014), “Hazardous Times for Monetary
Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-
Taking?”, Econometrica, Vol. 82, Issue 2, pp. 463–505.
Igan, D. and Kang, H. (2011), “Do Loan-to-value and Debt-to-Income Limits Work? Evidence from Korea”, IMF
Working Paper, IMF.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and Robinson, J. A. (2005), “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run
Growth”, in Aghion, P. and Durlauf, S. (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, 1st edition, pp. 385–472.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
