  23.05.2018 
 25th Financial Sector Meeting: Innovation, Transformation and Reputation 
Deloitte, Sociedad de Tasación and ABC 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Let me begin by thanking the organisers – Deloitte, Sociedad de Tasación and ABC – for 
their  invitation  to  me  to  participate  in  this  session  of  the  25th  Financial  Sector  Meeting, 
which on this occasion turns on three ideas: innovation, transformation and reputation.  
 
In my opinion, these three concepts accurately encapsulate the main challenges currently 
faced  by  the  financial  sector.  The  new  technologies  are  enabling  financial  institutions  to 
transform their systems and their business models, but this transformation should not lead 
us  to  forget  that  the  keystone  of  any  market,  and  all  the  more  so  financial  markets,  is 
customer confidence.    
 
The financial sector is faced with a singularly complex setting and this conference provides 
an  opportunity  to  confer  with  institutions’  key  decision-makers  on  the  different  ways  in 
which changes are being addressed at this time of transformation, which will be crucial for 
the future of the industry.  
 
The new technologies, which have already significantly impacted various sectors, now have 
the potential also to substantially change the way in which financial services will be provided 
in the not-too-distant future. I would thus like to take this opportunity to offer my view on 
the  opportunities  and  risks  these  new  technologies  pose.  In  this  connection,  I  shall  first 
briefly review the innovations I consider most significant and, secondly, I shall address 
the  challenges  posed  by  the  new  scenario  for  the  authorities,  and  in  particular  for  a 
central bank.  
 
Financial market innovations  
 
Any list of ongoing financial innovations inevitably highlights the weight of technology. The 
significance of the technological component in this new phase is such that it has ultimately 
lent its name to the process of change: Fintech. What is involved, however, is a broad and 
diffuse  concept,  which  encompasses  not  only  new  highly  technological  firms,  but  any 
financial  institution  that  is  innovating  through  the  application  of  new  technologies. 
Occasionally, it is also used to describe new business models and even to refer to the basic 
technologies enabling the various innovations.  
 
The confusion surrounding the Fintech concept is illustrative of the confusion deep-change 
processes can cause. In  these circumstances,  it is easy to be swept away by excessive 
enthusiasm  or  by  unwarranted  pessimism,  two  options  with  little  value  added.  It  is 
undoubtedly much more useful to focus on separating those innovations with the potential 
to  improve  efficiency  in  the  provision  of  financial  services,  cutting  costs  and  increasing 
security,  and  those  seeking  to  adapt  to  the  changes  occurring  in  demand,  from  those 
spurious novelties that provide no significant improvements and which should be blocked 
as soon as possible. In other words, what is truly important should be separated from what 
is simply showy.  
 
In this respect, cryptoassets or cryptotokens are one of the most striking developments 
in this area, going by the extensive media coverage some of them – such as the bitcoin – 
are receiving. But this does not mean that they are the most important or even the most 
promising innovation. Indeed, in my view, their current use poses more risks than benefits: 
they have a low level of acceptance as a means of payment, they are subject to extreme 
 3/6 
 volatility,  they  have  numerous  operating  vulnerabilities  and  they  have  been  related  to 
fraudulent or illicit activities in many cases.  
 
I shall not, however, give an exhaustive list of the risks of crypto assets, since the position 
of the Banco de España in this connection is well-known. But I will draw attention to how 
important  it  is  to  disassociate  cryptoassets  or  tokens  from  their  underlying  distributed 
ledger technology. 
 
Distributed ledger technology offers interesting possibilities insofar as it allows, in short, a 
ledger book to be shared securely among various agents. Although this technology is not 
yet  sufficiently  mature,  it  has  the  potential  to  generate  efficiency  gains  and  cost  cuts  in 
activities that require continuous reconciliations among various agents, either because such 
activities are relatively non-standardised, involve a high number of intermediaries or require 
complex  processes.  Areas  such  as  securities  trading  and  post-trading,  international 
settlements, collateral management, trade finance and the management of digital identities 
might benefit from the use of this technology once it ultimately matures.  
 
Also, the programming of smart contracts on a distributed network might add further gains 
in efficiency, by providing for the automation of processes. This is so, especially, in the case 
of  complex  contracts  that  give  rise  to  multiple  transactions  distributed  over  time  or 
conditional upon one another.  
 
Other innovations receiving less media attention than cryptotokens nevertheless appear to 
be more mature and are, in practice, exerting a notable impact on the way in which financial 
institutions  in  general,  and  banks  in  particular,  provide  their  services.  I  am  referring 
specifically to big data, artificial intelligence and what is known as cloud computing.  
 
Big  data  offer  clear  potential  for  enhancing  and  personalising  the  supply  of  financial 
services. True, financial institutions have for some time been using massive data processing 
techniques  to  enhance  knowledge  of  their  customers  and  to  personalise  their  services. 
However,  these  possibilities  have  now  been  boosted  thanks  to  the  growing  volume  of 
information that is available in digital  formats, cheaper storage costs and the increase in 
computing power.  
 
The moves in big data are in fact boosting the development of other technologies that go 
beyond  mere  data  processing.  This  is  the  case  of  artificial  intelligence  and  automatic 
learning. They have numerous applications in the financial sector and are directed not only 
at end-products and customer relations, but are also transforming other financial services-
provision facets, including banks’ in-house operations in areas such as risk management or 
regulatory compliance. 
 
The use of virtual agents or virtual recognition is already contributing to enhancing users’ 
relationship  with  financial  services-providers.  But  artificial  intelligence  and  automatic 
learning can also be applied to tasks such as automatic information reconciliation, fraud 
detection, risk mitigation and regulatory compliance.  
 
The final innovation I should like to mention in this brief review is cloud computing. In an 
environment in which data are configured as a strategic asset, this technique enables new 
4/6 
  solutions to  be offered with  greater  speed,  cost  efficiencies  to  be  attained and  business 
process  adaptation  to  become  more  nimble.  That  said,  this  must  all  be  done  while 
maintaining an appropriate level of security, especially as far as critical areas are concerned.  
 
A little historical perspective suffices to see the improvements that new technologies can 
bring to users. Credit and debit cards, ATMs and on-line banking are obvious examples of 
past  innovations  that  have  changed  our  day-to-day  for  the  better.  The  success  of  these 
changes, however, has been closely bound up with the appropriate treatment of risks and 
the vulnerabilities that inevitably accompany these processes. The move to a more digital 
economy  is  accompanied  by  greater  cyber  threats,  and  new  measures  safeguarding 
processes, assets and customer data must be developed.  
 
Along with paying particular attention to the management of these threats, it will also be 
essential to respond to the challenges stemming from the concentration of operational risk 
among  a  small  number  of  critical  service-providers,  or  those  arising  from  customer 
protection. Financial services-providers must also meet the challenge of understanding in 
their full dimension the functioning and results of increasingly automated and autonomous 
algorithms and procedures.  
 
Organisational changes to address the challenge of financial innovation  
 
The role of regulators and supervisors is to contribute to harnessing in full the benefits of 
innovation while maintaining risks within reasonable and socially acceptable limits. As you 
can  imagine,  this  is  no  easy  task  and  requires  the  authorities  themselves  to  undertake 
internal transformation processes so as to be able to appropriately meet these challenges. 
 
As  a  result  of  this  need,  the  Banco  de  España  has  in  recent  years  assigned  growing 
resources to monitoring and analysing financial innovation.  
 
The first step was the creation, in February 2017, of an internal group with representatives 
from different business areas within our central bank to gain a cross-departmental view of 
the phenomenon and to promote coordination among these different areas.  
 
One  year  on,  we  have  deemed  it  necessary  to  take  a  further  step,  assigning  specific 
resources to the analysis of financial innovation. To do this, a new Associate Directorate 
General was created last March. 
 
This new area pursues three major aims: (i) to understand the dimension of the changes 
taking place, (ii) to analyse the consequences of the new developments, and (iii) to provide 
for coordination and contact with the market and the other authorities involved, including 
those from other jurisdictions since, in short, financial technological innovation is a global 
phenomenon.  The  ultimate  aim  is  to  develop  an  overview  of  the  main  features  and 
challenges facing financial services-providers.  
 
By  way  of  conclusion,  let  me  stress  that,  if  duly  harnessed  and  managed,  the  new 
technologies  and  the  growing  digitalisation  of  the  financial  sector  may  offer  major 
opportunities  for  increasing  efficiency  and  improving  financial  services  as  a  whole.  They 
may also be useful in adapting services to the changes taking place in user demand.  
 5/6 
 As  regulators  and  supervisors,  we  believe  we  must  be  an  active  part  of  this  process, 
performing the role assigned to us by society by analysing the developments taking place 
in the market and promoting, within our remit, healthy, orderly and positive innovation in the 
financial sector.  
 6/6 
 