Jens Weidmann: Germany - current economic policy debates
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  joint  IMF-BBk
conference "Germany - Current Economic Policy Debates", Frankfurt am Main, 18 January 2018.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I welcome you all to the joint IMF-Bundesbank conference on current economic challenges. It is a
pleasure to have you here.
Germany has posted four years of positive growth, record levels of employment, and the lowest
unemployment  rate  since  reunification.  The  casual  observer  might  therefore  be  forgiven  for
thinking that Germany’s economic challenges don’t look so pressing after all.
But I know that Managing Director Christine Lagarde is very fond of John F Kennedy’s saying
that, "the best time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining". And in the face of imminent
demographic shifts in Germany, prudence requires that we take this wisdom to heart. I am more
than happy that Christine will chair today’s concluding panel, guiding the discussion on a possible
post-crisis agenda for Germany and the euro area.
Right now, Germany is still enjoying the calm of what is referred to as the "demographic pause".
But  starting  from  2020,  the  effects  of  an  aging  society  will  begin  to  kick  in  strongly.  Over  the
course  of  the  next  decade,  the  dependency  ratio  will  rise  from  about  one  retiree  per  two
employees to about one retiree per employee.
Without comprehensive policy action, this implies a significant slowdown of potential growth. And
the repercussions will not be limited to Germany. A marked reduction in the growth potential in
the  euro  area’s  biggest  economy  would  be  a  burden  for  the  overall  state  of  the  euro  area
economy. It could also translate into lower long-term interest rates in the monetary union. This in
turn would not make matters easier for monetary policymakers.
Germany’s balanced budget, saving decisions or, more broadly, its current account surplus as a
consequence, is largely driven by demographic considerations. But what makes sense from a
domestic  perspective  might  spell  trouble  for  the  euro  area  and  the  world  at  large,  as  it  might
detract from international demand. This is a worry voiced by some observers, the IMF among
them.
Are  these  worries  valid?  Do  Germany’s  policies  need  to  change  in  order  to  accommodate
international  concerns? And  are  there  policy  options  that  could  strengthen  Germany’s  growth
potential and provide a boost to international demand at the same time – thus killing two birds
with one stone? In the next 15 minutes, I will briefly sketch out some possible answers to these
questions.
2. Wages and inflation in Germany
Despite the very favourable economic situation in Germany, inflation has not quite kept pace with
the expansion. And while I am pretty sure that Arthur Okun, inventor of the misery index, would
marvel at this remarkable combination of low inflation and low unemployment, this is nonetheless
something of an economic conundrum.
Standard economic theory would suggest strong wage growth in the face of increasing labour
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
market  tightness. And  in  time,  higher  wages  would  translate  into  higher  inflation  as  well.  But
wages have been growing at a moderate pace even in the presence of a positive output gap.
Notwithstanding  that  wage  growth  is  now  slightly  above  the  long-term  average,  indicators  of
labour market slack would suggest higher wage settlements.
What can explain the modest wage growth in Germany? Bundesbank research suggests that
migration  from  other  EU  member  states  partially  accounts  for  dampened  wage  pressures  in
Germany. Trade unions’ higher  weight  on  requests  for  reduced  working  time  or  more  training
probably also plays a part. I’m sure the upcoming discussion will delve deeper into this as well.
But when it comes to modest wage growth in the face of tight labour market conditions, Germany
is by no means unique. It seems to be a rather widespread phenomenon, characteristic of the
current situation in the US, the UK, Japan and Sweden, for example.
This  suggests  that  the  factors  responsible  for  holding  back  wage  growth  are  not  only
idiosyncratic,  but  at  least  partly  international  as  well.  Recent  research  by  the  Bank  for
International Settlements, for example, suggests that the greater contestability of labour markets
1
via the proliferation of global value chains puts a lid on wages.
More research is needed here, however, to determine which factors are the most prevalent, and
whether they are temporary or secular in nature.
3. Fiscal policy
What can be said with confidence in my view, however, is that a positive output gap does not
signal a need for an expansive fiscal policy stance. Rather, to heed Kennedy’s advice would be
to maintain a safety margin to the existing fiscal rules in the face of the looming demographic
challenges.
Yet this does not mean that there is no need for action on fiscal policy. Action is warranted to
counteract the demographic drag on growth – but action not with regard to the overall stance, but
with regard to how the money is spent.
Targeted investments in research, education and, especially, digital infrastructure are required to
raise growth potential. And pension reforms that tie retirement age to life expectancy would help
to maintain a high pension level while mitigating losses in labour supply.
Most of these measures require a shift in public expenditure from consumption to investment,
rather than additional spending. Just as repairing a roof on a beautiful, sunny day, this may not be
the most attractive thing to do. But it would be the right thing to do, in my opinion. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  calls  for  a  more  expansive  fiscal  stance  in  Germany  are  informed  by
hopes of its stimulating effect on overall demand in the euro area. Such an attempt, however,
seems likely to disappoint. As the import content of public expenditure is low, spillovers to other
euro area countries are likely to be small, even when accounting for equilibrium effects.
4. Germany’s current account surplus
By a similar token, raising public spending in order to reduce Germany’s current account surplus
would likely be a futile undertaking as well.
Macro-econometric  simulations  show  that  a  deficit-financed  expansion  of  public  investment  in
Germany  by  1%  of  GDP  over  two  years  would  have  a  very  small  impact  on  other  euro  area
countries. The current account balance for the rest of the euro area would rise by less than one-
tenth  of  a  percentage  point  –  and  this  is  on  the  assumption  of  no  monetary  policy  response.
Given  endogenous  monetary  policy  –  which  would  imply  a  tightening  on  that  occasion  –  the
2
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
stimulus would have barely any impact at all.
The German surplus has been the subject of much economic debate in recent years. Of course,
neither current account surpluses nor deficits are a bad thing per se. Current account surpluses
and  deficits  reflect  net  foreign  lending  and  borrowing,  respectively;  and  depending  on  the
circumstances, both can be rational as well as non-detrimental for a given country.
In  Germany,  for  example,  the  period  following  reunification  saw  substantial  domestic  demand
and substantial capital requirements that pushed the current account into the red for an extended
period of time. On the other hand, it is now appropriate for Germany to be running surpluses,
since demographic change will hit the economy particularly hard.
According  to  long-term  OECD  projections,  no  major  industrial  country  will  grow  as  slowly  in
economic terms over the next decades as Germany. Foreign assets accumulated will enable the
German economy to participate in the potentially more dynamic economic growth elsewhere.
Of course, demographics alone cannot explain the entire German surplus – according to IMF
estimates,  aging  accounts  for  about  three  percentage  points  –  but  it  should  be  taken  into
consideration.
Additionally, it should be noted that the latest distinct rise in Germany’s trade surplus was due to
the low oil and commodity prices and a relatively weak euro. And with regard to the latter, the
heightened trade surplus is also a reflection of the ECB’s very accommodative monetary policy
stance regarding the euro area on average.
Bearing that in mind, it is disputable whether the national current account balances of member
states in a monetary union are meaningful at all. On a global scale, it would be more appropriate
to refer to the euro area balance, which is significantly lower.
While the German current account surplus is projected to decline over the next few years, the
current account is not expected to become well-balanced. It will be interesting to see whether the
experts in our afternoon session conclude that there is a need for active policy measures by the
German authorities. And I am curious to learn what measures would be seen as appropriate, if
any.
After  all,  the  German  surplus  is  the  result  of  millions  of  decisions  made  by  enterprises  and
consumers  in  Germany  and  abroad.  I  do  not  know  of  any  misaligned  incentives  such  as
protectionist  measures  to  impede  imports  or  promote  exports.  And  there  is  obviously  no
manipulation of the exchange rate to create current account surpluses in Germany; the euro is a
free-floating currency.
Of course, a current account surplus reflects a surplus of savings over investment. To the extent
that capital is flowing out of the country due to missed investment opportunities, public policy
action is certainly called for.
The  way  to  go,  then,  is  to  create  a  more  investment-friendly  environment  in  Germany.  The
panellists possibly share my  view  that  improving  efficiency  in  engineering  the  policy  switch  to
renewable  energy  or  in  fostering  digitisation,  for  instance  by  broadband  network  expansion
nationwide, could serve to stimulate private investment. Additionally, removing barriers to entry in
the services sector and opening up closed professions could provide an impetus for stronger
productivity growth. 
5.  Strengthening the euro area’s resilience
Facing economic challenges head-on will not only prove a boon to citizens’ prosperity. It will also
raise the equilibrium real interest rate. And this will make the job of a central bank substantially
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
easier, as it adds distance to the zero lower bound.
But  while  raising  growth  potential  in  Germany  and  the  other  member  states  will  do  much  to
strengthen the euro area, it is not the end-all to making the monetary union more resilient.
When  it  comes  to  resilience,  one  has  to  talk  about  risk  sharing.  How  can  shocks  that  hit
individual member states particularly hard be cushioned?
In the United States and other large currency areas, shocks are spread through the distribution of
business profits and losses throughout the currency area, because company owners are often
resident in other states.
Another channel of private economic risk sharing comes through saving and lending. Enterprises
and households take out loans in different US states during an economic downturn to bridge a
slump in earnings. Risk sharing through fiscal policy takes a back seat by comparison. Only 10%
to  25%  percent  of  all  risks  are  shared  by  a  common  fiscal  policy  in  federations  like  the  US
3
orCanada.
Clearly, much could be achieved in the euro area by strengthening cross-border corporate equity
funding. To tear down the walls in European capital markets by standardising national insolvency
regimes is, in my view, just one particularly important step. Investors need to be able to count on
a level playing-field existing throughout Europe. Not only will that promote private risk sharing; it
will  also  reduce  capital  flows  to  less  productive  businesses  and  stimulate  flows  to  more
4
productive ones. That will boost economic momentum, as OECD research confirms.
Additionally, as Christine Lagarde has pointed out, "there is an inherent debt bias embedded in
the global tax system". The development of equity markets, including in Europe, is suffering from
5
the preferential tax treatment given to debt over equity capital.
Interest payments can be deducted from taxable income; equity costs cannot. Eliminating this
bias, which I admit would not be trivial in political terms, would encourage businesses to make
greater use of equity capital as a funding instrument. And that, in turn, would facilitate greater
private risk sharing whilst at the same time reducing the debt bias.
Another way in which risk could potentially be shared might be for enterprises and households to
take out cross-border loans in times of crisis. Yet this mechanism hardly worked at all during the
crisis in the euro area.
One of the steps taken in Europe to prevent the repetition of a financial crisis was to create the
Banking Union. With its Single Supervisory Mechanism and rules on bailing-in creditors in the
event of bank failures, the Banking Union bolsters the banking sector's resilience. This makes a
loss  of  confidence  in  national  banking  systems  less  likely. And  less  danger  of  a  fragmented
financial system stabilises lending, particularly in turbulent times.
A common European deposit guarantee scheme could, in theory, even heighten this confidence.
However, as with any insurance policy, one would have to make sure in this case, too, that the
insurance does not cover losses which have already occurred, like bad loans already on banks’
books, and that the insurance does not encourage careless behaviour in the future. And, in my
view, the preferential treatment of sovereign debt on banks’ balance sheets has to be done away
with in Europe to avoid a mutualisation of sovereign risks through the back door. Credit to general
governments is not risk-free, as the sovereign debt crisis reminded us in no uncertain terms.
One precondition for a European deposit insurance scheme, then, is that the size of government
bond  portfolios  that  banks  hold  on  their  books  is  limited.  Credit  to  sovereigns  should  not  be
treated any differently from credit to enterprises or individuals.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
On that note, I would like to conclude by recalling something else President Kennedy said: "There
are  risks  and  costs  to  action.  But  they  are  far  less  than  the  long-range  risks  of  comfortable
inaction." To me, that aptly describes the situation Germany and the euro area find themselves
in.
I now look forward to exploring promising avenues of action with you, and wish us all an exciting
and rewarding conference!
1
2
3
4
5
Raphael Auer & Claudio Borio & Andrew Filardo, 2017. “The globalisation of inflation: the growing importance of
global value chains", BIS Working Papers 602, Bank for International Settlements.
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The international spillover effects of an expansion of public investment in Germany,
Monthly Report, August 2016, pp. 13-17, and studies with similar results cited there.
Allard, C, P K Brooks, J C Bluedorn, F Bornhorst, K Christopherson, F Ohnsorge, T Poghosyan and an IMF staff
team (2013), “Towards a Fiscal Union for the Euro Area", IMF Staff Discussion Note, 13/09.
Adalet McGowan M and D Andrews (2016), “Insolvency Regimes And Productivity Growth: A Framework For
Analysis", OECD Economics Department Working Papers No 1309.
German Council of Economic Experts (2017), “Towards a future-oriented economic policy".
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
