François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  The  sustainability  of  European
Monetary Union and institutional reform
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at The ECB and Its
Watchers  XIX  Conference,  organised  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability,
Frankfurt am Main, 14 March 2018.
 Accompanying slides.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In order to make the European Monetary Union sustainable in the medium term, we have to make
it more resilient to future crises. The current economic cycle is admittedly in a very robust phase
today, but this will come to an end at some point. If we do not  want  to  overburden  monetary
policy during the next recession, we need to strengthen our Economic Union. These objectives
should be, including here in Germany, two sides of the same coin. To ensure monetary policy
does  not  remain  “the  only  game  in  town”,  we  have  to  arm  ourselves  with  stronger  economic
instruments at the European level. There is a serious risk, however, of missed opportunities as
the present debate over the future of the euro area seems to be getting bogged down in never-
ending  arguments  such  as  on  the  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS)  or  sovereign
debt restructuring. We should rather focus our efforts on the many other proposals that are more
consensual. In my remarks today, I will elaborate on the three old clichés that are paralysing the
debate and that we must put behind us to move forward in the euro area. But before that, let me
say a few words about our monetary policy.
Our monetary policy is doing its part, thanks to its persistence and patience, as Mario Draghi
stressed this morning. Past questions about its effectiveness and our exit strategy seem to have
receded – and rightly so. We confirmed last week our course of gradual normalisation, with the
removal of the so-called “easing bias” on the APP. What we see now is a welcome alignment of
the  stars:  against  the  economic  background  of  a  robust  expansion  with  gradual  progress  on
inflation,  there  is  a  broad  convergence  of  market  expectations  with  the  views  within  our
Governing Council. At present, there is very little debate among us. But this convergence doesn’t
preclude vigilance. We’re closely watching the somewhat slow pace of inflation – I believe the
Phillips curve is still at work, although with a time lag – and the global risks, starting with US trade
policy and the evolution of the exchange rate.
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  core  of  my  message:  the  need  to  strengthen  our  Monetary  Union  by
making concrete progress on Economic Union. There is currently a window of opportunity: the
economic recovery is robust, and many euro area reform proposals point in the same direction,
including  the  Commission  roadmap  of  December  2017,  President  Macron’s  speech  at  the
Sorbonne  last  September  and,  more  recently,  the  European  chapter  of  the  German  coalition
agreement. The outcome of the recent elections in Italy shows that we can’t waste any more
time  with  theoretical  debates.  We  as  central  bankers  are  concerned  here  with  avoiding
overburdening  monetary  policy  by  the  next  recession,  but  it  is  of  course  the  responsibility  of
politicians to act.
1/ The first cliché that emerges when we talk about reforming the euro area is the opposition
between vision – be it French or otherwise – and pragmatism – seen as a northern European
virtue.  We  must  be  practical,  and  take  real  needs  and  particularly  those  of  businesses  and
entrepreneurs as our starting point. At the same time, we need a political ambition if we are to act
–  call  it  a  “vision”  if  you  wish.  Today,  the  key  to  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  investment  and
innovation.  But  to  innovate,  in  digital  technology  or  in  the  energy  transition  for  example,
companies need to be able to take more risks, which requires more equity financing over the
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
long term, rather than debt financing. The euro area is seriously lagging behind in this respect:
equity capital amounted to only 73% of GDP in the third quarter of 2017, compared to 123% in
the United States. This brings me to my first solution for strengthening our Economic Union: a
European-level "Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation",  which  would  better
channel the euro area’s EUR 350 billion savings surplus into equity financing for innovation, in
digital  or  renewable  energy  technologies.  This  Financing  Union  should  bring  together  existing
initiatives  and,  as  a  priority,  the  Capital  Markets  Union,  but  also  the  Banking  Union  and  the
Juncker Investment Plan.
There is no tremendous political obstacle on this rather technical agenda. Within the Governing
Council of the ECB, we all find it extremely regrettable that the Capital Markets Union is currently
being overlooked and last Thursday we urged that “specific and decisive steps” be taken in that
field.
2/ The second cliché is the complacent idea that action at the European level would be a
substitute  for  national  reforms.  Let  me  say  on  the  contrary  that  national  reforms  are  a
prerequisite for any enhancement of the Economic Union, and France is well aware of this. I say
this in my capacity as a totally independent central banker: the new government is acting with
impressive  speed  on  structural  reforms.  National  reforms  are  necessary  but  they  are  not
sufficient as our challenge is this: how to ensure stabilisation and better allocation at the euro
area  level.  Regarding  stabilisation,  I  see  two  avenues.  First,  a  better collective  economic
strategy in the euro area. Member States are responsible for their economic policies, but the
euro area will indeed be better off with more reforms in countries where they are needed, like
France,  and  with  more  fiscal  or  wage  support  in  countries  with  room  for  manoeuvre,  like
Germany or the Netherlands. Second, a precautionary stability-oriented instrument in order
not  only  to  manage  crises  ex-post,  but  to  prevent  them  ex-ante.  Such  an  instrument  already
exists, in theory, in the ESM toolbox in the form of the ‘Precautionary Financial Assistance’. Yet, it
has  never  been  used,  and  could  probably  be  improved,  with  clear  rules  and  some  form  of
automatic  prequalification  system,  to  avoid  a  stigma  effect.  This  enhancement  of  the  crisis
prevention  instruments  could  form  part  of  a  broader  transformation  of  the  ESM  and  its
governance into a European Monetary Fund (EMF).
The issue of allocation should also be seriously addressed. In order to boost potential growth in
the long term, expenditure on investment and on our future are vital, including on education and
training and, of course, new technologies. This is true of national budgets, but we could amplify
the effect through a euro area investment budget. This budget could be used to finance, for
the benefit of all euro area Member States, certain “common goods” such as digital technology,
energy transition, security, and external border protection. As all countries would benefit from this
budget, it would be precisely the opposite of a transfer union. In a nutshell, what I have elaborated
on so far are the accelerators of the Economic Union: micro, macro and fiscal [slide].
3/ This leads me to the third and last cliché: we should stop pitting risk reduction against risk
sharing  or,  to  put  it  another  way,  responsibility  against  solidarity  or,  in  a  complementary
perspective,  rules  against  discretion.  These  oppositions  create  a  sterile  division  between
northern  Europe  and  southern  Europe.  To  work  well,  our  Union  needs  both:  risk  reduction
mechanisms  and  risk  sharing. As  I  just  said,  for  crisis  prevention  to  be  credible,  we  should
implement fiscal discipline – including the present rules of the Stability and Growth Pact – but we
should also have the instruments needed to cushion the effects of asymmetric shocks that may
arise suddenly, regardless of all the efforts a Member State can make. It is time to forget about
ideological trench warfare. Let me share with you four areas where practical progress is needed:
First, bolstering private risk sharing. The simple and obvious way to achieve this is to build
the Capital Markets Union within the Financing Union that I mentioned earlier. We are still
lagging far behind the United States where capital markets are capable of absorbing around
40%  of  a  state-specific  shock.  What  is  more,  a  genuine  Financing  Union  would  further
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
increase the efficiency of monetary policy by ensuring better circulation of liquidity in the euro
area.
Second, EDIS.  We  have  made  significant  strides  with  the  first  two  pillars  of  the  Banking
Union,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism
(SRM). We still need – and it should be our priority – to strengthen the SRM with a sovereign
backstop to the Single Resolution Fund and a simplified decision-making process tailored for
emergency cases of resolution. Now, there needs to be some form of compromise to move
forward on the third pillar, EDIS, as well. A suitable and pragmatic approach could be a first
step focused on providing the liquidity needs of the national deposit guarantee schemes, as
proposed  by  the  European  Commission  last  October.  We  don’t  need  from  the  start  an
integrated European guarantee.
Third, sovereign debt restructuring. It is legitimate and important to ask ourselves how to
make the euro area better able to withstand sovereign debt crises in case they happen. In
this regard, enhancing market discipline can be part of the solution – the proposals to set up
a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism build on this idea. However, we have to be very
cautious and make sure that it does not become part of the problem. When rules are rigid,
market  expectations  may  prompt  sudden  chain  reactions  or  speculative  attacks  and  put
financial stability at risk. And nobody should underestimate the “transition problem” on the
existing debts if such a policy were to be announced.   
Fourth, the  institutional  architecture  of  the  euro  area. If  we  make  progress  on  the
substance  (the  three  instruments  I  mentioned),  there  is  a  strong  case  for  a  euro  area
Finance Minister in order to implement them. He would be President of the Eurogroup and a
member  of  the  European  Commission,  as  mentioned  in  the  European  Commission’s
proposals  published  in  December  2017. As  a  compromise  between  rules  and  discretion,
this Finance Minister could rely on the expert advice of an independent institution such as a
strengthened European Fiscal Board.
Let  me  sum  up.  It  is  high  time  we  took  pragmatic  and  decisive  steps,  beyond  the  three  old
clichés  which  are  impeding  progress  towards  a  more  sustainable  European  Monetary  Union.
They  draw  a  pointless  distinction  between  vision  and  pragmatism,  European-level  action  and
national reforms, and between risk reduction and risk sharing. There are three solutions: first, a
“Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation";  second,  better  coordination  of  economic
policies supplemented by a stability-oriented instrument within the ESM (or EMF); and third, a
euro area investment budget for the financing of common goods. Thank you for your attention. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
