Bank of Italy – CEPR Conference
Labour market participation: 
Forces at work and policy challenges
Welcome address by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Luigi Federico Signorini 
Centre “Carlo Azeglio Ciampi”
Rome, 15-16 March 2018
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
it is a pleasure to welcome the participants to the Bank of Italy-CEPR conference on 
‘Labour market participation: Forces at work and policy challenges’. 1  
A  well-functioning  labour  market  is  essential  for  sustaining  growth  and  maintaining 
social  cohesion.  The  purpose  of  this  conference  is  to  improve  our  understanding  of  the 
secular  changes  affecting  both  labour  supply  and  demand,  the  attendant  threats  and 
opportunities, and the policy challenges. 
I  shall  briefly  discuss  these  changes,  look  at  some  of  the  policy  measures  already 
undertaken in various jurisdictions, and propose a few open issues for discussion. 
Trends in labour supply 
In  Europe,  labour  force  participation  has  increased  considerably  over  the  past  few 
decades and, despite marked heterogeneity across countries, has now drawn level with the 
US. According to the latest data, it was equal to 73 per cent in 2017, around ten percentage 
points above the level recorded in the early 1980s.  
There are three main drivers of this development.  
The first is the growing involvement of women in market work. Female participation in 
the EU has increased by about 20 percentage points since the early 1980s, reaching 68 per 
cent in 2017. This reflects various factors: technological progress that has reduced the time 
required for unpaid household work, greater availability of flexible working arrangements, 
increased  supply  of  affordable  childcare  services  and  more  sharing  of  household  work 
between men and women. With reference to the US, the contribution of female employment 
to  the  occupational  structure  will  be  the  focus  of  one  of  the  papers  to  be  presented  this 
morning.2 
The  second  driver  is  increased  education,  a  feature  that  is  positively  associated  with 
labour market attachment. In Europe, the share of individuals aged 20-64 with academic or 
advanced professional education rose by around 10 percentage points in the last 15 years, 
reaching 30 per cent in 2017. The greater labour market attachment of persons in central age 
brackets has more than compensated for the lower participation of younger individuals, who 
now tend to remain longer in education.  
                                                           
1 
2  Cerina, F., Moro, A., and Petersen Rendall, M. (2018), ‘The role of gender in employment polarization.’ 
I wish to thank Eliana Viviano and Francesco D’Amuri for their assistance in preparing this speech. 
The  third  driver  is  migration.  Immigrants’  labour  market  participation  is  high,  and 
their  share  in  the  working  age  population  has  increased  significantly  in  developed 
countries (e.g. in Europe from 4.4 per cent in 2002 to 8.2 per cent in 2016). Few papers in 
the literature have found a negative impact of migration on employment of host-country 
workers; on the contrary, given that foreign-born and native workers have different skill 
sets, their respective labour services are often found to be complementary.3  
The positive contribution to labour market participation of some demographic factors is 
likely to slow in the future. Notably, the baby-boom bulge in the age structure, which for a 
long time has sustained the share of working-age population, is now starting to push up the 
share of retirees. For given retirement rules, ageing reduces the participation rate. According 
to the European Commission,4 however, the share of active individuals aged 20-64 will still 
increase by 3 percentage points between 2016 and 2070, owing in part to increases in the 
statutory retirement age in many countries.  
Future trends in migration are exceedingly difficult to predict. Migration pressures are 
likely to increase, as more people in less-developed countries cross the threshold between 
absolute poverty (which affords no opportunity to move) and that condition where one has 
acquired the minimum amount of knowledge and resources required to pursue a better life 
elsewhere. On the other hand, in developed countries issues about the social acceptability of 
immigration  loom  increasingly  large  in  the  political  debate  and  the  management  of 
migrants’ flows and their integration are highly controversial. 
Trends in labour demand 
Trends in the demand for labour are driven by the twin primal forces in contemporary 
economies:  technological  progress  and  globalisation.  Many  fear  that  downward  pressures 
are deriving from both of these forces in the advanced economies. 
Historically, there have always been concerns that technological innovation would have 
negative effects on employment, especially during downturns. In this never-ending debate, 
views have been rather disparate, with prominent economists occasionally – and not always 
prudently – venturing into dismal predictions. 
In the third edition of his Principles of political economy and taxation (1821), Ricardo 
wrote: ‘The opinion, entertained by the labouring class, that the employment of machinery 
is  frequently  detrimental  to  their  interests,  is  not  founded  on  prejudice  and  error,  but  is 
conformable to the correct principles of political economy’.5  
                                                           
3   Peri, G. (2016), Immigrants, Productivity, and Labor Markets in Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4). 
4   European Commission (2018), Ageing report 2018 - Underlying Assumptions and Projection Methodologies. 
5   Ricardo, D. (1821), The Principles of Political Economy & Taxation. London: New York: J.M. Dent; E.P. Dutton, 
reprinted in 1911.  
In  his  famous  essay  ‘Economic  possibilities  for  our  grandchildren’  (1930),  Keynes 
wrote: ‘We are being afflicted with a new disease of which some readers may not yet have 
heard the name, but of which they will hear a great deal in the  years to come – namely, 
technological unemployment. This means unemployment due to our discovery of means of 
economising  the  use  of  labour  outrunning  the  pace  at  which  we  can  find  new  uses  for 
labour.’6  He  also  thought  that  in  one  hundred  years  there  would  no  longer  be  a  need  for 
humans to work much at all. Three hours of work per day would suffice to satisfy the ‘old 
Adam in most of us’, he said, that is, mankind’s innate urge to produce with ‘the sweat of 
his brow’. We have twelve years left to reach this goal.7 
In the words of Mokyr et al.,8 ‘if someone as brilliant as David Ricardo could be so 
terribly  wrong  in  how  machinery  would  reduce  the  overall  demand  for  labour,  modern 
economists  should  be  cautious  in  making  pronouncements  about  the  end  of  work.’  Our 
experience so far is that, in the long run, technological change improves living standards by 
boosting productivity and increasing output and consumption, without destroying jobs in the 
aggregate.9 Average working hours have indeed come down, but they are nowhere near the 
level  Keynes  imagined.  Doomy  predictions  suggesting  that  machines  would  at  a  certain 
point  in  the  future  have  ‘an  absolute  and  a  comparative  advantage  over  humans  in  all 
activities’10 are likely to prove misplaced.11  
However,  technological  advances  do  imply  changes  in  the  occupational  structure.  In 
recent  years,  many  have  detected  one  such  change  in  the  form  of  a  ‘polarization’  of  the 
labour  market.  Middle-range  jobs  involving  routine-intensive  tasks,  which  can  be  easily 
automated, have been hardest hit; as a share of total employment, they have fallen by about 
7  percentage  points  in  the  US  and  9  points  in  Europe.12  At  the  same  time,  increased 
employment opportunities have arisen at both ends of the skill distribution. The demand for 
high-skill professionals has increased because their skills complement technology. But the 
demand for low-skill workers has also increased, because jobs that are intensive in certain 
manual tasks (such as personal care services) are not easily replaced by technology, while 
greater  productivity  in  the  rest  of  the  economy  and  higher  incomes  translate  into  greater 
demand for such services. 
                                                           
6   Keynes, J.M. (1930), ‘Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren’, in Essays in Persuasion, New York: W.W. 
Norton & Co., reprinted in 1963. 
7   Ibid, Chapter II. 
8   Mokyr,  J.,  Vickers,  C.  and  Ziebarth,  N.L.  (2015),  ‘The  History  of  Technological  Anxiety  and  the  Future  of 
Economic Growth: Is This Time Different?’, in Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(3). 
9   Autor, D. (2015), ‘Why are there still so many jobs?’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(3). 
10   Mokyr, J., et al, op. cit. 
11   DeLong, B. (2017), ‘Inclusive AI: Technology and Policy for a Diverse Urban Future’, speech delivered at the Citris 
and Banatao institute. 
12   OECD  Employment  Outlook  2017,  Chapter  3,  p.  121,  Figure  3.A1.1.  Middle-skill  occupations  include  jobs 
classified  under  the  ISCO-88  major  groups  4,  7,  and  8  (clerks,  craft  and  related  trades  workers,  and  plant  and 
machine operators and assemblers). 
Globalisation reinforces this trend. Stronger international competition favours the rise 
of ‘superstar’, winner-takes-all firms, thus improving the conditions of their workers (not to 
mention  their  owners  or  managers)  over  all  others.  At  the  same  time,  in  many  advanced 
economies delocalisation depresses the demand for intermediate-skill workers employed in 
the production of tradable goods.  
The  implications  in  terms  of  income  polarisation  are  not  always  obvious.  One  paper 
that will be presented here shows that the increase in labour demand at the opposite poles of 
the skill distribution has also generated endogenous supply responses, such as higher female 
labour  market  participation  and  a  rise  in  immigration.13  Another  paper  shows  that  more 
innovative firms pay higher wages not only on average, but even to low-skilled workers.14 
However,  while  the  long-run  effect  of  technological  change,  based  on  historical 
evidence, is likely to be entirely beneficial, in the short run disruptions and displacements 
are to be expected, and many jobs will be at risk. Policies cannot ignore this. 
Reforms 
The challenge is therefore to find ways to enable economic systems to reap as many of 
the long-run benefits as possible, while alleviating any short-run costs of structural change. 
While a unique first-best solution does not exist, both theory and experience point to the 
usefulness  of  certain  structural  reforms  to  foster  widespread,  inclusive  growth  of 
employment opportunities.  
I  shall  briefly  mention  three  policies  that  are  (or  should  be)  on  the  agenda  of  most 
countries:  (i)  measures  to  sustain  participation;  (ii)  measures  to  improve  human  capital; 
(iii) measures to make structural adaptation easier and fairer (‘flexicurity’). 
Sustaining  participation  –  There  are  three  main  developments  that  can  affect 
participation: 
• 
• 
•  managing migration flows and effectively integrating immigrants. 
achieving gender parity in participation rates; 
extending the working life; 
Progress  in  women’s  participation  has  been  substantial  in  Europe,  but  in  most 
countries  parity  remains  a  distant  prospect.  The  difference  between  male  and  female 
participation rates is currently around 10 percentage points in the European Union and in 
the United States; despite recent progress, the difference is twice as large in Italy. More 
flexible  working  hours  and  family-friendly  workplace  arrangements  are  two  ways  of 
                                                           
13   Basso,  G.,  Peri,  G.  and  Rathman,  A.  (2017),  ‘Computerization  and  immigration:  theory  and  evidence  from  the 
United States’, NBER WP 23935. 
14   Aghion, P., Bergeaud, P., Blundell R. and Griffith, R. (2018), ‘The Innovation Premium to Low Skill Jobs’. 
 
achieving  more  inclusive  participation  (and,  incidentally,  a  more  equitable  distribution 
of  household  chores).  In  many  European  countries  there  is  plenty  of  scope  for  further 
improvement, e.g. concerning the supply of childcare facilities. 
The  continuing  increase  in  life  expectancy  makes  raising  the  retirement  age 
unavoidable to ensure that pension systems are sustainable; this in turn is bound to result in 
higher participation rates in the older age brackets. Many European countries are revising, 
or need to revise, their public pension systems. According to the  assessment  made in the 
Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure  by  the  European  Commission  released  one  week 
ago, 12 members of the European Union have issues concerning the long-term sustainability 
of  their  public  finances,  partly  due  to  pension  expenditures.15  For  those  countries  that 
adopted ambitious reforms it is important not to backtrack on them in the future.  
Already legislated pension reforms will imply in Europe, between 2016 and 2070, an 
increase in the statutory retirement age of more than two years;16 the impact on labour force 
participation for the 55-64 age class will be substantial (12 percentage points). The increase 
will be much stronger in Italy, where radical reforms enacted gradually over the past two 
decades  have  transformed  what  used  to  be  one  of  the  least  sustainable  public  pension 
systems into one of the most sustainable. Between 1990 and 2016, average age at retirement 
had already increased from 57 to more than 62; it is expected to have increased by a further 
five years by 2070. Participation rates in the 55-64 age class are projected to be among the 
highest in large European countries. (Let me add that we need to revise the age brackets we 
typically use: ‘65+’ can no longer be taken as synonymous with ‘presumed retired’.) 
One might think that an ageing workforce would be less productive or innovative, or 
that grey heads keeping their jobs for longer will displace younger workers. There can be 
different points of view on this. On the one hand, recent research concerning Italy17 shows 
that  the  unexpected  increase  in  the  employment  of  mature  workers  that  took  place  after 
changes in public pension rules in 2012 did not reduce employment in other age classes. On 
the other hand, a paper18 to be presented  tomorrow finds a negative impact of ageing  on 
dynamism and growth.  
Managing  migration  is  the  trickiest  challenge  of  all.  Good,  dispassionate,  data-based 
economic research may help set the stage for an informed public-policy debate. One paper 
that  will  be  presented  tomorrow19  on  the  impact  of  the  regularisation  of  undocumented 
migrants on the labour market in Spain is very much in this spirit and provides interesting, 
nuanced results.  
15   European Commission (2018), European Semester  Winter Package: reviewing Member States’ progress on their 
economic and social priorities. 
16   European Commission (2018), The 2018 Ageing Report: Underlying Assumptions and Projection Methodologies. 
17   Carta, F., D’Amuri, F. and von Wachter, T. (2018), ‘Workforce ageing, pension reform and firms’ dynamics’, Bank 
of Italy Occasional Papers (forthcoming). 
18   Engbom, N. (2018), ‘Firm and Worker Dynamics in an Aging Labor Market’. 
19   Monras,  J.,  Vazquez-Grenno,  J.  and  Elias,  F.  (2018),  ‘Understanding  the  Effects  of  Legalizing  Undocumented 
Immigrants’. 
Education – The improvement in the education level of the European workforce during 
the past ten years is partly due to targeted policies (though the latter differ greatly across 
countries).  For  all  the  progress  that  has  been  made,  however,  there  is  evidence  that 
European education systems are still struggling to equip workers with the skills they need.  
A recent survey20 shows that, especially in southern European countries, an increasingly 
large  share  of  workers  are  both  over-educated,  i.e.,  they  received  extra  education  not 
required for the job, and under-skilled, i.e., they lack certain specific task-related abilities. 
This  suggests  that  many  European  education  systems  have  not  quite  succeeded  in 
integrating  general  and  vocational  education  in  an  efficient,  balanced  way.  The  former 
appears  to  be  biased  towards  purely  academic  knowledge,  and  to  neglect  the  adaptable, 
problem-solving abilities required in the labour market. The latter focuses too narrowly on 
specific skills, which raise employability in the short term, but rapidly become obsolete.21  
In respect of education, Italy has a problem of its own. Indicators of formal education 
(years  of  schooling,  levels  of  educational  attainment  at  specific  ages)  have  long  been 
significantly lower in Italy than in other countries at a comparable level of development. For 
a long time this did not seem to  matter  much. In the 1970s and 1980s, Italy’s ‘industrial 
districts’  (clusters  of  small,  specialised  manufacturing  firms)  prospered  largely  on  the 
strength  of  a  peculiar,  highly  localised  form  of  human  capital,  acquired  in  vocational 
schools,  through  on-the-job  training,  and  through  general  social  interaction  (sometimes 
called  the  ‘local  industrial  climate’).  In  that  context,  the  returns  to  formal  education 
appeared to be low. Since then, however, the increasing global importance of technology-
related skills has radically changed the picture; the ‘industrial climate’, important as it is, is 
no longer enough. In fact, inadequate human capital development is, I suspect, one of the 
reasons behind the unsatisfactory productivity growth of the country in the past couple of 
decades.  Favoured  by  (piecemeal)  reforms,  some  progress  is  being  made  along  both 
dimensions of education: average schooling is up, and international comparisons of skills 
for young cohorts are now less unfavourable than they used to be. However, a gap remains, 
and in my opinion it receives less systematic public-policy attention than it deserves.22 
Increasing  flexibility,  providing  safety  nets  –  Growing  empirical  evidence  shows 
that  greater  labour  market  flexibility,  coupled  with  policies  that  reduce  labour  market 
duality,  results  in  better  outcomes.  For  example,  countries  that  entered  the  Great 
Recession  with  more  flexible  labour  markets  have  generally  shown  greater  resilience. 
                                                           
20   Flisi, S., Goglio, V., Meroni, E., Rodrigues, M. and Vera-Toscano, E. (2017), Measuring Occupational Mismatch: 
Overeducation and Overskill in Europe—Evidence from PIAAC, in Social indicators research, 131(3). 
21   Krueger, D. and Kumar, K.B. (2004), ‘Skill-specific rather than general education: A reason for US–Europe growth 
differences?’, Journal  of  economic  growth, 9(2);  Hanushek,  E.A.,  Schwerdt,  G.,  Woessmann,  L.  and  Zhang,  L. 
(2017), ‘General education, vocational education, and labor-market outcomes over the lifecycle’, Journal of Human 
Resources, 52(1). 
22   Brandolini, A. and Cipollone, P. (2001), ‘Multifactor productivity and labour quality in Italy, 1981-2000’, Bank of 
Italy  Working  Papers,  422.  Bugamelli  M.,  Lotti,  F.  (2018)  Productivity  growth  in  Italy:  a  tale  of  a  slow-motion 
change, Bank of Italy, Occasional papers, 422 Colonna, F. (2017), ‘Chicken or the egg? Human capital demand and 
supply’, Politica economica, 33(1). 
issue 
is  how 
The 
to  balance  fast  system-wide  reallocation  with  sufficiently 
comprehensive  individual  security:  while  not  easy,  this  balance  can  in  principle  be 
pursued  through  flexible  labour  regulation  accompanied  by  an  appropriate  form  of 
protection  for  those  who  lose  their  jobs,  by  retraining,  and  by  active  labour  policies. 
Four papers will be presented at this conference that deal with these issues: specifically, 
the effectiveness of short-time work subsidies in saving jobs,23 the relationship between 
workers’  flows  in  multi-plant  firms  and  firing  restrictions,24  the  relevance  of  advance 
layoff notices for workers’ reallocation,25 and the effectiveness of active labour market 
programs.26 
In  the  past  few  years,  many  European  countries  have  taken  steps  to  improve  the 
functioning  of  the  labour  market.27  The  LABREF  dataset  of  the  European  Commission, 
which records all reforms in employment protection legislation, lists almost twice as many 
measures in 2008-2013 as in the previous seven years. In Italy, the number of reforms grew 
by  a  factor  of  seven  during  those  years,  while  the  reform  process  continued  in  2014  and 
2015. Reforms extended the coverage of the unemployment benefit system, enhanced active 
policies,  and  increased  the  flexibility  of  labour  market  rules,  notably  by  making  firing 
procedures simpler and less uncertain. The French reform of 2017 goes much in the same 
direction.  
Available research has shown that the Italian reforms have contributed to creating new 
stable  jobs  after  a  period  of  prolonged  stagnation,  and  to  accelerating  the  conversion  of 
temporary into permanent jobs.28 One paper along these lines will be presented tomorrow.29 
The path ahead 
Europe  has  made  considerable,  if  uneven,  progress  in  improving  labour-related 
regulation in the past few years. Even though the profound scars of the Great Recession are 
still visible in many countries, employment levels are now higher than they were before the 
crisis started in 2008; the share of individuals actually participating in the labour market is 
also at its highest level ever, reflecting both increased dynamism in our societies and the 
effect of policies that have reduced disincentives to work. Still, much remains to be done. 
                                                           
23   Cahuc,  P.,  Kramarz,  F.  and  Nevoux,  S.  (2018),  ‘Short-Time  Work  and  Employment  in  the  Great  Recession  in 
France’. 
24   Cestone, G., Fumagalli, C., Kramarz, F. and Pica, G. (2018), ‘Insurance Between Firms: The Role of Internal Labor 
Markets’. 
25   Fredriksson, P., Cederlöf, J., Nekoei, A. and Seim, D. (2018), ‘Consequences of advance layoff notice for workers 
and firms’. 
26   van der Klaauw, B. and Ziegler, L. ‘A Randomized Experiment on Matching Unemployed Workers to Employers’. 
27Turrini et al., (2015), ‘A decade of labour market reforms in the EU: insights from the LABREF database’, IZA 
Journal of Labor Policy, 12(4). 
28   Sestito, P. and Viviano, E. (2018), ‘Firing costs and firm hiring: Evidence from an Italian reform’, Economic Policy, 
93(33). 
29   Boeri, T. and Garibaldi, P. (2018), ‘Graded Security and Labor Market Mobility: Clean Evidence from the Italian 
Jobs Act’. 
Labour  markets  are  excessively  segmented  between  insiders  and  outsiders.  Due  to 
persistent  rigidities  and  to  less  favourable  economic  prospects  than  in  the  past,  younger 
generations entering the labour market today face worse job prospects, in terms of stability, 
career profiles, and wages, than those enjoyed by previous generations.  
Technological  trends  might  reinforce  the  dualism  between  high-  and  low-skilled 
workers.  Trade  protection  or  a  retreat  from  the  technology  frontier  would  be  myopic. 
Increasing  and  improving  general  education  and  supporting  (re-)training  are,  instead,  a 
priority  to  make  growth  more  inclusive.  A  difficult  balance  needs  to  be  struck  between 
cushioning individual workers from the most disruptive effects of change and fostering the 
active adaptation of the individuals themselves and of society at large. 
There is ample scope for further research. I have already mentioned some of the papers 
in this conference that focus on certain key subjects. Let me mention, by way of conclusion, 
three additional open issues:  
•  Do we know enough about the actual cost effectiveness of active labour market policies 
in different institutional frameworks? I have not yet seen much research contrasting the 
outcomes of such policies with alternative uses of public money, such as a reduction in 
the tax wedge on labour.  
•  Do we know enough about what drives the efficiency of the matching process between 
job-seekers  and  vacancies?  Do  we  understand  the  reasons  for  persistent  geographical 
and skill misalignments? What is the key to designing policies to target structural, long-
term unemployment? 
•  Finally,  many  are  puzzled  by  how  little  wage  cyclicality  is  normally  observed, 
especially at the aggregate level. Can this be due to composition effects, i.e., to the fact 
that  negative  demand  shocks  usually  hit  low-skilled  or  low-tenured  workers  hardest? 
What is the impact of nominal wage rigidities, and of job-seekers’ behaviour?  
Barbara  Petrongolo,  who  is  to  deliver  the  first  speech  in  this  conference,  will  focus 
precisely on this last point. I do not want to encroach any further on her presentation. It is 
therefore high time for me to close these remarks – and to wish you all a stimulating and 
lively discussion. 
the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed by 
