François Villeroy de Galhau: External imbalances - challenges and
policy responses
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  "Financial
Globalisation" conference, Central Bank of Ireland Symposium, Dublin, 2 February 2018.
Accompanying slides
 Speech elaborated with the contributions of Antoine Berthou, Matthieu Bussière, Laurent Ferrara,
Sophie Haincourt, Francesco Pappadà and Julia Schmidt
Ladies and Gentlemen,
First  and  foremost,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  on  the
75th anniversary of its creation, and especially my colleague and friend Governor Philip Lane. I
am  delighted  to  be  part  of  this  conference  dedicated  to  “Financial  Globalisation”,  with  such
distinguished speakers and panellists.
I would like to share with you a few thoughts on global current account imbalances and in doing
so  I  will  take  mostly  a  policy  perspective.  The  stylised  facts  are  well  known  so  I  will  be  brief
[Slide2]. Starting from the late 1990s, the world economy was characterised by very substantial
growth in global current account imbalances. Despite a process of rebalancing and short-term
movements mainly related to commodity prices that started with the Great Recession in 2008–
09,  these  imbalances  have  remained  large  and  persistent.  Consequently,  net  international
positions  have  continued  to  increase  [Slide  3].  The  euro  area  is  one  of  the  regions  where
developments have been particularly striking [Slide 4]. Although countries such as Spain or Italy
have  rebalanced  their  current  accounts,  imbalances  still  persist,  mostly  due  to  the  large
surpluses of Germany and the Netherlands.
But  why  should  we  care  about  these  imbalances?  After  all,  there  is  no  reason  why  all
countries in the world should be balanced at all times, as these imbalances simply reflect the
need for funding current or future consumption and investment. However, excessive external
imbalances  may  become  a  source  of  concernbecause  the  funding  of  deficit  countries  by
surplus economies is subject to “sudden stops” and even reversals.  Experience suggests that
large imbalances are often a leading indicator of subsequent crises and sudden stops. As shown
by Philip Lane in one of his numerous contributions to this topic,  current account balances prior
to the Great Financial Crisis exceeded levels consistent with underlying economic fundamentals
and thus implied large and costly adjustments thereafter. These vulnerabilities are not confined to
emerging  market  economies:  large  and  persistent  current  account  deficits  may  also  precede
financial crises in advanced economies,  including in the euro area.
1
2
3
I will structure the rest of my talk as follows. First I will talk about the determinants of the current
account, focusing on the role of the exchange rate. In the second part I will say a few words
about the composition of external funding (gross and net capital flows). Finally I will conclude
with a discussion of available policy options that could address the persistence of current
account imbalances, globally and within the euro area.
 1. The determinants of global imbalances, and their adjustment mechanisms
The  economic  and  social  costs  of  correcting  current  account  imbalances  are  potentially
dramatic.  The  macroeconomic  effects  of  a  transfer  of  resources  from  debtor  to  creditor
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries is an old issue, going back to the debate between Keynes and Ohlin about Germany’s
4
international obligations after World War I. In recent decades, Maury Obstfeld and Ken Rogoff
have pointed out in a series of papers that the basic mechanism of the adjustment results in a
transfer of real resources from debtor countries to surplus countries, regardless of the drivers of
global rebalancing.
In  the  debtor  country,  there  is  a  clear  macroeconomic  cost  related  to  a  drop  in  domestic
spending and welfare, leading to large negative output gaps and high unemployment rates, and in
turn  putting  strong  downward  pressures  on  wages.  This  is  typically  what  we  saw  in  the  euro
area, where the adjustment contributed to the very different dynamics of unit labour costs across
countries  [Slide  5],  and  therefore  led  to  relative  price  adjustments.  In  cumulative  terms  since
2007, Germany has seen real exchange rate appreciation of about 8% relative to France, and
20% relative to Spain, although we should take into account in these dynamics the large gains in
German competitiveness before the crisis. The adjustment relied mainly on nominal adjustment
in deficit countries.
The  link  between the  current  account  and  the  real  exchange  rate  is  still  subject  to
considerable debate among academics. If we look at a simple scatter plot showing how current
account variations and real  exchange  rate  variations  have  been  related  since  the  early  2000s
[Slide  6],  the  conclusion  is  quite  pessimistic:  over  this  period,  yearly  variations  in  the  real
exchange  rate  have  only  been  weakly  negatively  related  to  current  account  adjustments.  One
interpretation,  however,  is  that  a  rebalancing  requires  large  real  exchange  rate  variations  and
therefore implies large costs in terms of welfare for deficit countries. In addition, this relation may
differ a lot between the “build-up” periods of global imbalances and periods of “rebalancing”. If we
split the sample into the period before and after the “peak” of these global imbalances in 2006
[Slide  7], there is indeed a clear asymmetry: current account variations were more strongly
related  to  real  exchange  rate  movements  in  the  four  years  following  the  “peak”  (rebalancing
period) compared to the four years before the peak in global imbalances (build-up period). There
are many reasons why this relationship could change over time: for example it has been shown
on  the  export  side  that  very  productive  exporters  react  less  strongly  to  real  exchange  rate
movements than small and unproductive exporters.  This means that when there is a need for
rebalancing,  a  lot  happens  through  the  import  side  and,  in  deficit  countries,  through  demand
compression.
2. The funding of large imbalances
5
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  financial  side  of  the  current  account  and  discuss  the  sustainability  of
excessive  current  account  imbalances,  focusing  mainly  on  the  level  and  composition  of  the
funding.
Large current account imbalances, in particular deficits, pose significant risks for external debt
sustainability and raise the possibility of sudden stops.  Gross positions are now 3 to 4 times
larger than their 1995 level, ranging from 150–300% of GDP (150% in the case of the US and
300% in the case of France, for example). Net positions are considerably smaller [Slide 8, table
on right-hand side], but have widened by a factor of 5 to 10 with respect to their level in 1995.
6
The  counterpart  of  persistently  large  current  account  imbalances  is  large  net  external  asset
positions [as already shown in Slide 3], but also continued accumulation of external assets and
liabilities.
In this respect, the composition of the financial account (FDI, equity and debt portfolio flows as
well  as  the  other  investment  category,  which  largely  comprises  banking  flows)  matters.
Examining  the  different  financial  instruments,  one  notices  that  the  volatility  in  overall  flows  is
largely  driven  by  banking  flows  [Slide  9].  Given  the  large  pre-crisis  expansion  in  cross-border
banking  flows,  especially  within  the  euro  area,  the  “low”  level  observed  in  recent  years  could
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
simply be interpreted as a return to normal. Indeed, in the aftermath of the Great Financial Crisis,
banking flows retrenched the most, followed by debt portfolio flows.  Portfolio equity flows have
been much more resilient than debt flows, which have halved between the pre- and the post-
crisis periods. The resilience of equity flows shows that they have better risk-sharing properties
8
than debt.
7
So, even though important measures are taken to reduce trade balances (sometimes at a high
cost), the way these current account deficits have been financed continues to impact current and
future current account imbalances, thus limiting the efficiency of demand rebalancing. Valuation
effects  and  income  flows  are  increasingly  driving  net  external  positions,  more  than  the  trade
balance itself [slide 10]. This implies keeping a close eye on the types of financial flows which
finance current account imbalances, and watching out  for the relative contribution of FDI, equity,
debt  and  banking  flows  to  the  build-up  of  external  imbalances  as  well  as  the  exchange  rate
exposure both on assets and liabilities.
3. So what are the possible policy responses to limit excessive global imbalances?
Let  me  start  by  stressing  what  the  non-adequate  responses  are.  First,  protectionism  is  a
temptation  but  it  is  not  an  option.  From  a  macroeconomic  point  of  view,  an  increase  in
protectionism is recessionary and inflationary, acting as a negative supply shock. Furthermore,
as the current account is determined by the balance between savings and investment, there is
no clear evidence that trade policies are likely to affect both variables. For example, due to the
increasing  integration  of  global  value  chains,  any  increase  in  tariffs  on  imported  inputs
immediately translates into higher production costs, thus undermining export competitiveness.
So,  imposing  new  trade  barriers  –  or  “bilateral  deals”  –  on  some  trade  partners  not  only  has
almost no chance of eliminating the overall current account deficit, but it also threatens long-run
economic growth.
Alternatively,  it  would  also  be  misleading  for  countries  to  carry  out  non-cooperative  domestic
macroeconomic  policies.  Competitive  devaluations  first:  after  some  unilateral  and  unfortunate
declarations  last  week,  several  of  us  on  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  felt  the  need  to
reiterate that during the last IMF Annual Meetings in DC last October we committed with all our
partners to a multilateral approach saying that, I quote, “we will not target our exchange rates for
competitive purposes”. Any deviation from this common rule would be at the cost of breaking
mutual trust and global growth.
Speaking of the Governing Council of the ECB, let me say a few words on our monetary policy. It
is following, with confidence and with patience, a path of gradual normalisation. But one shouldn’t
focus excessively on the sole instrument of monthly net asset purchases: whether we end them
in  September  or  taper  them  somewhat  more  gradually  is  not  a  “deep  existential”  question…
There are two more important issues:
First, we prefer, as in Irish dancing, a four-hand reel rather than a solo; we will rely more and
more  on  the  entire  policy  package,  including  the  sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets,  the
forthcoming reinvestments and the forward guidance on interest rates. And we will follow a
predictable sequence.
Second,  the  timing  of  this  sequence  will  depend  on  the  inflation  outlook  and  its  progress
towards our target of close to but below 2%. We will accordingly monitor the impact of the
exchange rate evolution – which is a source of uncertainty –, and be ready to reassess if
necessary.
Fiscal devaluations have also been considered by countries aiming at boosting competitiveness
through changes in their tax system, typically by cutting labour and/or capital taxes, while rising
consumption taxes.   This  shift  in  the  tax  system  increases  the  competitiveness  of  domestic
firms with respect to foreign ones, both in domestic and export markets. In practice, however,
9
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
there are empirical limits to this strategy. A race to the bottom on corporate tax rates also raises
increasing challenges about the social fairness of globalisation – and hence its sustainability – as
President Macron stressed in Davos… and as is even pointed out sometimes in debates about
Ireland. 
Recent research has put emphasis on the noticeable influence that fiscal policy can have on
variations in imbalances, including in the US and Germany. In this respect, the recent US tax
reform adopted by Congress is expected to significantly boost the US economy, which is already
at full employment, leading in turn to increasing imports and a widening external deficit. So, it
clearly  risks  increasing  global  imbalances.
  Symmetrically,  within  the  euro  area,  some
countries  with  large  positive  current  accounts  recently  experienced  budget  surpluses  (e.g.  in
2017, 0.9% of GDP in Germany and 0.7% of GDP in the Netherlands). This suggests that a fiscal
boost in those countries could help to correct intra-euro area imbalances, be it through public
investment spending or tax cuts for households.
10
So, what is the solution? More than ever, there is a need today for active multilateralism to face
our global challenges. In the uncertain world of 2018, it is the responsibility of a strong Europe,
along with Canada and some Asian partners, to convey this message.
Let  me  conclude  by  focusing  on  the  intra-European  level.  The  euro  area  is  experiencing  an
excess  of  savings  relative  to  investment  of  about  3.5%  of  GDP  (12-month  cumulated  current
account  for  the  period  ending  in  November  2017). Savings  should  circulate  more  freely
across Europe, to where investment needs are, especially towards productive investment, and
one  notable  way  of  achieving  this  is  by  shoring  up  equity  which  is  the  key  to  an  innovation
economy. A large part of the solution lies at the European level, with the building of what I call
a “Financing Union for Investment and Innovation”  (FUII),  that  would  merge  together  the
initiatives already in place – the “Capital Markets Union” (CMU) of course, but also the Banking
Union  and  the  Juncker  Plan.  In  the  Governing  Council,  we  all  find  it  regrettable  that  CMU  is
presently the forgotten child in the political discussions about the strengthening of the euro area.
CMU would help significantly to foster private risk-sharing by:
First, providing incentives for cross-border investments – preferably in equity – through the
harmonisation of accounting, taxes and insolvency laws;
Second,  developing  pan-European  savings  products  more  oriented  towards  long-term
investment.  This  could  be  done  through  a  variety  of  savings  vehicles,  starting  with  the
creation of European venture capital funds;
Third, completing the Banking Union.
 To conclude, global imbalances are not inevitable and we always need fresh ideas to improve the
functioning of our globalised economies. In this respect, I would like to quote George Bernard
Shaw, the famous Irish writer, who said once “You see things; and you say ‘Why?’. But I dream
things that never were; and I say ‘Why not?’” Thank you for your attention.
 1
2
3
4
Milesi Ferretti, G.-M. and A. Razin (1998). Current account reversals and currency crises: Empirical regularities,
NBER WP No. 6620.
Lane, P. and G.-M. Milesi-Ferretti (2012). External adjustment and the global crisis, Journal of International
Economics, Elsevier, vol. 88(2), pages 252–265.
Gourinchas,  P.O.  and  M.  Obstfeld  (2012).  Stories  of  the  Twentieth  Century  for  the  Twenty-First, American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, American Economic Association, vol. 4(1), pages 226–265.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (2001). The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There a Common
Cause? in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, ed. by Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, Vol. 15, NBER
Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.: MIT Press, pp. 339–412. Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff
(2005). Global Current Account Imbalances and Exchange Rate Adjustments, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Vol. 36, No. 2005–1, pp. 67–146. Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (2007). The Unsustainable U.S. Current
Account  Position  Revisited.  In:  G7  Current  Account  Imbalances:  Sustainability  and  Adjustment,  in  NBER
Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., pp. 339–376
Berthou, A. «A strong euro is less harmful to the most productive exporters », Eco Notepad (Bloc-notes Eco),
Banque de France, December 2017. See also : Exchange rate movements, firm-level exports and heterogeneity,
Banque de France WP #660
Obstfeld, M. (2012). Does the Current Account Still Matter?, American Economic Review, American Economic
Association, vol. 102(3), pages 1-23.
Bussière, M., J.  Schmidt & N. Valla (2016). International Financial Flows in the New Normal: Key Patterns (and
Why We Should Care), CEPII Policy Brief 2016–10,  2016 , CEPII.
Albuquerque,  R.  (2003).  The  composition  of  international  capital  flows:  risk  sharing  through  foreign  direct
investment. Journal of International Economics, 61(2), 353–383.
Fahri, E., G. Gopinath and O. Itskhoki (2014). Fiscal Devaluations, Review of Economic Studies, 81(2), pp. 725–
760.
Chinn, M. (2017). The once and future global imbalances? Interpreting the post-crisis record, Speech at the
Jackson Hole Symposium, August 2017
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
