Benoît  Cœuré:  Trade  as  an  engine  of  growth  -  prospects  and
lessons for Europe
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  NBRM  High  Level  International  Conference  on  Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Management,
Skopje, 16 February 2018.
 I thank you for inviting me to speak here in Skopje today . I would like to take this opportunity to
discuss  an  issue  which  I  believe  is  key  for  the  economic  future  of  Europe  and  particularly
relevant here, in the Western Balkans: the prospects for trade as an engine of growth.
1
For  several  years  now,  global  trade  growth  has  puzzled  many  observers.  While  global  trade
grew at about twice the rate of GDP before the crisis, it has slowed measurably since then and
has often grown at the same rate as, or even below, that of global output. However, in 2017,
world import growth once again outpaced world GDP growth. The euro area is benefiting from
this recovery, with export growth the highest in many years.
In my remarks this morning, I will argue that the rebound in trade mainly reflects cyclical factors.
Accommodative  monetary  policies  worldwide  have  succeeded  in  boosting  growth  and
investment  and,  with  them,  global  imports.  Structural  headwinds  remain,  however.  Maturing
global  value  chains,  geographical  shifts  in  trade  and  an  accelerating  push  towards  more
automation make it less likely that trade can again expand at the pace observed during the pre-
crisis boom.
To  the  extent  that  trade  helps  lift  growth,  policymakers  have  a  role  to  play  in  providing  an
environment that is conducive to trade. At the same time, they need to ensure that appropriate
systems are in place to support workers affected by secular shifts in both trade flows and labour
demand.
Rebound in world trade
Let me start with a few facts and charts.
Last year, global imports expanded by 5%, the strongest growth in seven years. On the left-hand
side of my first slide you can see that the rebound in global trade was broad-based, with both
emerging and advanced economies contributing in roughly equal proportions. On the right-hand
side  you  can  see  that  this  by  and  large  reflects  the  fast  broadening  of  the  global  economic
expansion. At the end of last year, 75% of the economies worldwide experienced growth above
their three-year averages. In 2016, this share was below 30%. So, the global economy is in a
much more robust state today than it was just a few years ago.
The breakdown of extra-euro area exports also shows that the current synchronous expansion is
fertile ground for a strong rebound in trade. You can see this on the left-hand side of my next
slide. By the end of last year, euro area exporters had expanded their business with virtually all of
our main trading partners.
Growing demand from China, and emerging Asia more generally, as well as recovering demand
from commodity exporters are once more contributing to, rather than subtracting from, export
growth. One exception to this benign picture is the United Kingdom, where Brexit repercussions
might already be showing through in the data.
Trade has also gained momentum within the euro area. You can see this on the right-hand side.
Although intra-euro area export growth is currently somewhat weaker than extra-area growth, we
can see that exports are today contributing more evenly to growth across euro area countries. It
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
is no longer only a few Member States that are benefitting from a booming global economy.
In particular, structural reforms and internal devaluation in formerly stressed economies, together
with a protracted period of weak domestic demand during the crisis years, have prompted more
firms  in  these  economies  to  improve  their  competitiveness  and  thereby  profit  from  a  rise  in
foreign demand, both inside and outside the currency union.
This is perhaps best illustrated by the share of exports in GDP on the left-hand side of my next
slide. Last year, compared with the period 2000 to 2007, this share rose strongly in Ireland and
Slovenia, while Portugal, Greece and Cyprus also managed double-digit gains. This supported
the economic recovery and helped to reduce unemployment.
A natural side effect of these changes was a notable widening of the euro area’s current account
surplus.  You  can  see  this  on  the  right-hand  side. Almost  all  Member  States  that  entered  the
financial crisis with large current account deficits are today reporting current account surpluses.
Of the euro area’s 19 Member States, 13 have current account surpluses.
But  the  chart  also  illustrates  clearly  that  the  rebalancing  has  remained  limited  to  formerly
stressed  economies.  Up  until  recently,  current  account  surpluses  have  continued  to  rise  in
Germany  and  in  the  Netherlands,  the  two  export  powerhouses  in  the  euro  area.  While  these
surpluses undoubtedly reflect strong underlying fundamentals in terms of competitiveness, they
also  reflect  an  imbalance  between  domestic  savings  and  investment.  Higher  domestic
investment would therefore be a constructive way to address large current account surpluses
and, at the same time, to prepare for future challenges.
Now, does the current trade recovery bode well for the future? What are the prospects for global
and euro area trade? Will we return to an environment where trade growth persistently outpaces
GDP growth?
In answering these questions, I will distinguish between cyclical and structural factors.
Cyclical factors affecting trade growth
As for the cyclical factors, empirical evidence suggests that economic growth alone is often not a
sufficient condition for strong trade growth. Indeed, trade did not start to lift off before we saw a
nascent  recovery  in  global  investment,  which  had  weakened  significantly  after  the  Great
Recession.
On  my  next  slide  you  can  see  that  in  advanced  economies  the  share  of  public  and  private
investment in output declined sharply with the advent of the crisis and has remained well below
pre-crisis levels since then. For emerging markets, the investment share had been rising but it
has plateaued in recent years.
2
intensity.   As  a  result,  a  slowdown 
So,  the  composition  of  growth  matters  for  trade.  Investment  in  particular  has  a  relatively  high
import 
typically  has  a
disproportionately  large  adverse  impact  on  trade,  relative  to  other  GDP  components.  It  is
therefore no coincidence that the recovery in trade last year was led by exports of capital goods
and intermediate goods, both key inputs to investment. You can see this clearly in the case of the
euro area on the right-hand side.
investment  demand 
in 
The implication is that future trade growth will depend to some extent on the sustainability of the
current  investment  recovery.  For  sure,  continued  accommodative  financial  conditions  and
business optimism will continue to support investment and hence trade. The United States has
also just lowered its taxation of capital, which can be expected to further boost growth in capital
formation.  In  the  euro  area,  investment  is  expected  to  remain  robust  due  to  rising  corporate
profits, high levels of expected earnings, and an increasing need to modernise the capital stock.
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Indeed, according to Eurosystem staff projections, investment in the euro area is expected to
3
increase by just over 10% until the end of 2020.
So, overall, we can be confident that investment growth, and the current broad-based economic
expansion more generally, will continue to support international trade in the coming years.
Structural factors affecting trade growth
Yet,  while  the  cyclical  pick-up  in  trade  remains  supportive,  structural  headwinds  may  prevent
rates of trade growth returning to the levels we observed in the two decades prior to the crisis. In
short,  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  the  factors  that  have  supported  extraordinary  trade
4
growth rates in the past were special and are likely, by and large, to have run their course.
For  example,  rapid  financial  deepening  in  emerging  economies,  and  better  access  to  capital
markets, has helped boost trade growth in the past. But research suggests that there are likely
diminishing marginal effects of finance on trade growth.  In other words, there appears to be a
threshold – when private sector credit reaches around 100% of GDP – beyond which financial
deepening no longer contributes meaningfully to trade growth.
5
But by far the strongest factor behind the boost in trade growth prior to the crisis, but which now
appears  to  be  waning,  is  the  international  outsourcing  of  production  processes  via  so-called
global value chains.
I would like to focus on this factor in the remainder of my remarks.
Global value chains involve production processes being split into a number of intermediate steps,
mainly  in  order  to  exploit  international  factor  income  differences. As  a  result,  production  has
become dispersed across countries, and mechanically increased the amount of trade that took
place for a given final output. You can see this clearly on my next slide. In the past, we have seen
a close relationship between global value chain growth and the share of imports in total output.
The  global  integration  of  China,  for  example,  not  only  increased  its  exports  to  developed
economies,  but  it  also  increased  its  imports  of  raw  materials  and  intermediate  goods  from
neighbouring emerging economies. This boosted overall world trade relative to output.
However,  as  you  can  see  on  the  same  slide,  since  the  crisis  we  have  seen  a  levelling-off  of
participation rates in global value chains. In other words, the share of global value chain related
exports and imports in total trade has stabilised. This means that the support for world trade from
global value chains has recently faded.
The  important  question  to  ask  then  is  whether  this  levelling-off  will  be  temporary  or  more
permanent. In the view of ECB researchers, there are at least three factors that suggest that the
slowdown in global value chain formation is likely to persist, at least in the short term.
The first factor relates to supply-chain risks.
You will recall that the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Japan caused severe supply disruptions.
Some companies discovered, the hard way, that supply chains were not transparent, rather like
the fault lines in securitisation that caused the great financial crisis. In short, suppliers hired sub-
contractors,  who  themselves  hired  sub-contractors,  and  so  on. As  a  result,  an  OECD  report
suggests that supply chains are increasingly designed to contain risks as well as costs.  Often,
this implies shorter and more transparent value chains. And given the intimate relation between
digitalisation and trade, this trend could be amplified further in the future by rising cyber risk and
risks to data integrity.
6
The second factor relates to shifts in comparative advantages.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  the  past,  wage  differentials  for  unskilled  labour  made  the  international  fragmentation  of
production  processes  worthwhile.  Some  of  those  wage  differentials  are  now  less  marked  as
emerging economies continue to develop. In China, for example, real wages have increased by a
factor of ten since 1995.
The  implications  for  trade  are  twofold.  First,  as  the  Chinese  and  other  emerging  market
economies mature and incomes grow, there is a rising shift from investment to consumption.
This results in a lower trade intensity of demand. We already see that Chinese import growth has
slowed markedly.
The second implication is that outsourcing of production processes has become less profitable.
In the short term, this is unlikely to unravel existing value chains that also benefit from important
supplier network effects – that is, from local upstream and downstream inputs and services. But
in the long run it might lead to businesses reconsidering their offshoring practices.
This brings me to my third point.
Shifts in comparative advantage could simply mean that other, less developed economies will
take over from the more mature economies at the lower end of global value chains, following the
traditional “flying geese” pattern. Like nomads, firms move on and global value chains move with
them. Lumpy technological change could even help some of these economies leapfrog and jump
7
directly to the most advanced stage of technology – the so-called “advantage of backwardness”.
I  would  like  to  suggest,  however,  that  the  fourth  industrial  revolution  –  and  the  associated
increase in automation and the use of artificial intelligence – may mark a move away from this
model.
The  reason  is  that  the  increased  use  of  robots  has  the  potential  to  modify  the  relative  factor
intensities  in  the  production  of  certain  goods  and  services  and  may  thereby  sever  the  link
between, say, cheap labour and the location of unskilled manufacturing activities.  Put simply, if
robots can deliver the same output more cheaply, more efficiently and closer to the consumer,
9
then firms may have fewer reasons to spread production across countries.
8
In other words, robots could turn global value chains on their head and cause firms to reconsider
offshoring practices. A survey by the Boston Consulting Group, for example, revealed that more
than 70% of senior manufacturing executives in the United States consider that robotics improve
the economics of local production.
10
Lower automation costs are a key ingredient of this rethinking. Indeed, while the cost of labour is
rising  in  traditional  low-cost  developing  economies,  the  cost  of  robots  has  fallen  sharply.  By
some estimates, the average price of industrial robots has declined by about 40% over the past
ten years and is projected to decline considerably further.
11
And the potential for automation is enormous. A recent McKinsey report suggests that 60% of
global  manufacturing  activities,  and  81%  of  manufacturing  hours,  could  be  automated  using
existing technology.
 This is not just a topic for the future. We are already seeing clear signs of
accelerating automation.
12
According to data from the International Federation of Robotics, the global supply of industrial
robots grew by 19% on average between 2009 and 2016. It is forecast to increase further by
almost 80% by 2020, bringing the total stock of robots to around three million.
Of course, technological progress also changed the way we produced goods and services in the
past. But because the current breakthroughs – just think of 3D printers, autonomous vehicles or
cognitive  computing  –  are  virtually  unprecedented  in  scope  and  scale,  the  “march  of  the
machines” may potentially render a significant share of the international fragmentation of trade
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
redundant, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
The rise of automation may therefore accelerate a process that Dani Rodrik termed “premature
deindustrialisation”  in  developing  economies.
  This  term  describes  a  pattern  whereby
developing economies see their manufacturing base shrink at a level of income that is far below
the level attained by advanced economies before they started to deindustrialise.
13
This  means  two  things.  First,  the  impact  of  reshoring  and  the  automation  of  unskilled
manufacturing  processes  on  developing  countries’  labour  markets  could  be  significant.  The
International Labour Organization recently estimated that around two-thirds of jobs in the textile,
clothing and footwear industry in Indonesia are at risk of automation.
 For Cambodia, the figure
is 90%.
14
Second,  automation  may  become  a  headwind  to  the  catching-up  process  of  developing
countries.  Historically,  productivity  in  the  manufacturing  sector  has  tended  to  converge  to  the
global frontier more easily than that in other sectors. Manufacturing was thus traditionally a sector
that allowed developing economies to catch up with advanced economies. China is certainly a
case in point. But to the extent that automation accelerates the decline in manufacturing, it may
force countries to consider the development of other growth models.
None of this is to say that technological progress is bad and should be stopped. On the contrary,
if managed wisely, the fourth industrial revolution has the potential to lift global income levels and
to improve the quality of our lives. After all, technological progress remains the engine of both
growth and aggregate employment, although often in an increasingly disruptive way.
Historical  evidence  provides  some  cause 
for  optimism.  A  recent  study  on  German
manufacturing,  for  example,  finds  that  automation  accounts  for  around  a  quarter  of  the
manufacturing  jobs  lost  between  1994  and  2014.
  But  these  jobs  were  fully  offset  by  higher
employment in the services sector. Moreover, manufacturing workers in positions with greater
exposure to robots were more likely to stay at their current workplace, although not necessarily in
the same job and usually at the cost of lower wages.
15
Such compositional changes have taken place in the past too. For instance, the share of US
employment  in  agriculture  fell  by  56  percentage  points  between  1850  and  2015.  New
technologies may bring new opportunities too. The McKinsey report I mentioned estimates that
by 2030, around 10% of labour demand will be for positions that barely exist today, for example AI
specialists and big data analysts.
16
This transition is unlikely to be swift or easy, however. History also provides many examples of
how changes in relative sectoral demand can create large and long-lasting divergences in labour
market outcomes. The European Union is a case in point. There are regions where high rates of
unemployment  have  persisted  for  decades  following  the  decline  of  employment  in  certain
industries, such as coal mining and steel production.
In the end, the transition will be governed by the extent to which employment creation in new
sectors  keeps  pace  with  the  automation  of  jobs  in  existing  sectors. And  it  will  depend  on  the
ability of workers to acquire new skills, and potentially to relocate geographically, so that they can
transfer between sectors – and on how they can be empowered to do so.
Policy implications and conclusions
With this in mind, let me conclude with some policy implications.
The first is that automation implies that protectionist policies aimed at preventing – and reversing
– job losses among low-skilled workers in manufacturing are unlikely to achieve their aim.
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is because reshoring, forced or not, is ultimately the outcome of regained competitiveness
and  changes  in  relative  factor  intensities.  Production  then  becomes  more  capital  and  skill-
intensive and is unlikely to create many new jobs for low-skilled workers. Higher tariffs are also
less effective than they were in the past, given that intra-firm trade has grown substantially. As a
result, higher tariffs may well reduce domestic profitability.
In other words, policymakers need to adapt to the changing nature of global trade. As Richard
Baldwin  points  out  in  his  recent  book,  the  focus  on  the  flow  of  goods  between  countries  is
misplaced.  The  current  round  of  globalisation  relies  on  the  flow  of  know-how  across
borders.
 As such, whereas previous industrial revolutions tended to affect mainly low-skilled
workers, the current information revolution makes even mid-skilled jobs insecure.
17
The second implication is that policymakers need to help new industries to grow and develop.
This is particularly important for services, which already account for two-thirds of global GDP and
employment, and represent many of the potential growth sectors in the age of digitalisation and
automation.  Research  by  the  ESCB’s  CompNet  research  network  shows,  for  example,  that
many EU services sector firms are far behind the productivity frontier.
 Reallocating capital and
labour  towards  more  productive  firms  would  help  boost  overall  competitiveness  and  support
employment.
18
For the EU, this means completing the Single Market for services. The same CompNet research
points  to  the  potential  benefits  of  increased  trade  in  services.  Firms  that  have  just  started  to
export are, on average, about 15% more productive, 30% larger and pay 10% higher wages than
non-exporting  firms  in  the  same  narrowly  defined  sector.  Not  only  are  exporting  firms  more
productive at the outset, they increase their productivity in their first year of exporting by more
than comparable non-exporting firms.
19
But policy actions must go beyond trade initiatives. In Europe, we need comprehensive policy
action,  at  both  EU  and  national  level,  to  support  workers  who  have  lost  their  jobs  due  to
technological  shifts  and  facilitate  employment  in  emerging  industries.  Certainly,  this  involves
ensuring adequate education and retraining programmes to help smooth the transition to new
employment. But it also means continuing to address structural rigidities in labour markets that
may prolong and amplify secular shifts in labour demand. This includes fostering labour mobility
across EU countries. Freedom of movement of workers is undoubtedly an engine of growth.
But we should also be realistic. Not everyone will benefit from the technological changes, and
new solutions are needed to address these challenges. Continued high structural unemployment
in  some  European  countries  shows  that  this  is  an  area  where  policymakers  have  not  been
successful in the past.
The  third  implication  is  that  the  challenges  of  automation  go  far  beyond  employment.  History
corroborates  this  view.  Technological  progress  in  the  early  part  of  the  19th  century  was
accompanied  by  a  long  period  of  stagnation  in  real  wages,  even  though  output  per  worker
increased sharply.
 The late 19th century also witnessed a prolonged period of deflation brought
about  by  technological  improvement  that  was  unpopular  at  the  time,  even  though  it  was
accompanied by strong output growth.
20
21
The  Western  Balkan  economies  share  many  of  the  opportunities  and  challenges  that  I  have
discussed.  Lower  GDP  per  capita  raises  the  opportunity  to  leapfrog  and  jump  directly  to  the
digital economy, as well as the risk of being hurt by reshoring and premature deindustrialisation.
Trade  openness  in  the  region  remains  below  that  of  other  comparable  economies  in  central,
eastern  and  south-eastern  Europe.  This  may  in  part  reflect  institutional  factors,  such  as  the
effectiveness of the judiciary system or infrastructure development needs, but may also reflect
competitiveness  bottlenecks,  including  of  the  type  I  mentioned  earlier.  Addressing  these
bottlenecks at a national and at a regional level will foster trade, improve access to new, larger
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
markets and, ultimately, accelerate convergence and income growth in the region.
Thank you.
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
  8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
 I would like to thank A. Al-Haschimi for his contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the
opinions contained herein.
See e.g. Bussière, M., G. Callegari, F. Ghironi, G. Sestieri and N. Yamano (2013), “Estimating Trade Elasticities:
Demand  Composition  and 
the  Trade  Collapse  of  2008–2009,” American  Economic  Journal:
Macroeconomics 5(3): 118–151.
See Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, December 2017.
See e.g. ECB (2016), “Understanding the weakness in global trade: what is the new normal?”, Occasional
Paper No 178, IRC Task force, September.
Gächter, M. and I. Gkrintzalis (2017), “The finance-trade nexus revisited: Is the global trade slowdown also a
financial story?", Economics Letters, 158(C): 21–25.
See OECD (2013), “Global value chains: managing the risks,” in Interconnected Economies: Benefiting from
global value chains, Paris: OECD Publishing.
See Gerschenkron, A. (1962),Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of Essays. Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press, 1962.
See  also  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  (2016),  “Robots  and  Industrialization  in
Developing Countries”, Policy Brief No 50.
In some ways, this insight is similar to the assertions made by Paul Samuelson in his famous 2004 paper,
where he argued that productivity gains in one country can benefit that country alone, while permanently hurting
the other country. Unlike in Samuelson’s example, however, it might be developing economies that would suffer
from productivity shifts today. See Samuelson, P. (2004), “Where Ricardo and Mill rebut and confirm arguments
of mainstream economists supporting globalization,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(3): 135–146.
See  Boston  Consulting  Group  (2015),  “Made  in  America,  Again:  Fourth  Annual  Survey  of  U.S.-Based
Manufacturing Executives”, December.
See,  e.g.,  Sirkin,  H.,  M.  Zinser  and  J.  Rose  (2015),  “How  Robots  Will  Redefine  Competitiveness”,  Boston
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Consulting Group, September.
See McKinsey Global Institute (2017), “Jobs lost, jobs gained: Workforce transitions in a time of automation”,
December.
See Rodrik, D. (2015), “Premature Deindustrialization”, NBER Working Paper No 20935.
See Chang, J-H., G. Rynhart and P. Huynh (2016), “ASEAN in transformation. Textiles, clothing and footwear:
refashioning the future”, Bureau for Employers’ Activities (ACT/EMP), Working Paper No 14, International Labour
Organization.
See Dauth, W., S. Findeisen, J. Südekum and N. Wössner (2017), “German Robots – The Impact of Industrial
Robots on Workers”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 12306.
McKinsey Global Institute (2017), op. cit.
See Baldwin, R. (2016), The Great Convergence: Information Technology and the New Globalization, Harvard
University Press.
See ECB (2017), “Firm heterogeneity and competitiveness in the European Union”,Economic Bulletin, Issue 2,
2017.
See ECB (2017), ibid.
See Allen,  R.  (2009),  “Engels’  pause:  Technical  change,  capital  accumulation,  and  inequality  in  the  British
industrial revolution”, Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 46(4), pp. 418–435.
See Bordo, M., J. Lane. and A. Redish (2004), “Good versus Bad Deflation: Lessons from the Gold Standard
Era”, NBER Working Paper No 10329.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
