Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Investing  in  sound  policies  towards
sustainable growth
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 2018 Economic Briefing of the American Chamber of Commerce
of the Philippines, Inc. (AMCHAM), Manila, 24 April 2018.
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  afternoon!  I  thank  the  officers  and  members  of  the  American
Chamber  of  Commerce  of  the  Philippines  (AMCHAM)  for  the  invitation  to  speak  today.  My
message has two parts. First, I will give an update on the economy and its prospects over the
medium term.  Second, I will talk about the government’s policy directions, focusing on the BSP’s
initiatives  to  sustain  the  growth  momentum  and  make  the  Philippines  a  preferred  option  for
business and investment.
Let me pose a question you may have asked yourselves at some point: Is now a good time to
invest in the Philippines?
Conventional wisdom tells us that investing requires right timing. If you get it wrong, you may fail
to maximize the return on your resources, or you could be staring at significant losses.
Given the rational desire to avoid loss and reduce risk, it is easy to fall into the trap of being overly
cautious  and  missing  out  on  profitable  opportunities.  Indecision  and  unnecessary  waiting  can
also be costly.
Investing will always carry some degree of risk, and we can never fully anticipate how surprises
can disrupt or influence the market. The key is to not make decisions blindly. Indeed, information
on  potential  risks  and  returns,  as  well  as  knowledge  gained  from  prior  experience,  can  be
sources of confidence for any prudent investor.
So, is now a good time to invest? Do we have information to make the right call?  The balance of
information that we have suggests that it is indeed an opportune time.
Betting on the Philippines
We  at  the  BSP  remain  optimistic  about  the  Philippine  economy’s  prospects,  especially  as
economic  activity  continues  to  gain  traction  across  the  globe. According  to  the  latest  figures
released  by  the  IMF,  global  GDP  growth  reached  3.8  percent  in  2017,  the  fastest  pace  since
2011 as investment and trade continued to pick up. The IMF now forecasts the global economy
to grow by about 3.9 percent in 2018 and 2019, as accommodative policies support the stronger
growth impulses in advanced and emerging economies alike.
However,  we  continue  to  monitor  developments  that  could  dampen  this  growth  momentum. 
These include increased trade protectionism, rising geopolitical tensions, and the possibility of
heightened financial stresses owing to the onset of monetary policy tightening in a number of
economies especially in the U.S.
 
Even with these downside risks, we remain confident about our own prospects. The Philippine
economy is coming off another banner year. Real GDP expanded by 6.7 percent in 2017.  This is
the sixth consecutive year that the economy had grown by over 6.0 percent.
The IMF also shares our optimism, as it forecasts the Philippine economy to expand by about 6.7
percent in 2018 and 6.8 percent in 2019.  This is not far from the National Government’s target of
7.0-8.0 percent growth over the next three years. All these paint the Philippines as one of the
more dynamic and fastest-growing economies in Asia.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
We have also observed that growth has become more broad-based over the years. Along with
the services sector, manufacturing and construction have emerged as potent drivers of output.
On the demand side, increased capital investments and public spending, especially since the
past year, have complemented robust private consumption in stimulating economic activity.
Meanwhile, amid rapid economic growth, the inflation environment has remained manageable.
Except  for  2015  and  2016  when  the  decline  in  international  oil  prices  tempered  inflationary
pressures, inflation has settled within the announced target ranges since 2009. Thus far in 2018,
headline inflation has averaged 3.8 percent (using the new 2012 Consumer Price Index series). 
For 2018, our latest forecast estimates average inflation at 3.9 percent. This is near the high end
of our target range of 2-4 percent for 2018-2019.  So this bears careful watching.  Nevertheless,
we see inflation moderating and reverting to around 3 percent by 2019, the midpoint of the target
range.
We expect the confluence of strong growth and stable inflation being sustained over the medium
term.    Specifically,  as  the  National  Government  pours  in  more  investments  into  physical
infrastructure and increases expenditure in soft investments in our young population to provide
them with higher quality education, skills development and better health services, the economy’s
productive capacity will improve further.  These will help boost productivity and we can expect
further accelerated growth in potential output.
Meanwhile, various safety net programs to mitigate the impact of recent tax reform measures,
especially on the vulnerable sectors of society, should also help moderate inflationary pressures
in the immediate term.
We also believe that these public investments in physical infrastructure and human capital are
sustainable because they are  supported  by  prudent  fiscal  management.  The  first  wave  of  tax
reforms under the TRAIN Law, in particular, should help generate additional revenues to finance
the  Government’s  programs.  Reforms  to  encourage  tax  compliance,  improve  revenue
collections,  and  plug  regulatory  loopholes,  among  others,  are  also  in  the  pipeline  to  further
strengthen the country’s fiscal position.
At the same time, the country’s healthy financial system has also continued to fuel the growth
momentum,  as  domestic  liquidity  remains  ample  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  our  growing
economy, including the solid demand for loans across key economic sectors. Amid the robust
expansion  in  credit,  financial  institutions  have  enhanced  their  liquidity  and  risk  management
practices to prevent buildup of systemic risks, as reflected in their improved asset quality, firm
liquidity position, and strong capitalization.
The  rise  in  investments  and  increase  in  infrastructure  spending  have  been  accompanied  by
stronger demand for imports.  This is expected.  Over time, these investments will bear fruit in
the form of better infrastructure and improved domestic competitiveness.  This will support high
and sustainable economic growth.
Moreover,  despite  posting  an  overall  balance  of  payments  (BOP)  deficit  of  US$863  million  in
2017, the country’s external position continues to be manageable with the deficit at less than 1%
of  GDP.    Rising  inflows  of  foreign  direct  investments  as  well  as  sustained  overseas  Filipino
remittances and BPO receipts provide resilience against external shocks. Moreover, the ongoing
global economic recovery bodes well for our merchandise exports.  Meanwhile, the movement of
the  peso  remains  market-driven.    This  exchange  rate  flexibility  will  promote  self-correction
mechanisms  and  avoid  dangerous  build-up  of  unsustainable  imbalances.    These  elements
should all keep the balance of payments well under control. 
Finally, as a sturdy external liquidity buffer, we have built up gross internal reserves of over $80
billion equivalent to nearly 8-months worth of imports of goods and services.  We likewise have
access to market financing because of our hard-earned solid investment grade rating.  We have
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
likewise developed secondary liquidity buffers from various regional safety net arrangements we
have worked out with our neighbors.
To  summarize,  the  Philippines  continues  to  be  a  good  bet  for  investing  because  of  sound
macroeconomic  fundamentals.  Factors  in  its  favor  are  its  broad-based  growth,  within-target
inflation,  prudent  fiscal  management,  sound  financial  system,  and  manageable  external
payments position.
These  strengths  did  not  materialize  overnight.  These  are  well-earned  dividends  of  our  sound
commitment  to  timely  policy  actions  and  to  necessary  and  bold  structural  reforms  over  the
years.
With this in mind, it is easy to see good policymaking as akin to investing in the country’s well-
being. As with any investment decision, getting the timing right requires mindfulness, vigilance,
and flexibility, as economic conditions could shift at a moment’s notice. Prudence also requires
policies to be grounded on a reasonable assessment of pertinent information on potential costs,
benefits, and tradeoffs.
Clouds on the horizon
Nevertheless, in spite of a generally favorable economic climate, there are a few clouds on the
horizon that require us to be especially vigilant. There are two particularly key developments that
could  challenge  the  country’s  position  of  relative  strength.    We  intend  to  address  these  with
timely and well-informed policy responses.
One  revolves  around  dealing  with  inflation  and  potential  overheating.    At  our  most  recent
assessment  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  last  March,  we  determined  that  our  prevailing
monetary policy settings continued to be appropriate. Inflation has been evolving in line with our
projections, as the first-round price effects of the recent tax reforms appear to have been limited.
We also considered that prospects for domestic economic activity continue to be firm and within
economic potential that in itself is being bolstered by investments in both physical infrastructure
and social capital.
 
At the same time, the BSP has always been patient in analyzing data and calibrating scenarios in
assessing  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Our  latest  readings  do  show  that  the  risks  to  inflation
remain weighted toward the upside.  Our surveys indicate that inflation expectations have started
to  rise.    These  could  contribute  to  potential  second-round  price  effects.  Nevertheless,  non-
monetary measures such as targeted subsidies are expected to mitigate these second round
inflationary pressures.    We shall see.  And we shall act accordingly.
Today, the BSP has many options to maintain firm monetary control.  Since the adoption of the
Interest  Rate  Corridor  (IRC)  system  in  2016,  we  have  gained  sufficient  flexibility  to  rely  on
auction-based  instruments  for  liquidity  management  to  complement  our  workhorse  overnight
reverse repurchase borrowings at our declared policy rate.  We can adjust monetary conditions
by adjusting auction volumes to move our market-determined term deposit facility (TDF) rates. 
This  has  effectively  allowed  us  a  channel  to  provide  guidance  to  short-term  market  interest
rates.  In recent months, we have seen a firm anchoring to the BSP’s interest rate corridor as
market rates strongly trended upwards.  (Note:  For example, the 91 T-bill rate has increased by
more than 100bps since December 2017).
Our  active  domestic  open  market  operations  interact  in  close  coordination  with  our  foreign
exchange market operations, adjustments to reserve requirements, systemic macro-prudential
measures and risk-based supervision of individual banks.
In  sum,  BSP  actions  remain  timely  and  appropriate  to  dynamic  market  conditions.    These
actions  help  regulate  the  economy  and  control  inflation.    The  signal  will  be  continuously
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
reinforced by other BSP actions, as deemed necessary by developments.
Looking ahead, the BSP remains watchful against signs of inflation becoming more broad-based.
We  stand  firm  on  our  intent  to  take  immediate  and  appropriate  measures  to  ensure  that  our
monetary policy stance supports our price and financial stability objectives. The coming task of
the Monetary Board is to carefully evaluate the appropriateness of a measured policy response to
firmly anchor inflation expectations in line with our forecast that inflation targets will continue to be
met in 2018-2019.  Toward this end, we also note that economic growth remains solid enough to
absorb some policy tightening, if warranted.
The other issue pertains to keeping the financial system sound and stable amid constant shifts in
the  economic  landscape.  In  particular,  we  cannot  ignore  how  so-called  megatrends  have
changed  the  way  businesses  operate.  These  megatrends  have  made  policy  making  more
complex.  These include demographic changes and the rise of disruptive technologies.
To address these challenges, the BSP trains its sights on implementing game-changing financial
sector reforms to allow the financial system to be more flexible, market-driven, and innovative.
At this point, let me focus on some of the major reforms that we have already put in place.
The  effective  implementation  of  the  IRC  has  allowed  us  to  initiate  the  gradual  and  phased
reduction of reserve requirements consistent with efficient absorption of any excess liquidity.  We
began with a one percentage point cut effective in March this year. Subsequent reductions — in
the  nature  of  liquidity-neutral  operational  adjustments  —  will  be  done  with  the  proper  pace,
magnitude,  and  timing  and  will  largely  depend  on  the  liquidity  absorbing  capacity  of  our  open
market operations.
We would like to reiterate that as with the operational shift to the IRC system, the reduction in
reserve requirements is not intended to materially affect the prevailing monetary policy settings.
Think of it as the BSP shifting from one instrument of liquidity management to another, as liquidity
released  to  the  market  by  the  cut  in  reserve  ratio  will  be  re-absorbed  through  offsetting
adjustments  in  our  open  market  operations,  as  informed  by  our  updated  and  comprehensive
liquidity forecasts.
Another vital pillar in our financial sector reform agenda is the acceleration of financial market
development and deepening. We have rolled out various initiatives to further develop the local
currency  debt  and  foreign  exchange  (FX)  markets,  including  the  launch  of  the  Government
Securities Repo Program in November 2017.
As  part  of  this  coordinated  government  endeavor,  the  Bureau  of  the  Treasury  released  the
implementing  guidelines  for  the  enhanced  Government  Securities  Eligible  Dealers  (GSED)
Program last February 2018.  Further, the SEC is set to issue its exposure draft of the rules on
administration of government securities benchmarks, consistent with recent global benchmark
reform initiatives and international standards for interest rate benchmark design.
We have also undertaken various FX reforms towards a deeper and better organized FX market. 
This includes further liberalizing FX rules to reduce the cost of doing business and improve data
capture.  The latest initiative involved the removal of the prior approval requirement for private
sector  foreign  borrowings.    Instead,  there  is  a  post-transaction  regulation  requirement  for  the
primary purpose of capturing data.
Over the medium term, we also plan to enhance FX market governance and oversight to improve
transparency  and  price  discovery.    Ultimately,  we  want  to  see  a  more  liquid  FX  market  that
supports a flexible and market-determined exchange rate.
  Finally,  the  BSP  aims  to  foster  an  enabling  ecosystem  where  competition  and  responsible
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
innovations in the financial sector are encouraged to thrive. We have strategically opened up the
banking system to encourage competition, particularly from new players and fintech companies.
This is because we believe that leveraging on safe and innovative financial institutions can also
drive business and industry growth, and likewise open  gateways to greater financial inclusion.
We have also set our sights on the digitalization of the financial system.  We are working closely
with  the  industry  in  implementing  the  National  Retail  Payment  System  (NRPS)  to  establish  a
safe, reliable and affordable retail payments system, with an increase in the share of electronic
payments  to  at  least  20%  by  2020.  Just  yesterday,  the  BSP  launched  InstaPay,  the  latest
automated clearing house (ACH)  under  the  NRPS,  which  allows  for  safe  and  affordable  retail
electronic payments in real time. 
The  BSP  remains  mindful  of  potential  risks  to  financial  stability  and  integrity,  including  those
emanating from cyber-attacks, money laundering, and terrorism financing. We find that our “test-
and-learn”  approach  remains  useful  as  we  continue  to  deal  with  increasing  digital  innovations
and more complex threats to the financial system.
Final Thoughts
Ladies and gentlemen, as I close, let us return to the question I posed at the beginning. Is now a
good time to invest?
A  quick  look  at  the  current  economic  landscape  certainly  provides  a  compelling  argument.
Standing  on  a  position  of  strength,  the  Philippines  presents  tremendous  and  worthwhile
opportunities for business and investment.
While there are clouds on the horizon, the BSP continues to be vigilant and invests in the crafting
of sound policies and disciplined reforms to guarantee the continuity of our economic prosperity
and to further strengthen our domestic sources of resilience.
We will intensify our efforts to safeguard price stability as well as the health and stability of our
financial  system.  At  the  same  time,  we  will  continue  to  provide  a  conducive  operating
environment for the financial sector to help fulfill its role as catalyst of economic growth.
Thank you, and good afternoon.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
