Salvatore Rossi: Which new frontiers in banking?
Speaking notes by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy and President
of  the  Institute  for  the  Supervision  of  Insurance  (IVASS),  at  the  2018  Conference  on  "New
Frontiers in Banking: from Corporate Governance to Risk Management", Faculty of Economics,
La Sapienza University, Rome, 16 March 2018.
 In the banking business, the concept of frontier – and its crossing – can be intended in several
ways.
Let’s  start  with size. After  the  global  financial  crisis,  banking  systems  in  the  large  advanced
economies have undergone a substantial consolidation process. The number of small banks
has decreased; concentration ratios – measured as the share of banking system assets held
by the largest five banks – have increased both in the euro area and in the United States. In Italy,
at the end of 2016, the share of total assets accounted for by the five largest banks amounted to
43 percent.
This process is still under way, and will presumably continue in the foreseeable future.
It’s not always a good thing. From a financial stability perspective, big banks should ideally be
highly diversified and less exposed to idiosyncratic risks. However, the Lehman crisis proved
that big banks may end up holding very similar portfolios, in which case they might become
more vulnerable to adverse systemic shocks. In other words, the reduction in idiosyncratic risk
might come at the cost of an increase in total risk on their balance sheets.
Furthermore, the bigger a bank, the greater the “implicit subsidy” it enjoys in terms of higher
likelihood to be rescued in case of distress, either being bailed out or, in Europe, resolved rather
than liquidated. It’s the well-known “too-big-to-fail” problem.
All in all, big banks are not necessarily safer from a systemic perspective. It’s something that
should be evaluated case by case.
What  about business models? Another  “new  frontier”  for  the  bank  of  the  future  could  be  a
fundamental change in its business model, for instance from traditional retail banking to asset
management or corporate/investment banking.
The issue there is profitability, and it has very much to do with rules. The current weakness in
bank profitability, particularly in Europe, not only depends on macroeconomic cyclical factors,
which were very unfavorable in past years, but also on the new requirements in terms of capital
and liquidity, that were the regulators’ response to the excessive risk-taking of the pre-crisis era.
I  don’t  think  the  banking  sector  could  ever  be  back  to  the  double-digit  returns  of  the  past  20
years. It may rather converge to a “new normal” with more low- consuming-capital activities. In
any  case,  a  sustained  profitability  must  require  cutting  operational  costs,  as  well  as  a  lot  of
investment in new technologies.
New technologies are probably the most important new frontier for banks, and I will dwell on
them in a minute.
Let me first widen the topic of this roundtable a little bit, to the financial system at large. Banks
aren’t the only financial players, nor should they be, in perspective, the largely dominant ones, at
least in countries like Italy.
In this country the financial structure is already evolving, though at a still moderate pace. Non-
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial firms, especially the biggest ones, are now using equity and bond markets much more
than in the past for their financial needs, although still not enough, in my opinion.
  But in Italy we may need not just more markets. Non-bank intermediaries, such as private equity
and venture capital funds, are still underrepresented in the financial landscape.
However, from a prudential point of view there’s a delicate balance to strike between a more
articulated  financial  structure,  which  is  desirable per  se,  and  the  need  not  to  give  “shadow
banking”  unlimited  freedom.  We  are  working,  together  with  our  colleagues  in  the  world
regulatory circles, on such a difficult puzzle.
Let  me  conclude  with  some  words  on  the  third  and  most  important  new  frontier  that  I’ve
mentioned  before  for  the  financial  system:  technology.  Again  I’ll  look  at  this  issue  from  a
regulatory point of view.
We are observing how digitalisation is already changing the financial business. Although many
of  our  intermediaries,  particularly  the  smallest  ones,  are  lagging  behind  in  the  process  of
digitalisation,  the  road  ahead  is  clear:  we  are  talking  about  technologies  that  are  well
consolidated, they are not “new” anymore.
Fintech firms are a step forward. In a stricter sense, Fintech firms are new players aiming at
crowding out traditional intermediaries like banks. Banks are reacting in different ways: some
are buying Fintech start-ups and trying to internalize them in their business models, others are
establishing partnership agreements and externalizing part of their production function, others
are trying to internally develop Fintech-like business units. We don’t know which approach will
prevail.
What we know is that part of the intermediation chain and of the payment system is moving
outside  the  traditional  financial  ecosystem.  Incumbents  are  feeling  the  pressure  of  these
changes.
The potential for efficiency gains, increased accessibility to financial services and lower end-
user  costs  are  great,  but  great  opportunities  always  come  with  great  risks.  Safeguarding
against risks without curbing innovation is the challenge regulators will face in the near future.
Existing  rules  have  been  designed  for  traditional  activities  and  intermediaries.  It  is  more  and
more difficult to understand how, when, and to which agents they can be applied.
The  temptation  to  over-regulate,  minimizing  the  risks  at  the  expenses  of  innovation,  may  be
great.  This,  however,  would  not  only  be  against  the    public  interest,  but  also  probably
impossible, given the liquid nature of innovation. What regulators may reasonably do is to adopt
a pragmatic, flexible approach, coordinated
across  jurisdictions  and  based  on  a  continuous  dialogue  with  the  industry,  as  was  recently
suggested by the FSB.
For  the  time  being,  approaches  and  stages  of  development  vary  considerably  across
jurisdictions. The majority of supervisors are still in the early stages of understanding the new
phenomena.
Continued sharing of supervisory practices in this area is crucial.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
