Andreas  Dombret:  Mediating  between  worlds  –  eight  years  at  the
Bundesbank
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank
until 30 April 2018, at the Farewell reception, Frankfurt am Main, 4 May 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen
 How time flies. It was mid-April 2010: I was eight years younger than I am today, my hair was far
less grey, and I was wearing shorts.
I  was  enjoying  a  short  break  on  Majorca  when  someone  from  the  secretariat  of  the  then
Bundesbank President Axel Weber called to say I should collect something of a personal nature
from the German consulate in Palma. Naturally, I complied with the request, but with hindsight I
was quite unprepared for what lay in store. And that was how I received the certificate appointing
me  to  the  Bundesbank’s  Executive  Board  under  a  German  flag,  dressed  in  a  polo  shirt  and
shorts …
That was back in the spring of 2010. But as you know, form follows function. So I swapped my
shorts for a suit and tie, and made my way, in great anticipation, to the Bundesbank.
Being a trained banker – I am touched and grateful to see that the current CEOs of every bank I
have ever worked for are here in this room: Christian Sewing from Deutsche Bank, Dorothee
Blessing from JP Morgan, Martin Reitz from Rothschild and Armin von Falkenhayn from Bank of
America – as I said, being a trained banker, I always imagined that a central bank would surely be
a bit like a commercial bank in one way or another. As you can imagine, I was in for a surprise –
and, as it quickly turned out, a pleasant one at that.
If there is one thing I have learned these last eight years, it is that central banks are not the same
as  commercial  banks. And  I  mean  that  in  a  positive  sense.  That  is  because  of  the  mandate
which central banks follow and which commits them to serving the common good. Another thing
that  quickly  caught  my  eye  eight  years  ago  was  how  intensely  Bundesbankers  dedicate
themselves  to  the  matter  in  hand.  “Professional  goals  trump  personal  progress”  is  the  motto
here, and I must say I felt right at home with that modus operandi from day one.
The same goes for traditional German economics which, as you all know, is geared to stability
and based on rules. That tradition has been my constant companion throughout my tenure here
at the Bundesbank. And being an alumnus of the classical school of economics, I am also a
passionate  advocate  of  the  market  economy,  committed  to  stability,  and  sceptical  about
excessive government influence. And let’s be honest here, with that kind of profile, where better
to work than at the Bundesbank?
On a very broad note, I found the Bundesbank to be a place where, without having to disown my
ordopolitical beliefs, I was able to devote my attention to my responsibilities and to raise fresh
topics – and not just the uncontroversial ones. You can’t measure anyone, least of all a banking
supervisor  –  Felix  Hufeld  will  know  what  I’m  talking  about  –  in  terms  of  whether  they  keep
everyone happy. To quote Franz-Josef Strauss: “Everybody’s darling, everybody’s idiot”. I have
always been in favour of taking a stance, standing up for clearly defined viewpoints, always being
open for dialogue, and positioning the Bundesbank ahead of the curve.
During my term of office, I felt my natural role was as the Bundesbank’s ambassador. That was
not  just  how  I  interpreted  the  position  itself  –  it  was  also  a  deep-seated  passion  of  mine  to
heighten  the  Bundesbank’s  standing  –  in  the  world  of  banking,  in  the  markets,  among  other
German and global institutions, in the fiscal policy sphere, in matters of economic education –
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and to accomplish all that not only in Germany, but around the globe.
Hardly surprising, then, that I spent a lot of time – a huge amount of time, in fact – jetting around
the  world  over  the  past  eight  years.  My  wife  could  tell  you  a  thing  or  two  about  that. As  the
Bundesbank’s G20 deputy, the presidencies in Korea, France, Mexico, Australia and Turkey fell
within  my  direct  term  of  office;  as  for  the  G7,  my  tenure  coincided  with  the  presidencies  of
Canada, France, the USA, the United Kingdom and Germany. My role as the Bundesbank’s IMF
deputy took me on regular visits to Washington, but also to IMF meetings in Tokyo and Lima. On
top of that, I travelled to the BIS in Basel, the OECD in Paris, and the European Parliament and
the Commission in Brussels, and so on.
I have a confession to make: extending our network of Bundesbank representative offices was
particularly close to my heart, and I am pleased to say that we stabilised this network during my
tenure  and  added  two  new  locations  –  Istanbul  and  Pretoria.  Now  we  have  representatives
everywhere we want to be represented.
You will no doubt have gathered by now that the international dimension was always particularly
important to me. Indeed, I recall my first Franco-German financial summit in 2010, where I had
the privilege of standing in for Bundesbank President Axel Weber. On the French side, Banque
de  France  governor  Christian  Noyer  was  represented  by  his  deputy,  and  my  colleague  and
friend,  Jean-Pierre  Landau.  Christine  Lagarde,  still  the  French  finance  minister  at  that  time,
looked at the two of us before turning to German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble to say:
“Well, Wolfgang, if the representative of Germany's central bank has the surname Dombret and
the  one  from  France  is  called  Landau,  there  isn’t  really  much  point  in  holding  these  Franco-
German summits any more, is there? …”.
But representing the Bundesbank externally was just one part of my duties. Being a manager, I
aspired to mould my surroundings a little from the inside as well. But ultimately, the Bank is one
of those places where the institution moulds its Executive Board, which is why I am now proud to
say that I am a Bundesbanker.
At the same time, I am pleased to have implemented one project or the other within the Bank. I
never  regarded  the  Bundesbank  as  an  ivory  tower  out  here  in  the  Ginnheim  wilderness.
Interaction with the markets and dialogue with the banks was a cause I genuinely believed in –
one which I both pushed and encouraged. With all due distance, I always felt that permeability
between the worlds – between the central bank and politics, between supervisors and banks –
was particularly important.
Parallel worlds – or "echo chambers”, to use today’s parlance – are of no use to anyone; hence
my  enduring  commitment  to  forging  a  constructive  and  open  relationship  between  central
bankers and bankers. I dare say my mission to bring banks and supervision closer together over
the  past  eight  years  has  been  successful  –  and  I’m  talking  here  not  about  nepotism  or
fraternisation but about nurturing a greater sense of mutual understanding.
In  this  vein,  I  would  also  like  to  take  a  stand  against  the  wholesale  criticism  levelled  against
bankers who “switch sides” like Mario Draghi or, more recently, Jörg Kukies – after all, I’m one of
that ilk, too. If you ask me, what we need is more interaction and more dialogue – and never
more so than in times like these in the face of increasingly complex topics. Taking on an official
post for the res publica is always something of a commitment, and I do hope that many more
bankers will offer to take a public position. Rest assured: the experience of working in an official
capacity for the common good is far more rewarding than advocating the interests of the few.
And who is better placed to say that than me, having lived in both worlds?
The work that piled up on my desk these past eight years encompassed a wide variety of topics.
The  term  of  office  of  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele  and  myself  was  undoubtedly  an  era  marked  by
substantial change, and events kicked off during our very first weekend in office, when the first
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Greek  rescue  package  needed  to  be  assembled  in  Basel  amid  intense  political  and  time
pressure.  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele  and  I  spent  our  first  week  at  the  Bundesbank  attending  two
meetings  a  day  of  the  Bundesbank's  financial  crisis  team  –  believe  you  me:  that  was  a
particularly intense way to get started back in May 2010.
Much has changed since then. The period of low interest rates is posing an entirely new set of
challenges for the banking and central banking communities. Supervision of large institutions has
now evolved into European supervision. Structural change in the banking world, sparked by the
triple  whammy  of  low  interest  rates,  digitalisation  and  regulatory  reforms,  is  something  we  all
need to get to grips with – credit institutions, central banks, banking supervisors and not least
consumers  and  bank  customers.  I  would  not  be  exaggerating  if  I  said  these  were  the  stiffest
challenges in decades. Looking to the future, I dare say that geopolitical risk might prove to be
more significant than economic risk. Let’s hope I’m wrong.
Just as times have changed, so, too, has the agenda. Ask me to select the headlines for my
term of office at the Bundesbank and I would pick out topics like the capital markets union, of
which I was an early advocate in spite of some resistance. There are other subjects such as the
profitability of credit institutions in Germany, Brexit and everything it involves, and not forgetting
the emergence of new FinTech players. Lastly, Basel III presented a very special challenge for
me – I fought on the front lines for many years in the interests of banking stability, and you can
take it from me that I had my eyes firmly set on what was best for Germany. And I hope that the
reforms will now indeed be implemented in a proportionate manner for smaller institutions. That
was something which I, for one, supported from the very outset, and I would say we are on the
right path. Negotiating and extending the IMF’s bilateral borrowing agreements, adding the yen,
Australian dollar and renminbi as reserve currencies, expanding the Bundesbank’s risk control
capacities, and establishing the “House of Microdata” in the Bank’s Directorate General Statistics
also  feature  in  my  track  record  over  the  past  eight  years.  And  if  you  find  one  or  the  other
sculpture  here  on  the  Bank’s  grounds  aesthetically  pleasing  or  displeasing,  the  chances  are
that’s another thing I will have to take responsibility for.
One  final  important  issue,  I  found,  was  to  highlight  the  climate  risks  lurking  on  bank  balance
sheets  as  a  direct  impact  of  climate  change  and  to  call  for  change.  Hence  our  decision  to
dedicate this year’s annual banking supervision symposium in its entirety to the topic of climate
change  and  sustainable  banking  –  and  a  large  majority  of  the  participants  hailed  it  as  a
resounding success.
It goes without saying that there is still some unfinished business on my desk after eight years in
office. First, I would dearly have loved to install a regulatory sandbox in Germany as a way of
nurturing  and  learning  from  the  FinTech  sector  –  but  not  everyone  in  Germany  backed  that
initiative.  Second,  I  would  have  liked  to  have  done  more  to  harmonise  financial  reporting
standards; I’m sad to say that the IFRS and US GAAP today are further apart than they were in
2010.  Third,  there  is  the  matter  of  the  regulatory  treatment  of  government  bonds  –  an
international accord on this topic has now become a rather distant prospect, much to my regret.
But giving up is out of the question.
And lastly, risks at the Bundesbank have increased dramatically over the past years as a result
of both the asset purchase programmes and the recent rise in interest rate risk. In a clear sign of
heightened risk, we have had to add €14.5 billion to our provisions for general risks since I took
over  responsibility  for  the  Bundesbank’s  risk  control  function.  If  you  had  told  me,  when  I  took
office,  that  the  Bundesbank’s  balance  sheet  –  of  which  I  have  been  a  co-signee  for  eight  full
years, remember – would expand more than three-fold, that TARGET2 claims would make up
roughly half of total assets, and that more than 40% of our interest income would be generated
by negative interest rates, that would have been beyond the stretch of my imagination. Pressing
ahead with asset purchase programmes for all eternity certainly cannot be the answer to every
problem – on the contrary: the longer they run, the greater the cost will be.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
I hope my successor – whom I wish every success in his new post – will be able to report that all
of the points I have just mentioned have turned out differently when he leaves office.
Ladies and gentlemen, tempi passati – my time at the Bundesbank has come to an end, and I’ve
finally reached the finishing line of my term of office. And you now see me not just in a suit, but
also in a thoughtful and slightly sentimental frame of mind.
But just as the years have flown by, so, too, have the minutes here today. I’m fast running out of
speaking time, so all that remains is to thank everyone. I will begin by expressing my sincere
personal gratitude to Axel Weber and to you, Jens Weidmann. It was an honour to work with two
such outstanding presidents. Mr Weidmann, I got to know you about ten years ago and have
been able to observe you close up over the past seven. I hope your path in the world of central
banking takes you a very long way yet. And I know I’m not the only one hoping this.
And before I give the floor to you, Carl-Ludwig Thiele, let me express my wholehearted thanks for
our  fruitful  cooperation  and  your  friendship.  We  will  remain  on  close  and  cordial  terms  in  the
future, too. Carl-Ludwig, I wish you the very best!
My special thanks go out to all the Bank’s employees. It meant a great deal to me to have worked
directly with so many of you. Just as the Bundesbank should not be an ivory tower, nor should
the Executive Board be one, either.
I managed to say goodbye to many colleagues, but sadly not to every single one of them, so I
would like to use my speech to say that no matter how obscure and complex my questions were,
you  never  failed  to  give  me  a  well-founded  and  reasoned  answer.  That  is  one  of  the
Bundesbank’s greatest strengths.
So thanks to all of you for the invariably good and loyal cooperation. Over the past eight years I
have crossed paths with many colleagues not just from the Bundesbank, but also from the other
central banks, the Finance Ministry and BaFin, and I have learned a great deal from you, been
able to put a lot of work into practice, and have much to thank you for. Thank you from the bottom
of my heart for all the support I have received both within and outside the Bundesbank.
Being unable to express my gratitude to everyone in person, I will have to make do by expressing
my cordial thanks to “my” Directors General: Messrs Bartholomae, Bischofberger, Fehr, Loeper,
Reischle and Ziebarth and Ms Sung. Yes, and even Joachim Nagel belongs in that group, albeit
for only the first six months of my term of office …
I  am  also  deeply  indebted  to  my  office  team  –  Ms  Sattler,  Ms  Schultz,  Ms  Walker  and
Mr Bechmann – without whose fantastic backing I would have been left high and dry – I knew I
could always count on you. My secretary Ms Schultz and my chauffeur Mr Bechmann have even
been with me through thick and thin over my full eight years at the Bundesbank.
I hope you have all recovered from the shock I imagine you got on Wednesday of suddenly no
longer receiving any e-mails from me, which I often sent before sunrise and late into the night.
There are also a number of names outside the Bank I would like to mention at this point. First, I
would like to thank Agustín Carstens, not just in his capacity as a representative from the Bank
for  International  Settlements  but  also  as  one  of  the  many  international  central  bankers  and
government representatives I have had the privilege of working with, some of whom have joined
us here in Frankfurt. I am delighted to see him here with us today.
Second, I would like to mention Danièle Nouy and Sabine Lautenschläger as representatives of
the still-young European Single Supervisory Mechanism. It’s quite remarkable to see what has
been built up over the past four years, and I am proud to have made my own small contribution
under their leadership.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, I would like to thank Thomas Steffen, to name just one of the colleagues at the Ministry of
Finance and at BaFin, for the particularly close and trusting working relationship over the past
years. Thomas, we touched base regularly, and our shared views on many issues benefited our
joint endeavours.
Let  me  also  thank  Mr  Trenkler  and  the  Kronberg  Academy  for  their  wonderful  musical
programme today.
And  last,  but  by  no  means  least,  I  would  like  to  thank  my  wife  for  her  support  and  for  her
understanding when I was out on the road yet again instead of at home. She told me earlier that
this is the wrong time and place to say anything more on this topic.
It was always with a sense of pride that I carried my Bundesbank business card in my wallet, and
I never wanted to work for any other institution over the last eight years. This pride is imbued in
part  by  the  strong  credibility  which  the  Bundesbank  continues  to  enjoy  –  and  rightly  so.  This
credibility  is  an  asset  in  itself,  and  its  importance  for  Germany  cannot  be  overstated.  I  have
benefited hugely from it. If I had a wish, it would be that politicians never call this precious asset
into question.
Ladies and gentlemen, I mentioned at the beginning of my speech that the Bundesbank is not a
commercial bank – I’ve grasped that now. The Bundesbank is the Bundesbank, and it always will
be the Bundesbank. I already decided last summer that I would not be available for a second
term of office for personal reasons. And no matter where the next stop on my career path will be,
I do hope that it will be a little bit like at the Bundesbank.
Thank you for all your valuable support and for your kind attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
