Opening Remarks 
BOT’s Policy Direction on FinTech Development 
Bangkok FinTech Fair 2018: SME and Consumer Financial Solutions 
Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob 
Governor of the Bank of Thailand  
Monday 19 March 2018  
Bank of Thailand Learning Center 
  
Distinguished guests  
Ladies and gentlemen 
Swasdee krub,  
 
A very good morning to you all. Welcome to the inaugural Bangkok FinTech 
Fair and welcome to the Bank of Thailand Learning Center. This Learning 
Center  was  first  opened  to  the  public  in  December  of  last  year.  
It is not only Bangkok’s newest learning center and public library but also 
an  open  space  for  individuals  and  entrepreneurs  to  collaborate  and 
exchange ideas. So, it is fitting that our very first Bangkok FinTech Fair is 
held at this venue.  
Over the next two days, we will be joined by some of the top minds from 
Thailand’s  fintech  and  financial  industry  as  well  as  regional  and  global 
leaders in financial innovation. The main discussion panels will present 
various  issues  surrounding  fintech  ecosystem  with  the  focus  on  SME 
financial  solutions,  retail  payments,  and  technology  infrastructure;  the 
cybersecurity room, which is in the library, will underscore the importance 
of cyber-awareness and highlight key security issues, ranging from emerging 
threats to defensive strategies; and the technology talk room and various 
presentation booths all over the venue will showcase some of the latest 
technologies and initiatives Thailand’s fintech and financial industries are 
working on. 
 1-7 
  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
On  the  program,  this  morning  I  am  supposed  to  talk  about  Bank  of 
Thailand’s policy direction on fintech development. Before I do so, I would 
like to take a step back and focus on three key words, which I believe are 
imperative  for  formulating  financial  sector  policy  for  Thailand  and  the 
region as a whole. These three key words are productivity, immunity, and 
inclusivity.  
First,  an  emphasis  must  be  placed  on  productivity  as  uplifting 
productivity is a critical requirement for long term growth of an economy. 
For one, at current stage, many countries in our region are facing structural 
transformation of aging workforce. Shrinking workforce can dampen long 
term  growth  prospect.  We  must  become  more  productive  in  order  to 
increase  output  level  and  improve  standard  of  living  of  our  people. 
Productivity  is  also  needed  to  boost  competitiveness  of  businesses  as 
expanding global trade network and emergence of large e-business platforms have 
introduced new competitors into our business landscape. Moreover, roles of 
banks could be challenged as sharing financial platforms gain prominence 
in the modern economy, and new fintech firms offer  financial products 
unbundled  from  the  long  standing  value  chain  of  banking.  Without 
meaningful adjustment—that is improving productivity, long term growth 
potential of an economy could deteriorate.  
Second, immunity becomes imperative in the current global economic 
landscape. We are living in the time of changes, where outcomes can be 
abrupt,  unpredictable,  and  volatile.  Amidst  the  fallout  from  the  Global 
Financial Crisis of 2008, where unconventional monetary policies flushed 
global financial market with excess liquidity, we are now entering the cycle 
where major central banks have started normalizing their monetary policies. 
Along the normalization path, one should expect to see market corrections 
 2-7 
and volatile asset prices. On top of this, rising US trade protectionism has 
raised concerns over global trade, investment, and production, and further 
measures could be retaliated. Global warming and geopolitical risks also 
increase in many regions of the world. Besides, rapidly changing technology 
could be disruptive for incumbents in many industries and also bring new 
forms  of  risks,  ranging  from  cyber  threats  to  strategic  risks  of  existing 
business models. All these uncertainties necessitate that building sufficient 
immunity becomes a key consideration in any financial sector policy.  
Third  is  the  notion  of  inclusivity.  We  need  to  understand  that  any 
financial  sector  policy  without  consideration  for  inclusivity  cannot  be 
sustained. This is especially important for Thailand and many countries in 
our region where income and wealth inequality is one of the most pressing 
social  and  economic  issues.  Any  policy  or  action  that  does  not  pay 
attention  to  the  issue  of  inequality  can  threaten  long-term  social  and 
economic  stability,  as  those  with  higher  capital  can  more  easily  reap 
benefits from economic growth and new technology, leaving those without 
access  to  new  technology  or  know-how  further  behind.  Eventually, 
inequality in income, wealth, and opportunity can raise social polarization, 
resulting in political gridlocks as seen in many countries.    
Ultimately,  policies  that  make  improvements  in  all  of  these  three  key 
imperatives can uplift the real economy and standard of living of people 
as a whole. Productive financial sector allows for more efficient resource 
allocation  among  different  segments  of  the  economy.  Maintaining  a 
resilience financial system allows for smooth functioning of the financial 
markets and keeps systemic risks at bay. And, an inclusive financial system 
ensures that benefits from economic growth can be shared fairly across the 
whole  society,  fostering  stable  social  and  economic  environment 
conducive for sustainable growth.    
Ladies and gentlemen, 
   3-7 
to 
lending 
information-based 
Amidst the rapidly changing technology, fintech can be and must be an 
instrumental driver of financial sector policy to fulfill the three key 
imperatives of productivity, immunity, and inclusivity.  
On  productivity  front,  fintech  can  enhance  efficiency  in  financial 
services.  Rise  of  new  electronic  payment  ecosystem  can  enable  more 
efficient  transfer  of  funds  and  significantly  lower  transaction  costs  for 
customers. Adoption of fintech platforms will allow banks to scale down 
on the high cost brick-and-mortar delivery model and shift to less costly 
and more  efficient  digital services. Lending process  can be made  much 
more efficient through usage of transactional data from e-commerce and 
payment  platforms,  and  banks’  business  model  could  change  from 
collateral-based 
lending.  Meanwhile, 
blockchain has advanced technology behind many aspects of the financial 
services, especially back-office operations and fund transfers. All of these 
help lower cost of financial transactions and improve ease of doing business 
for banks and customers, thereby improving productivity of the economy 
as a whole.   
On immunity front, prudent application of fintech can help banks and 
businesses improve their risk management. With the vast amount of data 
available  such  as  those  from  new  payment  ecosystem  and  digital 
transactions, banks can better analyze business conditions and make more 
accurate forecast of customers’ credit demand and credit risks, resulting in 
improved risk management model. Additionally, emergence of new data 
will  unlock  new  hedging  products,  especially  in  the  insurance  industry. 
Furthermore,  advancements  in  technologies  like  artificial  intelligence, 
biometrics,  and  blockchains  can  help  safeguard  financial  information, 
improve identity verification, and reduce the number  and magnitude of 
financial frauds. These developments will contribute to safer environment 
for both service providers and customers.  
 4-7 
On inclusivity front, expanding fintech universe and advent of new and 
diverse  platforms  can  improve  financial  access  of  customers, 
especially those who have been underserved by the current financial 
system. As different individuals have different levels of affordability and 
financial requirements, the ever-expanding fintech universe can offer wide-
ranging  choices  and  solutions  needed  to  fulfill  their  different  needs. 
Digitization  of  financial  services  and  emergence  of  new  platforms  can 
improve  financial  services  through  online  access  and  smartphone 
applications, which benefit customers both in cities and in remote areas. 
Fintech applications will also help with cross-border transactions for small 
businesses and enable fast and cheap remittance transfers for immigrant 
workers, thus creating opportunities and improving the quality of life of 
many  whom  might  have  been  underserved.  Meanwhile, information-based 
lending can help small businesses without adequate collateral gain access 
to funding at a fair price. All of these solutions lead to lower cost of financial 
services, greater financial access, and greater opportunity for the public.  
Ultimately, “fintech” can help unlock massive potential of our people and 
businesses and be a powerful tool for Thailand and developing countries 
to improve on productivity, immunity, and inclusivity of the financial system 
as well as for the whole economy.  
Ladies and gentlemen,   
The theme of our very first Bangkok FinTech Fair focuses on SMEs and 
consumers, because these two groups face various challenges and can 
benefit  greatly  from  the  adoption  of  fintech.  For  Thailand,  SMEs 
represent  the  majority  of  firms  and  make  up  over  80  percent  of  total 
employment. Many SMEs struggle to gain access to finance and payment 
services, which, on one hand, can be attributed to poor financial health 
due to loss of competitiveness. On the other hand, many SMEs lack the 
financial management skills and collateral needed for funding, and their 
 5-7 
cost of finance remains high. Meanwhile, the Thai public is facing big hurdles 
of low long-term savings and high household debts, with Thailand having 
household  debt  to  GDP  ratio  amongst  the  highest  in  the  region.  Many 
households lack access to efficient and low-cost financial services, be it the 
deposit, payment, insurance or loan products. These people need to be 
better served by our financial system to be able to unlock their potential, 
improve standard of living, and ensure their financial security as they age. 
Despite many challenges, I am delighted that exciting developments and 
initiatives are taking place in Thailand and around the region using fintech 
to address these problems. Allow me to highlight some of these initiatives. 
We have:  
  Accounting  service  applications  for  SMEs  and  start-ups  on  cloud 
platforms 
  Online  mortgage  refinance  portals  that  help  select  the  best 
refinancing option for mortgage clients 
  Real-time and low cost cross-border money transfer and remittance 
platforms  
  Biometric  verifications  for  e-KYC  to  facilitate  remote  access  to 
financial services 
  Machine  learning  using  alternative  data  such  as  social  media  for 
credit scoring  
  Real-time invoice financing through common supply chain platform 
  Standardized QR Code for e-payments, which has reached nearly 1 
million merchants within six months after exiting from the Bank of 
Thailand’s Regulatory Sandbox; and last but not least 
  PromptPay, a real-time payment infrastructure that has facilitated 
electronic payments for over 39 million registered IDs in Thailand 
 6-7 
These are just some of the solutions available for SMEs and consumers in 
our market.  
To this end, I believe that over the next two days we will get to see many 
more exciting products and projects that can inspire innovation; broaden 
our understanding of the current technology landscape; and help set the 
policy  agenda  for  strengthening  Thailand’s  and  our  region’s  fintech 
ecosystems, especially to serve SMEs and consumers. Seeing the extensive 
works put on by our staff and partners and many prominent leaders and 
individuals in attendance this morning make me certain that we are on the 
path towards fulfilling our goals.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To  attain  the  overall  improvement  in  productivity,  immunity,  and 
inclusivity, the Bank of Thailand is committed to supporting adoption of 
financial  technology  by  financial  institutions  and  promoting  fintech 
innovation while ensuring that key risks can be contained. Throughout the 
next two days I look forward to personally interacting with all participants, 
to learn and find ways we can collaborate for the benefits of the Thai and 
regional financial industries and our fintech ecosystems.  
Thank you very much for participating in our very first Bangkok FinTech Fair. 
I wish you all a successful and fruitful event.   
 
  7-7 
