Andreas  Dombret:  Prospects  for,  and  obstacles  to,  greater
proportionality in regulation – a supervisor’s perspective
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the second Regional Banking Conference of the State of Hesse, Brussels, 21 February 2018.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I would like to start by thanking you very much for the warm welcome and for inviting me to this
event.
When I was asked to speak to you here today about the prospects for, and obstacles to, greater
proportionality in banking regulation, I jumped at the opportunity – and I did so because this is a
topic that is especially close to my heart.
Let’s take a look back: when the debate first started in 2016, I sought to have the Bundesbank
review whether smaller credit institutions were unduly burdened by regulation. And once we were
able to show clear signs of this, I decided that the Bundesbank should be quick to turn the debate
towards potential solutions.
This is all the more important to us because we regard diversity as a key attribute, not only in
nature  and  our  society  but  also  in  our  economy  and  the  banking  sector. After  all,  diversity  is
crucial to economic development, too – it means increased competition for the best approaches,
more choice in decision-making, and greater innovation.
Today,  I  have  been  presented  with  the  task  of  talking  about  regulatory  proportionality  from  a
supervisor’s perspective. As you have already heard what the credit institutions have to say, I
need  only  give  a  rough  overview  of  the  reasons  for  greater  proportionality  and  the  burdens
weighing  on  smaller  institutions.  Instead,  I  will  focus  on  the  prospects  for,  and  obstacles  to,
greater proportionality, before wrapping things up by outlining what greater proportionality in the
EU might look like.
2. Why do we need greater proportionality?
The arguments in favour of greater proportionality are myriad – you have doubtless spoken about
many of the reasons for it at this conference already. And, as far as banking supervisors are
concerned,  too,  there  are  strong  arguments  as  to  why  greater  regulatory  proportionality  is
needed.
Now that the financial crisis is over, we have stricter rules and a common European approach to
supervision in the form of Basel III and the banking union. These rules are mainly geared towards
large banks with international ties, which is not exactly surprising considering these banks were
the ones at the epicentre of the crisis.
In Europe, however, the international standards since Basel I have been applied to all banks. In
this sense, we have a single rulebook for the EU that is designed to guarantee a level playing
field. That’s one side – the bright side – of the coin. On the flip side – the tarnished side, so to
speak – this unity has come at much too a high cost to smaller and medium-sized institutions
ever since Basel II.
The Basel III reforms have made it even harder for these banks, as the rules are getting more
and more complicated and explicit, and the list just keeps getting longer. This is increasing the
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
compliance workload – that is, the effort associated with meeting the requirements as well as
demonstrating that they have been met. In fact, these rules are well suited to the lion’s share of
increasingly  complicated  banking  business  –  but  the  reality  is  that  not  all  banks  and  savings
banks have as complex a set-up as is assumed under the new framework.
After almost a decade of regulatory reform, the international community of banking supervisors
has been asking itself a number of questions for some time now. In which areas are reforms
counterproductive? Where are they disproportionate? To come to the point straight away, we can
only answer these questions if we start by looking at the excessive strain placed on smaller and
less complex institutions.
3. Opportunities and obstacles: reduce operational burden, retain minimum capital and
liquidity requirements
What, then, do the burdens faced by smaller and medium-sized institutions look like? There is
one  point  I  would  like  to  make  quite  clear.  The  problem  is  not  so  much  capital  or  liquidity
requirements but rather the high operational burden as a result of implementing these regulations
and complying with them. This burden is considerable for all institutions, regardless of their size.
However,  small  institutions,  owing  to  their  smaller  staff  sizes,  are  far  less  able  to  spread  the
costs  of  compliance  across  their  employees  and  have  to  either  hire  additional  staff  or  enlist
external help. This tends to lead to proportionally higher burdens.
The diagnosis is therefore  clear:  small  and  medium-sized  institutions  are,  to  a  certain  extent,
groaning  under  the  weight  of  increasingly  complex  regulation,  which  often  goes  above  and
beyond the level of complexity seen in their business models. But what is the right course of
action? Before we administer any form of medication, I would like to outline three principles that
need to govern treatment.
First, financial stability must remain our primary concern. In concrete terms, this means that
institutions that are systemically important or pursue a risky business model cannot expect
any easing of requirements.
Second,  the  concept  of  the  rule  of  law  means,  in  short,  that  all  relief  measures  must
conform to the principle of equal treatment.
Third, treatment is likely to be most effective where discomfort is greatest – in other words, it
should  target  the  day-to-day  burden  for  institutions  with  low-risk  business  models.  Any
easing of solvency or liquidity rules is out of the question.
Allow me to expand on the last point: virtually all smaller institutions already meet capital and
liquidity requirements. Recently, when finalising Basel III, we saw to it that smaller institutions, in
particular, would not be unduly burdened. While globally systemically important institutions are
now subject to slightly stricter requirements commensurate with risk, small and medium-sized
banks  have  scarcely  been  affected  –  in  fact,  requirements  have  been  eased  for  many  small
German institutions.
To put it in no uncertain terms, sufficient capitalisation and liquidity is the most important line of
defence for banking supervision and financial stability. With that in mind, there can be no leeway
as far as this is concerned.
4. Greater proportionality in the EU
Within  the  framework  of  the  principles  I  just  mentioned,  new  treatments  are  providing
considerable  scope  for  banking  regulation  that  is  more  proportionate  for,  and  thus  more
reconcilable with, smaller and less complex institutions.
In the EU, work on this was kicked off in 2016 with an initiative launched by the finance ministers
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of  the  United  Kingdom  and  Germany. As  this  topic  has  also  kept  us  at  the Bundesbank  very
busy, we had our say a short time later by presenting initial concrete proposals for increasing
proportionality in Europe. We have been working on improving and fine-tuning our proposals ever
since.
As part of its general overhaul of EU banking regulation, the European Commission put forward
proposals  for  strengthening  the  principle  of  proportionality.  The  European  Parliament  then
produced  a  draft  report,  on  which  it  was  possible  to  submit  comments  until  recently.  While
completing the report is not the final step, it’s nevertheless an important step for the legislative
process. At this point, I would like to say a special word of thanks to rapporteur Peter Simon for
his  excellent  work.  The  proposals  for  eased  requirements  in  the  areas  of  disclosure  and
reporting are highly extensive and, to my mind, a very welcome development. Furthermore, we
consider  it  a  good  thing  that  the  thresholds  are  to  be  raised  for  trading  book  institutions.  It  is
much to my regret, however, that a general approach – such as the small banking box – was
rejected. I’ll come back to this shortly.
Without  wishing  to  anticipate  the  final  result  of  the  legislative  process,  I  would  like  to  paint  a
picture of how we, as German banking supervisors, need to tackle the issue of proportionality in
the EU. With that in mind, let’s turn our attention to three key questions: who, how, and what?
Let’s begin with “who”, as in who should be subject to eased requirements. As I have already
mentioned,  we  are  focusing  on  small  institutions.  In  other  words,  the  target  group  comprises
institutions  with  a  manageable  level  of  total  assets.  The  problem  is  that  the  definition  of
“manageable” varies from country to country in the EU. In order to account for this heterogeneity,
we  will  probably  set  an  absolute  threshold  value  for  total  assets  combined  with  a  relative
threshold value that takes national GDP into account.
This  quantitative  threshold  value  will  be  accompanied  by  additional  criteria  in  order  to  prevent
institutions  with  riskier  business  models  from  benefiting  from  simplified  rules.  Thus,  banks  to
which reduced requirements apply are not permitted to use internal models; they ought to have a
small trading book and carry out derivatives transactions to a limited extent only; and they may
not participate to any meaningful extent on the capital market or in cross-border activities. But as
experience  has  taught  us  that  it  is  all  but  impossible  to  draw  up  an  exhaustive  list  of  criteria
covering all eventualities, the final decision must rest with the supervisors. And, of course, banks
should ultimately also have the opportunity to reject their classification as such an institution.
Now let’s turn to “how”. There are basically two potential ways of improving proportionality here.
First,  we  could  take  a  small-scale  approach  and  introduce  simplifications  and  exceptions  for
individual rules. Second, we could create a whole new framework that is specifically tailored to
small banks and low-risk institutions. The second solution would be further-reaching and clearer-
cut. But at present, the majorities in Europe appear to favour the small-scale solution.
And  then  we  still  have  to  consider  “what”.  It  is  important  the  emphasis  lies  on  reducing  the
administrative workload and minimising the red tape. The measures we are currently reviewing
include  exceptions  to  disclosure  requirements,  reductions  in  the  granularity  of  reporting
requirements and a simplified form of the net stable funding ratio (NSFR).
In  deciding  which  areas  could  potentially  be  simplified,  we  must  weigh  up  the  benefits  of
regulation – that is to say, the preservation of financial stability – against the costs generated for
the private sector. Essentially, all regulations that are non-essential to effective supervision are
up for discussion.
Conversely, that also means that many rules are not up for debate, however. As I have already
mentioned,  no  concessions  can  be  made,  in  particular,  when  it  comes  to  the  risk-weighted
capital ratio, the leverage ratio or the short-term liquidity coverage ratio.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  other  aspect,  I  believe,  is  particularly  crucial.  The  business  models  of  small  banks  are
neither generally simple nor automatically low-risk – and that is especially true when seen in their
entirety. A supervisory system that works according to the principle of proportionality therefore
needs  to  be  simple  but  also  robust.  Financial  stability  must  not  be  jeopardised  under  any
circumstances.
5. Finalised Basel III standard must be implemented proportionately
For  the  same  reason  –  that  is,  to  strengthen  financial  stability  –  it  is  very  important  that  we
implement the recently finalised Basel III package fully in the EU. After all, that’s no less than we
expect of the US and the other member countries of the Basel Committee.
But as I see it, full implementation of the Basel III rules doesn’t mean that all banks need to be
affected by these highly complex rules to the same extent. To recap, the Basel standards are
primarily aimed at internationally active banks.
In this regard, member countries of the Basel Committee are free to apply other rules to smaller
banks that are only active in their own home markets and do not pose a threat to international
financial stability. And this is the framework we should largely use when revising the EU rules.
For instance, when it comes to a review of the trading book, we at the Bundesbank are in favour
of retaining the simple, standardised approaches that are currently in place for small institutions
with small trading books. Although the new, complex standardised approach is all well and good
for institutions that engage in substantial trading activity, I don’t think they are suited to locally
based savings banks or people's banks.
We  also  support  the  idea  put  forward  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  European
Parliament  of  excluding  development  banks  from  the  scope  of  the  CRD/CRR  regulatory
framework. Given, above all, the particularities of the business models of German development
banks and their public mandate, I fail to see why these institutions should be subject to complex
international regulation. In this respect, we at the Bundesbank strongly support the concept of a
criteria-based exemption rule for development banks. We are also calling for institutions with total
assets in excess of €30 billion to be covered by an exemption. In doing so, we are going beyond
the European Commission’s draft proposal. The report published by the European Parliament,
too, follows a similar train of thought under certain conditions – which means that it’s now up to
the German negotiators in Brussels to set the right course.
So what I am saying is that when implementing the Basel III reforms in the EU, the rules must be
applied in full to internationally active banks. But when it comes to smaller banks that are not
internationally  active,  first,  we  should  focus  specifically  on  reducing  the  operational  burden  by
scaling back or removing inappropriately complex rules. And second, we need to check whether
it would be possible to exempt entire groups of institutions such as development banks from the
European regulation.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, the euro area is experiencing impressive economic growth again for the
first time in a decade. A differentiated banking system is a key pillar of the economy – and I am
convinced that this diversity makes our economy more dynamic and more resilient.
And we must be careful not to burden this differentiated banking system unnecessarily through
regulation. For us, as supervisors and regulators, this means addressing parts of the banking
regulation that have become overly complex.
We should not place any disproportionate obstacles in the way of small institutions and savings
banks. It is now up to the European Parliament, the EU Council of Ministers and the European
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Commission to pave the way for substantial improvements.
Together with my banking supervision colleagues at the Bundesbank, I will continue to strive for
greater  proportionality  in  banking  supervision.  The  current  developments  in  Brussels  give  us
reason to be optimistic.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
