    Banque de France / Deutsche Bundesbank conference 
Paris, 21 June 2018 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
“Monetary policy making under uncertainty” 
          Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr). 
Page 1 sur 5 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good morning and welcome to Paris for the 6th joint conference organised by the Deutsche 
Bundesbank  and  the  Banque  de  France.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  Emmanuel 
Fahri, Emanuel Moench and Benoit Mojon for assembling such an interesting set of papers. I 
will return to the topic of the conference later. 
I would like to use my opening remarks this morning to discuss a highly topical challenge for 
monetary  policy:  how  to  enhance  confidence  and  how  to  respond  to  policy-induced 
uncertainty. We obviously live in an increasingly uncertain world. The lack of predictability of 
US  trade  policy  –  or  worse,  its  protectionism  -  and  the  lack  of  clarity  about  Brexit  risks 
reversing many of the gains of a globally integrated economy. The euro area itself is seeing a 
return  of  uncertainty.  Winston  Churchill  once  famously  said:  “true  genius  resides  in  the 
capacity  for  evaluation  of  uncertain,  hazardous  and  conflicting  information”.  Obviously  we, 
Central Bankers, do not claim to be geniuses, but our duty as policy makers, is to deal with 
this uncertainty, while sticking to our mandate. 
 I.  How to enhance confidence? 
I don’t need to repeat today the important decisions we announced at our recent Governing 
Council meeting in Riga.  We expressed our confidence in the convergence towards SAPI (a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation). Let me elaborate somewhat on the foundations 
of  this  confidence,  looking  first  at  economic  data  and  forecasts  and  second  at  some 
principles of our monetary policy. 
Data and forecast 
In economics, it can be hard to know exactly where you are. Monthly and quarterly data can 
be  quite  jumpy  and  there  are  often  multiple  plausible  hypotheses  to  explain  them: 
measurement error; abnormal season effects; one-off effects like strikes or natural disasters; 
or a genuine change in the underlying economy. What happened to output in Q1 is a case in 
point.  Was  the  slowdown  from  0.7%  real  GDP  growth  in  Q4  2017  to  0.4%  in  Q1  2018 
mismeasurement  errors  across  quarters?  Unusually  cold  weather  or  a  German  influenza 
outbreak? A sign of concern about a potential trade conflict? Or a warning of a slowdown in 
underlying economic growth? The Governing Council judged that it was largely a moderation 
from the exceptionally strong growth of Q4 compounded by some temporary and supply-side 
factors  at  both  the  domestic  and  the  global  level,  as  well  as  weaker  impetus  from  external 
trade.  
Page 2 sur 5 
 The  Euro-system  staff  projections  of  economic  growth  of  2.1%  in  2018,  1.9%  in  2019  and 
1.7%  in  2020  remains  consistent  with  an  ongoing  solid  and  broad-based  recovery;  the 
French  economy,  which  is  sometimes  considered  to  be  a  good  proxy  for  the  Euro-area 
average, is likely to follow a similar growth path with 1.8%, 1.7% and 1.6% in 2020 according 
to the Banque de France. 
On  the  inflation  outlook,  as  part  of  the  SAPI  criteria,  recent  ECB  and  Euro-system  staff 
projections  have  become  more  and  more  stable  giving  us  increasing  confidence  that  the 
improving economic growth we have seen will translate into rising wage and price inflation. In 
other words, whilst we might be a bit less certain precisely where we are in the cycle, we are 
more confident that we are heading in the right direction on inflation. 
Monetary policy decisions 
When would the Governing Council end the net asset purchases? When would it announce 
this  decision?  These  were  questions  left  hanging  and  the  subject  of  market  speculation 
before  our  meeting  in  Riga.  Besides  the  famous  and  important  three  “Ps”  –  perseverance, 
patience and prudence - the Governing Council’s decisions were also guided by three “Cs”: 
credibility, consistency and clarity. Each element is important. 
  Credibility:  Our  actions  are  credible  because  they  stick  to  our  mandate  and  our 
economic  forecasts,  in  particular  with  respect  to  the  inflation  outlook.  And  we  were 
obviously  wise  not  to  change  the  inflation  target  of  2 %  over  recent  years  despite 
many different calls to do so.  
  Consistency: We  acted  consistently  with  what  we  have  previously  said  as  was  the 
case  in  our  previous  packages  of  December  2016  and  October  2017.  This 
consistency  helped  to  have,  at  least  since  March,  an  “alignment  of  the  planets” 
between  the  Governing  Council’s  views  and  those  of  outside  forecasters,  including 
market  expectations.  It  was  important  that  we  announce  the  end  of  the  net  asset 
purchases as soon as we felt the SAPI criteria would be met. 
  Clarity: Uncertainty is today the number one enemy of growth and financial stability. 
By providing clear guidance on the path of asset purchases and interest rates – once 
more several months in advance - we have done our best to reduce uncertainty about 
future monetary policy conditions, at least out to the horizon that it is prudent to do so. 
The consistency, credibility and clarity of the  Riga decisions was reinforced by the fact that 
they were agreed unanimously, demonstrating strong cohesion within the Governing Council. 
In this divisive world, in this divisive Europe - unfortunately, on tough issues like migration - 
this  cohesion  was  our  shared  responsibility  and  duty  to  protect  the  common  good  of  340 
million  Europeans:  their  currency,  the  euro.  They  support  it  at  an  overwhelming  majority  of 
Page 3 sur 5 
 74% - confirmed in the Spring 2018 Eurobarometer, with an increasing majority in Italy. This 
confidence in the euro obliges us to act together.  
I would like here to welcome another recent positive commitment from political leaders: the 
Franco-German agreement in Meseberg. The message is clear and threefold: 
i. 
The  Eurozone  needs,  besides  Monetary  Union,  a  strengthening  of  the  Economic 
Union. If not, monetary policy would remain the only game in town, and be at risk of 
being overburdened by the next recession. 
ii. 
Economic  Union  needs  public  risk  sharing  –  an  enhanced  ESM  and  a  euro-zone 
budget – as well as private risk sharing. Let me also stress this one, adding Banking 
Union – with a fully credible resolution mechanism – and Capital Market Union. CMU 
–  which  we  strongly  advocate  with  President  Jens  Weidmann  and  the  whole 
Governing Council - fortunately is in the Declaration too, with a commitment to realise 
“decisive progress”. 
iii. 
Europe needs a Franco-German impetus. Both countries took their responsibility, still 
on time. It is now up to the 19 to elaborate a common and operational package. The 
Euro-zone should seize this moment: it’s now or never. 
 II. 
Policy-induced uncertainty 
The  global  and  European  economy  is  confronted  by  two  possible  policy  shocks:  trade  and 
fiscal  policy.  Since  we  are  currently  enjoying  the  World  Cup,  it  seems  appropriate  to  call 
these policy-induced own goals.  
Rise in protectionism 
The first of these is the risk to the global trading system of the  rise  in  protectionism. The 
initial measures announced so far by the United States and then China only cover about 1% 
of global imports and should have limited direct effects on inflation and activity. But they have 
logically triggered retaliation by other countries or regions and the risk of an escalating  and 
global trade war is no longer unthinkable.  
The  classical  analysis  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  higher  trade  tariffs  treats  it  as  a 
negative supply shock involving a trade-off between lower output and higher prices, at least 
in the short run. Studies that use this rather mechanical approach tend to find significant but 
still relatively limited effects. The IMF, for example, has examined the fairly severe scenario 
of  a global  rise  in tariffs that  causes  a  10%  increase  in  import  prices  but conclude  that  this 
would only lead to a 15% fall in global trade and a drop of around 2% in world GDP after 3 
years. 
Page 4 sur 5 
 This  type  of  analysis,  in  my  view,  seriously  underestimates  the  possible  effects  because  it 
ignores the shock to confidence through two channels. Firstly, uncertainty can increase risk 
aversion  in  financial  markets  and  reduce  the  supply  of  credit.  Second,  a  loss  of  business 
confidence can deter investment. Both uncertainty channels would tend to depress demand. 
What’s  more,  they  can  be  front-loaded  and  occur  before  any  trade  restrictions  come  into 
effect.  Indeed  the  damage  can  be  done  even  if  no  additional  trade  restrictions  are  actually 
imposed. 
A  good  example  of  outcomes  before  the  facts  is  Brexit.  For  the  time  being,  the  UK  has 
conducted a referendum and triggered Article 50 but doesn’t leave the European Union until 
March next year: there are no tariff or trade barriers. Yet the pound fell immediately after the 
referendum result in anticipation of more difficult external trading conditions in the future; this 
has substantially hurt the purchasing power of UK households. Business investment slowed 
down  –  as  apparently  it  has  in  Canada  due  to  NAFTA  uncertainty.  The  Bank  of  England 
estimates that UK real GDP is already 1¾-2% lower than it otherwise would be as a result of 
Brexit. 
Fiscal policy 
Uncertainty about fiscal  policy in many advanced economies is a second source of policy-
induced uncertainty. Public debt  has risen significantly since the Great Recession. Average 
gross government debt in the Euro Area rose from around 65% of GDP in 2007 to peak at 
over 90% in 2014 and is currently still over 85%, despite the fact that primary balances have 
improved on average across the Euro Area. 
The macroeconomic costs of fiscal uncertainty can be felt even without an actual sovereign 
debt  crisis.  Risk  premia  increase  and  raise  the  cost  of  borrowing  but  without  any  risk-
adjusted increase in return for savers. The risks of fiscal uncertainty are highly non-linear and 
one  could  almost  say  binary  due  to  the  reaction  function  of  financial  markets,  as  we  have 
seen  since  2010  in  the  Euro-zone.  Below  a  certain  threshold,  fiscal  uncertainty  has  very 
limited  effects  on  sovereign  borrowing  spreads  or  economic  activity.  But  once  public  debt 
reaches levels at which its sustainability comes into question, for some financial investors at 
least, there is the risk of self-fulfilling crisis. This uncertainty can weigh heavily on investment 
and growth. 
 III.  Monetary policy response to policy-induced uncertainty 
How should central banks respond to this policy-induced uncertainty? I would like to return to 
the three C’s I mentioned earlier: credibility, consistency and clarity. 
Page 5 sur 5 
 To protect our credibility, we need to stick to our mandate of price stability. And in this regard 
I  would  say  that  we  are  more  certain  about  the  path  of  inflation  than  we  are  for  growth.  A 
protectionist  shock  would  be  undoubtedly  bad  for  growth  but  the  effect  on  inflation  is  more 
ambiguous, at least in the short run. A persistently high oil price would as well be negative for 
growth but contribute to inflation. 
Sticking to our mandate also means no fiscal dominance. The relationship between monetary 
and  fiscal  policy  ultimately  depends  on  who  determines  the  price  level.  The  risk  with  fiscal 
dominant regimes is that inflation rises in line with public debt because people expect it to be 
eventually  monetized  by  the  central  bank.  Modern  central  banking  is  unambiguous  on  this 
point – we cannot have fiscal dominance and the path of inflation is set by the central bank. 
Not only are central banks forbidden from monetary financing, the timing of monetary policy 
decisions is not determined by the fiscal problems of member states.  
The  second  C  is  consistency.  Theoretical  models  often  assume  the  existence  of  a  central 
bank  reaction  function.  A  well-known  reaction  function  can  be  a  powerful  tool  in  stabilizing 
output and inflation because yield curves can adjust in anticipation of future policy in line with 
the evolving outlook for the economy. To return to my football theme, Mervyn King referred to 
this  as  the  Maradona  theory  of  interest  rates.  But  credible  reaction functions  don’t fall from 
the sky and need to be earned by communicating and acting consistently through time. We 
are  and  will  remain  predictable  for  our  stakeholders.  Through  its  forward  guidance,  the 
Governing Council has also indicated its intention to move gradually and in accordance with 
the  data.  Faced  with  uncertainty  about  the  strength  of  the  transmission  mechanism,  we 
should be guided by pragmatism - the level of inflation relative to the medium-term objective - 
and gradualism. 
The final C is for clarity. Central bankers should try to spell out what they will and won’t do as 
much as possible. On the first part, we were clear in Riga; on the second part, let me stress 
that we cannot fully compensate for the uncertainty created by other policy-makers; nor can 
we  fully  offset  their  effects.  We  have  shown  in  the  past  few  years  that  monetary  policy  is 
flexible, and we have been willing to use every instrument within our mandate to respond to 
too  low  inflation.  We  have  gone  well  beyond  what  people  thought  possible  and  we  will  do 
whatever is necessary to deliver on our price stability mandate - no more and no less. 
Thank you for your attention 
   