William  C  Dudley:  The  importance  of  incentives  in  ensuring  a
resilient and robust financial system
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the US Chamber of Commerce, Washington DC, 26 March 2018.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  to  you.    In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  discuss
financial regulation and the ways in which proper incentives help ensure resiliency in the financial
system. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the
1
Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.
We have come a long way since the global financial crisis in building a more resilient financial
system—one that can better support the provision of financial services to American households
and businesses such as those represented here, both in good times and in bad.  But, there is
still unfinished business. 
On the regulatory side, for example, there is more work to be done to ensure that a systemically
important  bank  can  be  resolved  effectively  on  a  cross-border  basis  in  the  event  of  failure. 
Additionally,  the  efficiency,  transparency,  and  simplicity  of  the  regulatory  system  could  be
improved without weakening the core reforms to capital, liquidity, and resolution that have made
the financial system much stronger. 
Most importantly, we need to recognize that an effective regulatory regime and comprehensive
supervision are not sufficient.  We also need to focus on the incentives facing banks and their
employees.  After all, misaligned incentives contributed greatly to the financial crisis and continue
2
to affect bank conduct and behavior.   
Today,  I  will  address  this  issue  of  incentives,  with  emphasis  on  the  complementary  roles  of
regulation, supervision, and bank culture.  Each of these is necessary to ensure that we have a
robust and resilient financial system not just today, but also in the future. 
Progress since the financial crisis
The  financial  crisis  was  a  watershed  event  that  exposed  severe  deficiencies  in  the  financial
system—including  the  inadequacy  of  bank  capital  and  liquidity  buffers,  poor  risk  management
and internal controls, and bad bank cultures.  Many financial firms took on an excessive amount
of  risk  and  did  not  always  act  in  ways  consistent  with  the  interests  of  their  customers  or  the
broader public.  The crisis revealed woeful shortcomings in many of these elements, with terrible
consequences for the economy and millions of people. 
Over  the  past  decade,  the  official  sector  and  the  financial  industry  have  made  considerable
progress  in  addressing  these  problems.    The  banking  system  is  much  sounder  and  more
resilient as a result, in a number of ways. 
3
First, systemically important banks are much safer.   They have much bigger liquidity and capital
buffers, and the quality of capital is much improved.  Moreover, the capital regime now has a
forward-looking element in which annual stress tests examine banks’ ability to withstand losses
under  severely  adverse  economic  conditions  and  constrain  the  amount  of  capital  that  can  be
returned to shareholders via dividends and share repurchases.  Strengthened liquidity standards
have given the market greater confidence that banks possess adequate resources to weather
temporary  storms  that  arise.   At  the  global  level,  Basel  III  has  helped  to  level  the  competitive
playing field in a number of ways—including, most recently, by imposing constraints on banks’
use of internal models to meet their capital requirements, and by introducing a leverage buffer for
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
systemically important firms, similar to what we already have in place in the United States.
New regulatory standards have been complemented by a supervisory framework for the largest
banks that explicitly acknowledges the impact that distress at such firms could have on financial
markets  and  the  economy.     These  efforts  have  led  to  considerable  improvement  in  risk
management at banks, which should help better sustain the flow of credit to the real economy
throughout the business cycle. 
4
Second, considerable progress has been made in terms of resolution.  Systemically important
banks now have living wills that provide a roadmap for how these firms would be resolved in the
event of imminent failure.  Moreover, there is now a well-defined mechanism under Title II of the
Dodd-Frank Act for recapitalization of a failed systemically important firm.  The FDIC now has the
authority to initiate a “single point of entry” resolution, which places the parent holding company
into  FDIC  receivership  and  transfers  its  subsidiaries  to  a  new  parent  company.    Total  loss-
absorbing capacity, or TLAC, of the old parent company would be available to absorb losses and
could  be  used  to  recapitalize  the  new  parent  company.    But,  the  task  of  operationalizing
resolution for large, global banks—including achieving full clarity on the roles of the home and
host supervisors—is still not complete.  It is key that work continues on this front to ensure that a
systemically important firm can fail without threatening to topple the rest of the financial system—
an important step toward ending “too big to fail.” 
Third,  some  of  the  obvious  systemic  vulnerabilities  exposed  by  the  financial  crisis  have  been
remedied.    Important  changes  include  mandatory  clearing  of  standardized  over-the-counter
derivatives through central counterparties, or CCPs; more intensive supervision of systemically
important CCPs; and reforms of the tri-party repo system and the money market mutual fund
industry.  But, even as we reduce or eliminate old vulnerabilities, we must not rest on our laurels,
for new vulnerabilities will inevitably take their place. 
These accomplishments notwithstanding, I have no doubt that the current regulatory framework
could be improved.  Indeed, the official sector should assess the efficiency and effectiveness of
regulations on an ongoing basis.  I agree with Vice Chairman Quarles’ observation that there is
more  we  can  do  to  make  the  regulatory  regime  more  efficient,  transparent,  and  simple—
including relief for small banks, greater tailoring based on a firm’s level of systemic importance,
and simplifying the Volcker Rule.  Some of these changes have already been adopted or are in
process. 
Greater focus on incentives is needed
5
But,  I  also  think  we  must  take  a  broader  view  of  what  characterizes  a  resilient  and  robust
financial  system.    To  that  end,  we  need  to  carefully  monitor  the  incentives  that  influence  the
behavior of financial firms and their employees. 
Indeed, the record from the crisis and more recent years shows just how powerful incentives can
be  in  driving  firms  and  individuals  to  do  things  that  are  imprudent  and/or  unethical.    Bad
incentives can lead to conduct that not only generates large risk exposures and market excess,
but also erodes trust and confidence in the financial system.  For example, the pre-crisis housing
boom would not have gone so far, for so long, without the widespread breakdown in mortgage
6
underwriting practices that was driven by poor incentives.
Some examples of bad incentives that contributed to the financial boom and bust included:
Compensation  practices  at 
performance over longer-term, sustainable returns;
The willingness of the credit rating agencies to designate tranches of subprime mortgages
triple-A  in  exchange  for  fees  paid  by  a  small  number  of  issuers  of  mortgage-backed
that  rewarded  volume  and  short-term
financial 
firms 
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
securities;
The willingness of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to use their implicit government support to
take on large amounts of mortgage risk with very little capital backing;
The  willingness  of AIG  to  use  its  triple-A  rating  to  provide  credit  protection  to  banks  and
securities firms against complex mortgage obligations with little direct capital support or an
adequate liquidity backstop; and,
The  pegging  of  money  market  mutual  fund  share  prices  at  par,  which  led  to  investors
running at the first sign of trouble.
Since then, we have seen a number of other costly breakdowns that were driven, in part, by poor
incentives. 
In the LIBOR scandal, a relatively small number of banks manipulated LIBOR to their benefit
through rate-setting submissions that were not based on actual transactions.  In contrast, a
new U.S. Treasury repo reference rate will be based on actual transactions in a deep and
liquid  market,  and  is  designed  to  be  compliant  with  new  principles  set  forth  by  the
7
International Organization of Securities Commissions.
In the foreign-exchange market, bad incentives helped encourage rate rigging at particular
rate-fixing times.  Reforms were subsequently introduced, including recommendations from
the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  Report  on  Foreign  Exchange  Benchmarks  and  the  recent
8
publication of the FX Global Code, developed by central banks and market participants.
The  creation  of  millions  of  unauthorized  accounts  at  Wells  Fargo  also  reflected  bad
incentives.  Bank employees were compensated on sales volume with aggressive cross-
selling  targets  without  customers  actually  receiving  beneficial  services.    In  response,  the
Federal Reserve Board entered into a consent cease-and-desist order with Wells Fargo that
requires the firm to improve its governance and risk management processes. 
These recent cases were particularly disturbing in terms of their scale and flagrancy, and—in the
case of the rate-rigging scandals—the collusion by employees across firms.  I am particularly
struck  by  the  fact  that  manipulation  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  occurred  even  after  the
LIBOR  scandal  was  well  known.    These  episodes  underscore  the  tremendous  power  that
incentives have to influence and distort behavior, potentially leading to massive damage to bank
cultures, reputations, and finances. 
Some lessons on incentives that stand out for me include:
Guarding against technical design flaws that can be manipulated and exploited for profit;
Ensuring that incentives are aligned and consistent with desired behaviors;
Recognizing how rules, however well-intentioned, can be gamed; and,
Having  appropriate  mechanisms  in  place  to  identify  problems  early  and  to  ensure  rapid
escalation and amelioration.
Many  of  these  issues  and  risks  likely  also  apply  to  your  companies.    But,  I  think  they  are
particularly important for financial institutions—especially those that are systemically important. 
The  scale  of  such  firms  magnifies  the  impact  of  bad  incentives  on  the  financial  system  and
economy.  At the same time, that scale also makes it more difficult for senior management to
properly control a firm’s activities and monitor the conduct and behavior of its employees.  For
these reasons, we need strong internal and external checks on banks—an area to which I will
now turn. 
The complementary roles of regulation, supervision, and culture
As  I  said  earlier,  a  sound  financial  system  is  one  that  is  safe  and  resilient,  can  support  the
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
provision of financial services at a reasonable price to the real economy in good times and in
bad,  and  promotes  confidence  and  trust  among  its  customers  and  counterparties.    Financial
institutions should be prudently managed and subject to strong internal checks—including risk
management policies and procedures, internal controls, compliance, and audit.  Meanwhile, an
effective  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  should  be  as  efficient,  transparent,  and
simple as possible. 
I think these goals are broadly shared by supervisors and banks alike, which suggests to me that
the relationship between supervisors and banks does not always need to be adversarial.  Indeed,
a healthy dialogue helps this supervisory process to work well.  For example, it is important that
firms  are  proactive  in  revealing  problems  to  their  supervisors.   And,  individual  institutions  can
certainly  benefit  from  the  horizontal  perspective  that  supervisors  bring  to  examinations.    This
perspective can highlight where the firm stands vis-à-vis best practices, or where there may be
important vulnerabilities in its operations. 
Of course, there is an irreducible amount of tension built into this relationship, given that each
party’s roles, interests, and responsibilities will not always coincide.  Banks are naturally more
sensitive  to  constraints  on  their  profit  opportunities  or  dividend  policies  and  to  the  costs  of
regulation.    They  may  also  question  how  much  protection  is  necessary—for  example,  how
stringent the capital requirements or how severe stress testing assumptions should be.  These
are areas where I would expect perspectives to differ. 
Supervisors are principally focused on compliance with laws and regulations as well as issues of
safety and soundness.  They also bring to their work a perspective on financial stability that may
not match the more narrow interests of the firm.  For example, supervisors seek to address the
externalities created by the failure of a systemically important firm by imposing higher capital and
other requirements than the firm would likely select if left to its own devices. 
The financial crisis is a vivid reminder that there can be many risks to financial stability, and of
the  need  for  strong  internal  and  external  constraints  on  banks.    Here,  the  “three  pillars”  of
regulation,  supervision,  and  bank  culture  must  all  play  effective  roles.    Regulation  establishes
what  is  legally  permissible  for  banks  to  do;  supervision  helps  to  reinforce  those  rules  and
evaluate  whether  the  bank’s  controls  and  other  processes  are  conducive  to  safety  and
soundness; and bank culture sets the norms for what is appropriate behavior.   But, at the same
time, these pillars are mutually reinforcing. Regulation and supervision, for example, attempt to
address various market failures in banking that can contribute to excessive risk taking.
  Bank
culture, in turn, helps establish norms in areas where regulation may be silent. 
10
9
In this way, regulation, supervision, and bank culture are complements, and deficiencies in any of
these pillars can be problematic.  For example, as we have seen in cases of unsafe or unethical
behavior in recent years, strong regulation and supervision cannot substitute for deficiencies in
bank culture—especially not on a timely basis. 
It is the public sector’s job to establish and enforce rules, but rules are inherently limited in their
ability to constrain conduct and behavior.  Much of our regulatory regime has been developed in
response  to  financial  problems  that  have  arisen  over  time.    Because  regulation  is  typically
reactive in this way, it may not always keep pace with the evolution of the financial system or the
broader economic environment.  Also, we must recognize that, at times, actions will be taken
that are clearly inconsistent with the spirit of the rules that are place, or the rules will simply be
violated.
Consider the use by Lehman Brothers of so-called Repo 105 transactions to window-dress its
balance  sheet.    Beginning  in  late  2007,  Lehman  used  Repo  105  transactions  to  temporarily
remove  securities  from  its  balance  sheet  for  a  few  days  in  order  to  mislead  investors  and
counterparties  about  its  financial  condition.    These  transactions  had  the  benefit  of  being
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
recognized as “sales” even though they were nearly identical to standard repo transactions that
stayed on the balance sheet. 
In another example, following the introduction of Basel III, some banks tried to reduce their capital
requirements by transferring risk to other counterparties.  In certain cases, this occurred even
when those counterparties did not provide any additional resources to absorb potential losses—
either because they were very thinly capitalized, or were affiliated with the banks in question. 
that 
the  establishment  of 
too  many  bright-line  rules  may  prove
I  would  also  note 
counterproductive to the goal of encouraging good bank cultures.  For one thing, detailed rules
can  be  construed  as  implying  that  the  responsibility  for  good  conduct  rests  with  the  public
authorities.    For  another,  rules  may  create  opportunities  or  incentives  for  legal  or  regulatory
arbitrage.  When banks work to find creative ways around rules, it can have an insidious effect on
culture.  
As I see it, an organization’s culture gets into trouble when it equates “what is right” with what is
legally permissible, and when “what is wrong” becomes viewed as what is legally impermissible.
 A proliferation of rules—followed by the gaming of these rules—can be ultimately self-defeating.
The end result may not only be a loss of trust, but also over time a more burdensome regulatory
regime than would otherwise be the case. 
11
So,  while  regulation  and  supervision  are  necessary  to  ensure  a  resilient  and  robust  financial
system,  I  very  much  doubt  that  they  are  sufficient.    They  need  to  be  supplemented  by  bank
management that pays close attention to incentives, conduct, and culture.  As I have previously
said,  incentives  drive  conduct,  which  establishes  the  social  norms  that  help  define  a  firm’s
culture.
  The first step is for firms to evaluate the incentives that they have in place with respect
to personnel evaluation, compensation, and promotion and to make sure they are consistent with
the  type  of  behaviors  they  want  to  encourage.    For  example,  how  are  compliance  violations
treated in compensation and promotion decisions?  Are incentives in place to encourage people
to speak up early, when problems are smaller and more manageable?  When employees do
speak up, how are they subsequently treated? 
My colleagues and I at the New York Fed have commented previously on the essential role of
good  culture  in  a  bank’s  reputation,  financial  condition  and  performance,  and  in  customer
confidence  and  trust.
    As  we  have  argued,  “cultural  capital”—through  its  ability  to  limit
misconduct risk—can be an important bulwark to a firm’s financial capital.
12
13
Culture is often viewed as a “soft” topic, but I would disagree.  The financial penalties associated
with misconduct are anything but soft—with bank fines since the crisis estimated at more than
$320 billion as of year-end 2016.
  The hit to a bank’s reputation from misconduct can also be
quantified  through,  for  example,  the  associated  impact  on  its  share  price  or  funding  costs. 
Culture  should  be  about  concrete  incentives  and  behaviors  that  help  achieve  specific  goals,
implying that it should not be viewed as a “soft” issue. 
14
I have argued on several occasions that bank leaders could get a better view into their firms’
progress on conduct and culture by doing more collectively.
  For example, major banks in the
United States could participate in an industry-wide survey of their employees conducted by an
independent third party, with the results anonymized to encourage respondents to be candid in
their assessments.  I suspect that these results would create a more accurate picture of how
banks are doing, and would likely underscore how much work continues to be needed to improve
bank cultures. 
15
Another idea that I have discussed is the creation of a database of banker misconduct to combat
the  problem  of  “rolling  bad  apples.”    In  these  cases,  employees  who  are  dismissed  due  to
suspicion or proof of misconduct are unwittingly hired by other firms in the industry, where they
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
have the opportunity to repeat their actions.  Understandably, firms are concerned about legal
risk if they share information about banker misconduct, but there may be ways to address these
concerns  through  legislation.    Once  again,  I  invite  the  industry  to  take  the  initiative  on  these
issues, and to look to the public sector for support.
For their part, I believe that supervisors have a special role to play in assessing incentives at the
firm level and their possible implications for bank behavior and misconduct.  Supervisors can
mitigate  misconduct  risks  by  supporting  the  development  of  effective  corporate  governance
regimes, prudent risk management policies, and strong compliance and control structures—all
within a framework of effective oversight from the firm’s board of directors. 
Ultimately, establishing and maintaining an effective culture with appropriate risk governance and
controls is the responsibility of individual firms and the industry, but the official sector can help by
highlighting best practices and addressing collective action problems and other market failures.
Areas where further work on incentives is warranted
I would like to briefly touch on some areas where further work on incentives may be warranted,
including regulatory changes that might address certain incentive and first-mover problems.  At
the outset, let me say that I do not have all the answers and do not mean to suggest that these
are the only areas that need improvement. But, these issues are ones where more investigation
into possible solutions may be warranted. 
As I discussed earlier, we have made substantial progress in raising banks’ capital buffers.  But, I
believe it would also be worthwhile to evaluate other changes to our capital regime to encourage
earlier  action  by  banks  when  the  economic  environment  deteriorates.    Banks  are  naturally
reluctant  to  raise  capital  due  to  concerns  about  stigma  and  potential  equity  dilution.    This
hesitancy  was  demonstrated  clearly  during  the  financial  crisis.    Bank  management  may  also
delay such a move because they may be prone to over-optimism about the outlook for their firm
or the economy.  There is also an externality problem, as a bank does not internalize the benefit
that accrues to the financial system when it takes steps to strengthen its own financial condition. 
Although  supervisors  have  tools  available  in  such  circumstances,  these  require  a  safety-and-
soundness basis that may not always be available in a timely manner.  Changes in the 2018
Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review program enable banks to avoid a Federal Reserve
Board objection based on the quantitative assessment by raising new capital.  While this is a
step in the right direction, the current regime may not be sufficient to ensure that banks will raise
capital more proactively. 
Compensation  is  also  a  powerful  incentive.    As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  emphasis  in
compensation practices on short-term performance over longer-term sustainable returns was a
key vulnerability revealed during the crisis that helped motivate imprudent behavior.  Currently,
senior  bankers  are  paid  mainly  in  cash  and  deferred  stock  grants.    This  structure  creates
incentives to take actions to maximize a bank’s share price, rather than to minimize the risk of
the  bank’s  failure.    While  compensation  practices  today  feature  a  larger  deferred  component,
greater emphasis on deferral in the form of long-term debt—which can also be recognized as
TLAC—could better align senior managers’ interests with the long-term safety and soundness of
the firm.
16
As I see it, this approach could have two benefits.  For one, it would reduce the incentives for
risk-taking. For another, if TLAC debt holdings were at risk of conversion to equity in the event of
failure,  I  believe  senior  bankers  would  be  incentivized  to  cut  dividends  or  raise  equity  capital
earlier to reduce the risk of failure.  Having a regime in place that creates strong incentives for
management to steer aggressively away from bad outcomes would be better than one in which
management has incentives to temporize in the face of rising risks. 
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some  banks  have  experimented  with  such  compensation  schemes,  and  I  would  encourage
more to do so.  But, this type of reform may also need a push from the regulatory side.  Banks
may be reluctant to adopt such pay structures on their own for competitive reasons.  They may
perceive that there is a first-mover disadvantage in attracting and retaining talent. 
Another possible reform could involve putting a greater onus on senior management for the costs
incurred  from  regulatory  fines  or  other  legal  liabilities,  rather  than  on  shareholders  alone. 
Shareholders should not be shielded from such costs and fines—as they may have also profited
from associated gains—but it doesn’t seem fair or prudent to shield the decision-makers from
responsibility for costly breakdowns as much as they are now.  Greater personal liability may
also be a powerful incentive to promote better behavior.  I suspect changes in these areas would
lead senior managers to encourage their staff to speak up earlier about emerging risks, be more
attentive when red flags were raised, and respond sooner and more forcefully. 
I would also note that the many regulatory reforms introduced over the past decade may create
incentives of their own, with important implications for bank behavior. Such incentives may alter
the nature and locus of risk-taking, and therefore need to be closely monitored.  Risks could be
shifted  outside  the  banking  system,  or  the  incentives  could  lead  to  different  bank  strategies,
business models, and product offerings that introduce new risks. 
There  is  a  long  history  of  such  behavior.    For  example,  off-balance-sheet  instruments  rose
sharply  in  the  1980s  in  response  to  the  introduction  of  minimum  primary  and  total  capital
requirements  based  on  balance  sheet  size.    More  recently,  in  some  jurisdictions  the  use  of
leverage ratios based on period-end reporting of assets—as compared to period averages in the
United States—has encouraged window-dressing behavior by some banks at quarter-end.  So,
while  the  reforms  have  mostly  had  the  intended  effect  of  encouraging  safer  institutions,
authorities  and 
institutions  should  also  be  mindful  of  potential  unintended
consequences. 
Conclusion
financial 
To sum up, we have made considerable progress toward a more resilient and robust financial
system.  While we should do more to make the regulatory regime more efficient, transparent,
and simple, there are outstanding issues that still require additional work—such as the cross-
border resolution of large global banks.  We should also focus more on incentives, which can
help ensure that regulations are dynamic and work well, and that banks are incentivized to take
action early to steer away from trouble.  Finally, regulation and supervision are necessary but not
sufficient—they  must  be  supplemented  by  bank  cultures  that  encourage  ethical  behavior,  the
early identification of problems, and a willingness to address those problems proactively. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
 Won Chai, Gerard Dages, James Hennessy, Beverly Hirtle, Thomas Noone, Kevin Stiroh, Katherine Tilghman
Hill, and Emily Yang assisted in preparing these remarks. 
See Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report (January 2011). 
For further discussion, see remarks by Kevin J. Stiroh, A Perspective on Supervisory Objectives and Trade-offs,
February 23, 2017. 
See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System, The  Federal  Reserve  System:  Purposes  and
Functions (2018). 
See  remarks  by  Randal  K.  Quarles, Early  Observations  on  Improving  the  Effectiveness  of  Post-Crisis
Regulation,  January  19,  2018.  See  also  remarks  by  William  C.  Dudley, Lessons  from  the  Financial  Crisis,
November 6, 2017.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
For further discussion, see Ashcraft and Schuermann, Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage
Credit, Staff Report No. 318, March 2008.
See remarks by Lorie Logan, The Role of the New York Fed as Administrator and Producer of Reference Rates ,
January 9, 2018. See also the Alternative Reference Rates Committee.
See Financial Stability Board, Final Report on Foreign Exchange Benchmarks, and FX Global Code.
For  further  discussion  of  supervisory  activities,  see  Eisenbach,  Haughwout,  Hirtle,  Kovner,  Lucca,  and
Plosser, Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions:  What Do Supervisors Do? February 2017. For a
discussion of the complementarity of supervision and regulation, see Eisenbach, Lucca, and Townsend, The
Economics of Bank Supervision, Staff Report No 769, January 2017.
For a discussion in the context of misconduct risk, see remarks by Kevin J. Stiroh, Misconduct Risk, Culture and
Supervision,  December  7,  2017.  See  also  Chaly,  Hennessy,  Menand,  Stiroh,  and  Tracy,  Misconduct  Risk,
Culture and Supervision, December 2017.
William  C.  Dudley, Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry:
Expanding the Dialogue, October 20, 2016.
See for exampleWilliam C. Dudley, Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services
Industry,  Remarks  at  the  Workshop  on  Reforming  Culture  and  Behavior  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry,
October 20, 2014. William C. Dudley, op. cit. October 20, 2016.  William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Culture
Imperative – An Interbank Symposium, January 11, 2017.  William C. Dudley, Reforming Culture for the Long
Term,  Remarks  at  the  Banking  Standards  Board,  March  21,  2017.    Michael  Held, Reforming  Culture  and
Conduct in the Financial Services Industry:  How Can Lawyers Help? March 8, 2017.  Kevin J. Stiroh, op cit.
December 7, 2017.
See Stiroh, op. cit. December 7, 2017 and Chaly et al op. cit.
Boston Consulting Group, “Staying the Course in Banking,” March 2, 2017. 
See e.g., William C. Dudley, op cit. October 20, 2014 and William C. Dudley, op. cit. March 21, 2017.
For  related  discussion,  see  Mehran  and  Tracy, Deferred  Cash  Compensation:  Enhancing  Stability  in  the
Financial Services Industry, August 2016, and Mehran and Tracy, Performance Bonds for Bankers: Taking Aim at
Misconduct, November 9, 2016.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
