Rameswurlall  Basant  Roi:  Monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies,
and challenging reforms undertaken by the Bank of Mauritius
Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the annual dinner
for major economic stakeholders, Flic-en-Flac, 17 November 2017.
 Distinguished guests
Ladies and gentlemen
Good evening
I am pleased to welcome you, once again, to the Bank of Mauritius Annual Dinner.
Ever since I initiated this annual ritual of holding a dinner with major economic stakeholders way
back in December 1998, I have often been told by a few that my speeches tend to be lengthy. I
have a problem. And the problem is that short speeches take too long to write; it also requires an
exhaustive use of my cerebral capacity. Long speeches take less time to write. This evening, I’ll
ask for your forbearance once again because the Bank of Mauritius is 50 years old.
There cannot be a more fitting occasion to travel back into 50 years of central banking policies
than one of golden jubilee celebrations. In an address that I gave exactly two weeks ago on the
occasion  of  the  Inauguration  of  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  Museum,  I  focused  on  the  institutional
development aspects of the Bank over the 50-year period. This evening, I have chosen to give a
very  broad  brush  stroke  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  as  they  have  evolved  in
Mauritius and of the financial sector reforms and regulatory and supervisory reforms undertaken
by the Bank over the years.
Against a backdrop of high unemployment rates and widespread poverty, the overriding need for
leading  the  Mauritian  economy  into  a  self-sustained  growth  path  had  set  the  agenda  for
monetary, exchange rate and fiscal policies quite soon after independence. The rupee was then
linked to the Pound sterling at the rate of £1 = Rs13.33. In view of the predominance of the United
Kingdom in the trade and payments position of Mauritius, a fixed relationship between the pound
sterling and the rupee was found to be favourable to the expansion of trade and capital flows
between  the  two  countries.  In  a  global  context  of  fixed  par  values,  a  single  currency  peg  for
Mauritius facilitated the mechanics of trade and payments both within the sterling area and with
the rest of the world.
For any country in a dreadful state of underdevelopment seeking to foster economic growth, the
link to the Pound sterling was clearly a major handicap. Because of the link to the Pound sterling,
interest rates in Mauritius had to move synchronically with interest rate movements in the UK.
The Bank’s ability to pursue an independent monetary policy was thus severely constrained. In
other words, the prevailing interest rates in Mauritius were unrealistic as they were not at levels
consistent with the economic development objectives of the time. The pressing need for creating
conditions conducive to sustained growth required financing at rates of interest affordable to risk
takers,  more  so  in  an  economy  with  a  plethora  of  drawbacks  and  deficiencies,  including
investors having limited commercial skills. The Bank had thus purposively effected successive
rounds of interest rate cuts in 1969 and 1970 that severed the connective relationship between
its  policy  rate,  that  is,  the  then  Bank  Rate,  and  the  Bank  of  England  key  policy  rate.  With  an
expansionary monetary policy stance combined with an expansionary fiscal policy stance, began
an eventful chronicle of macro-economic policy making in Mauritius.
As opposed to a free market system, Mauritius had in place a regime of direct monetary control.
The  then  Bank  Rate,  deposit  rates,  lending  rates  and  yields  on  Government  papers  were  all
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
administratively  set  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  Transfers  and  payments  for  international  trade
transactions and capital transfers required prior approval of the Bank of Mauritius. This regime of
direct monetary control and exchange control, seen in the light of the then prevailing economic
and financial conditions, were arguably a legitimate strategy.
In the early years of the 1970s, selective credit controls by economic sectors were introduced for
channeling funds to priority economic sectors with limits set on the overall bank credit expansion
with a view to containing the surge in aggregate demand in the economy. Quite expectedly, bank
credit  grew  far  above  the  desired  rate.  The  inordinate  bank  credit  expansion  in  a  contextual
excess liquidity situation largely attributed to the then sugar boom, the oil price shock of 1973
combined with an across-the-board increase in wages and salaries had given rise to double-digit
inflation rates, thus putting a stop to a very long period of price stability. Rising cost of living had
made it compelling for the Government to introduce what is today known as the annual cost of
living  compensation.  Inflation  had  turned  out  to  be  a  serious  policy  concern.  In  today’s  free
market context, one would have ordinarily expected the cost bank credit to go up, meaning that
interest  rates  would  have  had  to  be  stepped  up.  Instead,  the  costs  of  bank  credit  to  export
promoting and import substituting enterprises were intentionally kept low, reflecting the authority’s
objective of creating an enabling environment for the expansion of the manufacturing sector.
One of the most dramatic events that marked the first half of the 1970s was the breakdown of
the Bretton Woods system on the 15th August, 1971. Overnight, the world financial system had
moved from a fixed exchange rate regime to a floating exchange rate regime. Exchange rates of
the  world’s  major  currencies  had  ceased  to  be  linked  to  gold,  directly  or  indirectly.  Their
determination was thereafter left to the inter-play of market forces. Many developing countries
had adopted some kind of a pegged exchange rate regime which meant pegging the national
currency to such a major reserve currency that best served the country’s economic and financial
interests.  The  Mauritian  rupee  had  continued  to  be  pegged  to  the  Pound  sterling.  Since  the
Pound sterling floated as did other major currencies in the wake of the breakdown of the Bretton
Woods system, the rupee floated along with.
A flush of liquidity,  unsterilized,  that  had  swelled  aggregate  demand  side-by-side  with  an  ever
growing fiscal deficit also heavily financed by the central bank money had triggered a tension in
the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee.  The  tension  was  exacerbated  by  a  weakening  of  the  Pound
sterling as from May 1975. Weeks later, on the 30th June, the Pound sterling suffered one of its
sharpest falls. The effective depreciation of the pound sterling against other leading currencies
compared with the Smithsonian agreement of 1971 was nearly 30 per cent. It meant that along
with  the  Pound  sterling,  the  rupee  also  had  depreciated  significantly  thus  adding  further
pressures on domestic prices. The double digit inflation rates had turned out to be a major policy
concern.
Inevitably, the exchange rate regime had to be reviewed. On the 5th January, 1976, the rupee
was de-linked from the pound sterling and pegged to the Special Drawing Right (SDR) of the
International Monetary Fund at the central rate of SDR1 = Rs7.713759. Seen in the light of the
trade  pattern  of  Mauritius,  the  SDR,  a  basket  of  currencies  with  the  US  dollar  having  the
preponderant weight, was obviously an import-biased basket. The principal objective of the new
peg, while intended to help minimize volatility of the exchange rate of the rupee, was to ward off
pressures on internal prices stemming from the external front. So much was the Government
concerned about the inflationary conditions in the economy that the new peg was decided upon
even  at  the  expense  of  deteriorating  external  payments  position.  The  economic  development
objective  was  not  adequately  reflected  in  selection  of  the  peg.  Whereas  the  peg  to  the  SDR
favoured  imports  on  the  one  hand,  the  qualitative  and  quantitative  controls  on  imports  were
designed to check imports on the other. It did not make much harmonic sense in policy making.
Because of the preponderance of the US dollar in the SDR basket, the peg of the rupee to the
SDR  could  only  stabilize  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  against  the  currencies  of  its  major
trading partners during a period of relative stability in the US dollar. In a world economy where
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
authorities  were  desperately  grappling  with  the  problems  arising  out  of  the  breakdown  of  the
Bretton Woods system and the unprecedented oil price shock of 1973, the resulting volatility of
exchange  rates  of  major  currencies  seemed  to  have  been  taken  lightly  in  deciding  on  the
appropriateness of the new peg. Given an export-oriented strategy, the appropriateness of the
new peg has remained a moot question.
In spite of a relatively tight monetary policy stance, demand conditions, fueled by an expansionary
fiscal policy, had continued to be buoyant with the result that the balance of payments posted
successive years of deficits. There was a clear and persistent gap between the level of import
demand and the country’s foreign exchange earning capabilities. The basic causes of the deficits
were the adverse terms of trade, the high level of public expenditure and deficit financing, the
excessive growth in wages and salaries and the distortions in the domestic cost price structure.
All  the  policy  sins  committed  by  decision  makers  were  ultimately  disastrously  reflected  in  the
balance of payments position of the country. The ill-effects of unchecked fiscal deficits year in
and year out on the economy via excessive monetary expansion were conveniently left at the
doorstep of Bank of Mauritius for resolution. The emerging precarious situation was indicative of
an urgent need for bold measures. Instead, Government had recourse to foreign borrowings in
an attempt to postpone painful adjustment measures. Humans, being what they are, the moment
for under-spending almost never comes. Like fat people at a wedding feast, fiscal policy makers
told to themselves they would eat less after the party was over, to make up for it. But in public
finance, there is never a good time for fasting. The die was already cast. Bold measures, as
always, need bold political courage. The second oil price shock of 1978 gave yet another blow to
the  economy.  The  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  had  dwindled.  The
situation was desperate.
Drastic  measures  could  no  longer  be  delayed  by  having  continued  recourse  to  foreign
borrowings.  In October, 1979, the IMF agreed to an economic and financial programme under a
Stand-by Arrangement. On the 23rd October, 1979, the Mauritian rupee was devalued by 22.9
per  cent  against  the  SDR  basket  to  foster, inter alia,  export-led  growth.  The  devaluation  was
expected  to  restore  the  profitability  and  external  competitiveness  of  Mauritian  exports  and  to
encourage  import  substitutions  in  the  economy.  The  economic  and  financial  programme  was
designed to stabilize the economy by bringing about a balance between the demands for and the
supply of resources and to correct the balance of payments disequilibrium in the medium term.
The  measures  under  the  programme  included  an  exchange  rate  depreciation  supported  by
restrictive budgetary, incomes and credit policies. The objective was to depress the demand for
imports  by  way  of  the  resulting  higher  rupee  import  prices.  But,  against  all  principles  of  good
economics, the government had decided to grant a massive across-the-board increase in wages
and  salaries  thus  mitigating  the  positive  outcome  expected  of  the  devaluation  of  the  rupee. A
central banker’s job, it’s often said, is to take away the punch bowl just as the party gets going.
Way back in 1979, Government had decided to keep the bar open. Bad politics destroyed good
economics.
The economy continued to face a number of difficulties which were caused by factors beyond
the authorities’ control. Adverse weather conditions which prevailed in early 1980 had led to a
heavy shortfall in sugar exports in 1980–81. A fall in the rupee price of sugar exports which was
due to the weakening of the pound sterling weakened the country’s external payments position. A
realignment of the external value of the rupee became inevitable and the rupee was devalued
once more – not to use the euphemism “re-adjustment” – on the 27th September, 1981, by 16. 7
per cent in terms of the SDR. Two massive devaluation in six years reflected badly on the fiscal
policy performance of the Government.
But  we  do  have  to  recognize  that  the  world  economy  was  facing  numerous  challenges
throughout  the  1970s.  The  external  economic  environment  was  far  from  being  hospitable  to
countries in a state of under-development. The breakdown of the Bretton Woods system had
given rise to serious disturbances. The unprecedented oil price shocks of 1973 and 1978 had
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
unleashed destabilizing forces the world over. Authorities were learning for the first time since the
end of World War II how to cope with a situation never seen before and resolve new problems
posed by the two traumatizing events. The world economy had dipped into its worst economic
recession since the end of the post-World War II. Stagflation, a state of high inflation rates and no
growth, characterized the world economy. Governments and central banks the world over were
having a very hard time resolving problems never known before. In Mauritius, recurrent strikes by
trade unions, demands for higher wages and salaries, recurrent inclement weather conditions,
high inflation rates fueled by high prices of oil and high unemployment rates were certainly not
ideal  conditions  for  a  take-off  to  self-sustained  growth.  It  was  a  decade  of  restlessness  and
crises 
the  economy  did  however  undergo  meaningful
transformation.  Policy  mistakes  were  made.  Right  policies  would  have  lessened  the  pains
economic adjustment later. There are great lessons that all of us need to draw from the policy
mistakes  of  the  past.  If  we  don’t  learn  from  our  experience,  we’ll  never  learn  at  all.  I  was
dismayed to see how the honest economist became a lonely voice of reason, and thus, a very
valuable  voice,  but  ignored  most  of  the  time  arrogantly  rather  than  nonchalantly.  Ultimately,
society, in particular the less privileged class, paid the price of the policy mistakes and arrogance
of the charlatans. 
in  many  respects.  Admittedly, 
It  cannot  but  be  appropriate  –  indeed  very  appropriate  –  at  this  juncture  of  my  address  this
evening, to underline that the then Bank of Mauritius Act had an abhorrent sentence that read as
follows: “The  Minister  may  from  time  to  time  give  such  directions  to  the  Bank  as,  after
consultation with the Governor of the Bank, he considers necessary in the public interest.” Even
where directives were not formally issued, the Bank was required to seek the nodding approval of
the Minister on many policy matters. Obviously, the Bank was not an independent organization.
Having gone through the trials and tribulations in the field of monetary policy making for years and
spent  a  greater  part  of  my  life  in  the  central  banking  community,  I  have  to  say  that  it’s  the
responsibility of one and all to preserve and protect the independence of the Bank of Mauritius in
policy  making  and  implementation  from  deplorable  baskets  of  fake  economists,  self-seeking
advisers and imposters in the veiled pursuit of self-interests. It’s in the best interest of society to
have a central bank that is truly independent. Independence of the central bank must be treated
as sacrosanct. Never ever forget how a mafia-infested Italy was saved in the not so distant past
from catastrophic situations. Two institutions are said to have saved Italy: the Vatican and the
central bank of Italy.
By 1982, the world economy had bottomed out of one of its worst recessions since the end of
World War II. A new era in monetary and fiscal policy making began. On the fiscal side, the sales
tax that evolved into what we refer to as VAT (Value Added Tax) was introduced as part of a well-
meaning  and  determined  effort  to  curb  the  budget  deficit.  On  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  side,  a
fundamentally important strategic policy move was made. As I mentioned earlier, the rupee had
been linked to the SDR with a view to reducing the exchange rate variability of the rupee. With the
steady strengthening of the US dollar especially since 1981, the SDR had appreciated against
other major currencies which in turn resulted in an appreciation of the rupee on a trade weighted
basis. More or less the same problems were baked in the SDR peg as in the Pound sterling peg.
The time was up to do away with the SDR peg. With effect from the 28th February, 1983, the
rupee was delinked from the SDR and pegged to a trade-weighted basket of currencies, which
was more representative of the external trade pattern of Mauritius. The pegging of the rupee to
the  new  and  a  much  simpler  basket  of  currencies  was  expected  to  be  more  effective  in
stabilizing its exchange value. It was a heavily export-biased basket designed to be a perfect fit
for an export-oriented growth strategy.
Concomitantly,  a  number  of  key  measures  was  announced  for  implementation  decidedly.
Government had given its unwavering political commitment to pursue the measures to the finish.
Never  in  the  history  of  Mauritius  were  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  so  harmoniously
orchestrated  and  finely  tuned  with  a  host  of  fiscal  and  trade  liberalization  policies  for  the
achievement  of  a  common  economic  goal.  In  the  scheme  of  things,  trade  liberalization
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
meant, inter alia, elimination of quota on imports, removal of import licenses, gradual reduction of
tariffs and customs duties etc. On the fiscal side, the pre-eminent measures were a planned
reduction of the then high corporate tax and income tax. A prudent wage policy was deemed a
key  element  in  the  overall  policy  package  to  beef  up  the  competiveness  of  the  Mauritian
economy.  On  the  central  banking  side,  a  few  policies  aimed  at  complementing  measures  for
strengthening competiveness and financial sector reforms were set as an agenda for immediate
execution. The export sectors were the first policy target. The Bank’s exchange rate policy was
immediately geared towards one prime objective: achieve and maintain the competitiveness of
the  export  sectors.  Following  the  introduction  of  the  new  currency  peg,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius
monitored the exchange rate of the rupee on a daily basis. Corrective steps were taken as and
when they were deemed necessary. In this exercise, constant attempts were made to keep the
exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  (I  mean  real  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee)  stable.  The
exchange rate of the rupee, deftly managed, in an imperfect financial market eventually enabled
exporters to better predict costs and prices of their products.
The previous two currency pegs had not permitted the re-alignment of the exchange rate of the
rupee  on  a  regular  basis.  The  new  peg  did.  Investment  in  the  economy  shot  up.  The
manufacturing sector, in particular the export sectors, underwent an unprecedented expansion.
The economy fired in all its cylinders. Entrepreneurs mushroomed. Like boats in the rising tide of
economic prosperity, new enterprises floated profitably. Exports shot up. The economy attained
a state of full employment conditions. The foreign exchange reserves of the Bank of Mauritius
rose  to  levels  never  attained  before.  Economic  prosperity  reached  the  lowest  strata  of  the
population. Government revenue collections improved substantially despite cuts in corporate and
personal  income  tax  rates  and  reduction  in  tariffs  and  customs  duties.  It’s  certainly  not  my
intention to claim that the unprecedented economic prosperity of the second half of the 1980s is
attributable solely to the Bank of Mauritius. Far from it.
I am sure, you will agree with me that entrepreneurship and industrial success do not occur from
a  void.  They  thrive  in  the  soil  of  political  structure  and  a  culture  comprising  many  essential
elements. Those combined elements give rise to synergy and to a mood of optimism. A critically
important element in addition to the ones I mentioned earlier, was the decision to go for financial
sector liberalization. The objective of doing away with exchange control was announced in 1984
and accordingly measures were taken to gradually do away with the regime. By the mid-1980s,
the foreign exchange reserves level of the Bank of Mauritius had reached more than comfortable
levels and the budget deficit drastically curbed to a point that Government repaid quite a chunk of
its external repayment obligations ahead of due dates. In August 1986, the Stand-by Arrangement
with  the  IMF  was  over.  Economic  recovery  was  well  under  way.  The  balance  of  payments
position for Mauritius had improved considerably. The then prevailing economic conditions did not
warrant yet another Stand-by Arrangement with the IMF.
The launch of offshore banking in August 1989 portended an acceleration of the elimination of
exchange control. Proper sequencing of financial sector liberalization required that the inter-play
of market forces be promoted in the financial industry. It was a strenuous walk away from the era
of  financial  repression.  Ceilings  on  bank  credit  expansion  –  the  long  established  method  of
containing bank credit expansion – began to give way to market forces. The Bank gradually let go
the  administrative  determination  of  interest  rates  in  the  economy.  Effective  open  market
operations  imperatively  required  market  determination  of  the  prices  of  Government  debt
instruments. In 1992, the  Bank  moved  away  from  a  rule-of-thumb  method  of  determination  of
prices for Government papers to a method of weekly auctioning. While the process of financial
sector  liberalization  was  well  under  way,  Mauritius  adopted  Article  VIII  of  the  Articles  of
Agreement of the IMF in September 1993. Prior approval of the Bank of Mauritius was no longer
required  for  transfers  and  payments  of  international  trade  transactions.  By  July  1994,  the
Exchange Control Act was suspended.
A  new  framework  for  monetary  policy  making  was  adopted  and  a  Monthly  Monetary  Policy
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Committee Chaired by the Minister of Finance with the support of late Prof. Maxwell Fry of the
University of Birmingham was set up. Mauritius was among the very few countries in the world to
have had a Monetary Policy Committee in 1994. In subsequent years, the monthly meetings were
held in house under the chairmanship of the Governor.
With the suspension of exchange control, began a full-fledged market based financial services
industry in Mauritius. Normally, a market based financial industry presupposes fiscal discipline
and,  more  importantly,  rigors  in  public  finance  if  monetary  and  financial  stability  has  to  be
maintained,  particularly,  in  relatively  smaller  jurisdictions.  In  the  years  just  after  abolition  of
exchange control, government borrowings from the central bank had reached very high levels
because  of  expanding  budget  deficit.  Excess  demand  for  foreign  exchange  on  the  domestic
foreign exchange market invited the Bank to more than frequently intervene on market up to a
point it no longer was willing to proceed with intervention for fear of depleting its foreign exchange
reserves.  It  was  a  typically  monetary  economics  textbook  illustration  of  what  happens  to  the
financial  markets  via  the  current  account  balance  of  payments  when  the  fiscal  position  of
Government is persistently out of line with economic realities. The end result was a chaos in the
domestic  foreign  exchange  market.  The  market  ran  short  of  foreign  exchange.  The  rupee
depreciated at an accelerated pace and the Bank of Mauritius, for some reasons, failed defend
the rupee. The market desperately needed a shock therapy.
In the dying days of 1998, the Bank of Mauritius gave a counter shock to the money market by
causing yields on treasury bills to shoot up and selling them directly to the public. Central bank
financing  of  the  fiscal  deficit  was  soon  completely  replaced  by  financing  from  the  public.  The
Bank regained its lost credibility and equilibrating forces worked their ways into the market. Order
in  the  market  was  restored.  The  tight  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  Bank  along  with  the
“massaging” of the exchange rate of the rupee in a highly imperfect market gave the country, for
the first time in its history, four successive years of current account surpluses in the initial years
of the new millennium.
Both the domestic money market and the foreign exchange market were still in their fledgling
state of development. Even five years after the suspension of exchange control, players in the
money and foreign exchange markets were still operating with the same frame of mind as in the
days  prior  to  the  abolition  of  exchange  control.  They  shied  away  from  such  elementary
operations as forward sales and purchases of foreign currencies. The risk-averse attitude was
worryingly pervasive. Since the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate (MSS) was the single largest seller of
foreign currencies in the market, the Bank forcefully drove the MSS to actively engage in forward
sales of sugar export proceeds. It had required the CEO and the accountant of the MSS the gall
and guts, the audacity to persuade their very conservative Board of Directors to be innovative.
The then treasurer of Barclays Bank, a forward-looking young professional in finance, with the
explicit support of the Bank of Mauritius threw his weight in the game and gave the kick-start for
an  innovative  approach  of  treasury  management.  The  domestic  money  and  foreign  exchange
markets wherein millions of US dollars are traded today started right then and there. It’s in the
best interests of our financial industry and, by extension, to the economy as a whole that these
two  markets  grow  healthily  at  a  sustainable  gait,  without  which  the  effectiveness  of  monetary
policy transmission mechanism is seriously impaired.
One of the most important contributions made by the Bank of Mauritius in the past seventeen
years  finds  its  roots  in  a  fundamentally  important  amendment  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius Act  in
2004. The dual licensing regime, one for offshore banking and the other for domestic banking,
introduced in 1988 before the launching of offshore banking in Mauritius in 1989, was done away
with;  it  was  replaced  by  a  single  banking  license  regime.  The  removal  of  the  regulatory  wall
between offshore banking activities and domestic banking activities was a turbo-charged enabler
of  the  widening  and  deepening  of  the  domestic  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  Isn’t
awesome that the foreign exchange reserves of the Bank of Mauritius have gradually risen to a
record level of about US$5 billion despite consequential declines in export proceeds over the past
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
several years? No importers, no Mauritian travelling abroad, no student studying abroad has had
any problem of foreign exchange for ten years unlike it often used to be in the past. The Mauritian
economy has had ten years of enduring stability in the domestic foreign exchange market. We
often take this for granted and insult the man, the institution that gave the country this precious
gift of stability. That stability, indeed a very rare gift to any economic system for so long a time,
ought  to  have  been  taken  full  advantage  of  for  purposes  of  durable  social  and  economic
development. There are risks of instability in the offing that hopefully will be effectively tackled by
the Bank and other agencies in the years ahead.
Thus far, the Bank has taken the stand that if the risk-taking behaviour of financial institutions
cannot be regulated perfectly, it must impose some kind of prudential ratios to curb the volume of
transactions. Otherwise the Bank would commit the same fallacy as gun control opponents who
argue that “guns do not kill people, people do”. As we are unable to regulate fully the behaviour of
gun owners, we have no choice but to restrict the circulation of guns more directly.
In  an  ever  changing  technological  environment,  new  risks,  new  threats  and  greater  regulatory
challenges keep emerging. They intensify the regulatory burden for achieving financial stability.
Our current regulatory and risk management systems are designed to retrospectively identify at
what point in time a thief stole your money, not to alert you when he is actually stealing it. They
are expected to change soon with the Bank’s risk-based supervision approach. Regulation and
supervision of financial institutions is fast moving to a state of things where you might possibly
beat  the  system  but  not  the  house.  It  does  not  necessarily  go  to  say  that  the  Bank  will  be
regulating for zero failures. Such an approach would of course stifle financial innovation.
Human  nature.  I  come  back  to  an  important  element  in  Hyman  Minsky’s  financial  instability
hypothesis. The longer people make money by taking risk, the more imprudent they become in
risk-taking.  It’s  self-fulfilling  when  the  going  is  good.  If  everybody  is  simultaneously  becoming
increasingly more risk-seeking, the value of things like, say, privately issued cryptocurrencies,
goes  up.  This  increases  the  ability  to  lever  and  the  game  keeps  going.  Human  nature  is
inherently pro-cyclical. Human beings are not inherently given to equilibrium; they’re inherently
given to manic depression.
Once  the  process  of  financial  sector  liberalization  was  over,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  threw  its
weight on setting in place the building blocks for financial stability towards the end of the 1990s.
The  Bank  came  up  with  a  completely  new  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  deposit-
taking institutions.
The Bank of Mauritius has since made relentless efforts to improve the jurisdiction’s institutional
set up and constantly update its regulatory standards. A successful regulatory authority needs
independence in the exercise of its powers. The Bank of Mauritius was made legally independent
in the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004. Along with the independence, the Act made allowance for the
setting up of a Monetary Policy Committee. In the great spirit of responsible central banking, I
have done what could possibly be done to maintain the independence of the Bank.
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Board of Directors of the Bank, myself included, my wife,
Meera, and the staff of the Bank, I wish you all Happy Holidays and the very best for 2018.
Thank you.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
