   5 March 2018 
The new challenges facing central banks 
Colegio de Ingenieros de Caminos 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Let me begin by thanking the School of Civil Engineering for inviting me to inaugurate this 
cycle of meetings with regulatory agencies. Many thanks to the President of the School, its 
Management Board and all of you for being here today.  
The international financial crisis that began in 2007 has given rise to various changes and to 
the emergence of new challenges. Central banks are, today, in a rather different and novel 
situation compared with where we were before the crisis some 10 years back, and we are 
affected by a debate about our functions in the economy and the thrust of our policies.  
In the past decade central banks have increased monetary stimuli manifold and there have 
been  deep-seated  changes  in  the  monetary  and  regulatory  policy  objectives  and 
instruments implemented. We are now emerging from the crisis and this is raising even more 
the  profile  of  the  debate  on  the  role  central  banks  should  play  and  whether  the  policies 
pursued in recent years should be maintained, or progressively abandoned, and at what 
speed and to what extent either alternative should be taken.  
The challenges facing central banks can be grouped in three areas: 
 first,  what  is  being  labelled  as  the  “new  normal”  in  the  macroeconomy  and  its 
implications for monetary policy;  
  second, the challenge for financial regulation policies;  
  and third, the new challenges posed by financial innovation and the new technologies. 
The impact of the crisis on monetary policy  
But before addressing these challenges, I think it might be useful to take a short step back 
to remember where we have come from. We can only understand today’s challenges if we 
bear  in  mind  the  changes,  often  far-reaching,  that  have  come  about  in  central  banks  in 
response to the crisis.  
The  global  financial  crisis  came  about  following  a  build-up  of  bubbles  in  the  advanced 
economies, mainly in the financial and real estate sectors, a process to which easy financing 
conditions proved conducive in a setting in which risks were not appropriately priced.  
In any event, what was surprising was the intensity and global nature of the crisis that broke 
in 2008. Given highly integrated financial markets and complex interconnections, instability 
spread rapidly, leading to the most serious financial crisis since the Second World War. In 
the European Union the crisis was, moreover, exacerbated by a double-dip recession, which 
has prolonged the recovery period and has also revealed the weakness of the euro area’s 
institutional framework. 
The crisis also left the monetary and regulatory policy “manual” that central banks had been 
applying in tatters.  
Pre-crisis, monetary policy in the advanced economies was essentially defined by inflation 
targets and a key instrument, the interest rate. In parallel, the goal of financial stability was 
chiefly  addressed  with  microprudential  regulation  and  supervision.  This  framework  was 
broadly consistent with the goal of economic growth, given that the control of inflation was 
 3/7 
 estimated  to  be  the  best  means  for  ensuring  the  economy  drew  closer  to  its  potential 
growth. 
The crisis showed that this framework was no longer valid. The control of inflation, though 
it  remains  a  necessary  condition,  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure  growth;  and  microprudential 
regulation was no longer effective, in or of itself, for guaranteeing financial stability.  
As a result, central banks have adapted their policies, which are now more complex in terms 
of objectives and instruments.  
Monetary policy has had to face up to the problem of what is known as the “zero bound” 
on  interest  rates.  Basically,  this  is  the  situation  that  Keynes  coined  the  “liquidity  trap”: 
interest rates close to zero cease to be an effective monetary policy instrument. This has 
led  to  the  development  of  new instruments,  so-called  “unconventional  monetary  policy”, 
which  mainly  includes  quantitative  easing,  private  and  public-sector  financial  asset 
purchases, and the explanation and signalling of the monetary policy to be applied in the 
future, namely “forward guidance”.  
The outcome has been a large increase – four- or fivefold – in the balance sheet of the main 
economies’ central banks. In the case of the Eurosystem, the ECB balance sheet accounted 
for 12% of euro area GDP before the crisis and now stands at approximately 40%, around 
€4.4 trillion.  
Supervisory policy, for its part, has had to face the challenge of macrofinancial instability in 
a context of highly interconnected markets at the global level. In this area, the response has 
been three-pronged.  
First, the strengthening of microprudential regulation, with the new Basel III Accord, which 
includes greater capital requirements and a stricter framework for systemically important 
financial institutions. Second, the development of a new instrument, macroprudential policy, 
which addresses systemic risk and the procyclical behaviour of the financial system as a 
whole. And, third, the greater international coordination of regulation, which is necessary 
given the reality of globalised financial markets. Notable in terms of coordination has been 
the creation of the Financial Stability Board and, in the case of the European Union, the 
activation  of  the  Banking  Union,  beginning  with  the  SSM  and  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism. 
The new monetary policy  
I shall now turn to the challenges central banks face. The first is, evidently, identifying what 
is understood by the “new normal”.  
One question on which economic policy discussions are focusing is whether the advanced 
economies are in a new situation of secular stagnation, a “new normal” characterised by 
low growth, low inflation and low interest rates.  
We are seeing how, despite lower unemployment rates and the closing of the gap between 
potential  and  real  output,  inflation  rates  remain  persistently  low.  A  series  of  factors  can 
account  for  this  behaviour.  Some  are  transitory,  such  as  the  insufficient  increase  in 
employment, or the impact of deleveraging processes in some economies. But there are 
4/7 
  also  factors  of  a  more  structural  nature,  including  the  effect  of  globalisation  and 
technological progress, or demographic factors. 
In any event, it should be stressed that there are other policies apart from monetary policy. 
In particular, both fiscal policy and structural reforms have a key role to play in supporting 
demand, boosting real interest rates and raising productivity and potential growth. 
Regarding  monetary  policy,  the  central  question  is  this:  to  what  extent  should  the 
macroeconomy  of  the  “new  normal”  lead  to  a  new  “conventional  model”  for  monetary 
policy? In particular, it is considered whether the management of the central bank’s balance 
sheet will become entrenched as a permanent part of the normal instruments of monetary 
policy. Estimates, while subject to major uncertainty, suggest that real interest rates and 
inflation will remain at low levels, meaning that nominal rates will also be low, thereby limiting 
their effectiveness as a monetary policy instrument. 
Against  this  background,  central  banks  are  likely  to  retain  the  use  of  unconventional 
monetary policies. Analysis of these policies is leading to debate, as yet inconclusive, on 
their effectiveness, the optimal size of central bank balance sheets and on the impact that 
they might have in terms of financial stability and the medium- and long-term fiscal situation.  
True,  as  the  recovery  gains  momentum,  and  provided  this  translates  into  a  sustained 
adjustment  by  inflation  towards  its  target,  the  need  for  monetary  policy  to  support  the 
economy will tend to diminish. The US Federal Reserve has already begun to reduce its 
balance  sheet  at  a  gradual  and  predictable  pace,  and  the  ECB  has  slowed  the  pace  of 
increase of its own balance sheet. This reduction in stimuli will extend the monetary policy 
headroom for acting effectively in the face of possible future crises. 
The  monetary  policy  normalisation  strategy  can  but  be  slow  and  will  tend  to  be  applied 
predictably, with close scrutiny of its impact both on economic growth and inflation and on 
financial stability.  
It is worth recalling that, in 2013, the markets rather hastily interpreted some statements by 
the Federal Reserve, the clarification or correction of which gave rise to a bout of turbulence, 
owing  to  the  different  forecasts  as  to  the  speed  at  which  expansionary  monetary  policy 
would be abandoned or softened. That episode provided a lesson for all central banks that 
have applied unconventional policies, in two respects: monetary policy should be corrected 
very slowly, and the correction should be predictable to the markets. In sum, predictability 
and  a  clear  communication  strategy  will  be  important  in  preventing  adverse  market 
reactions.  
Financial regulation and supervision  
The second area I would like to mention concerns the challenges in financial regulation and 
supervision. As I said, the crisis has led to an overhaul of financial regulation, centred on 
three  main  areas:  the  strengthening  of  microprudential  regulation;  the  development  of 
macroprudential regulation; and the stepping-up of international coordination. 
These new regulations provide a scenario of greater security for the financial sector. If we 
have learned anything in recent years it is that there is always a risk of another crisis. But I 
believe  we  are  now  better  prepared.  The  new  regulations  impose  greater  capital 
 5/7 
 requirements on financial institutions and stricter supervision, including new instruments for 
the early identification of financial risks.  
The main challenge for regulatory policy is now to fully implement the reforms approved and 
to closely monitor their impact on the financial sector, and, where appropriate, to calibrate 
the  new  regulatory  framework.  Along  with  this  general  challenge,  I  would  highlight  two 
elements that will have a bearing on regulatory policy management.  
Firstly, the interrelatedness of monetary and macroprudential policy. Generally, both policies 
can  be  complementary.  But,  as  the  years  of  expansion  prior  to  the  financial  crisis 
demonstrated, the economy’s cyclical position and the accumulation of financial risks may 
become decoupled. Financial imbalances thus built up, and yet inflation was contained and 
the real economy appeared to show no signs of overheating.  
Central banks will have to have both policies strike a balance in order to achieve the dual 
objective  of  economic  and  financial  stability.  Here  it  is  important  to  have  an  institutional 
structure that ensures synergies and consistency between monetary and prudential policies.  
The  second  conditioning  factor  is  the  fact  that  globalised  financial  markets are  a  reality, 
which requires a permanent international coordination effort in the management of financial 
policies. Coordination is needed to tackle contagion across different markets in jurisdictions 
and,  also,  to  prevent  regulation  being  distorted  by  means  of  regulatory  arbitrage,  or  the 
competitive lowering of regulatory standards across jurisdictions.  
Fora such as the Financial Stability Board, the Basel Committee and the European Single 
Supervisory  and  Resolution  Mechanisms  have  gained  in  importance.  A  third  pillar,  the 
European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme,  has  still  to  be  defined  and  remains  the  subject  of 
political negotiations.  
The challenges of financial and technological innovation  
Finally, I shall refer to the challenges posed by financial and technological innovation.  
Since the year 2000 we have witnessed a proliferation of technological changes that are re-
shaping the global economy. This started with the Internet, which was only incipient at the 
turn of the century, followed by electronic trade, mobile phones, artificial intelligence and 
big data. Technology is introducing new types of services and products, and is challenging 
the traditional commercial models in all economic sectors.  
In the case of the financial system, there is considerable scope for improving the efficiency 
and  quality  of  services  through  the  application  of  new  technological  processes.  We  are 
seeing how new technologies are being incorporated into traditional functions, for instance 
in how payments are made, in the automated management of risk pricing and in financial 
consultancy.  
The  financial  sector  is  adapting  to  this  new  reality.  Traditional  banks  are  taking  the  new 
technologies on board, occasionally through strategic alliances with new technology firms. 
New companies are also being incorporated into the sector, ranging from small start-ups to 
large firms. The new firms must, however, win the confidence of consumers and investors, 
6/7 
  something  that  traditional  financial  institutions  have  secured  over  a  long  period  of  time, 
anchored by strong regulation and financial supervision.  
From  the  standpoint  of  the  regulators,  the  fintech  challenge  affects  both  prudential  and 
consumer protection policies.  
From  the  prudential  perspective,  regulators  must  strike  a  balance  between  catalysing 
innovation and the efficiency that new technologies can provide, and maintaining a sound 
regulatory framework. The guiding principle should be to apply the same regulation for the 
same type of financial services. In this respect, as the presence of fintech increases, it might 
be useful to put greater emphasis on the regulation of services, instead of placing it on the 
institutions that provide these services.  
Turning  to  consumer  protection  policies,  it  is  vital  that  investors  and  consumers  should 
understand how the new services function and the attendant risks, including, for example, 
credit,  cyber-security  and  privacy-protection  risks.  Here  we  should  strengthen  our 
information and financial education policies.  
We  are  mindful  at  the  Banco  de  España  of  the  need  to  step  up  our  efforts  in  this  area. 
Indeed,  last  week  we  approved  a  reform  whereby,  under  our  Directorate  General 
Operations, Markets and Payment Systems, a new Associate Directorate General Financial 
Innovation and Market Infrastructures was created to assume the competencies in these 
areas, centralising in this new structure the functions previously assigned to different units 
in the Bank.  
This Associate Directorate General will have to face two families of problems.  
First, the questions that arise with the emergence of new agents and new operators in the 
financial markets, providing services that already existed (but in a different way), or services 
that  did  not  exist,  namely  new  types  of  financial  services.  As  regards  these  new  market 
players,  two  groups  of  problems  are  posed:  on  one  hand,  those  referring  to  matters  of 
competencies,  i.e.  all  agents  and  operators  should  be  subject  to  the  same  demands  or 
regulations; on the other, investors and consumers should be protected and alerted as to 
the new risks, just as they are in respect of the former operators and their products.  
The second family of matters which the new Associate Directorate General of the Banco de 
España  must  face  concerns  new  technology  and  its  application  in  financial  markets, 
something which, in these times of continuous innovation, is obviously of great importance.  
Thank you for your attention.  
  7/7 
