PSD2: WILL IT BE A GAME-CHANGER? 
Speech by Job Swank, Executive Director of De Nederlandsche Bank at ESB’s Conversation 
with Regulators on Innovation in Payment Services, 18 January 2018 in The Hague 
1.   Introduction 
•  Ladies and gentlemen, I’m grateful to the organizers of this conference for inviting me 
here. This Conversation with Regulators is the last in a series of events on innovation in 
payment services, organized by ESB. For those of you who can read Dutch, I highly 
recommend the dossier Innovatie in Betalen, issued by ESB in September.  It has much 
more to offer than you will hear from me today. 
•  Today’s topic is PSD2. PSD2 is a European directive, to be implemented through national 
legislation. And PSD2 is about payments. To most people, these topics – legislation and 
payments – are extremely boring, a necessary evil. Probably not to you. Otherwise, you 
wouldn’t be here, but you are certainly a minority. 
•  But life will change for the better, at least according to innovators, fintechs and other 
market suppliers. Customers can be disencumbered from the tedious activity of making a 
payment. They may enter a shop or webshop, pick whatever they want and have the 
shopkeeper take care of the payment … which will be the end of civilization as we know 
it.  Or perhaps even more sophisticated: refrigerators, printers and other home appliances 
can order their own refill … and arrange for the payment without intervention of the 
consumer. A bank customer may receive an offer from a mortgage broker, perfectly 
geared toward her financial position and spending pattern … before she even considers 
buying a house. 
•  This is not the future, this is now. Those services – if that’s the proper term to use – are 
technologically feasible and supplied as we speak. So, the question is not whether or when 
we will enter into a new era (we already have), but rather on what scale. This very much 
depends on the receptiveness of the public at large and on the reactions of regulators and 
supervisors to the new possibilities. 
1 
       •  PSD2 is the response of the regulators. It is a response that facilitates innovation. It com- 
pels banks, payment institutions and other players to prepare for an era in which financial 
services are mainly delivered through smartphones, tablets and other electronic devices. 
•  DNB welcomes PSD2 and the associated innovations. Still, a number of issues are pending. 
Customer privacy is the most salient one, but there are more challenges: on the demand 
side, on the supply side and with the regulators. The rest of my talk is organized along this 
triplet: demand, supply and regulation. I do not have definite answers to all pressing 
questions related to PSD2. What I’ll try to do, is give you a concise impression of issues 
that need further attention in the near future. 
2.   PSD2 and the demand side: consumers and retailers 
•  Let’s start with some basics. What is PSD2? PSD2 is the legal framework for retail 
payments in the European Union. The radical new element of PSD2 is attractive for some, 
and frightening for others. That is: a bank is obliged to give so-called service providers 
online access to the account of a customer … if – and only if – the customer consents. 
This is an important proviso. The service providers exist in two types: the ones that 
initiate payments and the ones that extract and exploit information from bank accounts. 
Such data – on all kinds of transactions – contain commercial value. The collected 
information can also be redirected to the bank customer as a housekeeping book. Both 
types of service providers will be regulated under PSD2. 
•  What is the intrinsic demand for innovative payment services? The novelty of PSD2 is 
primarily concerned with payments connected with e-commerce. Two facts. First, those 
payments are still a small portion of the market. Right now, only 2 percent of total 
payments in the Netherlands. Second, there are already several ways to pay online: through 
credit cards, by PayPal and, in the Netherlands, through iDEAL. What else would you need 
to become a happy payer? I hasten to say that this question may be rather silly. The story 
goes that Henry Ford once sighed: “If I had asked my customers what they wanted, they 
would have said … faster horses”. Paying online in the Netherlands is quite easy, also 
compared to other countries. Moreover, already next year, the ideal of 24/7 instant 
payments will be realized for mobile and internet payments. But judging from the 
excitement in the industry, plenty of new P2P applications are likely to be within reach. 
2 
     •  What are retailers interested in, as for payment methods? Reach, user convenience, 
conversion time and – last but not least – cost. Larger retailers may have an incentive to 
offer payment initiation services themselves, hence bypassing their banks and avoiding 
bank fees. From this angle, PSD2 may certainly become a game changer. 
 •  The future need for account information services is also difficult to assess, at least where 
consumers are concerned. Account information services can emerge as smartphone apps 
that give the customer an up-to-date overview of her payments and financial position. This 
may be quite useful to analyze one’s expenditures, when a financial advice is needed, or 
some financial product. I assume that most people acknowledge the benefits of such a 
service, especially if information from several accounts is combined. But this is probably 
just the beginning of the further use of payment data. While the exploitation of account 
information is extensively regulated, it is a very delicate matter. I will not go into the 
possibilities and horror stories connected with the commercial use of payment data 
(incidentally, the industry prefers the term “customer intelligence”). But let me elaborate a 
bit on two contradictory attitudes with the general public when it comes to privacy. 
  In 2014, ING announced it considered to use payment data of its clients for commercial 
purposes. You may remember that this caused a national outcry on privacy. So fierce that 
soon after the announcement, ING decided to abandon its plan. A recent survey by Carin 
van der Cruijsen, a researcher at DNB, confirms that the Dutch public is very reluctant to 
share their payment data with third parties, even for innovative services. An effective way 
for banks to lose client confidence is to publicly hint at selling customer data to other firms. 
At the same time, most people are frightfully willing – or unconscious – in allowing 
internet firms like Google to tap and exploit their search activities on the Web. 
  •  Of course, the European legislator has been fully aware of the privacy concerns. PSD2 
provides for a number of requirements regarding the use of data and data protection. In 
addition, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) will become applicable soon. 
But certain issues on privacy are still pending, mainly due to possible contradictions 
between PSD2 and the GDPR concerning consent [, which is the legal basis for the 
provision of payment services and the use of account information]. More work is needed 
on this score by prudential and privacy supervisors. In the Netherlands, this requires close 
cooperation between the Dutch Data Protection Authority and DNB. 
3 
PSD2 and the supply side 
•  Payments business is a network industry. The entrance of new users – be it consumers or 
retailers – increases the value of the network for all players. There are substantial 
economies of scale, due to network externalities and also because setting up a payment 
infrastructure requires large amounts of investment. This infrastructure is traditionally 
offered by banks. However, the network effects may raise entry barriers on the supply 
side, as well as lock-in effects on the demand side. These, in turn, may become obstacles 
to innovation and competition. One way to overcome such obstacles is to separate the 
provision of payment services from the infrastructure. This is exactly what PSD2 intends 
to achieve to stimulate competition and innovation. Banks maintaining the infrastructure, 
new players providing new services. 
•  But this solution gives rise to new concerns. The first is the risk of fragmentation. The 
potential benefits of PSD2 might be frustrated if banks and payment service providers 
would communicate by a wide diversity of technical interfaces. Common standards help 
to create a critical mass and to incite new players to enter the market. Standardization is 
not provided for by PSD2 or its lower regulations. For good reasons, as regulations should 
be technologically neutral and principle-based. Thus far, principles on standardization 
could not be agreed in the Euro Retail Payments Board either, due to conflicts of interest 
between banks and the new payment service providers [screen scraping, among other 
things]. So, the question remains how standardization can be achieved without creating 
one dominant force. I will come back to this shortly. The answer may be further 
cooperation between banks and the new service providers to come to standards that will 
be broadly accepted in the market. As long as competition is not hindered, of course. That 
is the real challenge. 
•  The second, related, concern is the potential role of BigTech. PSD2 makes it easy and 
attractive for BigTech companies like Google and Apple to enter the European market as 
payment service providers. If these companies were given a license, they would get access 
to the accounts of bank clients and acquire the right to use payment data, provided that the 
customer consents. Like other service providers, they will have to comply with PSD2 and 
the General Data Protection Regulation. But BigTech companies have a clear competitive 
advantage when it comes to global brand awareness, international reach and financial 
resources. Hence, they may oust smaller players and obtain a dominant market position. 
4 
    “Winner takes all”. This is probably not the best outcome for Europe and certainly not in 
the spirit of PSD2. The big – unanswered – question is, then, how to avoid it. 
•  How should small players get the chance to develop. Loosely speaking, PSD2 gives them 
the right to access bank accounts; again, if the customer consents. But this is only their 
legal position. Can they survive if BigTech penetrates into the market? Will they be 
squeezed, then, between the incumbent banks and the new big players? Not necessarily! 
There is an increasing tendency for banks and fintech companies to work together. Banks 
provide a large customer base, capital and regulatory experience. The fintechs, in turn, 
offer specialist expertise and agility in product development. For them, the proverb “If you 
can’t beat them, join them” seems to apply. 
•  Another concern or challenge is: what does PSD2 imply for the business models of banks? 
Banks provide and maintain the infrastructure, which the new players can use freely to 
supply their services. Banks cannot charge for the access, for information requests or for 
the use of their infrastructure. So, banks may need to review and adapt their business 
models. Fortunately, PSD2 also provides banks with new business opportunities. They can 
decide to become payment initiation service provider or account information service 
provider and offer their customers the new services themselves. They can reorganize 
themselves, create agile teams of young and creative people to develop innovative tools, 
based on access to the account. This is already happening. And, of course, they can 
closely cooperate with fintech companies. 
3.   PSD2 and the payment system 
 It is also important to look at the system as a whole. This is where DNB comes in. DNB is 
entrusted with the prudential supervision of banks and payment service providers settled 
in the Netherlands. DNB is also the central bank. In that capacity, it is legally mandated to 
promote a sound functioning of the payment system. 
•  PSD2 gives financial supervisors a prominent role in maintaining the security of payments 
in the EU. PSD2 not only creates business opportunities, it may also change banks’ risk 
profiles. Operational risk in particular is likely to increase. This includes cybersecurity, 
digital fraud and the risk of mismanagement of personal data and privacy. New service 
providers are also exposed to these risks. Banks, in addition, may have to adapt their 
business models, which creates a strategic risk. On the other hand, individual banks 
5 
       prosper to the extent that they can exploit the new opportunities that PSD2 offers. 
Supervisors and central banks will have to monitor these new risks and developments, 
both for individual banks and from a system perspective. This is not something new. But 
the playing field may become in a constant state of flux over the next decade, posing new 
challenges to the authorities. 
•  As a central bank, DNB welcomes PSD2 and the associated innovations. By increasing 
competition, PSD2 can make the payment system more efficient. There are at least three 
unresolved issues, though, which will come to the fore sooner or later. First, banks are 
expected to maintain the infrastructure for payments, which the new players can access for 
free. Then, the strategic question arises whether there will be sufficient incentives for 
banks to invest further in the infrastructure. Second, the payment system as a whole may 
become more complex and more fragmented, due to a lack of standards. Is this a problem 
that needs intervention by the competent authorities or can it be solved by the industry 
itself? It may serve as a warning here that, until now, European stakeholders have not been 
able to develop a standard interface for access to bank accounts. Third, if BigTech 
penetrates into the European market, who should organize the countervailing power to 
prevent market dominance. And how could this be done? 
4.   Concluding remarks 
•  Let me conclude. PSD2 compels the payment industry to head for a new digital era. This 
may have major strategic consequences for online payments. In my address, I have raised 
a series of questions on privacy, on the potential role of BigTech and on the conceivable 
prospect of a fragmented payment system. While DNB welcomes PSD2, these questions 
deserve ample further reflection in the coming years. 
 I thank you for your attention. 
6 
     