International  cooperation 
Joachim  Wuermeling: 
regulation - between myth and reality
Speech  by  Prof  Joachim  Wuermeling,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at a reception to welcome the new chief representative of Deutsche Bundesbank’s
New York office Gabriele Kabelac and to bid farewell to Dr Claudia Stirböck, New York City, 11
September 2018.
financial
in 
1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It is wonderful to be back in New York City, a city so rich in American and international flair.
We are here today to welcome the Bundesbank’s new chief representative, Gabriele Kabelac.
For us at the Bundesbank, this event is much more than a simple changeover – it symbolises
the importance of our transatlantic partnership and friendship.
But tonight is also the final night of Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year. Rosh Hashanah, I
learned, is also referred to as the Day of Remembrance. It requires an “accounting of the soul", a
deep reflection on the past year.
Before coming here, I reflected not only on my personal year, but also on the political year behind
us. I thought, for instance, about the still-looming trade war and its possible repercussions on
economic growth throughout the world. But I also thought about the negotiations over finalising
Basel  III  –  which  have  been  completed,  thankfully,  but  were  difficult,  quite  frankly  –  and  the
deregulation  debate.  It  became  clear  to  me  that  the  values  of  international  cooperation  and
multilateral alliances are being visibly threatened by growing political tensions within our nations
as well as between them.
I  have  reflected  then  on  what  would  be  necessary  to  enter  into  a  healthier  new  year  for  our
transatlantic friendship and for international cooperation. Let me make a few remarks about what
– in my opinion – won’t work and what can work. I will focus on banking and financial supervision,
my main responsibility as a member of the Bundesbank’s Executive Board.
2 The illusion of national sovereignty
The  first  approach  that  won’t  work  is  in  my  opinion  the  illusion  of  national  sovereignty.  This
means the idea that – as the Brexit cheerleaders led the British people to believe – if you pull your
country out of the web of international agreements, you can go it alone and even be better off.
Unfortunately,  reality  has  been  demonstrating  how  much  of  a  myth  that  is.  Regarding  Brexit,
many people in the UK are only now beginning to realise how dependent their economy has been
and still is on EU membership. Many problems became only obvious during the exit negotiations
– most of which were never an issue during the leave campaign.
I  think  that  compartmentalisation  helping  the  national  economy  is  a  dangerous  illusion  which
does  not  provide  substantial  solutions  to  serious  challenges.  There  has  never  been  such  a
mythological nation-state, and it certainly doesn’t exist in the era of the internet, smartphones and
mass air travel.
What then is sovereignty in the 21st century? It is the capacity to decide rationally about where
cooperation is, on balance, better than going it alone, even if it entails unpleasant compromises.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
3 The rationale for international cooperation in financial regulation
Following that, it seems reasonable to approach many areas of the economy in an internationally
cooperative, rules-based manner. Financial regulation, in my opinion, continues to be one area
conducive to this approach, as we want to prevent a regulatory race to the bottom and to ensure
fair competition, i.e. a level playing field.
It was in that spirit that the G 20, led by the United States, spearheaded the efforts to tackle the
financial crisis.
The G 20 efforts have created a rational, viable approach to international cooperation that is in the
interest of all member states – its principles should therefore remain pillars of the regulation of
international finance.
It is built on close transatlantic and international cooperation between our central banks and our
regulators and supervisors. It also rests on the joint work in international regulatory fora to foster
our  mutual  understanding  and  the  common  language  we  have  developed  over  the  past  thirty
years.
This approach also builds on a whole body of international minimum standards, like the Basel III
regime for internationally active banks that we have developed over the last ten years. The Basel
III standards have proven to be a success story, as they are the foundation for banking regulation
in more than 100 countries.
4 The illusion of the global level playing field
Ladies and gentlemen, as we strive to prevent a race to the bottom and maintain a fair, level
playing field, I am convinced that international, rules-based cooperation is – and should remain –
the method of choice not only, but in particular in the area of financial regulation.
At the same time, I am less convinced that Basel III is a “one size fits all” approach and that
adherence to international standards makes national supervision redundant. Basel standards are
minimum standards that cannot cover each and every national specificity – in these few selected
areas, national authorities need to fil these gaps, and adjust the standards accordingly. Another
legitimate,  but  limited  deviation  concerns  the  reduction  of  administrative  burdens  for  smaller
institutions – like they are currently pursued in the US and the EU. Further, if a non-EU bank has
substantial activities in the EU, it should have a consolidated subsidiary that is supervised in that
jurisdiction.  An  internationally  active  bank  cannot  have  core  capacities  of  risk  management,
capital and liquidity only in one spot.
We have seen that the Intermediate Holding Corporation laws in the US work quite well; and the
same  will  be  true  of  the  forthcoming  EU  equivalent,  the  Intermediate  Parent  Undertaking
Regulation.  The  subsidiarisation  requirement  will  also  enhance  the  systemic  stability  of  the
financial  ties  between  the  UK  and  the  EU  after  Brexit.  Generally  speaking,  it  is  also  a  useful
backstop against a regulatory race to the bottom, as it will make it difficult to provide cross-border
services from less well-regulated locations.
So I do understand that in light of Brexit and the end of London’s direct access to the EU single
market fears of regulatory fragmentation are worsening and leading to more calls to maintain a
global level playing field.
That’s why the important achievements of non-discrimination against foreign firms on the one
hand and the G 20’s minimum standards should be upheld.
However, our approach to international cooperation is to make sure that every supervisor can
oversee the entities active in its jurisdiction.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Simple answers to complex problems are comforting, but they divert our attention from the real
issues.
The concept of splendid isolation is a myth; it solves no problems.
If the transatlantic partnership and close multilateral cooperation are to be resilient cornerstones
of  the  world  economy,  we  need  rational,  careful  decision-making,  policy  case  by  policy  case;
where  some  cases  will  be  better  dealt  with  in  the  national  realm,  while  others  will  turn  out  to
require coordinated or even cooperative approaches.
The Bundesbank  has  a  reputation  as  being  principles-oriented  –  sometimes  maybe  even  too
much so. We will continue to seek our US partners’ advice and work towards mutually beneficial
solutions, where cooperation is rational and viable.
Our  New  York  representative  office  plays  an  important  role  in  those  efforts,  and  to  end  my
remarks, I want to introduce four persons who play important roles in furthering cooperation.
Let  me  start  with  the  Executive  Board  member  inter  alia  responsible  for  our  New  York  office
since September 1: Burkhard Balz. With twenty years of banking and regulatory experience, he
will be an understanding partner for discussions on any financial topic. And, as a former member
of  the  European  Parliament,  he  is  internationally  well  connected  and  speaks  the  language  of
diplomacy. At the Bundesbank, he will not only be responsible for our representatives abroad –
and therefore the New York office – but also for the important area of payment and settlements
systems.
We are both grateful for the excellent job that Ms Claudia Stirböck has done over the past five
years as our chief representative in New York: she played a vital role in the exchange between
the Bundesbank and the Federal Reserve and was instrumental in shaping our understanding of
US regulatory policy during her tenure. I am pleased that she will continue to apply her broad
expertise back home at the Directorate General Economics in our Central Office.
Ms Stirböck leaving our New York office is a loss, but I am confident that Ms Gabriele Kabelac will
be  an  excellent  successor.  Coming  from  our  Directorate  General  Economics,  she  brings
profound financial sector knowledge with her. Moreover, with her experience in coordinating the
Bundesbank’s  participation  in  international  forums,  she  will  not  only  be  a  highly  effective  and
creative contact to all of you, but will also be a joy to work with.
Our  new  team  now  has  the  honour  of  welcoming  –  and  I  have  the  pleasure  of  introducing  –
tonight’s keynote speaker: Professor Stanley Fischer.
What is there to say about a man who has served as Governor of the Central Bank of Israel –
where he successfully guided the country through the global financial crisis of 2008 – but also
Vice  Chair  of  the  Federal  Reserve?  And  all  that  after  having  been  the  World  Bank’s  Chief
Economist, the IMF’s Deputy Managing Director, and Vice Chairman of Citigroup.
The most fascinating item, to me, on his CV is that he was professor at the MIT Department of
Economics, where he was the Ph.D. thesis advisor not only to Ben Bernanke, but also to – you
guessed it – Mario Draghi.
I have therefore decided to let someone else find the right words: former US President Barack
Obama. Four years ago, he said that Stanley Fischer would “bring decades of leadership and
expertise” with him, and that he was “widely acknowledged as one of the world’s leading and
most experienced economic policy minds.” I have nothing more to add, and I am honoured to
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
give the floor to Professor Fischer.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
