 A welcome address and opening remarks by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the Innovation and Cybersecurity Conference 
  Sandton Convention Centre, Johannesburg   
28 August 2018 
 
Good  morning, Governor, fellow Deputy Governors,  fellow regulators (in particular our 
colleagues  form  National  Treasury,  the  Financial  Sector  Conduct  Authority  and  the 
Financial  Intelligence  Centre),  our  colleagues  from  numerous  neighbouring  central 
banks, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
 The South African Reserve Bank (SARB)  is pleased  to welcome so many of you  who 
have  decided  to  join  us  at  this  conference.  We  appreciate  the  great  interest  in  this 
event,  both  from  domestic  and  from  international  stakeholders.  We  remain  fully 
committed  to  engaging  and  cooperating  with  all  our  stakeholders  on  crucial  policy 
matters and the changes in our shared landscape. 
 We  hope  that  the  next  three  days  will  offer  great  insights  and  will  spark  beneficial 
conversations on the themes and topics of this conference. 
 Introduction 
 We are undoubtedly facing an epoch of unrivalled change that is far more exponential 
than  the  Cambrian  Explosion  that  Andrei  Kirilenko  will  make  reference  to  in  his 
presentation later today. This era offers many opportunities, and government agencies 
in collaboration with business and the wider society can play a critical role in leveraging 
these opportunities to the benefit of all humankind. In this regard, Frans van Houten is 
quoted as having said: “Government should seek more strategic approaches to develop 
dynamic,  resilient  infrastructure.  Business  must  be  more  creative  in  offering  financing 
solutions as partners with government, and people must support sustainable innovation 
as a public policy priority.” 
  Page 2 of 5 
Conferences  such as these  are  part  of a  collaborative  effort  in  our  mission  to  deepen 
our insights into and understanding of innovation and cybersecurity. We hope that you 
too  will  benefit  from  these  proceedings  and  will  emerge  from  this  conference  with  an 
expanded  knowledge  on  these  critical  issues  that  we  will  be  covering  over  the  next 
three days.  
 The  genesis  of  this  conference  dates  back  to  2016  when  the  SARB  organised  and 
hosted its first Cybersecurity Conference. That conference underlined the importance of 
cybersecurity  and  cyber-resilience.  In  2017,  the  SARB  hosted  the  first  Payments 
Innovation  Conference  in  collaboration  with  domestic  and  international  payments 
stakeholders. This Payments Innovation Conference sought to develop more profound 
insights  into  the  innovations  emerging  in  the  payments  ecosystem,  while  facilitating  a 
better  understanding  of  the  role  of  innovation  and  regulatory  frameworks  in  the 
payments industry.  
 However,  we  cannot  engage  in  conversations  about  the  remarkable  amount  of 
innovation  taking  place  in  the  financial  services  industry  without  addressing  the 
cyber-threats  that  we  also  face.  It  was  therefore  prudent  for  the  SARB  to,  this  time, 
merge the two conferences into one.  
 This Innovation and Cybersecurity Conference will focus on the following five themes: 
  Emerging innovations 
  Leveraging new technologies 
 Innovation and the regulator – challenges and opportunities 
  Cybersecurity trends 
  The South African journey – getting to harmonisation and action 
 I will now make some brief introductory remarks before handing over to the Governor of 
the  SARB,  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  to  deliver  the  opening  address  on  ‘Disruptive 
innovation  and  cybersecurity:  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  perspective  and 
response’.  
  Page 3 of 5 
Innovation 
 It  is  becoming  evident  that  the  ever-accelerating  pace  of  emerging  technological 
innovation,  notwithstanding  all  its  advantages,  is  disruptive  to  the  financial  services 
being offered by financial institutions, and it also poses some challenges for regulators. 
Innovation  introduces  new  players  to  the  financial  services  industry  and  enables 
incumbent  industry  participants  to  expand  the  scope  of  their  financial  offerings. 
Innovation  generally  leads  to  the  expansion  of  markets  and  greater  efficiencies,  and 
could  potentially  result  in  lower  costs  for  the  end  user  of  financial  products  and/or 
services.  Regulators  taking  positions  to  enable  innovation  and  competition  stand  to 
benefit, among others, consumers.  
 In  PricewaterhouseCoopers’  (PwC)  21st  Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO)  Survey1,  both 
cyber-threats and  the speed of technological change make it into the top six anxieties 
that keep CEOs awake at night. Through this Innovation and Cybersecurity Conference, 
we  will,  for  example,  explore,  in  a  round  table  discussion  with  industry  leaders 
moderated  by  Governor  Kganyago,  ‘how  exponential  technology  will  drive  change  in 
the  current  financial  sector  landscape’.  This  topic  is  particularly  relevant  because 
exponential  technology  has  the  ability  to  threaten  the  survival  of  firms  that  are  highly 
successful  today,  even  if  they  spend  large  amounts  on  innovation  initiatives.  It  was 
Steve  Jobs  who  said:  “Innovation  has  nothing  to  do  with  how  many  R&D  dollars  you 
have. When Apple came up with the Mac, IBM was spending at least 100 times more 
on R&D. It is not about money. It’s about the people you have, how you’re led, and how 
much you get it!”  
 Financial  institutions  must  keep  pace  with  what  is  happening  in  the  technological 
sphere if they are to remain relevant and are to survive. Environmental forces such as 
innovation  invariably  create  both  threats  and  opportunities  for  all  the  role  players,  no 
less  so  than  in  the  financial  industry.  There  is  an  adage  that  says:  “Adapt  quickly  to 
change or perish seamlessly without change in the 21st century.” 
                                                  
1 See PwC’s 21st CEO Survey, The anxious optimist in the corner office, available at 
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/ceo-survey/2018/pwc-ceo-survey-report-2018.pdf. 
Page 4 of 5 
 Cybersecurity 
 As financial institutions and infrastructure  service providers evolve to keep up with the 
pace  of  technological  change  such  as  application  programming  interfaces,  distributed 
ledger  technologies,  artificial  intelligence  and  cloud-computing,  just  to  mention  a  few, 
sophisticated cybercriminals continue to target banking and payment systems, with the 
potential to disrupt their operations and potentially cause harm to the broader financial 
system  and  even  the  entire  economy.  But  it  is  not  only  technological  progress  and 
innovation  that  increase  cyber-risk;  cyber-threats  may  also  undermine  innovation.  It 
was  James  Comey,  the  former  FBI2  Director,  who  said:  “The  diverse  threats  we  face 
are  increasingly  cyber-based.  Much  of  America’s  most  sensitive  data  is  stored  on 
computers.  We  are  losing  data,  money,  and  ideas  through  cyber-intrusions.  This 
threatens innovation.” 
 It  is  thus  essential  that  these  kinds  of  risks  are  well  understood  and  that  all  financial 
institutions  and  market  infrastructures  are  secured  against  cyberattacks.  The  financial 
services  industry  should  strive  to  have  cybersecurity  practices  in  place  that  are  agile 
and responsive to emerging cyberspace activities and developments.    
 Through  this  Innovation  and  Cybersecurity  Conference,  we  will  learn  more  about  the 
emerging  types  of  cyber-threats  and  cyberattacks  facing  the  financial  ecosystem.  We 
will discuss the risk management practices, controls and defence mechanisms that the 
financial sector should adopt to deal with these cyber-threats and cyberattacks.  
 This  conference  is  also  a  platform  to  collaborate  on  cyber-resilience  through  national 
and  industry-specific  cyber-response  structures  in  the  interest  of  financial  stability  and 
financial security in South Africa. 
 Closure   
 Allow me to extend a special word of thanks to speakers and panellists, both local and 
those from abroad, who have agreed to participate in this conference and to share their 
insights and experience with us.  
                                                  
2 Federal Bureau of Investigation (United States) 
Page 5 of 5 
 I hope that the focus of the next three days will be on coordinating efforts, establishing 
response  structures,  and  creating  regulatory  certainty  in  this  disruptive  environment 
where innovation and cybersecurity converge.  
 Thank you. 
 Page 6 of 5 
