Nor  Shamsiah  Mohd  Yunus:  DFIs  of  the  future  -  maximising
development impact
Welcome remarks by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the World Bank and Bank Negara Malaysia Forum on Performance
Measurement for DFIs "DFIs of the Future: Maximising Development Impact", Kuala Lumpur, 9
August 2018.
 I would like to thank the World Bank for collaborating with Bank Negara Malaysia to organise this
important event as we think deeply about the future of development finance, especially on how
we  can  elevate  the  role  of  development  financial  institutions  in  Malaysia  to  achieve  greater
development impact. This is timely as the country is charting its future direction.
History tells us that economic development is a collective responsibility. The success story of
Malaysia’s development journey over the past six decades is a testament to this. Our goal has
always been to achieve sustainable and inclusive growth, consistent with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development advocated by the United Nations. Thus, the development priorities of
the  nation  and  the  materialisation  of  the  17  United  Nation’s  Sustainable  Development  Goals
(SDGs) will be key for us over the next few years.
To this end, development financial institutions or DFIs in short, play a very crucial role. The first
DFIs in Malaysia were established in the 1960s and 1970s as specialised financial institutions
with specific mandates to develop strategic sectors, spanning agriculture, infrastructure, small
and medium enterprises, export-oriented and high-technology industries.
Since  then,  DFIs  have  contributed  to  the  economic  transformation  of  Malaysia  and  helped  to
reduce  inequality.  For  example,  through  them,  the  unserved  and  underserved  segments  of
society  have  increased  access  to  financial  services.  Rural  communities  have  benefitted  from
microfinance initiatives and agent banking services. Last but not least, DFIs have contributed to
macro-economic  stability  through  the  provision  of  counter-cyclical  financing  during  periods  of
financial instability.
The strategic role of DFIs make them well placed to contribute to the development priorities of
the nation, and assist in the materialisation of the SDGs. Specifically, DFIs can play an important
role in contributing to the advancement of the following SDGs: no poverty, zero hunger, good
health and well-being, quality education, clean water and sanitation, affordable and clean energy,
industry,  innovation  and  infrastructure,  reduced  inequality,  sustainable  cities  and  communities
and climate action, amongst others. Thus, as institutions designed with developmental mandates
in mind, DFIs are primed to serve the greater good. For Malaysia, the developmental story is not
over as we seek to transform our economy into a high income nation while ensuring no one is left
behind. The task ahead of us is challenging, but it is not insurmountable.
As such, the stakes are higher than ever. In this environment, it is important for DFIs to ensure
that they remain relevant. The urgency for change remains high, as shifts in the global economic
and  social  landscape  continue  to  create  risks  and  unforeseen  externalities  that  may  dampen
growth.  Thus,  the  focus  on  building  resilience,  creating  building  blocks  to  address  financial
instability,  boosting  national  competitiveness,  strengthening  human  capital, 
inculcating
sustainable consumption and increasing productivity, will be paramount in shaping our success
ahead.
With all these in mind, I will put forward three points in my remarks today, relating to the business
models, performance and regulatory framework for DFIs.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Key Message 1 – Re-engineer business models of DFIs
First and foremost, for DFIs to contribute effectively to the development priorities of the nation, it
is important for each DFI to ensure their long term financial sustainability. Without this foundation
of  continued  financial  health  and  strength,  DFIs  will  not  be  able  to  contribute  meaningfully  as
there  will  be  constraints  and  limitations  in  executing  their  objectives. As  policymakers,  Bank
Negara  Malaysia  envisions  an  environment  where  DFIs  are  financially  independent  from  the
Government with enduring business models that can continue to deliver positive benefits to the
economy  and  broader  society.  Over  the  long-term,  DFIs  should  not  be  dependent  on  fiscal
support to deliver their mandates and hence, will need to diversify their sources of funding to be
sustainable in the long run. What we should seek is not short-term fixes but enduring business
models that will deliver positive impacts to the economy and society as the economic landscape
changes.
At the same time, business models for DFIs should be firmly grounded on strong governance
and  a  culture  of  professional  management.  Good  governance  underpins  any  successful
business  model  and  it  is  of  utmost  importance  that  DFIs  follow  best  practices  that  promote
integrity,  transparency  and  accountability.  To  achieve  this,  DFIs  should  strive  to  strengthen
behaviour and risk culture within the organisation. Strong governance entails crafting well-defined
mandates that will insulate the organisation from undue external interference. Focus should also
be given to foster a culture that welcomes active debates and critical thinking at all levels of the
organisation  to  guard  against  groupthink.  Last  but  not  least,  to  sustain  effective  and  high
performance, continuous upskilling of the board, senior management and staff is crucial to be
able to seize opportunities and overcome challenges as they arise.
While the DFIs of today have grown in size and outreach, there remain opportunities for them to
maximise their full potential. Innovation is lacking in developing diversified financial products that
are tailored to meet the specific needs of targeted sectors. This is compounded by their limited
capacity and capability to manage the potential risks arising from financing high risk sectors due
to information asymmetries.
DFIs  should  aim  to  become  the  centre  of  reference  for  new  growth  sectors  and  emerging
markets  and  develop  expertise  in  risk  assessment  and  management  of  high  risk  projects  in
those  sectors.  Underlying  the  strategies  for  a  good  business  model  is  the  need  for  DFIs  to
strengthen research and analytical capabilities to address their lending capacity by developing
innovative solutions. Given the digitalisation of finance and proliferation of technology in financial
services,  DFIs  need  to  remain  at  the  frontier  of  these  developments.  This  could  include
leveraging on big data and forging partnerships with technology firms to develop digital solutions
at lower cost and increased efficiency.
At the broader level, the development finance architecture should also shift to be more effective
in  channelling  resources  and  catalysing  private  investment  to  developmental  oriented  projects
and  initiatives.  Whilst  most  DFIs  have  been  self-sustainable  for  the  past  few  years,  DFIs  will
need to diversify their sources of funding and ensure that the structure of liabilities is appropriate
for the assets that they hold to be sustainable in the long run. DFIs cannot be dependent on fiscal
support to carry out their mandates. DFIs should aim to have strong competitive position on new
growth  sectors  supported  by  a  sustainable  strategy  and  management  execution  capabilities.
Last  but  not  least,  DFIs  are  required  to  continuously  review  their  institutional  fit  and  business
models to increase their development impact while remaining financially sustainable. Effective
DFIs should also be able to act as catalysts to promote private sector investments and support
economic growth.
One example of a financially sustainable business model is demonstrated by the experience of
Nacional  Financiera  (NAFIN)  as  an  enabler  to  Mexico’s  aspiration  to  combat  climate  change
through the Renewable Energy Financing Facility, or  REFF. As REFF provides risk mitigation
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
mechanisms  such  as  guarantee  and  insurance  in  addition  to  financing,  it  has  attracted  the
private  sector  as  co-investors  and  guided  the  financial  institutions  to  develop  capacity  in  risk
management of renewable energy projects. This demonstrates that with in-depth understanding
of the sectors they are serving, DFIs can design solutions which achieve the desired impact,
whilst crowding in private capital.
Key  Message  2  –  Performance  measurement  framework  anchored  on  developmental
objectives will ensure alignment of business strategies to deliver the highest value
My  second  point  relates  to  adopting  a  performance  measurement  framework  for  DFIs  that  is
anchored  on  development  objectives.  This  is  to  ensure  alignment  of  business  strategies  to
deliver the highest value to society.
DFIs play an important role in bridging financing gaps by participating in markets not adequately
served  by  the  private  sector.  These  are  often  developing  sectors  and  markets  which  are
characterised by high risks and uncertainties. Therefore, by extension, we cannot evaluate DFIs
using mere financial indicators as they are not adequate to capture the contributions of DFIs to
the wider economy and growth of the nation. DFIs must also be measured by the additionalities
they create.
In  my  view,  a  DFI  can  be  deemed  to  be  successful  when  its  participation  addresses  market
failures and brings high value addition by:
(a)    Influencing  project  design  and  delivery  in  a  way  that  will  generate  employment,  increase
income levels and welfare of targeted sectors, expand tax revenues and multiply economic spill-
overs;
(b)  Crowding in  or  attracting  private  investments  or  financing  in  new  growth  sectors/markets
through innovative financial structures; and
(c)  Creating an enabling environment for economic segments to flourish by actively contributing
to the sound design and implementation of public policies.
The  difference  in  measuring  the  success  of  the  DFIs  means  that  it  is  important  to  have  a
structured and comprehensive performance measurement framework. This framework must be
anchored  on  developmental  outcomes  to  create  strong  incentives  for  strategic  alignment  to
achieve greater development impact.
For example, the BancoEstado of Chile has for the past 4 years published integrated reports
which are called the “Social Footprint of BancoEstado”. They showcase the achievements of the
Bank’s  development  impact  in  terms  of  meeting  the  SDG  agenda.  BancoEstado  embeds
relevant SDGs and developmental KPIs in their performance measurement framework. They are
then hardwired into key decision making processes to ensure productive and effective allocation
and  distribution  of  resources  aimed  at  meeting  the  development  objectives.  Similarly,
performance measurement of development impact is the backbone of FinDev Canada, where
their success is not only measured by financial sustainability but whether they also improve the
lives of those impacted by the businesses they support.
On this note, I would also like to mention that sustainable and impactful financial solutions are not
reserved  exclusively  for  DFIs.  The  whole  financial  sector  has  a  professional  and  civic
responsibility  to  advance  the  sustainability  and  inclusion  agenda.  This  responsibility  includes
upholding the fiduciary duty of financial institutions to preserve the trust, integrity and confidence
in the financial system. By being responsible citizens, financial institutions will go a long way to
repair the trust deficit between the industry and the public brought about by bank failures and the
numerous cases of market misconduct, manipulation and scandals.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
To this end, Bank Negara Malaysia has pioneered the measurement of development impact to
complement  financial  performance  by  implementing  the  Value-based  Intermediation  (VBI)
Scorecard  with  selected  banks.  The  VBI  scorecard  contains  components  of  qualitative  and
quantitative  measures  of  impact  to  cultivate  an  impact-driven  mindset  and  drive  improvement
within the banking industry. We hope that this will be a stepping stone to enhance the contribution
of the financial sector to public welfare.
In summary, as the old adage correctly points out, “If you can’t measure it, you can’t improve it.”
Hence,  the  accountability  and  effectiveness  of  DFIs  need  to  be  measured  through  a  robust,
structured  and  comprehensive  performance  framework.    This  two-day  Forum  is  dedicated
towards  realising  this  outcome.  Challenges  in  measuring  performance  and  collecting  credible
data  that  will  best  quantify  the  development  impact  will  be  discussed  to  identify  workable
solutions drawing from the experience of other leading international DFIs.
Key Message 3 – Enabling regulatory and policy environment to support DFIs in realising
their full potential
My third and last point relates to the regulatory framework to support DFIs in realising their full
potential.  An  appropriate  regulatory  and  policy  ecosystem  is  crucial  to  nurture  a  culture  of
innovation that will support the achievement of development impact within the DFIs.
Bank Negara Malaysia is committed to cultivate this through the application of proportionality in
our  regulations.  The  concept  of  proportionality  is  related  to  the  application  of  differentiated
prudential requirements for institutions of varying sizes, systemic impact and complexity in order
to avoid excessive compliance costs. These costs may be burdensome and disproportionately
high  to  smaller  institutions.  The  application  of  proportionality  can  take  the  form  of  reduced
reporting  burdens  or  simplified  rules  for  some  institutions.  Proportionality  however,  does  not
necessarily mean less stringent regulations. For some institutions, it may mean lower leverage,
additional safeguards and prudential measures. Thus, proportionality entails an adjustment to the
complexity  of  the  rules  taking  into  account  the  risks  and  externalities  posed  by  financial
institutions. It is important to understand that this does not necessarily result in a lower degree of
stringency.
This practice is not entirely new as we have been practising proportionality in regulating DFIs.
This is reflected in prudential regulations on capital and liquidity which are applied to DFIs as well
as corporate governance and financial reporting requirements. 
forward, 
this  application  of  proportionality  will  be 
Moving 
to  reflect
developmental  outcomes.  The  Bank  is  refining  its  methodology  for  DFIs  to  support  greater
differentiation at the individual  institution  level  based  on  the  nature,  size,  complexity  and  most
importantly,  the  unique  roles  and  mandates  of  each  DFI.  Prudential  and  conduct  standards
applicable to DFIs will also continue to be renewed and adapted where relevant. The balance that
we  aim  to  strike  can  only  be  achieved  if  DFIs  also  lift  their  game  to  ensure  strong  internal
controls and risk and performance management. 
further  enhanced 
In addition to proportionality, a related issue is the need to review the overall DFI landscape in a
holistic manner. An important step towards steering the DFIs forward will be to conduct a review
on the mandates of the DFIs. Since the establishment of the DFIs in Malaysia more than four
decades ago, their mandates have remained largely unchanged.
Periodic mandate reviews are important especially in a country like Malaysia where there is rapid
economic  growth  and  structural  change  as  the  country  moves  from  one  stage  of  growth  to
another.  Mandate  reviews  will  not  only  identify  gaps  within  the  economy  that  DFIs  can  play  a
meaningful  role,  but  to  reduce  areas  which  overlap  with  each  other  and  other  players  in  the
financial sector. For the immediate future, there are pockets of financing gaps particularly in the
new and emerging sectors that the DFIs could support. Examples of these areas are: the high-
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
end services and advanced manufacturing sectors, as well as knowledge or technology-based
sectors including green-tech and biotech industries. These are key drivers that will accelerate the
transformation of Malaysia into a high-income economy in a sustainable and inclusive way.
Last but not least, as part of the holistic review, we should be prepared that some DFIs may have
to  “graduate”  into  the  mainstream  legal  and  regulatory  landscape  of  the  Malaysian  financial
system. This would mean that they may no longer be placed under the Development Financial
Institutions Act.  This  is  a  positive  development  as  it  reflects  the  maturity  and  success  of  the
institution in delivering on its developmental mandates.
In conclusion, the progress of the nation is a collective responsibility. All of us have our own part
to play. Our roles may be different but we share a common vision towards a shared, inclusive
and sustainable prosperity for all.
For all of us gathered here today, this outcome is crystallised in the vision for DFIs to lift the
growth  and  development  of  Malaysia.  For  this  to  happen,  DFIs  need  to  ensure  that  they  are
financially sustainable, possess the agility to support the existing and new economic drivers, and
constantly  measure  their  performance  and  contribution  in  an  appropriate  performance
management framework.
As DFIs will continue to be at the forefront of efforts to meet the SDG goals, I hope that the next
two days will sow the seeds for individual and collective actions that will both transform DFIs and
increase their development impact.
With this, I wish all of you a productive forum.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
