Marzunisham Omar: Waqf – an economic perspective
Speech by Mr Marzunisham Omar, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Forum  on  "Waqf: An  Economic  Perspective",  Kuala  Lumpur,  9 April
2018.
 It is an honour to speak on waqf from an economic viewpoint. Waqf, or Islamic endowment, is a
virtuous act which not only serves as a philanthropic tool but holds great potential for economic
development.
Allow me to share some thoughts on the relevance of waqf and three strategies to unlock its full
potential to benefit our country.
Revival of waqf is timely to unlock its full potential
Waqf is part of Islam’s great and long history. It is a well-established concept, conceived during
the time of the Prophet, peace be upon him. When Umar ibn al-Khattab acquired a piece of land,
he asked the Prophet how best to use it. The Prophet advised him to make the land inalienable
and to use it for the benefit of the unprivileged – the poor and those in need. With that, the land
was established as waqf.
Over  the  centuries,  this  tradition  continued  and  waqf  has  made  vast  contributions  to  the
development  of  Islamic  civilisation.  Notable  examples  include  the  waqf  of  Süleymaniye  in
Istanbul, which provided for the construction of schools and universities, and the waqfs of Murad
II and of Bayezid II in Edirne that built and operated hospitals that provided free treatment. 
While these are inspiring examples from the past, it is no question that waqf remains relevant
today. It can play an important part in our quest to develop a more dynamic, progressive and
inclusive economy. It can do so by tackling some of the major challenges facing society, such as
inequality and improving access to quality education and health.
We must not allow intergenerational inequity to widen and magnify. And waqf, as a vehicle for
those in a more privileged position to voluntarily give back and reinvest in the society, can help
promote  social  mobility  and  stem  this  vicious  cycle  of  inequity.  As  a  sustainable,  inter-
generational mechanism for social investments, waqf could effectively contribute towards a more
equitable society.
As  stated  in  the  Quran,  wealth  that  has  been  bestowed  by Allah  should  not  merely  circulate
among the rich. The Prophet said: “Blessed is the wealth of a Muslim from which he gives to the
poor, the orphans and the needy travellers.”
In  Islam,  wealth  is  regarded  as  a  means  and  not  an  end,  and  Islamic  wealth  management
acknowledges responsibility towards the community and benefitting those in need.
Strategies to strengthen the effectiveness of waqf
It is, therefore, timely to revive waqf and to bring back its glory days. Let me put forward three
strategies  that  we  can  explore  to  unlock  waqf’s  full  potential  as  a  platform  for  Islamic  social
finance.
First, is to broaden waqf assets and their applications. Fundamental to this is the need to correct
the perception of waqf.
One of the biggest misconceptions is on its usage. Waqf is to benefit all. While waqf land has
traditionally been used to build mosques, cemeteries or tahfiz schools, nothing in the Quran or
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Hadith  prohibits  wider  use  of  waqf  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  community.  In  fact,  there  is  no
requirement for a waqif or donor and beneficiary of waqf to be a Muslim.
There are instances from past Islamic civilisation where the use of waqf extended beyond those
that  were  directly  related  to  the  religion  and  specific  needs  of  the  Muslims.  Waqf  land  and
buildings were used to build schools, hospitals and infrastructure to benefit both Muslims and
non-Muslims alike. The Al-Azhar University is an excellent example of a waqf asset.
This makes a lot of sense. It is obvious that waqf should be prioritised to improve education and
health, critical ingredients for social mobility and a productive workforce.
There  are  an  estimated  300  square  kilometres  of  waqf  land  –  the  size  of  the  main  island  of
Langkawi  –  in  the  country,  and  unfortunately,  most  of  this  land  remains  undeveloped.    Think
about all the needs that can be met by developing this land – affordable housing, schools and
universities, hospitals, sports facilities, research centres and industrial complexes.
While I acknowledge the challenges in developing this land, including ownership and registration
issues, as well as limitations in financial resources, these are surmountable. Fora such as the
one this afternoon play an important role in bringing together various stakeholders to deliberate
on possible strategies to address these challenges, facilitate the development of waqf assets
and increase their productivity.
Limiting waqf to land and immovable property is another misconception. With the emergence of
contemporary reinterpretations of fiqh rules and Islamic finance, there are new techniques that
can inject new life into waqf.
One such concept is cash waqf, which is a waqf of a liquid asset that gives returns which can be
utilised  to  meet  the  intended  objectives  under  the  waqf  charter.  In  this  regard,  I  welcome  the
Waqf Fund initiative by the Association of Islamic Banks in Malaysia (AIBIM) whereby six islamic
banks have come together to collaborate with State Islamic Religious Council of ten states to
provide  channels  to  collect  and  manage  cash  waqf  in  a  more  coordinated  and  structured
manner. The returns have so far been utilised for economic empowerment, education and health
projects.
In addition, the concept of temporary cash waqf, introduced by ISRA and endorsed by the ISRA
Council  of  Scholars  in  2016,  opens  up  a  new  interesting  potential.  Funds  collected  through
temporary cash waqf, such as through sukuk, can be used to develop Shariah-compliant profit-
generating projects. The completed projects would be declared as waqf assets upon maturity of
the sukuk, and its future benefit could be enjoyed by waqf beneficiaries in perpetuity.
The  potential  of  applying  financial  innovation  in  waqf  has  proven  to  be  a  success,  as
demonstrated  by  waqf  sukuk  in  countries  like  Saudi Arabia  and  Singapore.  The  examples  in
these countries include sukuk issued to raise capital for the development of waqf land, which led
to the revitalisation of an old mosque and modernisation of shop houses that were in a rundown
condition. 
Through  the  concepts  of  replacement  and  conversion,  substitution  and  exchange  that  are
allowed in Islam, there is flexibility in the way waqf assets are invested, so that they can be most
productively deployed.
This example can be replicated here as a means to obtain funds to renovate old, neglected or
under-developed real estate properties into highly valued and desirable prime properties. In the
process,  value  is  created  from  the  land  or  property  which  would  have  otherwise  been
underutilised and undervalued.
Another  innovative  and  creative  form  is  corporate  waqf.  We  do  not  need  to  look  far  for  a
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
successful  model.  The  establishment  of  Waqaf  An-Nur  Corporation  Berhad  (WANCorp)  to
manage  stocks  and  assets  of  Johor  Corporation  under  endowment  has  essentially
institutionalised the link between a corporate entity and waqf. This ensures efficient, transparent
and professional management of waqf assets.
Success stories and good practices of waqf management should be emulated and be used by
others as a benchmark to further spur the vibrancy of waqf development in this country.
The  second  strategy  is  to  ensure  that  we  achieve  the  goals  of  social  equity  and  economic
efficiency in operationalisation of waqf projects. While projects developed from waqf proceeds
should  benefit  society  at  large,  it  is  my  humble  view  that  it  makes  sense  from  an  economic
efficiency standpoint to allow market mechanism to allocate these scarce resources.
As waqf is intended to generate benefits in perpetuity for all generations to come, operating the
fund  on  commercial  terms  allows  it  to  be  invested  and  managed  in  a  manner  that  ensures
preservation of capital. Prioritising economic efficiency can help strengthen the position of waqf
to carry out its social equity objectives effectively.
To illustrate, rental of waqf-developed commercial complexes should be market determined, but
lots with preferential rental rates could be designated for deserving community purposes, such
as co-working spaces for start-ups and entrepreneurs.
In  healthcare,  waqf  hospital  charges  should  be  comparable  with  private  medical  fees,  but
different pricing tiers could be provided for the B40 segment and other deserving patients.
Similarly, waqf-owned universities should charge full tuition fees to all, but offer scholarships and
other forms of need- and merit-based assistance for high-potential students from less privileged
backgrounds.
This approach is indeed in line with the conditions for waqf creation – ziyadah and nuqsan, idkhal
and ikhraj, which grant flexibility and openness to redirect waqf benefits to those in greater need.
If executed well, waqf can be both economically efficient and sustainable, while at the same time
fulfiling its socio-economic objectives.
The  third  imperative  is  to  professionalise  and  modernise  waqf  management.  For  waqf  to
progress strongly, it requires a new character and a more modern image. In this regard, I would
identify  two  priorities,  namely  professionalising  those  who  are  entrusted  to  manage  waqf  and
putting in place proper governance framework. Let me elaborate.
The management of waqf must be entrusted to experienced and knowledgeable experts with the
highest integrity – that is, people with the right calibre, right competency and right character.
The  USD  37.1  billion  Harvard  Endowment  is  run  by  some  of  the  best  minds  in  finance,  who
determine the most optimal asset allocation strategies that deliver the best sustainable returns
for the university. In 2017, the endowment contributed more than a third of Harvard’s operating
revenue.  Returns  from  the  fund  help  to  provide  scholarships  and  to  fund  ground-breaking
research. Surely we would like to see the same in our Malaysian universities.
Acquiring such expertise and capability may take time. To expedite this, I would like to suggest
that waqf authorities explore partnering or collaborating with experts from the private sector to
commercialise or monetise waqf assets.
In  particular,  partnerships  with  Islamic  financial  institutions  can  help  waqf  authorities  develop
waqf assets productively with the required financial expertise on board.
A  good  example  is  the  partnership  between  Majlis  Agama  Islam  Wilayah  Persekutuan  and
Lembaga  Tabung  Haji  in  developing  Menara  Bank  Islam  on  a  1.2  acre  waqf  land  in  Kuala
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Lumpur.  The  RM151  million  project  is  a  milestone  achievement,  being  the  first  large-scale
commercial development project on a waqf land in the country. 
Another important aspect in professionalising waqf management is instilling good governance. It
is unfortunate that management of waqf has had some governance challenges.
Efforts  must  be  directed  at  strengthening  its  governance  and  management. Adequate  internal
controls have to be put in place, including risk management, internal and external audits, and
compliance systems. Its standards of disclosure and transparency need to be at par with those
of modern finance or of endowments in advanced economies.
For a start, waqf authorities should provide high-quality disclosure and reporting of waqf activities
to instil trust and confidence among the contributors and wider stakeholders. Contributors want
to know where their contributions are going and how they are being spent.
In  this  regard,  the  Waqf  Fund  collaboration  between  Islamic  banks  and  the  State  Islamic
Religious Councils provides a good mechanism for the financial sector to lend its expertise and
share best practices on good governance and transparency practices in managing fund. Under
the initiative, the Code of Governance and Transparency of Waqf Fund will be issued by AIBIM.
This will act as guidance for more efficient and effective management of waqf and with higher
governance and transparency practices, thus bringing waqf to the next level.
Conclusion
Waqf has played a significant socioeconomic role throughout history. Exciting potential lies within
waqf, even today. As trustees of wealth bestowed upon us by Allah, we are entrusted to ensure
that  waqf  meets  its  intended  objectives.  If  properly  developed,  managed  and  utilised,  we  can
harness  its  potential  as  a  highly  effective  platform  for  sustainable  economic  growth,  one  that
creates sustainable and perpetual benefits for all, especially our future generation.
It is time to put strategies and plans into action. 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
