Governor     
Title 
Date 
Event 
Venue 
: Mr. Tariq Bajwa 
: SBP’s 70th Anniversary: Welcome Note by Governor SBP
: July 01, 2018 
: State Bank of Pakistan’s 70-year Celebration Event 
: SBP Head Office Karachi. 
State Bank of Pakistan’s 70th Anniversary 
Welcome Note by Governor SBP
Governor Sindh Mr. Zubair, 
Honorable Finance Minister, Dr Shamshad Akhtar,  
Respectable Former Governors, State Bank of Pakistan, Dr. Ishrat Husain, Mr. 
Yasin Anwar, Mr. Ashraf Wathra 
Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalam-o-aliakum and a very good morning! 
It is my pleasant duty and distinct privilege to welcome you all to the 70th 
anniversary of the establishment of State Bank of Pakistan. On the auspicious 
occasion of the opening of the SBP on July 1st, 1948, the Quaid said: 
“The opening of State Bank of Pakistan symbolizes the sovereignty of our state 
in the financial sphere. I need to hardly dilate on the important role the State 
Bank will have to play in regulating the economic life of our country. The 
monetary policy of the bank will have a direct bearing on our trade and 
commerce, both inside Pakistan as well as with the outside world and it is 
only to be desired that our policy should encourage maximum production and 
free flow of trade.” 
Page 1 of 4 
The SBP as an institution has tried to live up to the expectations of the Quaid. 
From a modest beginning in borrowed premises, ladies and gentlemen, SBP 
rose to have earned the reputation of being a professional, progressive and 
forward-looking institution. The journey has been challenging, arduous, but 
rewarding. This has been achieved by the grit and determination of those who 
have served in this organization during these decades. The example was set 
by our first Governor Mr. Zahid Husain who guided the Bank through its 
infancy and laid the basis of a sound financial system in face of an almost non-
existent banking system.  
Over the years, the passion, commitment and integrity that the rank and file of 
this institution has exhibited is unmatched by any other organization in 
Pakistan. SBP is one of the few public institutions in the country that have 
adhered to excellence in all fields especially human resource. 
With a competent and motivated human resource, the SBP has always strived 
to deliver the best and remained ahead of time compared to its regional peers. 
It is no wonder therefore, that SBP stands out in various fields: 
It was the first central bank in South Asia to have introduced a legal 
• 
framework for microfinance in 2001; 
It was the first central bank in South Asia to develop a regulatory 
• 
framework for branchless banking in 2008; 
It was the first central bank in South Asia, again, to have established an 
• 
independent Monetary Policy committee in 2015.  
Today, the SBP is a respected organization not only regionally, but also 
globally.  SBP’s professional excellence has been recognized at various 
international forums.  Some of these, I will recall here to refresh our 
memories: 
• 
Pakistan ranked No.1 in the world in microfinance regulatory 
framework by the Economist Intelligence Unit in 2010 and 2011, and number 
5 in overall financial inclusion environment in 2015. 
 Page 2 of 4 
• 
State Bank of Pakistan was voted as the Best Central Bank in Promoting 
Islamic Finance by a poll conducted by Islamic Finance News (IFN) in 2015 
and 2017;  
• 
SBP Governors have received accolades from different international 
organizations, which not only reflects professional excellence of the 
leadership, but also the institutional quality of SBP. My predecessor, Ashraf 
Wathra, was declared best Central Bank Governor recently. Earlier, Dr. 
Shamshad Akhtar and Dr. Ishrat Hussain were also conferred with such 
prestigious awards.  Similarly, SBP’s global partnerships with international 
organizations reached a new height during the tenure of Yaseen Anwar. Not 
just that, but the appointment of our former Governors at executive positions 
in leading international financial institutions, speak volume of their 
professional excellence. 
• 
Moreover, SBP’s senior staff have chaired and co-chaired various 
Groups and Committees at international forums, such as Alliance for Financial 
Inclusion and Islamic Financial Services Board.  
Not just that, but our staff has also been providing expertise to regional 
• 
central banks and organizations such as Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority, 
Bank of Oman, the Central Bank of Oman, Qatar and Bahrain and Gulf 
Monetary Council.  
Today, ladies and gentlemen, we are here to take stock of this institutional 
progress and celebrate our achievements. We will shortly play a documentary 
for you in which you will be able to experience this transformative journey 
that revolves around resilience, progress and modernization. 
We will also take this opportunity, ladies and gentlemen, to strategize our 
future based on the opportunities and challenges that lie ahead of us. To 
deliberate on these, we are privileged to have with us former Governors – the 
towering personalities of our country in the fields of economics and finance.  
We will seek their views and insight in understanding the granularities of 
evolving norms in the complex areas of political economy, institutional 
 Page 3 of 4 
management and inclusive and sustained growth. We will also seek their 
guidance in developing a long term vision for SBP.   
Once again, I thank all our distinguished guests for joining us today in our 
celebrations, despite being a Sunday. Thank you! 
  Page 4 of 4 
