François Villeroy de Galhau: Financial supervision and the role of
national authorities in Europe
Opening  address  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the
Autorité  de  contrôle  prudentiel  et  de  resolution  (ACPR)  Conference  on  Financial  Supervision,
Paris, 18 September 2018.
Mr. President [M. Draghi], Ms. Chair [D. Nouy],
 Mesdames, Messieurs,
 Bonjour et bienvenue à Paris,
It is a particular pleasure to welcome you to this conference on financial supervision and the role
of  national  authorities  in  Europe.  What  better  way  to  inaugurate  the  new  headquarters  of  the
ACPR – France’s supervision authority – than to bring in colleagues and experts from across the
continent.  I urge you to look at a few street names in the neighbourhood: this borough is called in
Paris “quartier de l’Europe” – very much in the spirit of what we are doing together at the SSM.
I warmly thank President Mario Draghi for being here. Before giving him the floor, let me stress
that we all have reasons to be proud of what has been achieved for Banking Union in the past
few years. But we must not be complacent. There are two priorities: one in substance, and one
in method.
 I. Our priority in substance: strengthening the second pillar on resolution
Now that we’ve had the Single Supervisory Mechanism up and running for four years, it’s easy
to  forget  that there  were  many  sceptics  who  were  sure  that  such  a  union  could  not  be
achieved. But, as Mark Twain would have said, “[we] didn’t know it was impossible so [we] did it.”
Today it is a tangible reality. In fact our supervisory practices have been harmonised upwards.
Our legal framework is stronger thanks to the single rulebook. And European banks are sounder
– the CET1 solvency ratio for major institutions has increased by more than 3 points since 2014
(from 11.3% to 14.6% at the end of last year). Danièle [Nouy], you deserve our congratulations on
this achievement!
Yet Banking Union’s second pillar, the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), is still incomplete.
Yes we have already managed our first cases, substantially improving the health of a number of
banks, notably in Spain and Italy. But making the SRM fully operational should be our top
priority.
 
In my opinion, it is the common backstop to the Single Resolution Fund that is really the key.
Experience from abroad is instructive: in most large jurisdictions, in particular the United States
and the United Kingdom, the intervention capabilities of resolution funds are backstopped by the
fiscal  authorities. And  they  are  not  a  burden  on  public  finances,  since  any  public  outlays  are
generally reimbursed by the private sector. The euro area agreement on the backstop reached
on the 29th of June is a crucial first step. It is now urgent to deliver on it by the end of 2018. Two
key issues remain: how to fund the backstop at a sufficiently high level to be credible, and
how  to  create  a swift  decision-making  process  to  deal  with  emergencies  –  if  we  need
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
weeks, it is useless. The euro area also needs a system for providing liquidity to financially
sound banks after resolution – one that is provided by the Eurosystem and secured by a high-
quality public guarantee.
 I’m fully convinced that once we have a credible and efficient mechanism for resolution, it will be
much easier to reach a pragmatic compromise on deposit insurance, probably with a focus on
liquidity sharing between national guarantee schemes.
 Let me add two thoughts on substance:
First, on anti-money laundering. In this area, I am convinced that we need to enhance our
approach by building on a network of national authorities and EBA that should ensure an
effective single anti-money laundering supervision. This means that EBA should have the
legal and human capacities to foster convergence of practices on the best standards, based
on clear European mandates. It should go as far as including effective breach of law reviews
and a capacity to directly intervene in some cases with European-wide impact.  
Second, what we have managed to achieve for banks can serve as an example for financial
markets. If we truly want to enhance financial integration for the purpose of better private risk
sharing and convergence across Europe, we need to advance the Capital Markets Union
agenda: we should in particular strengthen ESMA’s role as a supervisory authority, at least
with regard to wholesale market oversight – while duly involving national authorities when
appropriate. The Chairman of the AMF is a talented advocate of this.
II. Our priority in method: developing synergies within the SSM as a whole
Let me come back to the SSM. After only four years of existence, it is now fully operational, with
more than 2,300 supervisory decisions in 2017 alone. Those of you who work within the SSM are
the living breathing reality of European integration. Every day you prove that closer cooperation,
closer union is not a dream of the past but something we are still capable of today.
Part of the SSM’s success stems from its design: the mechanism constitutes an original model
of federalism, based on a close and continuous collaboration between the ECB and national
authorities at all levels: from the composition of the Supervisory Board to the Joint Supervisory
Teams (JSTs), the on-site teams and staff secondments.
This does not mean that all is rosy and that culture and practices have fully converged within the
SSM. Success allows us to consider now how the day-to-day functioning of the SSM can still be
improved. In my view, there are three main strategic priorities:
The first one is to further simplify processes. I welcome the current initiatives, including the
creation of the Simplification Group chaired by Petra Senkovic from the ECB and Edouard
Fernandez-Bollo  from  the  ACPR.  Various  measures  are  under  development,  like  the
growing  use  of  delegation,  the  streamlining  of  SREP  or  JST  functioning.  However,  an
essential challenge will be to make sure that all processes will remain optimised over time
and  that  simplification  becomes  a  full  and  permanent  part  of  decision-making,  from
conception to execution. To do so, simplification has to become one of the values that guide
the SSM.
The second priority is to promote mobility, thanks in particular to staff secondments and
more  on-site  supervisors  working  on  banks  outside  their  home  country.  Other  initiatives
could  include  very  short  staff  exchanges  or  swaps  within  JSTs,  between  the  ECB  and
national authorities, to allow members to better understand the culture and practices of their
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
counterparts.
The  third  and  final  priority  is  to develop  synergies.  Just  as  with  the  Eurosystem,  the
Banking Union constitutes a system with a strong center and strong national components,
which  ultimately  have  to  act  as  one  team.  The  goal  is  to  make  the  best  use  of  national
resources  by  fostering  their  participation  in  all  key  tasks  of  the  SSM.  National  authorities
should not hesitate to step up their involvement in the SSM. In return, the ECB should further
empower national authorities, especially in the framework of day-to-day supervision and in
the field of on-site inspections in branches or subsidiaries of significant institutions. Speaking
for  France,  the  ECB  can  obviously  rely  upon  the ACPR:  its  well-trained  employees  and
inspectors  are  fully  committed  to  serve  the  SSM  common  good  alongside  their  ECB
colleagues. As regards on-site inspections and cross-border missions, further efforts should
be made in order to tackle administrative hurdles. But I can already say that the ACPR will
aim to double its target of cross-border missions in 2019.
Strong cooperation between national authorities and the ECB is needed in banking supervision,
but not exclusively. Let’s not forget that a majority of national authorities are competent in other
fields of supervision, which matter for the SSM, such as insurance – which is the case for the
ACPR. These competences are valuable not only for the supervision of financial conglomerates
but also for the development of a more unified single market for insurance. In cooperation with
EIOPA, we are committed to preserving it after Brexit.
  Let me conclude. Ten years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, we have learnt three main
lessons.  First,  we  need  competent,  strong  and  independent  supervision.  Second,  we  need  a
level  playing  field,  at  least  in  Europe,  and  if  possible  at  the  international  level,  for  the
implementation  of  the  strengthened  rules:  without  demanding  supervision,  regulation  and  the
single rulebook could largely remain a paper exercise. Last but not least, we must never let our
guard down when it comes to financial stability. Anniversaries have to be a bastion against the
temptation to forget and fall asleep. The SSM is the fruit of all these lessons… and, under your
responsibility, the best guarantee for the future. Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
