Philip R Lane: 20 Years of ESCB statistics - what's next?
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Ninth ECB Statistics
Conference "20 years of ESCB statistics: What's next?", Frankfurt am Main, 11 July 2018.
 It is a pleasure to take part in this conference: the financial statistics produced by the European
System of Central Banks (ESCB) provide the data platform that is necessary for informed policy
making  by  central  bankers.  This  panel  is  dedicated  to  the  new  data  challenges  for  financial
stability, which has expanded in importance in terms of the mandates of central banks, especially
since the crisis.
 There  are  multiple  dimensions  to  the  preservation  of  financial  stability  and  the  restoration  of
financial stability in the aftermath of a crisis shock. The ex-ante conduct of micro-prudential and
macro-prudential policies can do much to preserve financial stability and build resilience against
systemic shocks. Once a crisis hits, the ex-post conduct of liquidity policies is a unique role of
central banks in managing a crisis and supporting the return of the financial system to normal
conditions in its aftermath.
 Of course, the inter-connections across financial systems imply that financial stability policies
have to be implemented with due attention to international and global financial conditions. At the
level of the EU and the euro area, there is much scope for coordination through the work of the
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) and the various policy levers of the European Central
Bank (ECB). However, there is much less scope for global coordination in managing financial
stability risks, even if the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), Financial Stability Board (FSB)
and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) help to build a common understanding of the common
risks facing the international financial system and there are some supra-national policy supports
available.
 At the same time, the extent of data sharing at an international level is quite limited. While the BIS
data hub facilitates the international sharing of firm-level data on systemically important financial
institutions among a small group of supervisors, this is an exceptional case: there is no similar
degree of data sharing for smaller banks or other types of financial firms.
 In similar fashion, European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR) has been a big step forward
in providing data on interest rate swaps and other derivative positions. Through the ESRB, it is
possible  to  obtain  an  EU-wide  view  of  the  operation  of  these  markets:  but  there  is  no
corresponding data matrix at the global level. It will be important that the EMIR dataset can be
linked  to  other  datasets  to  understand  the  total  balance  sheet  exposures.  The  adoption  of
common identifiers, such as  the  Legal  Entity  Identifier  (LEI),  across  the  various  granular  data
initiatives is critical to facilitate these linkages.
 Another  challenge  posed  by  globalisation  is  the  dual  roles  played  by  multinational  firms  in
production and in the international financial system.  It is increasingly difficult to interpret national
economic  and  financial  accounts,  given  the  mis-match  between  the  global-level  integrated
1
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
activities  of  international  firms  and  the  residency-based  concepts  that  underpin  national
accounting. In particular, the scale of cross-border intra-firm transactions is a severe challenge
in working out the implications of observed balance of payments flows. The wide spread use of
special  purpose  entities  in  the  financial  transactions  of  multinational  firms  further  adds  to  the
difficulty in accurately capturing the underlying trends. At European and global levels, developing
a shared understanding among statisticians of the international activities of multinational firms is
a high priority due to the threat to the relevance of statistics. The statistical system will also need
to  become  more  agile,  as  the  activities  of  multinational  firms  evolve  at  a  rapid  pace  and  the
underlying rules and manuals can take several years to catch up.
 So,  from  a  financial  stability  perspective,  in  identifying  next  steps  for  ESCB  statistics,  an
important priority is to continue the painstaking work to develop sufficient momentum and trust
across  jurisdictions  to  enable  more  data  sharing  at  a  global  level  across  these  various
dimensions.
 Let me turn to the data requirements for effective macroprudential policymaking. In particular, let
me  focus  on  borrower-based  measures  such  as  loan-to-value  (LTV)  or  debt-to-income  (DTI)
ceilings that can help improve the stability of mortgage markets. Since risks are concentrated in
the higher-risk tail of the distribution of mortgage loans, it is very helpful to have granular, loan-by-
loan data in calibrating borrower-based measures. In particular, a full risk assessment requires a
capacity  to  match  loan  data  with  borrower  characteristics  such  as  income  level,  employment
status, household composition, non-mortgage debts and other financial assets and liabilities. In
relation to gaining an overview of the aggregate debts of a household, it is important to highlight
the value of a comprehensive consumer credit register.
 Since  loan  balances  and  individual-level  characteristics  fluctuate  over  time,  it  is  preferable  to
have updated data on each loan, rather than just at the date of origination. Such a granular and
up-to-date data file requires a statistical capacity to match across different data sets, such that
cooperation between financial statisticians and the guardians of administrative data (such as tax
authorities) is highly desirable. Of course, it is necessary to set up robust procedures, in order to
ensure the reconciliation of data privacy rights and the policy value of an integrated data file.
 Let me turn the financial stability risks associated with the property sector. Boom-bust property
cycles have proven to be an important source of financial instability, such that it is essential to
have reliable data on developments in property-related lending and in property prices. In relation
to understanding the exposures of banks to the property sector, the rollout of AnaCredit should
facilitate  a  much  improved  understanding  of  the  distribution  of  exposures  and  the  inter-
connections  across  banks  via 
the  ESRB
recommendations on closing real estate data gaps will further help, especially in capturing non-
Bank funding of the sector.
2
the  property  sector.  
Implementation  of 
In  relation  to  property  price  indices,  best-practice  methods  in  the  measurement  of  residential
property prices are well understood but there remains an important challenge in improving the
calculation of price indices for commercial property prices. This is inherently trickier in view of the
intrinsic heterogeneity of the commercial property sector. The ongoing existence of data gaps in
commercial property prices in various countries is a significant barrier to a full analysis of the
risks posed by the commercial real estate sector. Given the substantial correlations in property
prices  across  countries,  there  are  material  negative  international  spillovers  from  inadequate
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
measurement  in  individual  countries:  it  is  in  the  collective  European  interest  to  develop
comprehensive property price statistics across all member countries.
 In terms of the financial stability agenda, progress is also needed in developing a uniform, pan-
European  approach  to  analysing  the  balance  sheets  of  investment  funds.  In  particular,  it  is
necessary to know the leverage and liquidity positions of funds (including synthetic leverage) in
order to trace out the potential dynamics of disorderly market events or redemption runs. Given
the increase in the relative importance of investment funds in the financial system, there is a mis-
match  between  the  effort  paid  to  collect  high-quality  banking  data  and  level  of  information
available for the funds sector.
 Finally,  the  spillover  and  contagion  dynamics  that  are  a  central  feature  of  full-blown  financial
crises can only be properly understood if more is done to measure the inter-connections across
different financial entities and different sectors of the financial system. For instance, there has
been  a  significant  improvement  in  the  monitoring  of  shadow  banking  at  European  and  global
levels, as captured by the reports published by the ESRB and FSB. At the same time, the matrix
of who-to-whom linkages remains sparsely populated, both across sectors and across borders.
An improved statistical understanding of inter-connectedness would be very helpful for financial
stability policymakers.
1
2
See  Stefan  Avdjiev,  Mary  Everett,  Philip  R.  Lane  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2018),  “Tracking  the  International
Footprints of Global Firms,” BIS Quarterly Review (March), 47–66.
More generally, the granular, detailed data collected by AnaCredit has transformative potential for a wide range
of financial stability topics.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
