Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Leveraging remittances for sustainable
development goals - a call to action
Keynote  address  by  Ms  Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Global  Forum  on  Remittances,  Investment  and
Development 2018 Asia Pacific "Leveraging Remittances for Sustainable Development Goals: A
Call to Action", Kuala Lumpur, 8 May 2018.
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to Kuala Lumpur and the Global Forum on Remittances,
Investment and Development 2018 Asia Pacific.
We  host  many  regional  and  global  events  here  in  this  building.  From  time  to  time,  we  are
reminded at these events that not all challenges are created equal.
Some challenges inspire hope for the improvement of countless lives beyond our own borders,
and create not just opportunities but a need for us to come together across social, economic and
cultural boundaries to advance the development agenda.
This Forum is such an occasion and Bank Negara Malaysia is honoured to be among partners
who are working together to build a better future for economic migrants the world over.
Beyond remittances: Migration and economic unfreedom
To provide some context for the discussions that will follow over the coming days, it seemed
fitting to draw on the work of Nobel Laureate Professor Amartya Sen nearly two decades ago.
In  his  magnum  opus  “Development  as  Freedom”,  Sen  described  how  a  particular  childhood
incident shaped his views on the concept of development.
It was during the days of religious conflicts in Dhaka, now the capital of Bangladesh. Ten year old
Sen was playing in his garden, when a man named Kader Mia came through the gate, bleeding
profusely. He had been knifed by some communal thugs while working in the neighborhood.
Kader  Mia  unfolded  his  tale  of  woe  to  Sen  and  his  family  as  he  was  rushed  to  the  hospital.
Despite his wife’s warning to Kader Mia not to venture into a hostile area in such troubled times,
he had no choice but to seek work there to bring food home to his impoverished family.
With the passing of Kader Mia, Sen learned from a very early age that economic “unfreedom”, as
he termed it, in the form of extreme poverty, can make one a helpless prey in the violation of
other kinds of freedom – including freedom from want, from fear and from discrimination.
Sen argued that development requires the removal of major sources of “unfreedom”, one of them
being poverty. In Kader Mia’s case, the price he had to pay for his economic “unfreedom” was
death. 
This is why we are here – to do our part to help many, like Kader Mia, who remain shackled by
their circumstances, achieve economic freedom.
This Forum seeks to address not just the question of facilitating transfers more efficiently, but
how  to  make  such  transfers go  further  and  do  more  to  meet  today’s  most  pressing  global
challenges  –  from  access  to  healthcare  and  education,  equal  economic  opportunity  for  all,  to
protection of the environment.
Without  addressing  these  challenges,  economic  freedom  would  remain  an  elusive  dream  for
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
many.
This Forum will cover a broad range of issues – not all of which will have clear solutions. But we
will most certainly learn more, understand better and hopefully, be able to determine what our
next steps must be. 
With that in view, let me take this opportunity to offer some brief reflections on what those steps
might be. 
Reinvigorating financial services to drive the SDGs
First,  we  need  to  do  more  to  reinvigorate  financial  services  to  drive  the  United  Nations
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Many countries in this region, including Malaysia, have made important progress in the adoption
of the SDGs under the national development agenda.
Certainly,  Malaysia  has  had  a  long-standing  commitment  to  the  pursuit  of  sustainable  and
inclusive growth.
Malaysia’s national economic development policies adopted since more than four decades ago
reflect  many  of  the  SDGs.  Like  many  central  banks  in  this  region,  financial  inclusion  is  an
important priority of Bank Negara Malaysia – one that is in fact legislated as a mandate of the
central bank, which is actually not all that common in many countries. Because it is a statutory
mandate  of  the  Central  Bank  in  Malaysia,  it  has  enabled  Bank  Negara  to  lead  and  drive  the
financial inclusion agenda with the support of our key domestic partners and stakeholders.
With growing global concerns over rising inequality and the disproportionate impact of crises on
the poor, there has been considerable focus by Governments and policymakers to ensure that
no segment of society is left behind in participating and benefitting from the nation’s development.
But what of the role of the financial services industry? 
It is worth noting that 14 out of the 17 SDGs include specific targets that focus at some level on
the financial sector. To mention a few:
On poverty: The SDGs include a specific target to build resilience of the poor and those in
vulnerable situations;
On hunger: Targets include doubling productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers
through secure and equal access to financial services;
On  health  and  well-being:    Ensure  universal  health  coverage,  including  financial  risk
protection;
On education: Ensure all youth and a substantial proportion of adults achieve literacy and
numeracy;
On  decent  work  and  economic  growth:  Encourage  the  formalisation  and  growth  of  micro
and small and medium enterprises, including through access to financial services;
On  industry,  innovation  and  infrastructure:  Increase  access  of  small  scale  industrial
enterprises to financial services; and
Of particular interest to this forum, on inequality: Reduce the transaction costs of migrant
remittances to less than 3 per cent and eliminate remittance corridors with costs higher than
5 per cent.
The list goes on. 
Yet,  based  on  a  recent  survey  report  by  GlobeScan,  only  one  third  of  the  private  sector
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
respondents  reflected  on  SDGs  in  setting  long-term  sustainability  strategies  for  their
organisations.
This should concern us.   
In 2015, 15 years after the Millennium Development Goals were adopted, the United Nations itself
conceded  that  the  Millennium  Development  Goals,  despite  propelling  significant  progress,  fell
short for many people.
So  a  different  approach  was  taken  for  the  SDGs.  One  that  was  more  encompassing  and
inclusive.  Five million people from 88 countries shared their deepest, most pressing concerns
and aspirations to create the SDGs. 
These aspirations would ring hollow without the dedication and commitment of those with the
influence and position to make a difference. For the financial sector, this needs to go beyond the
cursory initiatives that have generally been associated with “corporate social responsibilities”.  
Greater  progress  by  financial  institutions  to  more  fully  embrace  sustainable  principles  in  their
business  strategies  will  play  an  important  catalytic  role  in  delivering  the  SDGs. Among  other
things, it would provide a stronger focus on needs-based selling, increase financial resources
that are directed at economic activities that promote sustainable goals, and encourage support
for businesses to adopt sustainable practices.  
Looking beyond remittances
Turning more specifically to remittances which is the focus of this Forum, more can and should
be done to amplify the developmental impact of remittances.
In its report Sending Money Home, the International Fund for Agricultural Development estimates
that about 1 billion people – migrants and their families – send and receive remittances. This
translates to one in seven people in the world.
The most dynamic growth in remittances over the past decade has been in Asia, which receives
55 per cent of all flows. In some countries, remittances equal more than 20 per cent of GDP.
These statistics underscore the profound impact of remittances on development.
For  most  migrants,  the  prospect  of  dealing  with  banks  remains  generally  daunting.  Non-bank
remittance service providers (RSPs) on the other hand are trusted by migrants and a regular
point of contact to send and receive money.  This places them in a strategic position to evolve
from narrow service providers to change agents for entire communities, by providing financial
education and solutions that can help pull families out of poverty traps.
For example, RSPs can partner with financial institutions in sending and recipient countries to
create savings, insurance and investment products that are linked to migrant remittances. Some
developing  countries  with  large  diaspora  groups  have  successfully  issued  diaspora  bonds,
where the bond proceeds have been channeled to finance development projects in their home
countries. 
Other innovations can surely be developed to more effectively leverage migrant resources for
development.
There is certainly no shortage of creativity and innovation in financial services. Regrettably, the
Global  Financial  Crisis  will  remain  a  dark  period  of  history  where  such  creative  forces  were
misdirected, with dire consequences for growth and development. 
We must ensure that this never happens again.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  that  should  not  discourage  us  from  harnessing  and  redirecting  such  creative  forces  to
address today’s most urgent global challenges, and in the process, restore trust and confidence
in the financial industry. 
New paradigms in policymaking
This brings me to the role of policy. 
In recent years, global standard setters including the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision,
the Insurance Association of Insurance Supervisors and the Financial Action Task Force, have
heeded the call to promote a better balance between the objectives of financial stability, financial
integrity and financial inclusion. This has resulted in important strides taken to encourage a more
proportionate regulation.
Despite this, a recent report by the Financial Stability Board disclosed that as of 2017, the de-
risking  phenomenon  continued  at  the  global  level,  affecting  remittance  service  providers  and
many poor countries that rely on remittances from abroad.
Clarifying regulatory standards is an important step, but clearly this alone is not enough. 
So where to from here?
First, taking a cue from Albert Einstein who famously said that we cannot solve our problems
with  the  same  thinking  we  used  when  we  created  them,  there  is  a  need  for  policymakers  to
create safe harbours for experimentation.
A number of regulators have introduced regulatory sandboxes that have helped create a virtuous
cycle of innovation and sensible regulation, while isolating risks. 
In  Malaysia,  solutions  tested  in  the  Bank’s  regulatory  sandbox  enabled  the  Bank  to  design
regulatory safeguards that would allow the implementation of end-to-end electronic know-your-
customer processes for the provision of remittance services. 
By dispensing with the need to conduct physical face-to-face verifications, this is expected to
significantly expand access to remittance services for customers working and living in remote
parts of Malaysia, while effectively addressing money laundering and terrorist financing risks.   
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  also  successfully  collaborated  with  the  World  Bank  and  the  money
services business industry in Malaysia to pilot and adopt solutions that have expanded the reach
and reduced the costs of formal remittances. 
Second, policy life cycles will need to be managed more proactively, to allow for policies to be
renewed when conditions change.
While much is often said about policy stability, policies that fail to keep pace with conditions that
are  changing  far  more  rapidly  than  we  have  experienced  before,  can  be  counterproductive  at
best, and at worst, create greater risks for the system. 
The  SDGs  are  undeniably  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  attempts  to  capture  the  most
important global challenges that we face. Solutions to these challenges will invariably create new
issues for policy makers to consider. This in turn will lead to shorter policy life cycles, and a need
for faster policy responses to emerging issues.
Third, we need better remittance data. 
It  is  encouraging  that  efforts  are  being  taken  to  ensure  the  availability  of  official  global  data
sources on remittance flows. Yet, challenges remain in ensuring that the data is both complete
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and comparable. 
These  challenges  are  compounded  by  an  increasing  need  for  data  at  a  more  granular  and
disaggregated level. For example, initiatives by the United Nations Capital Development Fund to
survey  remittance  recipients  in  the  Mekong  region  helped  develop  a  better  understanding  of
relationships between gender and financial inclusion. Yet such data is not available in many other
countries.
With  the  large  and  increasing  size  of  intra-regional  migration  in  this  region,  there  are
opportunities  to  collect  and  share  remittance  and  migration  data  at  the  regional  level  to
complement global datasets. This could be advanced through existing regional forums, including
various forums at the ASEAN level.
Without  good  data,  we  cannot  hope  to  move  very  far,  or  with  much  confidence  in  efforts  to
increase the development impact of remittances. 
In summary, the notion of proportionate regulation has more than one dimension. It should not be
mistaken for lighter regulation, nor should it be informed by considerations of size alone. The
world is much more complex and regulators will need to find creative ways to better understand
and manage that complexity.
This is a paradigm shift in the way that regulation is traditionally approached – to one that is more
iterative, more inclusive and more discerning. 
Conclusion
Eleanor Roosevelt once said that universal human rights begins in small places close to home –
where  every  man,  woman,  and  child  seeks  equal  justice,  opportunity  and  dignity  without
discrimination. 
Remittances have significant potential to deliver such opportunities to millions of migrants in their
home countries. Let this Forum serve as a call to action, based on an honest search for better
understanding and a genuine commitment to pursue individual and collective solutions. 
With much at stake, we cannot afford not to.
Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
