Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
 
The Irish Mortgage Market – 2018 and beyond.  
 
Introduction  
 
Good morning.  I would like to thank the Institute of Bankers for arranging today’s event1.  
 
The housing and mortgage market in Ireland continues to attract significant public attention. The 
challenges in the housing market are a cause of real concern for many citizens.   
 
The interplay between the availability of suitable housing, house prices and the mortgage market are 
critical dynamics in the economy and society as a whole.  Furthermore, as we continue to deal with 
the toxic legacies of the financial crisis, both conduct and prudential related, it is clear that elements 
of dysfunction remain in both the housing market and the mortgage market.  
 
In my remarks today, I will cover:  
 
the key characteristics of a functioning mortgage market; 
 
the Irish housing market;  
 
the Irish mortgage market today;  
 
  macro prudential measures; and 
  mortgage interest rates and switching.  
 
I will start by providing an overview of the role of the Central Bank in the context of the mortgage 
market.  
 
Role of the Central Bank  
 
The mission of the Central Bank is serve the public interest by safeguarding financial and price 
stability and protecting consumers.  My aspiration for the financial services system is that is well-
managed, resilient and serves the needs of the economy and its customers over the long term. 
 
This requires that financial services firms:  
  have sufficient financial resources, including under a plausible but severe stress;  
  have profitable business models over the long-term;  
  are well governed, have effective cultures, with effective risk management and control 
 arrangements; and 
can recover if they get into difficulty, and if they cannot, are resolvable in an orderly manner 
without significant externalities or taxpayer costs. 
 
One key role of the financial services system is to provide borrowers with loans to purchase their 
homes.  The Central bank’s role is to ensure, through its economic analysis, its macro prudential 
tools, its micro prudential supervision (as part of the SSM2), and through delivery of its consumer 
protection mandate, that the economic and social good of mortgage provision (as a critical financial 
service) is prudent, sustainable, and that the best interests of consumers’ are protected. In other 
words, we strive to ensure that lenders are appropriately mitigating the risks inherent in mortgage 
lending.  
 
Unfortunately, there are few countries that have a worse experience than Ireland of the economic 
and human costs that arise when these risks crystallise.  This is why the Central Bank and other 
agencies have taken such interventionist action in the mortgage market since the onset of the 
 1 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
financial crisis.  Before considering these issues and risks further, it is worth spending a moment on 
the key traits of a functioning mortgage market. 
 
A simple functioning mortgage market 
 
In Ireland, the vast majority of mortgage lending takes place through the banking system.  As well as 
pooling risk (collecting savings from depositors and lending to borrowers), banks also undertake 
maturity transformation – obtaining relatively short term funding and lending over the long term.  
Banks charge margins above the cost of funding to cover, inter alia, operational costs, credit risk 
costs and to give a sufficient return after these costs to generate a sustainable profit over the long 
term.  
 
For the market to function well, consumers should be treated fairly and there should be appropriate 
frameworks in place, such that contractual terms are clear to support their decision-making, and 
strong protections exist to support them if they get into payment difficulties.  In order to 
differentiate between secured and unsecured lending in the pricing of loans, it is important that 
lenders have the ability, as a last resort, to realise the underlying security if the borrower defaults on 
the loan. 
 
A functioning market should deliver a sufficient supply of appropriately priced mortgages to support 
house prices that are in line with the fundamentals of the economy, without driving credit fuelled 
house price bubbles.  
 
It is evident that the Irish mortgage market has many of these aspects.  Indeed, there has been a 
significant strengthening across all these areas in the last decade or so.  However, it is also clear that 
dysfunction still exists – and continues to affect the functioning of the mortgage market in Ireland 
today.  I will turn to these shortly, but before I do, it is worth considering briefly, by way of context, 
the Irish housing market more broadly.   
 
The Irish Housing Market.  
 
Housing market developments are central to understanding both conditions in the mortgage market 
today and their evolution tomorrow.  The housing stock in Ireland was just over two million homes 
in 20163. This has flat lined since the height of the financial crisis - increasing by just 8,800 since 2011 
(less than a half of one per cent of the stock). Over the same period, the Irish population grew by 
over 170,000 (by 3.8%) to 4.7m. Added to this, with the welcome economic recovery, Ireland is 
experiencing:  
increasing income;  
increasing employment;  
 
 
  a longer term trend in a reduction in the size of households4; 
 
the increasing presence of foreign private equity firms and real estate investment trusts 
(REITs), which tend to operate mainly in urban markets; and  
  evidence of a trend to increasing use of short term lets in urban areas5. 
 
In other words, and in line with classical economic theory, the demand for housing has been 
increasing, at the same time as supply has, until very recently, been flat. Consequently, the strong 
recovery in house prices and upward pressure on rents are understandable looking at it purely in 
economic terms.  However, while understandable, this does not make it easier for those that are 
trying to secure housing across the wide spectrum of demand for it.   
 
 2 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
This clearly has consequences from an affordability perspective, particularly for first time buyers.  
The relationship between incomes and house prices mean that unless incomes rise or there is a 
decrease in house prices or there is further access to more affordable housing, the ability to 
purchase a home supported by mortgage finance will be increasingly difficult for more of the Irish 
population. The solution to this issue cannot be imprudent lending. The substantive solution to this 
societal issue is to build more and affordable housing for Irish people.  
 
If we look to the future, the population is expected to grow. Project Ireland 2040 estimates that by 
2040 the population of Ireland will reach almost six million. This will result in a need for 550,000 
more homes with current estimated housing demand of 30,000-35,000 per annum to overcome the 
current shortfall and then this will reduce to 25,000 new homes per year. In this context, Central 
Bank research points to house completions of approximately 23,500 units in 2018 and 28,500 in 
20196. 
 
The profile of the housing stock is also changing with an increase in the number of apartments. 
Recent CSO data shows that within the Dublin City local authority area, apartments (74,537) were 
the main dwelling type for the first time - replacing terraced houses (74,446)7. However, the 
proportion of apartment living in Ireland is the lowest in the European Union and the number living 
in semi-detached or detached housing in Ireland is the highest across the European Union8. 
 
These dynamics require funding to be available for building and for purchase.  It is unlikely and 
strongly undesirable, that this funding would all come through the banking system, as was largely 
the case leading up to 2008.   The presence, therefore, of non-bank financial institutions such as 
private equity, pension funds and insurance undertakings, in Ireland should be welcomed – 
providing as it does funding for development, and reducing the risks to the domestic financial 
system in the event that there is a downturn or a correction.  
 
 
The Irish Mortgage Market today  
 
The stock of existing mortgage loans at the end of December 2017 was €120.5 billion9. This is made 
up of Private Dwelling Home (PDH) loans of €98.5 billion and Buy to Let (BTL) lending of €21.9 billion; 
and is comprised of c.852,000 mortgage accounts (c.730,000 PDH and c.122,000 BTL)10.  
 
In 2017, there was €7.4bn of new lending for 35,400 loans11. This was a 30% increase in the total 
lending from 2016 to 2017. The average loan size for first time buyers was €206,216 and €232,275 
for second and subsequent buyers. Of the mortgages in scope of the Macro prudential mortgage 
measures, 54% relate to first time buyers and 46% to second and subsequent buyers.  
 
Mortgage lending is important for the economy.  It is critically important to the domestically focused 
retail banks.  At the end of 2017, residential mortgages represented 58% of banks’ total gross 
loans12. In 2017, new mortgage lending amounted to 38% of all new lending activities by the five 
retail banks, including lending outside of Ireland.  
 
Recent Central Bank research has indicated that near term developments in the volume of new 
mortgage lending warrants careful monitoring such that high levels of activity are not accompanied 
by the emergence of excessive cyclical systemic risk13. The macro prudential rules (which I will touch 
on later) and the micro prudential regulation and supervision of the retail banks are, therefore, 
critical to the continued safety and soundness of the domestic banking system.  
 
 3 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
It is one of the paradoxes of the Irish mortgage market that there are potential increases of cyclical 
risks, at the same time as we have the continued human suffering and financial stability risks of 
elevated non-performing mortgage loans.   
 
At the end of December 2017, c.48,000 PDH loans (7%) and c.18,000 BTL loans (15%) were more 
than three months in arrears on their repayments.  Within these figures, c.29,000 PDH (4%) and 
c.13,000 BTL (11%) loans are greater than two years past due.  10 years since the first waves of the 
financial crisis started buffeting Ireland, and five years since the peak of non-performing loans in 
Ireland, at a time when we are almost certainly closer to the next downturn than we are to the start 
of the last one, we still have a crisis in the mortgage market.   
 
First and foremost this matters because behind each account in arrears there is distress and, in the 
case of PDH loans, the vulnerability of borrowers at risk of losing their home.  This is why there are a 
significant number of protections and supports for consumers facing mortgage arrears.  
 
Within the remit of the Central Bank’s responsibilities, the approach to mortgage arrears resolution 
is focused on ensuring the fair treatment of borrowers through a strong consumer protection 
framework while ensuring banks are sufficiently capitalised, hold appropriately conservative 
provisions, and have appropriate arrears resolution strategies and operations in place. 
 
This includes, regulatory requirements such as the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears (CCMA), 
which was put in place to ensure the fair and transparent treatment of financially-distressed 
borrowers and governs how lenders interact with these borrowers. The CCMA includes 
requirements that arrangements be sustainable and based on a full assessment of the individual 
circumstances of the borrower and that repossession be used only as a last resort.  Firms must also 
follow the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process (MARP) when dealing with borrowers facing arrears. 
The MARP process also requires alternative options if a restructure could not be agreed or was not 
appropriate.  
 
Within the broader Irish consumer protection framework, there is a range of advice and support for 
those in arrears, including the Money Advice and Budgeting Service (MABS), the national mortgage 
Arrears Resolution Service (Abhaile) and a Court Mentor service to assist debtors faced with court 
proceedings.  
 
The Government also introduced the Personal Insolvency Act 2012, which introduced three debt 
resolution processes: A Debt Relief Notice, A Debt Settlement Arrangement and a Personal 
Insolvency Arrangement. The Insolvency Service was established in March 2013 as an independent 
statutory body. The Government also introduced a national mortgage-to-rent scheme. There are 
also a number of other non-statutory organisations providing assistance to those in mortgage 
arrears.  
 
However, these protections, safety nets and restructuring options are not going to address the 
underlying problems if distressed borrowers do not engage with their lenders or the supports that 
are in place.  In this context, it is noteworthy that:  
 
 circa 44% of PDH loans that are more than two years past due are also more than five years 
past due14; 
  38% of borrowers of PDH loans that are more than two years past due had not engaged with 
their lender as of end 201715.  
 
 4 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
There is clearly a high level of personal distress in individual borrower circumstances that are 
reflected in these numbers. However, particularly where borrowers are not engaging, and the hole is 
simply getting bigger, a functioning secured lending market has to have meaning to that 
security.  There are costs to all other borrowers through the impact on secured lending pricing 
together with financial stability risks where this security is undermined.  
 
In other words, the high level of non-performing mortgage loans continues to affect the functioning 
of the Irish mortgage market today.  Key determinants of mortgage pricing include the risk of default 
and the associated capital that a bank is required to hold to cover this risk.  It is a statement of the 
obvious, but this is why unsecured lending rates are higher than secured.  Not only do current 
default levels matter, but so do historical levels.  This is reflected in the Irish banks holding 
considerably more capital for mortgage lending than some European peers16. It is also why the 
higher interest rates and net interest margins in the Eurozone are typically, albeit not exclusively, 
found in the countries with higher levels of NPLs.  
 
There is also a correlation between these same countries and the shrinkage in their banking sector, 
and so a reduction in competition in the sector, as has been the case in Ireland.  The exit of providers 
and the impact on the attractiveness of the Irish market for new providers is also attributable to the 
level of non-performing loans.  Both of these factors also have obvious implications for mortgage 
pricing.    
 
From economic and financial stability perspectives, high levels of non-performing loans tie up capital 
and operational capability, which may otherwise be used in more productive ways.  Furthermore, 
the uncertainty of banks’ balance sheet strength and the subsequent reduction in market confidence 
make them more vulnerable to funding shocks.  
 
A comprehensive account of the history of non-performing loans in Ireland and the policy responses 
to them is outlined in the Central Bank’s paper on Resolving Non-Performing Loans in Ireland: 2010-
201817. 
 
Banks’ provisioning models, which determine the amounts they set aside for loan losses, include 
assumptions about house price movements.  In Ireland, the significant recovery in house prices has 
led to some reduction in the level of provision coverage of non-performing mortgage loans. The 
continued high level of non-performing loans makes them highly vulnerable to future economic 
downturns, from both the existing non-performing loans, and potentially new defaults.  While all the 
Irish retail banks are significantly better capitalised than pre 2008, they are more vulnerable than 
those without this legacy to future economic shocks. 
 
While recognising that eaten bread is soon forgotten, it is worth spending some time outlining what 
has been done. The hard work and sacrifices of those borrowers in distress that have engaged, the 
pressure and the requirements of the Central Bank, the banks’ willingness to sustainably restructure 
mortgages (enforced by the Central Bank’s requirements that legal action can only be done as a last 
resort18), all underpinned by economic growth, have resulted in the number of mortgage accounts in 
arrears being halved, primarily19 through restructure, since the peak of 2013.  
 
At the end of 2017, approximately one in six (c.118,000) of all PDH loans in existence had had some 
form of restructure. 87% of these loans were meeting the terms of this restructure, and 79% of them 
are no longer in arrears20.  Repayment probabilities of modified mortgages increase where 
permanent or longer-term, more sustainable modifications (i.e. in line with the Central Bank’s 
sustainability guidelines21) are put in place, rather than modifications of a temporary nature. Other 
factors more generally associated with mortgage payment difficulty such as higher loan to value 
 5 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
ratios, higher interest rates, loan origination cohort effects, geographic factors and interest rate type 
effects are all shown to have explanatory roles when focussing specifically on the repayment 
probabilities of modified mortgages.22   
 
Unfortunately, there has also been loss of ownership.  If we, economically and societally, want a 
functioning mortgage market, where secured lending is priced in a different way to unsecured, then 
that security must mean something.  Between September 2009 and December 2017, 8,506 PDH 
properties were repossessed.  This equates to around one in 16 of those that were in arrears at the 
2013 peak, or 7% of the restructured accounts, providing evidence that this action has been taken as 
a last resort as required under the CCMA. Approximately two thirds of these were surrendered or 
voluntarily sold, with the remainder repossessed through the courts.  The majority of those in the 
legal process now have been deemed non-cooperating before the legal process was initiated. 87% 
are in arrears over 720 days with an average arrears balance of over €53,00023.  
 
Recognising the individual distress these numbers represent, I would again urge anyone in arrears to 
engage with their lenders and / or the supports that are available.   
 
The Central Bank, as part of the SSM, continues to require banks to reduce non-performing loans in 
a sustainable way.  There are multiple tools available, including: re-engaging with borrowers, 
restructures, accounting write downs, mortgage to rent, engaging through the Insolvency Service, 
sales and securitisations and the legal process.   
 
It is in this context that the Irish retail banks have submitted updated NPL reduction strategies.  
These strategies include both planned workout and potential sales24.  In the three years to 
December 2017, about one quarter of the €45bn of NPL reduction in the Irish retail banks was 
achieved through portfolio sales. The remainder was due to on-going restructuring, workouts and 
write-offs. Similar proportions could be expected for the next three years. Portfolio sales are a 
legitimate and necessary approach for banks to use to address non-performing mortgage loans. 
 
Sales have proved to be controversial, particularly for PDH loans, in part due to a perception that the 
non-banks will seek to foreclose more aggressively than banks.  To date, this has not been the case. 
There has been no material difference in the number of legal proceedings issued between banks and 
non-banks, as a percentage of the total number of PDH accounts in arrears25.  
 
It is also important to emphasise that the Central Bank has, with the support of the Oireachtas, 
ensured that the protections of our Codes of Conduct, including the CCMA, travel with the loans – it 
is the activity of credit servicing that is regulated, not the ownership of credit.  A credit servicing firm 
cannot take an action on behalf of or on the instruction of an unregulated loan owner, which would 
be a prescribed contravention of the Code or the CCMA.    
 
This approach already being taken in Ireland is consistent with the approach being developed across 
Europe26.  The European Commission has identified the presence of well-developed secondary 
markets for NPLs as one of the building blocks of Capital Markets Union (CMU), which is focused on 
providing new sources of financing for EU businesses, SMEs and high-growth innovative 
companies in particular, reflecting both the continued importance of banks’ financing of the 
European economy and the associated need to resolve NPLs. The proposal creates a common 
set of rules that third party credit servicers need to abide by in order to operate within the 
Union. The proposal sets common standards to ensure their proper conduct and supervision 
across the Union.  It is focused on the activity, rather than regulating the ownership. 
 
 6 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
More problematically, it is evident that the restructures undertaken by the non-banks have typically 
been more limited or have simply continued with shorter term forbearance, with a much greater 
reliance on arrears capitalisations and temporarily reduced payments.  There are also concerns 
regarding the potential sale of loans where the borrowers have engaged, agreed and are meeting 
the terms of a long term restructure (such as a split mortgage) and are in many ways locked in to the 
arrangements with their lender – i.e. cannot re-mortgage.  
 
To this end, the Central Bank has committed to complete a review of the CCMA, focused primarily 
on its effectiveness as regards the sale of loans, which were not a significant feature of the market at 
the time of the last CCMA review.  
 
The protections of the CCMA only apply to buy-to-let mortgages if the residential property is the 
only residential property in the State owned by the borrower.  For mortgages in arrears that do not 
fall within the scope of the CCMA (e.g., buy-to-let properties which are not the only residential 
property in the State owned by the borrower), the provisions of the Code apply where the borrower 
is a ‘personal consumer’.  With respect to arrears resolution, the Code requires a lender to seek to 
agree an approach that will assist the personal consumer in resolving the arrears.  Where the 
borrower is a micro, small or medium sized enterprise, the SME Regulations apply, which include 
specific requirements that regulated firms must comply with as regards handling arrears and 
financial difficulties.  There is significant progress in restructuring buy to let mortgages with over 
22,000 restructures, and a 44% reduction in the level of BTL arrears since the September 2013 peak. 
Of these, 78% are performing in line with their restructure agreements. However, there remains 
over 22,000 buy to let mortgages in arrears that are not restructured or performing in line with their 
restructure agreement. Of these over 13,000 buy to let mortgages have accumulated more than 720 
days of arrears. While there are many complex cases behind these figures, it is important to 
recognise that investors were purchasing properties to gain an investment return.  
 
It is also important to note, that the Central Bank’s codes of conduct cannot offer further protections 
for those borrowers who are not engaging and are getting deeper into arrears.  As conduct 
regulator, the Central Bank does not have the power in regulating the conduct of business of 
regulated financial service providers to interfere with the strategy and commercial decisions or the 
legitimate contractual rights of lenders. If lenders could not rely on their contractual rights or make 
their own commercial decisions within a consumer protection framework, it is likely to impact on the 
provision of and the cost of providing credit in the market.  Rather, in regulating lenders’ conduct of 
business, the Central Bank seeks to ensure that lenders comply with relevant conduct of business 
rules, including, through providing consumers with all relevant information, putting in place a 
process for the management of customers’ financial difficulties and not exerting undue pressure or 
influences on customers.  
 
Macro-prudential mortgage measures 
 
As I have touched on already, the Central Bank has taken numerous measures to both address the 
mortgage arrears crisis in Ireland as well as mitigate the risk of recurrence.  These include significant 
enhancements in our micro prudential supervision, which includes intensive and intrusive 
supervision of, inter alia, the sustainability of business models, funding risks, governance and risk 
appetite, capital and credit underwriting, all of which are relevant to the provision of mortgages.  
These actions also provide enhanced protections for borrowers, as do the enhancements to 
consumer protection codes and the CCMA.   
 
Furthermore, the Central Bank of Ireland’s macroprudential mortgage measures were introduced on 
9 February 2015. The measures aim to increase both bank and borrower resilience and mitigate the 
 7 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
risks of credit-house price spirals emerging, by limiting the Loan to Value (LTV) and Loan to Income 
(LTI) ratios applying to new residential mortgage lending27. The macroprudential mortgage measures 
form an integral part of the Central Bank of Ireland’s macroprudential policy framework. 
 
The Central Bank can also strengthen the resilience of the banking system by using the 
countercyclical capital buffer.  The countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) is a time varying capital 
requirement. It is designed to make the banking system more resilient and less pro-cyclical by 
requiring firms to hold more capital at the appropriate time so they are prepared for a downturn. 
The CCyB is currently set at 0%.  
 
Deputy Governor Sharon Donnery recently spoke in relation to the CCYB28.  The speech considered 
Ireland’s intrinsic volatility and the scale of legacy debts which increases vulnerability to future 
cyclical reversals, the likely minimal impact on credit growth and economic activity, the 
measurement and outlook uncertainty alongside data and implementation lags, how to enhance the 
effectiveness of already active macroprudential instruments and the role of new accounting 
standards.  
 
The speech concluded that the arguments in favour of setting a positive CCyB sufficiently early in the 
cycle, to build in resilience and mitigate pro-cyclicality in a downturn, are compelling.  
 
Interest rates 
 
A common and justifiable complaint about the Irish mortgage market is the interest rates charged 
relative to the eurozone average interest rate. While averages can be misleading, as is the case in 
Ireland if tracker rates are included, it is undoubtedly the case that mortgage interest rates for new 
lending are higher in Ireland than the average for other eurozone countries.  There are multiple 
reasons for this and to illustrate them, it is worth comparing the Irish market with another with 
significantly lower rates, such as France.  This can be done through a number of lenses: 
 
1)  Credit risk:  
The historical and current level of defaults in the Irish system are materially higher than 
most other Eurozone countries, including France, which has an NPL ratio of 3%29. 
Uncertainty regarding effecting collateral, and the use of guarantees in France (for 58% of 
loans30), which customers pay for and which protect the banks in the event of the borrower 
defaulting are also relevant factors. 
 
2)  Fixed vs variable interest rates:  
In parts of continental Europe, mortgages are offered at long dated (15-20 years) fixed rates. 
In France, as at the end of 2016, fixed rate loans accounted for 97.9% of new lending and 
90.7% of outstanding loans31.  In Ireland, 81% of loans are on floating rates and the 
remainder mostly on short dated fixed rates (three years or less)32. Currently there are two 
banks that offer 10 year fixed rate mortgages and no banks have a term that exceeds 10 
years33.  This characteristic translates interest rate risk from the banks, who can typically 
hedge it, to the borrower, who typically cannot, so increasing the vulnerability of Irish 
borrowers to interest rate shocks and the credit risk associated with the loan.  
  3)  Size, depth and concentration of the market:  
In France, outstanding housing loans were €955 billion at the end of 2017, about eight times 
the size of the Irish mortgage market.  There are obvious economies of scale for firms in 
materially larger markets, which may enable them to spread their costs over a larger 
customer base.   
 
8 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
Perhaps more importantly, the level of competition is greater. In Ireland there is currently a 
limited number of lenders operating in the market and the largest lenders have a significant 
market share. Central Bank research shows significant concentration in the Irish market34, 
with each of the main lenders also still facing some degree of legacy weaknesses and 
therefore costs.  
 
The low level of new entrants into the Irish market, given the relatively low barriers to entry 
for other European banks, which do not require further authorisation to offer mortgages in 
Ireland, is noteworthy and is plausibly connected with the levels of NPLs remaining in the 
system, as well as the relatively small size of the market. 
 
4)  Switching 
The lower levels of competition in the Irish market combined with lower levels of switching 
reduces the level of market discipline being applied, allowing higher margins to be charged.  
Some lenders take advantage of this inertia to differentiate between new lending and old 
and charge higher margins on the older lending, which are unlikely to be justified by the 
factors I have described.   
 
Central Bank research35 shows that circa 8% of new loans arose from switching between 
providers.  This is significantly less than in many other European markets (including France 
and the UK).  While there are 41% of accounts that are on tracker mortgage interest rates 
and are unlikely to be able to make savings, a sizeable majority of other borrowers could, 
either by switching products with their existing provider or by switching provider.  
 
The Central Bank conducted research on switching in Ireland in 201736. The research showed 
that many consumers in Ireland have not considered switching their mortgage unless they 
are moving home and that many are concerned that the process is too difficult and complex 
– notwithstanding that they have been through the process at least once before in taking 
out their mortgage in the first place. One of the key findings from the CCPC research in 2016 
was that “Only about one in seven mortgage holders have thought about switching or 
actively engaged with their mortgage provider in the past five years. Just 2% have actually 
switched their mortgage in the past five years”37 In 2017, of the total count of new loans 
circa 8% were switchers (2,853 of 35,472). 
 
For a first time buyer taking out the average size of a new loan (€206,216) with a 20% 
deposit for a 30 year term, the current rates on offer vary from 2.60% to 4.2%38. The 
potential amount saved between the low rate of 2.6% and the highest rate of 4.2% is 
significant. The monthly difference is €183, the yearly difference is almost €2,200 the 
difference over 5 years is almost €11,000. While this is may be an extreme example, even 
smaller differences in interest rates matter, offering the potential for significantly reduced 
monthly payments and / or reduced mortgage terms.  
  
In August 2017, the Central Bank published a Consultation Paper on, Enhanced Mortgage 
Measures: Transparency and Switching39, which set out a series of proposed new mortgage 
switching and transparency measures.  Submissions received during the public consultation 
process are currently being analysed with the intention to issue amendments to the 
Consumer Protection Code 2012 in the near future.  
 
The aim of the proposed new measures will be to help consumers make savings on their 
mortgage repayments, to support consumers considering switching their mortgage and to 
ensure that such activity takes place within a transparent framework that protects the best 
 9 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
interests of consumers. When implemented, these measures will build on the strong 
framework of protections already in place for mortgage borrowers, including the enhanced 
transparency measures introduced for variable rate mortgage holders in 201640. 
 
Future developments  
As well as looking to the past, and at the present, it is important that we look to the future.  The 
projected levels of growth in the Irish mortgage market, high net interest margins, regulatory 
developments, financial innovation and the continued reduction in non-performing loans are likely 
to lead to increased competition in the market.   
 
Completion of Banking Union41 will hopefully increase the level of cross border activity within the 
Eurozone.  Similarly, Capital Markets Union42 should increase the fungibility of capital and liquidity 
across borders and so enhance cross border competition.   
 
Non bank mortgage lending is also likely to increase. If we look at the US, Quicken Inc. is an entirely 
on-line provider of mortgage credit. In 2000, Quicken Loans shifted its business model to an online 
platform. In the fourth quarter of 2017, Quicken Loans became the largest residential mortgage 
lender in the US ahead of all US Banks43. We also see Bank’s partnering with fintech firms. JP Morgan 
has recently partnered with Roostify which “…has made [their] digital mortgage process simpler and 
has reduced the time it takes to refinance by 15%”44. Furthermore, other technological innovation 
may reduce costs and enhance efficiency of mortgage provision in Ireland.  For example, the Central 
Bank agrees that the proposed introduction of e-conveyancing would enhance the mortgage 
switching process.  
 
In other words, the Central Bank welcomes and is supportive of technological innovation in the 
financial services sector45 and mortgage provision more specifically, given the improvements in the 
functioning of the Irish mortgage market that may accrue.  
 
Nonetheless, as we look to the future, we need to do so with caution and remember the lessons of 
the recent past.  The OECD has recently concluded that for Ireland “risks to the outlook are elevated, 
the most immediate one being Brexit. Property prices may increase more strongly, which would 
boost further construction activity in the near term but may induce another property bubble 
associated with a strong surge in credit growth. Persistently high private indebtedness also poses a 
downside risk, as it leaves the economy sensitive to rising interest rates.”46 
 
Conclusion  
 
I will conclude here.   
 
A key function of the financial services system is to provide borrowers with loans to purchase their 
homes. The financial services system should support the housing market and, more importantly, 
home seekers through the provision of sustainable mortgages.  
 
The regulatory framework, including the macro-prudential measures, the counter cyclical capital 
buffer, the prudential regulation of banks and consumer protection requirements are necessary to 
safeguard financial stability and to protect consumers.  
  
It is fair to say that while the Irish mortgage market has undoubtedly improved, the acute legacy 
issues that remain within the system are still causing significant dysfunction. Actions to address this 
dysfunction, and manage the associated risks, require continued efforts by all involved to sustainably 
address mortgage arrears, while maintaining an eye to the future.  10 years after the financial crisis, 
banks must continue to resolve these legacy issues to enhance resilience ahead of the next 
 10 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
downturn. This requires continued engagement with borrowers, a willingness to enter into 
sustainable restructures and other avenues including sales of loans – while ensuring the fair 
treatment of borrowers through adhering to the consumer protection framework.  
 
The Central Bank’s approach is focused on serving the public interest by seeking to:  
  address the legacy issues affecting the market (including those related to the tracker 
mortgage scandal);  
  ensure the lessons of the past are not forgotten and that mortgages are provided in a safe, 
sustainable manner that protects the best interests of consumers, through our economic 
analysis, macro prudential interventions, micro prudential supervision and conduct 
supervision; and  
  enhance the functioning of the market through enhancing transparency and market 
discipline, facilitating technological development and supporting, through our wider 
European engagement, initiatives that will enhance cross border provision.  
 
I thank you for your attention.  
 
  
 
 
 
                                                           
1 I would like to thank Trevor Fitzpatrick, Triona Forde, Fergal McCann, Tim O’Hanrahan and Adrian Varley and 
for their contribution to my remarks. 
2 The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) refers to the system of banking supervision in Europe. It comprises 
the ECB and the national supervisory authorities of the participating countries. In Ireland, the Central Bank is 
the national supervisory authority. The main decision making body of the SSM is the Supervisory Board and the 
Central Bank is represented by Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor Prudential Regulation. The ECB oversees banking 
supervision from a European perspective by establishing a common approach to day-to-day supervision and 
taking harmonised supervisory actions and corrective measures. The ECB directly supervises the 118 significant 
banks of the participating Member States. These banks hold almost 82% of banking assets in the euro area. 
This includes Bank of Ireland, Allied Irish Banks, Permanent TSB and Ulster Bank Ireland DAC. Ongoing 
supervision of the significant banks is carried out by Joint Supervisory Teams (JSTs). Each significant bank has a 
dedicated JST, comprising staff of the ECB and the national supervisors. The indirectly supervised banks, are 
known as “less significant” institutions. These banks are supervised by their national supervisors, in close 
cooperation with the ECB. At any time, the ECB can decide to directly supervise any one of these banks.  
3 See Central Statistics Office - Census of Population 2016 - Profile 1 Housing in Ireland.  
4 See Central Statistics Office. Census of Population 2016 - Profile 1 Housing in Ireland. Figure 2.2. This shows a 
long term decrease in the number of average persons per household since 1966 to 2011. From 2011 to 2016, 
the trend changed and there was a small increase of the average number of persons per household. 
5 See The Joint Oireachtas Committee Joint Committee on Housing, Planning & Local Government report on  
The Impact of Short Term Lettings on Ireland’s Housing and Rental Market. The report noted the lack of 
detailed information on the topic but did advise that “Preliminary research conducted by Dublin City Council in 
March 2017 on the extent of Airbnb activity in Dublin suggests that a total of 6,729 listings existed on Airbnb 
for all of Dublin, with 5,377 listings located within the Dublin City Council area at that point in time. Of these, 
50% were listings for entire houses or apartments”. 
6 See The Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2018 Q2. Box C “Leading Indicators of New Housing 
Output”. 
7  See Central Statistics Office Census of Population 2016 - Profile 1 Housing in Ireland.  
8 See Eurostat - Key figures on Europe 2017 edition 
 11 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
9 Source - Internal Central Bank reports. Data as at 31 December 2017.
  10 It is important to note that these are individual mortgage accounts. Some households may have more than 
one mortgage on a property. In the 2016 census, The Central Statistics Office note that the total number of 
households with a mortgage was 535,675 and this is down 8% since 2011 – See Central Statistics Office - 
Census of Population 2016 - Profile 1 Housing in Ireland – Tenure and Rent 
 
11 Source: “Macroprudential Measures and Irish Mortgage Lending: An Overview of 2017”. 
 
12 Source Internal Central Bank reports. 
13 See Enda Keenan and Martin O’Brien (2018) “New Mortgage Lending Activity in a Comparative Context”, 
Central Bank of Ireland Economic Letter, Vol 2018 No 5.  
14 See Sharon Donnery, Trevor Fitzpatrick, Darren Greaney, Fergal McCann, and Mícheál O’Keeffe “Resolving 
Non-Performing Loans in Ireland: 2010-2018”in Quarterly Bulletin 2018 Q2. 
15 Central Bank internal loan level data for the five main retail banks in Ireland. Engagement is defined along 
three criteria: either the borrower has filled out a Standard Financial Statement, has a permanent restructure 
to the terms of their loan in place, or is currently in a temporary restructure arrangement. 
16 See 2016 EU-wide stress test results 
17 See Sharon Donnery, Trevor Fitzpatrick, Darren Greaney, Fergal McCann, and Mícheál O’Keeffe “Resolving 
Non-Performing Loans in Ireland: 2010-2018”in Quarterly Bulletin 2018 Q2. 
18 See Central Bank of Ireland Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears.  
19 June 2013, 182,840 Mortgage accounts in arrears, December 2017, 92,949 Mortgage accounts in arrears. 
See Mortgage Arrears Statistics. 
20 See Mortgage Arrears Statistics. 
21 See Central Bank Internal Guideline - Sustainable Mortgage Arrears Solutions 
22 See Fergal McCann (2017) –“Mortgage Modification in Ireland. A Recent History” Central Bank of Ireland 
Economic Letter, Vol 2017 No 16. 
23 See Report on Mortgage Arrears 2016 Central Bank of Ireland 
 12 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
24 Unregulated loan owners account for c.3% of the outstanding value of Irish mortgage loans. This comprises 
€2 billion of PDH loans (2% of the PDH market) and €1.7 billion of BTL loans (8% of the BTL market). 
25 Figures derived from analysis of legal proceeding issued for loans in arrears as at 31 December 2017 by 
statistics division of the Central Bank. 
26 See http://ec.europa.eu/finance/docs/policy/180314-proposal-directive-non-performing-loans_en.pdf  
27  
  
28 See Donnery 2018 “When is the right time? Macroprudential policy and the cycle?”    
29 See T03.07.2 Asset quality: non-performing loans and advances by country 
30 See ACRP/Banque de France - Housing finance in France in 2016 - No. 82 – July 2017.  
31 See Footnote 24.  
32 See Table 3.b.1 Retail Interest Rates.  Floating rates include Standard of Loan to Value Variable rates, Tracker 
Rates and Fixed Rates up to 1 year. This totals to 81% of outstanding Loans. Fixed Rate loans for a period of 1 
to 3 years is 10.3% of outstanding balances and fixed rate loans over 3 years is 8.7%.  
33 See CCPC website on Mortgage Information 
34 See Box A: Competition in the Irish Mortgage Market 
35 See Box C “Leading Indicators of New Housing Output” in Quarterly Bulletin 2018 Q2. 
36 See Mortgage Switching Research Central Bank of Ireland April 2017. 
37 See CCPC, ‘Mortgage Holding & Mortgage Switching Market Research Findings’, B&A January 2016. 
38 See CCPC website on Mortgage Information (accessed on 24/5/2018). 
39 See Enhanced Mortgage Measures: Transparency and Switching Consultation Paper CP112  
40 In July 2016 a further addendum to the Consumer Protection was published following a public consultation 
process on Increased Protections for Variable Rate Mortgage Holders (CP98), and to give effect to 
consequential amendments to the Consumer Protection Code arising from the transposition of the EU 
Mortgage Credit Directive. 
41 Banking Union - In response to the financial crisis, The European Commission introduced a number of 
initiatives to create a safer financial sector. The proposals included, stronger prudential requirements for 
banks, improved protection for depositors and rules for managing failing banks. “The first two pillars of the 
banking union – the SSM and the SRM – are now in place and fully operational. However, a common system 
for deposit protection has not yet been established and further measures are needed to tackle the remaining 
risks of the banking sector (in particular, those related to non-performing loans, or the initiatives to help banks 
 13 
Central Bank of Ireland - RESTRICTED 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
diversify their investment in sovereign bonds).”  See https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-
euro/banking-and-finance/banking-union/what-banking-union_en for further details.  
42 Capital Markets Union - In September 2015, the European Commission adopted an action plan setting out a 
list of over 30 actions and related measures to establish the building blocks of an integrated capital market in 
the EU by 2019. 
The objectives of Capital Markets Unions are to  
•develop a more diversified financial system complementing bank financing with deep and developed capital 
markets 
•unlock the capital around Europe which is currently frozen and put it to work for the economy, giving savers 
more investment choices and offering businesses a greater choice of funding at lower costs 
•establish a genuine single capital market in the EU where investors are able to invest their funds without 
hindrance across borders and businesses can raise the required funds from a diverse range of sources, 
irrespective of their location 
See https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/growth-and-investment/capital-markets-union/capital-
markets-union-action-plan_en for further detail.  
43 See https://www.ft.com/content/88b10240-0869-11e8-9650-9c0ad2d7c5b5 
44 JP Morgan Annual Report 2017 (page 50) 
45 See Derville Rowland “Innovation and technology in financial services: a regulatory perspective” 
46 OECD (2018), OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2018 Issue 1: Preliminary version, OECD Publishing, Paris 
 14 
