Kevin  Stiroh:  Supervisory  implications  of  rising  similarity  in
banking
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution  Supervision
Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Financial  Times  US  Banking  Forum
"Charting a Course for Stability and Success", New York City, 1 November 2018.
Introduction
 Thank you very much for the invitation to speak at the “U.S. Banking Forum.” It is a pleasure to be
here to talk about the continued evolution of the U.S. financial sector. Before proceeding, I will
emphasize that the views expressed today are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views
1
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
It is now a decade since the financial crisis and the U.S. banking industry has made tremendous
progress in terms of repairing its aggregate balance sheet and building greater resilience. Capital
ratios are higher, liquidity pools are deeper, and we’ve seen fundamental improvements in risk
management  and  governance.  While  there  are  still  areas  for  continued  progress,  all  of  this
should  help  financial  firms  provide  critical  intermediation  services  across  a  range  of
macroeconomic and financial market conditions. This progress reflects both the recognition by
financial institutions of the need for greater resiliency in order to insulate themselves from shocks
and a stronger, more comprehensive, forward-looking regulatory and supervisory framework.
Over  the  same  period,  we’ve  seen  continued  evolution  of  the  underlying  business  models  for
some  of  the  largest  U.S.  financial  firms  in  response  to  external  forces.  Firms  are  navigating
2
statutory changes and a suite of new regulations that are still evolving and being implemented;
responding  to  investor  pressures  for  higher  returns  in  a  rising  rate  and  more  competitive
environment; and seeking to capitalize on fundamental technological advances, while managing
the risks associated with cybersecurity and greater competition from potentially disruptive new
entrants.
One recent observation is that the largest firms in the U.S. appear to be growing increasingly
similar  in  terms  of  their  underlying  business  models  and  strategies.  This  has  implications  for
balance sheet structure, earnings profile, and organizational structure. For example, some firms
traditionally  focused  on  capital  market  activities,  are  shifting  into  lending  activities,  while  other
more  traditional  banks,  are  expanding  capital  markets  activities.  In  both  cases,  this  serves  to
diversify  the  individual  firms,  while  also  making  them  more  similar  in  terms  of  the  business
strategies they pursue, the products they offer, and the customers they serve.
If  firms  are  responding  to  the  same  exogenous  forces,  this  might  not  be  surprising.  Indeed,
similar observations were made in the late 1990s as the deregulatory forces that culminated in
the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act  (GLBA)  led  to  predictions  of  a  few  “financial  supermarkets”  that
would offer the full range of financial services to all customers. More recently, industry analysts
and  commenters  have  pointed  to  the  range  of  capital  and  liquidity  regulations  that  may  be
pushing firms toward the same target state business model where large firms provide a wider
range of financial services.
If true, an obvious follow-up question is whether this should be a concern from a supervisory and
regulatory perspective. Today, I will discuss the premise that large banks in the U.S. have indeed
become more similar and then consider some reasons why this might be a topic of interest for
the official sector. I can think of several compelling microprudential and macroprudential reasons
why  this  would  be  the  case:  the  need  for  an  appropriate  risk  management  framework  that  is
commensurate with evolving risks; the need for supervisors to ensure that our assessments are
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
proactive and flexible enough to evaluate evolving firms; the potential for similar firms to become
“systemic  as  a  herd,”  where  a  given  shock  leads  to  correlated  responses  and  large-scale
disruption in the provision of financial services; and the potential for firms to move away from
areas of comparative advantage, which could diminish the overall efficacy of the financial sector.
I’ll conclude with some implications for our supervisory regime.
Environmental Context
The performance of financial firms in the decade since the financial crisis has been influenced by
a broad range of external forces. I’ll focus on three factors impacting how financial services are
provided and their impact on large firm similarity: the regulatory response to the financial crisis,
the interest rate environment, and technological innovation.
Regulation
The U.S. official sector has taken meaningful steps since the financial crisis to promote greater
resiliency and stronger risk management at the largest firms.  This includes: a greater focus on
both the quantity and quality of loss-absorbing capital; standards that focus on both short-term
and 
liquidity  management  and  positions;  activity  restrictions;  enhanced  risk
4
management standards and expectations; and new resolution and recovery regimes.
long-term 
3
I will focus on the capital side, where the largest banks face a number of regulatory standards
and supervisory expectations that impact both capital positions and the firms’ capital planning
process. The standards include point-in-time regulations that target a simple leverage ratio and
risk-based ratios. They also include forward-looking standards for both types of ratios that reflect
estimates of potential capital needs across a range of plausible, but severe macroeconomic and
financial conditions. These forward-looking estimates that result from our Comprehensive Capital
Analysis and Review (CCAR) program are now an integral, and some would say leading, part of
5
the post-crisis capital regime.
The  fact  that  firms  must  manage  against  multiple  capital  constraints  has  both  intended  and
potentially  unintended  consequences.  On  the  intentional  side,  this  framework  enhances
robustness. Risk assessment approaches and models are imperfect and a capital regime that
relies on a range of assessment techniques can increase robustness and mitigate the inherent
uncertainty  around  risk  measurement.  It  also  provides  a  check  against  potential  regulatory
arbitrage.
A  potential  unintended  consequence  is  pressure  toward  greater  homogeneity  of  the  largest
banks. Think about a simple example of a firm with a low-risk balance sheet where the leverage
ratio currently is binding, but the risk-based capital ratio is not. This firm may have incentives to
shift out of low-risk assets into higher-risk assets in order to optimize its balance sheet and the
corresponding  risk-adjusted  return  on  equity.  A  key  point  is  that  different  firms  face  different
marginal capital requirements for holding the same asset, depending on the other attributes of
their balance sheet and business model.
6
This type of response can impact both the size and the composition of a bank’s balance sheet.
Of course, the world is much more complicated than this simple example. Optimizing firms likely
consider a number of capital factors such as the current point-in-time ratios, current post-stress
ratios, and the potential impact of both types of ratios in the future, as well as other balance sheet
influences such as liquidity ratios and the recovery and resolution regime.
Recent academic work has begun to explore this topic and I think it is an important area where
regulators  and  supervisors  concerned  with  optimal  regulatory  design  can  learn  from  the
theoretical literature. Research suggests that in a world with multiple capital constraints, e.g., a
leverage ratio and a risk-based capital, banks face incentives to do the same thing rather than
 2 / 5
7
BIS central bankers' speeches
specializing  in  areas  where  they  each  have  a  natural  competitive  advantage.   This  type  of
academic  work  provides  a  conceptual  framework  for  understanding  how  optimizing  behavior
against  multiple  constraints  might  lead  banks  to  pursue  similar  strategies  and  become  more
homogenous over time.
Interest Rates
7
A second dominant theme over the post-crisis period has been unconventional monetary policy,
both  in  the  U.S.  and  around  the  world,  which  has  direct  implications  for  the  profitability  and
returns  of  U.S.  commercial  banks.  The  low  rate  environment  experienced  through  2015,  for
example, constrained bank earnings, particularly net interest income earned through traditional
banking activities over this period. More recently, current and expected future returns on equity
for large banks have improved, in part reflecting higher interest rates and net interest margins, as
well as other factors such as lower tax rates and expectations for a stronger economy.
Despite  recent  improvements,  earnings  pressures  over  most  of  the  post-crisis  period  have
pushed banks to reassess business strategies. For example, some banks attempted to enhance
returns by building capacity and reach in new businesses; some looked to benefit from scale and
scope  activities  by  leveraging  existing  infrastructure,  technology,  and  processes  to  offer  a
broader set of services at lower cost; some looked to reduce risk through greater diversification,
and others pulled back from activities outside of their core focus.
It is unclear what the net impact will be, but if all firms pursue the same strategies in search of
higher risk-adjusted returns, greater similarity could result. This pressure is potentially stronger
now than in the past due to the highly competitive nature of banking and this is an area for further
study.
Technology
A  third  theme  is  the  emergence  of  “fintech”,  which  I  think  of  as  the  intersection  between
technological  innovation  and  the  provision  of  financial  services.  While  innovation  has  always
been  a  competitive  driver  in  banking,  there  is  a  sense  that  both  the  pace  of  change  and  the
potential impact have become more pronounced. As prices for technology services and capacity
continue to fall and technological opportunities expand, more firms are able to adopt and leverage
the latest technological breakthrough.
Scale is likely to remain a relevant factor in the deployment of the latest technology, but, at least
among the largest firms, the playing field may be leveling as firms have the opportunity to benefit
from direct investments, consultants, and third-party vendors offering the latest services. If the
largest financial firms are responding to the same technological forces and pursuing the same
opportunities, one might expect their resultant strategic choices to contribute to greater similarity
over time.  Again, this is an empirical question that deserves further inquiry.
Next Steps
8
An  important  next  step  is  to  look  at  the  data  to  assess  whether  recent  industry  trends  are
consistent with the premise that large banks are becoming more similar. We examined a range
of balance sheet and income statement items, market indicators, and organizational structure
data to draw some preliminary conclusions. The results, reported in the appendix, are generally
supportive of the notion of greater homogeneity among the largest banks, but a more rigorous
assessment of these preliminary conclusions would be a fruitful area of investigation.
Why Do We Care?
I now turn to a final question – does this matter for supervisors and regulators? I think it does. I
will consider four potential reasons why this shift is relevant for the official sector’s concern for
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
safety and soundness and efficient financial intermediation: a firm’s risk management approach,
the  evolution  of  supervisory  focus,  the  development  of  macroprudential  risks,  and  allocative
efficiency of financial services.
I’ll begin with our core microprudential focus on ensuring that banks develop and implement the
appropriate risk management infrastructure for their evolving risks. While this is more linked to
the changes in business models than greater similarity, the underlying drivers are the same.
As  banks  respond  to  environmental  factors  by  expanding  into  new  activities  or  shifting  their
strategic  focus,  they  naturally  face  new  risks  and  must  adapt  their  risk  management
infrastructures along with their evolving business models. This entails ensuring the appropriate
level  of  expertise  about  the  new  businesses;  assessing  that  all  relevant  risks  are  identified,
monitored,  measured,  and  managed  for  each  business  line  and  the  firm  as  a  whole;  and
establishing  the  appropriate  interaction  with  the  enterprise  risk  management  functions  and
Boards  of  Directors.  These  are  core  parts  of  supervisory  expectations  for  traditional  risk
management and banks need to ensure that they are applied appropriately as they evolve.
Moreover, expansion into new activities can bring entirely new risks beyond the direct risks of
each specific business. For example, a firm that expands by offering a broader set of products to
its existing base of customers. This has the potential to introduce greater correlation of business
line  results  and  a  different  type  of  shock  if  a  financial  firm  potentially  loses  multiple  revenue
streams should a single customer face distress. Alternatively, a firm might be inclined to use one
business  line  to  cross-subsidize  another,  which  makes  measuring  and  managing  risks  and
allocating capital more difficult from a business line perspective. In both cases, the potential risks
would need to be managed at the enterprise level to reflect these cross-business linkages.
A second implication is the need for the supervisory community to be responsive to the evolution
of  firms’  strategies  and  business  models.  As  firms  evolve  and  pursue  new  strategies,
supervisors  need  to  understand  those  changes  and  assess  firms  accordingly.  We  must
constantly  evaluate  the  strategic  focus  of  the  firms  we  supervise  and  assess  whether  our
approach  and  perspective  are  appropriate  for  the  new  activities.  In  a  world  with  a  core  of
diversified  firms  that  are  more  similar,  for  example,  cross-firm  exams  and  horizontal  analysis
increase in value and supervisors might require broader skills.
Moving beyond individual firms, there is the potential for microprudential risks to transform into
macroprudential ones. If firms expand, diversify and become more similar, each might become
safer individually. The industry as a whole, however, might not be any safer or more resilient. If all
firms are effectively the same, they could become “systemic as a herd” and susceptible to the
9
same shocks in a way that leaves the aggregate provision of financial services more volatile.
The propagation mechanisms for an industry with a set of similar firms with a wider range of
activities  may  be  very  different  from  one  where  firm  heterogeneity  can  offset  and  smooth  the
impact of shocks. This suggests that supervisors and regulators should be concerned not just
with the firm as an entity, but with the industry as a portfolio of firms where aggregate outcomes
reflect both each firm’s individual contribution and correlation properties across firms.
Finally,  supervisors  are  concerned  about  the  efficient  provision  of  financial  services  and  the
ability  of  the  financial  industry  to  support  the  real  economy.  If  firms’  mix  of  activities  is  overly
determined  by  the  regulatory  environment,  firms  will  have  incentives  to  expand  into  activities
where  they  do  not  have  a  comparative  advantage.  As  a  result,  the  potential  gains  of
specialization  would  be  lost.  This  could  make  the  provision  of  financial  services  less  efficient
overall.
Judging  the  cumulative  impact  of  these  changes  in  a  comprehensive  way  that  includes  an
assessment of costs, benefits, and risks is challenging, but seems an important goal for optimal
policy design.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
A fundamental challenge for effective supervision is that the landscape is constantly evolving and
adapting in response to a wide range of regulatory, financial, and technological forces. This type
of dynamism is normal and inherently productive for the industry as firms continue to optimize in
order  to  serve  customers  efficiently  and  satisfy  investors,  but  it  does  raise  issues  that
supervisors must consider. As I’ve discussed, one recent type of evolution is the trend toward
greater similarity of the largest financial firms in the U.S.
In response, supervisors and regulators must continue their focus on taking a broad perspective
on supervision and risks. It is not enough to look at individual business lines or products, but we
should  continue  to  focus  on  enterprise  risk  management  that  reflects  each  business  and  the
interdependencies  among  them.  Moreover,  supervisors  should  be  dynamic  and  continue  to
evolve as the supervised firms do. Finally, supervisors should continue to develop an industry-
wide,  macroprudential  perspective  to  understand  the  impact  of  the  continuing  evolution  of  the
U.S. financial industry.
To  do  this,  supervisors  need  to  continue  to  leverage  our  cross-firm,  horizontal  perspective  to
better understand how the industry is evolving and what it might mean for our objectives around
safety and soundness of individual firms and the efficient provision of financial services for the
economy as whole.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
I would like to thank Nicola Cetorelli, Bev Hirtle, Michael Holscher, Anna Kovner, Paul Licari, Jackie McCormack,
Siobhan  Sanders,  Joao  Santos,  Katherine  TilghmanHill,  and  James  Vickery  for  helpful  discussions  and
analytical work.
See Getting It Right: Factors for Tailoring Supervision and Regulation of Large Financial Institutions, Randal K.
Quarles, July 18, 2018.
See Lessons from the Financial Crisis, William C. Dudley, November 6, 2017, for reviews from a regulatory
perspective; Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation, Randal K. Quarles,
January 19, 2018.
 Federal Reserve Board, Consolidated Supervision Framework for Large Financial Institutions, December 17,
2012.
The latest CCAR results can be found at www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/ccar.htm.
 See Dong Choi, Michael R. Holcomb, and Donald P. Morgan, Bank Leverage Limits and Regulatory Arbitrage:
New Evidence on a Recurring Question, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report #856 for evidence of
risks-shifting in response to the imposition of the supplementary leverage ratio in the U.S.
See Andrew G. Haldane, “Multi-Polar Regulation,” International Journal of Central Banking, June 2015, 11(3),
385–401; “Strengthening and Streamlining Bank Capital Regulation,” Robin Greenwood, Sam Hanson, Jeremy
Stein, and Adi Sunderam, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 479–565, Fall 2017; “Bank Capital Allocation
under Multiple Constraints,” Tirupam Goel, Ulf Lewrick, and Nikola Tarashev, October 2017, BIS Working Paper
#666.
A counterargument is that economies of scale and network effects from technology platforms could lead to
greater specialization, e.g., payments or mortgage lending.
See “CoVaR,” Tobias Adrian and Marcus Brunnermeier,  American Economic Review, Vol. 106(7), 1705–41 and
“The  Fundamental  Principles  of  Financial  Regulation,”  Markus  Brunnermeier,  Andrew  Crockett,  Charles
Goodhart, Avinash D. Persaud, and Hyun Shin, in Geneva Reports on the World Economy, 2009 for a broad
discussion and Empirical Evidence on ‘Systemic as a Herd’: The Case of Japanese Regional Banks, Naohisa
Hirakata, Yosuke Kido, and Jie Liang Thum, January 2017, for an empirical example.  The literature typically
focused on small firms acting in the same way, but the same principle likely applies to large firms that behave
similarly to amplify systemic risk.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
