Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 25 October 2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels at least
through the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued
sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we will continue to make net purchases
under the asset purchase programme (APP) at the new monthly pace of €15 billion until the end
of December 2018. We anticipate that, subject to incoming data confirming our medium-term
inflation outlook, we will then end net purchases. We intend to reinvest the principal payments
from maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time after the end of
our  net  asset  purchases,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  maintain  favourable
liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
Incoming information, while somewhat weaker than expected, remains overall consistent with an
ongoing  broad-based  expansion  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  gradually  rising  inflation
pressures. The underlying strength of the economy continues to support our confidence that the
sustained convergence of inflation to our aim will proceed and will be maintained even after a
gradual  winding-down  of  our  net  asset  purchases. At  the  same  time,  uncertainties  relating  to
protectionism,  vulnerabilities  in  emerging  markets  and  financial  market  volatility  remain
prominent. Significant monetary policy stimulus is still needed to support the further build-up of
domestic  price  pressures  and  headline  inflation  developments  over  the  medium  term.  This
support will continue to be provided by the net asset purchases until the end of the year, by the
sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets  and  the  associated  reinvestments,  and  by  our  enhanced
forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest  rates.  In  any  event,  the  Governing  Council  stands
ready to adjust all of its instruments as appropriate to ensure that inflation continues to move
towards the Governing Council’s inflation aim in a sustained manner.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP increased by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in both the first and the second quarter of
2018. Incoming information, while somewhat weaker than expected, remains overall consistent
with  our  baseline  scenario  of  an  ongoing  broad-based  economic  expansion,  supported  by
domestic  demand  and  continued  improvements  in  the  labour  market.  Some  recent  sector-
specific developments are having an impact on the near-term growth profile. Our monetary policy
measures continue to underpin domestic demand. Private consumption is fostered by ongoing
employment growth and rising wages. At the same time, business investment is supported by
solid  domestic  demand,  favourable  financing  conditions  and  corporate  profitability.  Housing
investment remains robust. In addition, the expansion in global activity is expected to continue
supporting euro area exports, though at a slower pace.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook can still be assessed as broadly balanced. At
the same time, risks relating to protectionism, vulnerabilities in emerging markets and financial
market volatility remain prominent.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  increased  to  2.1%  in  September  2018,  from  2.0%  in August,
reflecting mainly higher energy and food price inflation. On the basis of current futures prices for
oil, annual rates of headline inflation are likely to hover around the current level over the coming
months.  While  measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally  muted,  they  have  been
increasing from earlier lows. Domestic cost pressures are strengthening and broadening amid
high  levels  of  capacity  utilisation  and  tightening  labour  markets.  Looking  ahead,  underlying
inflation  is  expected  to  pick  up  towards  the  end  of  the  year  and  to  increase  further  over  the
medium  term,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing  economic  expansion
and rising wage growth.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth stood at 3.5% in September 2018,
after  3.4%  in  August.  Apart  from  some  volatility  in  monthly  flows,  M3  growth  is  increasingly
supported  by  bank  credit  creation.  The  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1  remained  the  main
contributor to broad money growth.
The  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  strengthened  further,  continuing  the  upward  trend
observed  since  the  beginning  of  2014.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  non-financial
corporations rose to 4.3% in September 2018, from 4.1% in August, while the annual growth rate
of loans to households stood at 3.1%, unchanged from the previous month. The euro area bank
lending survey for the third quarter of 2018 indicates that loan growth continues to be supported
by increasing demand across all loan categories and favorable bank lending conditions for loans
to enterprises and loans for house purchase.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to
significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  access  to  financing  –  in
particular for small and medium-sized enterprises – and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal policies, the broad-based expansion calls for
rebuilding fiscal buffers. This is particularly important in countries where government debt is high
and for which full adherence to the Stability and Growth Pact is critical for safeguarding sound
fiscal positions. Likewise, the transparent and consistent implementation of the EU’s fiscal and
economic governance framework over time and across countries remains essential to bolster
the resilience of the euro area economy. Improving the functioning of Economic and Monetary
Union remains a priority. The Governing Council urges specific and decisive steps to complete
the banking union and the capital markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
