Opening Remarks by H.E. the Governor of the Central Bank of the UAE 
for the 20th International Conference of Banking Supervisors  
Abu Dhabi, 28 November 2018 
 
As prepared for delivery 
 
Esteemed colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, 
 
Welcome to Abu Dhabi and to the 20th International Conference of Banking Supervisors 
(ICBS). It is a privilege to host all of you during a very special year for the UAE. We 
are  celebrating  the  Year  of  Zayed  –  marking  100  years  since  the  birth  of  UAE’s 
Founding Father. Consistent with the values advocated by the late Sheikh Zayed, the 
Year of Zayed celebrates people of all nationalities, faiths and cultural backgrounds. 
This event with its global participation is a true reflection of these values. 
 
[Introduction] 
 
On  this  occasion  of  hosting  the  ICBS  Conference,  let  me  emphasize  that  the  Basel 
Committee’s role as an international standard setter has progressively solidified over 
the years, and its work has become equally important for both developed and emerging 
market economies.  
 
Let us remind ourselves of the major shortcomings of the Basel framework prior to the 
Global  Financial  Crisis  –  (1)  too  little  capital  with  too  little  going  concern  loss 
absorption  capacity,  (2)  excessive  leverage,  (3)  neglect  of  liquidity  risks,  (4) 
weaknesses in banks’ resolvability and (v) insufficient macro-prudential considerations. 
A  decade  later,  tremendous  efforts  to  remedy  such  fault  lines  have  culminated  in  a 
balanced set of common standards – the Basel III.  
 
Reaching  consensus  on  the  necessary  reforms  was  a  difficult  journey.  From  broad 
consensus in 2010 to its finalization seven years later, this achievement required strong 
determination, leadership and coordination across the globe.  I take this opportunity to 
applaud  Basel  Committee’s  many  successes  -  (1)  strengthening  the  global  financial 
system,  (2)  addressing  “too-big-to  fail  problem”,  (3)  improving  banks’  risk 
management, and (4) providing credible tools to minimize procyclicality of prudential 
regulations. Significant improvements have also been made in home-host cooperation, 
which  is  the  bedrock  of  resilience  of  global  financial  system  and  help  minimize  the 
scope for regulatory arbitrage. 
 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  say  a  few  words  on  our  own  implementation  of  Basel 
standards  in  the  UAE,  followed  by  a  brief  focus  on  several  shared  challenges  for 
banking supervision that the Central Bank of the UAE (CBUAE) considers important. 
 
 
1 
[The  UAE  approach  to  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS) 
standards] 
 
The UAE remains a committed advocate of the Basel reform agenda. Upon joining the 
Basel  Committee  as  an  observer  in  2014,  we  became  a  proactive  adopter  of  global 
regulatory standards. We are convinced that higher and better quality bank capital is the 
cornerstone of a sustainable global financial order. The UAE has indeed benefitted from 
the Basel Committee’s outstanding efforts in many ways, supporting the evolution of 
our financial sector - in terms of its depth, breadth, efficiency and stability. Critics who 
argued  that  such  reforms  would  derail  global  economic  recovery  have  been  proven 
wrong.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  been  proven  that  only  well-capitalized  banks  can 
continuously provide credit through the economic cycle and remain profitable.  
 
We subscribe to the need for a good balance between risk sensitivity, comparability, 
simplicity and – let me add - proportionality - of the global framework. Looking back 
at our own implementation of the Basel framework in the UAE, we remain conservative 
in our approach. It takes into account the idiosyncratic risks of our banking system, and 
the need to mitigate their impact in a way which is appropriate for our jurisdiction: 
 
  First, a wider macro-prudential overlay is applied to our regulatory framework. To 
address  negative  externalities  posed  by  domestic  systemically  important  banks 
(DSIBs), capital surcharges are imposed on DSIBs. This is largely driven by their 
concentrated  market  position,  similar  business  models  and  entrenched 
interconnectedness with major counterparties. This surcharge also covers an implicit 
Pillar 2 component, while a detailed design of Pillar 2 framework is being finalized. 
Higher capital requirements are also motivated by UAE’s institutional environment, 
which presented potential for improvements in areas such as resolution regime for 
banks and bankruptcy proceedings for corporate borrowers. I am pleased to say that 
concerted efforts are already underway to address them. Additionally, banks have 
opted to maintain significant capital buffers over and above minimum requirements. 
As a result, the UAE banking system has sustained high level of capitalization, as 
evidenced by the average Leverage Ratio of 10.5% for the four DSIBs.  
 
  Second,  the  CBUAE  has  issued  comprehensive  requirements  on  large  exposures, 
which represent a conservative approach to sovereign risk and limits excessive risk 
concentrations. Past banking crises globally have either led to, were accompanied 
by or trailed closely behind a sovereign crisis. Learning from these lessons, we came 
up with an appropriate response. We are fully supportive of BCBS’s ongoing work 
on sovereign risk. Clearly, ignoring this issue is no longer an option.   
   2 
  Third,  UAE  banks’  capital  requirements  do  not  rely  on  internal  models  and  are 
calculated only by using the Standardized Approach. This approach has protected us 
against unwarranted variability in capital levels. It may have also impacted the risk-
sensitivity of the framework and given rise to competitive distortions amid the global 
nature of financial markets. Borrowers in the UAE may find ways to obtain credit 
from  foreign  banks  which  are  not  bound  by  those  constraints.  The  CBUAE  will 
therefore need to continuously assess its position on internal models. The backstop 
decided  by  the  Basel  Committee  –  a  floor  of  72.5%  of  Standardized  Approach 
requirements - is hence a welcomed development. This could potentially enable the 
UAE  to  move  towards greater  risk-sensitivity  without  jeopardizing banks’  capital 
levels.  
 
Let me reiterate UAE’s support and commitment to implement Basel III in line with the 
commonly agreed implementation schedule. We will use, where necessary, additional 
safeguards to complement these minimum standards in order to ensure that our financial 
system  remains  sound  and  robust.  We  will  also  enhance  the  level  of  cross-border 
cooperation, by establishing supervisory colleges for our DSIBs next year. This is vital 
to strengthen ties with supervisory authorities from jurisdictions where our banks are 
active, or whose banks are active in the UAE. 
 
[Concerns about global implementation] 
 
We all agree that the finalization of Basel III reforms is a major step forward towards a 
safer financial system. To fortify its continued success, a “full, consistent and timely” 
global implementation is the critical next phase. Deviations from the framework in the 
implementation  phase  may  counteract  the  benefits  sought  under  Basel  III.  Thus,  we 
very  much  welcome  the  BCBS  RCAP  process,  through  which  the  Committee  can 
monitor  the  implementation.  The  temptation  to  deviate  from  the  minimum  agreed 
standards will surface from time to time. And let me be straightforward - such risk is 
faced  by  developed  and  emerging  economies  alike.  We  have  observed  the  desire  to 
subject regulatory framework to divergent developmental priorities - providing support 
to home owners or specific economic sectors, or even facilitating trading-based business 
models of global investment banks.   
 
We  need  to  collectively  resist  such  temptations.  Heightened  global  risks  are  already 
upon  us  due  to  escalating  trade  wars,  geopolitical  tensions  and  high  indebtedness  in 
many  economies.  An  additional  layer  of  uncertainty  arising  from  a  new  “race  to  the 
bottom”  in  prudential  standards  should  therefore  be  avoided.  Hence,  we  need  to  be 
jointly vigilant in resisting calls for diluting the commonly agreed standards. It is our 
common responsibility to ensure that. Let us not forget that we, as central banks, must 
at all times seek to counter such short-term memory of past lessons, for the collective 
benefit of long-term financial stability and sustainable economic growth. 
 3 
 
[Future challenges to banking supervision and regulation] 
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now  turn  to  some  remaining  challenges  from  the 
perspective of developing economies. I want to focus on three specific challenges – (A) 
implementation  of  expected  loss  provisioning,  (B)  supervisory  safeguards  against 
money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing,  and  (C)  financial  innovation  and  cyber 
security. 
 
[A.  Expected loss provisioning] 
 
One  such  challenge  is  the  implementation  of  the  expected  loss  provisioning  rules, 
IFRS9.  Continued  involvement  of  the  Basel  Committee  in  its  implementation  is 
paramount.  There  is  a  clear  risk  that  our  common  efforts  to  simplify  a  globally 
comparable  prudential  framework  can  be  made  somewhat  more  challenging  by  an 
accounting standard that is based on complex internal models.  These are exactly the 
same models which we have opted to backstop amid concerns of arbitrage and perverse 
incentives. We fully support the concept of forward-looking expected loss provisioning. 
This  is  a  real  improvement  over  the  incurred  loss  approach  which  proved  to  be 
inadequate  -  enabling  banks  to  window-dress  asset  values  and  consequently  their 
capital.  
 
However, the manner in which IFRS9 is implemented creates risks comparable to those 
observed in the case of internal models recognized in the Basel framework. Banks have 
strong incentives to produce outcomes which minimize provisioning needs by relying 
on complex models where assumptions are not appropriately disclosed. Furthermore, 
supervisors  need  to  be  equipped  with  skills  to  review  such  sophisticated  models,  to 
ensure that provisioning is adequate and not underestimated. Having dealt with internal 
models in the capital adequacy context, a common challenge  remains for accounting 
models.  
 
In  the  UAE,  we  have  opted  for  a  more  prescriptive  approach  to  minimize  potential 
imprudent practices by banks. The CBUAE has maintained a backstop until sufficient 
experience is gained, and adequate supervisory comfort has been built in this respect. I 
therefore  welcome  the  fact  the  BCBS  is  devoting  more  scrutiny  to  how  members 
conduct supervision, such that we can learn and share good practices. 
 
[B.  Supervision of anti-money laundering risks] 
 
Another remaining challenge for supervisors in both emerging and developing markets 
is AML supervision. For many years, the global community has stepped up its efforts 
through  the  FATF,  the  EGMONT  group  and  other  initiatives  to  combat  money 
laundering and terrorism financing. Nonetheless, the threat is ever evolving. The UAE 
 
4 
is devoted to minimizing this pervasive threat. In bolstering our anti-money laundering 
and counter-terrorism financing defenses, we have recently enacted new legislation and 
revised the regulatory framework for exchange houses.  
 
We  are  also  strengthening  our  supervisory  capacity  via  specialized  risk  teams  and  a 
more  robust  risk-based  model.  CBUAE  has  also  completed  a  comprehensive 
assessment of national banks last year. The same for exchange houses is targeted for 
completion by this year end. The UAE is also actively exploring how best to leverage 
on technology to mitigate AML risks. In all of this, international regulatory cooperation 
is key. Clearly, AML risk is borderless. We very much appreciate further focus of the 
Basel Committee on AML risks, both in terms of facilitating good supervisory practices, 
as well as day-to-day supervisory cooperation. 
 
[C.  Challenges posed by financial technology] 
 
Lastly, we are observing how rapid advances in digital technology are transforming the 
financial landscape. Most are evolutionary in nature, while some are revolutionary in 
their scale and potential. Those advances bring with them disruptions of various kinds 
- not only to the financial industry, but also  to how we conduct supervision. A clear 
challenge is to balance the tradeoff between the efficiency and the safety and soundness 
of financial system in the face of such rapid changes: 
 
  In the UAE, we see rapid growth in both onshore and in the two offshore financial 
centers.  Regulatory  sandboxes  managed  by  financial  free  zones  have  facilitated 
experimentation of innovative services within pre-defined boundaries. Our startups 
and banks have also been actively developing a variety of FinTech initiatives - digital 
wallets, solutions to facilitate regulatory compliance, crowdfunding – just to name a 
few. 
 
  We must be watchful in maintaining the equilibrium between sound prudential and 
market  conduct  standards,  without  stifling  innovation.  To  achieve  this,  close 
engagements with regulated businesses, FinTech firms and other stakeholders in the 
broader ecosystem is pivotal. We believe that ongoing dialogue is the best way to 
ensure new players are aware and able to navigate the applicable rules. At the same 
time, it is our responsibility to ensure that supporting infrastructure is put in place 
for  sustainable  innovation  to  flourish.  As  we  navigate  through  the  evolving 
ecosystem, we must ensure that our supervisors are well-equipped to identify, assess 
and tackle potential risks associated with FinTech. I therefore cannot stress enough 
on  the  criticality  of  international  cooperation  in  this  area.  We  can,  and  should, 
mutually-benefit from this collective endeavor to find common approaches to such 
risks  and  share  best  practices.  Technologies  may  be  new,  but  most  of  the  risks  - 
within and across borders - are similar. 
 5 
 
  In the context of financial technology, cyber security is a key risk whose importance 
cannot be underestimated. Against this background, we very much welcome BCBS 
work on sound practices to manage pervasive implications of FinTech developments 
for  banks  and  bank  supervisors.  We  also  highly  welcome  further  cross  border 
supervisory  cooperation  to  strengthen  cyber-resilience  of  our  firms  and  market 
infrastructures.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 
In closing, we firmly believe that the UAE is a reliable global partner to host a dynamic, 
outward-looking financial system. By that I mean financial system which is governed 
by  robust  rules,  forward-looking  supervision and  a clear vision  of the  future. This  is 
envisioned and detailed out in the UAE Financial Sector Master Plan 2018-2028, which 
was developed to support the nation’s Post-Oil Strategy.  
 
Let me conclude by welcoming you again to the UAE and the conference. And I wish 
you all a constructive and insightful discussion over the next two days.  
 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 6 
