FIU PRESENTATION TO  
IBA MEMBERS 
 Opening speech delivered by 
Mrs. L. Matroos-Lasten 
Acting President 
Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten 
 On the occasion of the information session on: 
 AML/CTF within the International Banking Sector 
 Centrale Bank van Curaçao en Sint Maarten 
December 12, 2018 
 1 
     Ladies and gentlemen, good evening, 
 
I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  Association  of  International  Bankers  (IBA)  for  its 
initiative in organizing this important seminar titled AML/CFT within the international banking sector. 
I am pleased to share my opening remarks with you. This year marks the 10-year anniversary of 
the global financial crisis. If we learned anything from the crisis, it is that international cooperation 
and policy coordination is crucial to shape a sound, transparent, and attractive financial system.  
 
As the managing director of the  International Monetary Fund (IMF), Christine Lagarde, stated 
“The time to fix the roof is when the sun is shining.” That is to say, we should not wait for (reputational) 
storms to come our way to act agile.  
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  our  financial  sector  is  of  integral  importance  to  achieve  sustainable 
economic growth. Suffice to say is that, though its contribution has declined over the past 20 years, 
the international financial services sector remains a key economic pillar of Curaçao. The IFS sector 
generates  about  6%  of  foreign  exchange  earnings,  provides  labor  intensive  high-skilled 
employment to more than 1,000 persons, and contributes approximately 6% of GDP. In addition 
to these direct effects, the sector has indirect spillover effects across related industries, including 
the business, telecommunication, transportation, and hospitality sectors.  
 
Amid the increased  complexity of financial transactions, it  has become imperative  for financial 
intermediaries  such  as  international  banks,  to  keep  re-inventing  themselves  through  new  and 
innovative  products and services.  Simultaneously, the supervisory role of the  central bank is to 
ensure proper controls to prevent systemic collapse and achieve market integrity. Today, I would 
like  to  touch  upon  the  history  of  the  International  Financial  Services  (“IFS”)  sector,  the  main 
challenges this sector is facing, what we have achieved so far, and what our next steps are.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen, first allow me to take you back to the history of the IFS sector. By mid-1960s Curaçao 
had  become  a  well-known  international  financial  center  for  purposes  of  global  tax  planning. 
However, the prosperity of the IFS sector came to a halt with the termination of the Tax Treaty 
with  the  United  States  and  the  abolishment  of  the  U.S.  Foreign  Withholding  Tax  in  1985.  In 
addition,  the  sector  was  also  negatively  affected  by  other  developments,  such  as  the  negative 
connotation of global tax planning and increased bundling as tax-exempt region.  
 
Over the past years, however, Curaçao has taken several measures to meet international standards. 
One of the main measures taken was the enactment of a New Fiscal Regime in 2002 to be in full 
compliance with the policies of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) for fair tax practices. The new tax regime was created in line with the recommendations 
offered by the OECD, to avoid being labeled as a jurisdiction with harmful tax practices, and thus 
was  intended  to  avert  inclusion  on  the  OECD’s  ‘black-list’  of  non-transparent  offshore 
jurisdictions in 2000.  
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  now  continue  with  the  main  challenges  the  IFS  sector  is  facing.  With  the 
implementation of global regulatory standards, including Anti-Money Laundering (“AML”) and 
Combatting Financing of Terrorism (“CFT”) rules, banks have faced increased compliance costs 
 2 
in providing correspondent banking relations. In addition, tax information-sharing agreements that 
also result in more costs for the banks have added to the de-risking trend, which resulted in the 
ending of correspondent banking relations. Both the domestic banking sector and the international 
financial services sector in the Caribbean face this challenge. A correspondent banking relation is 
crucial  for  financial  institutions  in  the Caribbean, given  their  limited  access  to  foreign  financial 
markets. Furthermore, without a correspondent banking relation, Caribbean financial institutions 
cannot properly service clients’ accounts. Recently, many correspondent banks have terminated 
their relations because of the high perceived risks of the Caribbean and Latin American Region. 
In  the  monetary  union  of  Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten,  however,  the  CBCS  has  informed 
correspondent  banks  on  the  effective  implementation  of  AML-CFT  regulations,  and  positive 
assessments of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF), which have led to favorable 
results. For example, JP Morgan has recently reinstated its correspondent relation with two major 
banks in Curaçao. The CBCS is continuing with its efforts toward correspondent relations to attain 
more of these favorable results, and thus minimize the de-risking effects.  
 
The CBCS has always been active in promoting financial stability and minimizing risks via sound 
prudential and conduct supervision. The CBCS is constantly striving for ways to strengthen the 
financial  sector  by  enhancing  the  quality  and effectiveness  of  our  supervision.  Accordingly,  we 
promote  high  standards  of  skills,  integrity,  and  good  governance  among  all  our  supervised 
institutions and individuals. Although there is no substitute for sound regulation, we are aware that 
overregulation  prevents  our  jurisdiction  to  maintain  a  competitive  position  in  the  IFS  sector. 
Hence, another challenge we face is to achieve a proper balance between the effectiveness of rules 
and regulations on the one hand and the related risks in the IFS sector on the other. 
 
To attain this balance we believe that information-sharing and collaboration among the CBCS, the 
government, and IFS sector is crucial. Together we should strive to continuously reform the fiscal 
and legal framework of the financial industry to adapt to the ever-changing international business 
environment, thereby creating confidence for the (international) public.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen, now I would like to pay attention to some recent achievements in the areas of regulation 
and supervision that could help strengthen the IFS sector. We have successfully and positively been assessed 
by the major standard-setting bodies over the past years, such as the OECD, the World Bank, and 
the FATF, and subsequently, have implemented their recommendations. In addition, Curaçao has 
recently signed the Base Erosion and Shifting (BEPS) Multilateral Instrument (MLI). Currently, 
117 countries participate in the inclusive framework of the BEPS, representing more than 90% of 
world trade. The standards have been adopted by the European Union as one of the requirements 
that jurisdictions should meet to be excluded from the EU-list of non-cooperative jurisdictions. 
The CBCS has also recently been entrusted with the supervision of Securities Intermediaries and 
Asset  Managers.  Finally,  the  CBCS  is  in  the  process  of  becoming  a  signatory  member  of  the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
these  positive 
developments in the areas of regulation and supervision, we are taking a further step in the right 
direction to strengthen the IFS sector which certainly benefits the international banking sector. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, after discussing the history, the main challenges, and the key achievements of the IFS 
sector,  in  my  opinion,  the  question  that  remains  is,  what are  our  next  steps?  The  CBCS  understands  that 
(IOSCO).  With 
 3 
innovation is changing the environment in which you, as financial service providers, and we, as 
regulators and supervisors, are operating. With the need to process and analyze an ever-increasing 
volume, frequency, and granularity of data, we are prompted to implement Regulatory Technology 
(RegTech) and Supervisory Technology (SupTech) in our financial sector supervision to increase 
our effectiveness and efficiency. In our aim to preserve and foster the reputation of Curaçao as a 
sound,  transparent,  attractive,  and  reputable  international  financial  center,  we  strive  to  achieve 
institutional agility and adaptability to guide our financial sector into this new, technology-driven, 
era. Research has shown that over 85% of Global FinTech’s are directed toward or related to the 
financial  services  business.  This  suggests  that  the  financial  services  industry,  especially  the 
international  banking  sector,  will  most  likely  be  considerably  disrupted  in  the  upcoming  years. 
Considering  that  innovation  and  new  financial  technologies  transcend  borders  and  markets  in 
which international banks operate, we should take charge in shaping the future of regional and 
global financial services provision.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is imperative that I underscore that the CBCS is committed to fight money 
laundering and terrorist financing, and will continue to provide guidance for the financial sector 
to combat these abusive and illicit practices within our jurisdiction. The CBCS is currently updating 
the AML/CFT Provisions & Guidelines (P&G). In addition, the CBCS, the Financial Intelligence 
Unit Curaçao (FIU), and the Gaming Control Board (GCB) have agreed to meet on a quarterly 
basis  to  provide  a  platform  to  monitor  trends,  local  threats  and  vulnerabilities,  and  new 
developments in the area of AML/CFT.  
 
In 2022 our jurisdiction will be subject to the fourth round mutual evaluation by CFATF. A vital 
part  in  the  preparation  for  this  mutual  evaluation  is  the  National  Risk  Assessment  (NRA)  to 
identify, analyze, understand, and address AML/TF risks in Curaçao. The NRA is on track to be 
completed by the end of 2019 which provides our jurisdiction sufficient time to be duly prepared 
for the next CFATF evaluation.  
 
Allow me to close with the following statement: “It is always better to be compliant than be sorry”.  
 
I thank you for your attention and wish you a fruitful seminar. 
 4 
