Gent  Sejko:  The  importance  of  media  in  analysing  Albania’s
monetary policy
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the end-of-year meeting with the
media, Tirana, 20 December 2018.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 Welcome to our end-of-year meeting with the media.  I would like to thank you for your readiness,
objectivity, and seriousness in covering the activities of the Bank of Albania and informing the
public  about  them,  throughout  2018.  Thanks  to  you,  our  analyses  and  decision-making  have
been communicated in a thorough manner, mindfully tailored and styled in accordance with the
age and profession of the targeted audience. 
I must note that, in addition to broad geographic coverage, your comments and analyses on the
economic  and  financial  developments  in Albania  have  been  very  professional. At  the  Bank  of
Albania, my colleagues and I maintain that the current media reality is an important part of our
activity.  Our  decision-making  could  not  be  considered  complete  without  your  contribution.
Communication is a vital and delicate process for a central bank. I must emphasize that, without
your  help  and  objectivity,  realisation  of  Bank  of Albania’s  decision-making  regarding  monetary
policy and financial stability would have been an impossible mission.
Figuratively, I would point out that you are the ones that enable the translation of our analyses and
conclusions into an adequate and easy-to-understand message for the general public. You have
informed the public on our actions and interventions related to monetary policy, as well as on our
decisions  related  to  financial  stability,  market  efficiency,  banking  regulations  and  other  more
specific aspects.
This leads us to the conclusion that the level of reporting has improved significantly, which, in
turn,  urges  us  to  be  more  demanding  of  ourselves  in  all  the  arguments  and  analyses
underpinning our decision-making. I would like to thank you for your constructive role in reporting
news  items  related  to  developments  in  the  economy,  finances,  money,  the  banking  system,
inflation, financial stability, as well as to the risks towards which our economy is exposed.
I would also like to assure you that the Bank of Albania will continue to be an open and very loyal
institution vis-à-vis the media. The Bank of Albania will be continuously open to communication
with  regard  to  the  entire  spectrum  of  economic,  financial,  contemporary,  professional  and
unbiased news.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
It has become a tradition now for us to organise, during the end-of-year meeting with the media,
a modest but very meaningful ceremony: the awards ceremony for the best diploma thesis. We
value true scientific research in its highly beneficial capacity, from a long-term perspective, to
enable the building of contemporary and sustainable research models.
From this point of view, the Bank of Albania has endeavoured to boost its research capacities,
something we consider to be essential, ultimately helping to perfect our entire decision-making
process  related  to  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  For  this  very  reason,  the  award
ceremony for the best diploma thesis has become a consolidated activity of the Bank of Albania
geared toward supporting promising students in the field of scientific research within the scope of
central banking.
This year, students also showed a high interest in presenting their diploma theses. We received
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
27  studies  on  a  wide  range  of  economic,  financial,  and  legal  topics  focused  mostly  on  the
Albanian  economy.  It  is  a  delight  to  see  how  these  studies  use  contemporary  research
methodologies and valuable information intelligently to analyse economic phenomena, employing
theoretical and empirical arguments. In spite of the challenge of choosing the most interesting
studies, we now have our verdict on the “Governor’s Award for the Best Diploma Thesis 2018”.
The selection has not been easy. Each year, we receive increasingly more qualitative studies in
terms of research methodology, topic originality and methods applied in research.
I  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  all  the  contestants  for  the  high  quality  of  the  presented
studies. I hope and encourage you to further enrich your theoretical and empirical capacities as
you  advance  in  your  careers,  wherever  that  may  lead,  in  academia  or  as  experts  in  specific
fields. I hope you will be unremittingly engaged in scientific research, in a relationship of which
only the starting date is known.
Thank you and happy holidays!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
