Jan Smets: The future of central banking
Keynote address by Mr Jan Smets, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the conference
"Ten  years  after  the  start  of  the  crisis:  contours  of  a  new  normal",  organised  by  the  Belgian
Financial Forum and SUERF, Brussels, 14 September 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 it is a great pleasure for me to address this conference organised by the Belgian Financial Forum
and  SUERF  on  the  impact  of  the  crisis  and  how  it  may  have  shaped  a  new  normal  for  the
economy, for the financial system and for central banks. I thank the organisers for having invited
me to share with you some of my thoughts on the future of central banking.
I will not surprise when I say that it is good to first look back before being able to fully understand
where we stand now, and, eventually, give insights on where we may go from here. Indeed, the
future finds its roots in the past, and the present is precisely what brings both together. So, my
plan is to first walk with you through time, starting on 14 September 2008 – the day on which
Lehman  Brothers  failed,  now  exactly  ten  years  ago  and  which  marked  the  start  of  the  global
financial crisis. I will then say a few words on where we stand in the euro area at the current
juncture and seize the opportunity to briefly explain the monetary policy decisions the Governing
Council  of  the  ECB  took  yesterday.  Finally,  I  will  devote  the  remainder  of  my  talk  to  the
challenges  for  central  banks  going  forward:  what  is  the  future  of  central  banking  and  to  what
extent will it be different from central banks’ past?
As I said, exactly ten years ago we saw the start of the global financial crisis and some of its
repercussions  are  still  felt  today.  Not  that  there  had  not  been  worrying  signs  before.  On  the
contrary, already back in August 2007 banks started to hoard liquidity and on 9 August 2007 the
ECB was the first central bank which had to inject liquidity in the money market. Be assured, I
am not going to give you every single detail of the actions we undertook since then. I just want to
stress that by then many observers were impressed by the sheer size of the liquidity injection –
namely €94 billion -  which by now is really small compared to the almost €3.5 trillion increase in
the balance sheet of the Eurosystem we have seen in the meantime.
Indeed, the worst still had to come and in September 2008 it came abruptly in the form of a full-
blown worldwide banking crisis. Those were the days during which in Belgium alone two major
cross-border  banks  had  to  be  rescued  in  two  consecutive  weekends.  Very  soon  the  real
economy was hit too: euro area output dropped by around 4.5% in just two quarters and similar
sharp  contractions  where  seen  elsewhere.  We  now  refer  to  this  as  the  “Great  recession”,
contrasting sharply with the “Great moderation” – the qualification many people had given to the
two preceding decades.
Just at the time that the real economy started to recover, the euro area was hit by a second
recession which came with the sovereign debt crisis. That showed how much imbalances had
been  built  up  in  the  euro  area  and  how  ill  prepared  it  was  in  weathering  a  severe  economic
shock,  both  at  the  level  of  the  individual  member  states  and  at  the  level  of  the  –  indeed  –
incomplete  monetary  union.  The  consequences  of  the  multiple  feedback  loops  between  weak
banks, weak sovereigns and weak economies were devastating and eventually threatened the
euro itself in 2012. That is when the whole EMU deepening agenda was born and since then
major progress towards completing the monetary union has been made, particularly in the field of
banking  union.  This  process  is  still  unfinished,  an  aspect  which  will  be  discussed  in  Poul
Thomsen’s keynote address at the end of the conference. Still, I think that it was essential in
bringing about the recovery, together with the actions of the Eurosystem, namely the Outright
Monetary Transactions, the credit easing policies and, finally, the additional stimulus provided in
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the form of the Asset Purchase Program and the forward guidance on policy rates.
Early  2015  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  indeed  decided  to  significantly  step  up  its
accommodation. With a large amount of idle resources and with new headwinds stemming from
emerging market economies, inflation had dropped to very low levels and inflation expectations
started to show signs of downward drift. Not only was there a risk that the inflation outlook would
no longer be in line with our aim of inflation below, but close to, 2% over the medium term, there
were also increasing indications that the economy could slip into outright deflation.
Compared  to  that  period,  the  economic  situation  in  the  euro  area  has  improved  a  lot.  The
recovery has strengthened and broadened. All euro area countries are now growing. Contrary to
the  previous  recovery  phase,  domestic  demand  is  playing  an  important  role,  not  in  the  least
because it has been underpinned by our monetary policy measures. Employment creation has
been  particularly  strong  and  drives  households’  consumption  spending,  while  also  investment
has finally recovered. The pace of economic expansion has recently decreased somewhat, on
account  mainly  of  a  less  favourable  external  environment  where  the  tendency  towards  more
protectionism  and  the  problems  in  some  emerging  market  economies  dent  trade,  and
uncertainty  weighs  on  confidence.  These  developments  clearly  imply  downside  risks.  Still,
domestic  demand  remains  robust  and  the  slowdown  of  growth  up  to  now  mainly  reflects  a
normalisation after the particularly strong growth rates seen at the end of 2017.
With the absorption of economic slack, wage increases started to strengthen, and that process
will  eventually  result  in  feeding  domestically  generated  inflation.  While  headline  inflation  has
recovered on the back of increases in the price of oil, core inflation will gradually benefit from the
process of domestic reflation, further supported by receding uncertainty in inflation expectations.
In view of these developments, the Governing Council decided yesterday that – very much in line
with the view already conveyed in June – progress towards a sustained adjustment in inflation
has been substantial so far and that it is confident that the convergence of inflation towards our
aim  will  continue  in  the  period  ahead,  even  after  a  gradual  winding-down  of  our  net  asset
purchases. Therefore, we decided to reduce the monthly pace of our purchases to €15 billion
from October onwards and we anticipate ending them after December 2018, subject to incoming
data confirming our medium-term inflation outlook. While this is an important step towards policy
normalisation, we are also  of  the  opinion  significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  continues  to  be
needed  to  support  the  further  build-up  of  domestic  price  pressures.  Hence,  we  reiterated  the
forward guidance on the reinvestment and on policy rates, implying that we do foresee a very
gradual  process  of  policy  normalisation.  That  will  allow  financing  conditions  to  remain  very
favourable  and  to  support  both  the  economy  and  the  associated  reflationary  process  we  are
aiming for.
Having outlined where we stand, I should have paved the way for my reflection on the future of
central banking. How will it look like? What will be the focus of central banks in the coming years?
Well, at the risk of being a bit boring, I claim that central banks will continue doing what they did in
the  past  and  that  is,  building  trust  and  confidence  in  the  money  they  issue.  I  see  three  main
dimensions here. As in the past, central banks will care about the value of money. In other words,
monetary policy will continue to focus on price stability and in doing so stabilise the purchasing
power  of  money.  Central  banks  will  also  continue  to  take  care  of  the  safe  nature  of  money,
explaining  their  strong  interest  in  financial  stability  which  has  even  increased  since  the  crisis.
After all, the largest part of the money stock is not directly issued by central banks themselves in
the form of base money. On the contrary, it is created in the financial system and is held by the
money-holding  sector  as  liabilities  of  financial  intermediaries. A  significant  part  of  it  is  in  fact
deposits with commercial banks. Without having sound financial institutions, money cannot be
truly safe, nor will it be fully trusted by the public. And indeed, during the worst days of the crisis
we have seen flight-to-safety flows into banknotes, and away from the deposits held with – by
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
then, mistrusted -  banks. Finally, central banks will continue playing a key role in contributing to
the smooth functioning of the payments system and being active in overseeing this part of the
financial sector which is crucial to allow economic agents using the money they hold. With this, I
think, central banks will be very much in the business of making sure money performs well on
each of the three functions we typically attribute to it, namely being a unit of account, a store of
value and a medium of exchange.
At first sight, there is nothing new here, which confirms what I said earlier about the future finding
its roots in the past. Still, it is worth having a closer look at each of these central bank activities,
as I think they are subject to changes, be it as a direct consequence of the crisis or because
other trends have affected the economy, the financial system or the wider society.
Let  me  start  with  monetary  policy  and  its  focus  on  price  stability.  That  focus  served  us  well
during the crisis. By counterbalancing the disinflation, we avoided the Fisher type of debt deflation
effects and facilitated the necessary deleveraging process. It also helped us keeping control over
the real rate, at a time controlling it was complicated by the fact that we had to operate very close
to – if not at – the effective lower bound for nominal interest rates. This was not only helpful from
a macroeconomic perspective but was, I think, also favourable for financial stability. Of course,
our  ‘low  for  long’  poses  challenges  for  financial  institutions  and  can  lead  to  specific  risks  for
financial stability. Yet, I do think that some sort of leaning-against-the-wind counterfactual with
less monetary accommodation would eventually have been worse for financial stability, mainly
resulting from the negative macro feedback effects it would have caused. I am also of the opinion
that  the  associated  financial  stability  risks  should  be  addressed  by  appropriate  prudential
policies, particularly macroprudential policies – a point to which I return later.
A continued focus on price stability, and on our specific definition of it, will also be very beneficial
going forward. By stabilising inflation and hence inflation expectations at a level below, but close
to, 2% in the medium term, we make sure that the steady state level of nominal interest rates will
be  supported  by  an  inflation  compensation  component  of  that  magnitude.  That  in  turn  will  be
beneficial  for  financial  institutions  as  in  many  cases  their  business  models  have  difficulties  in
coping with very low nominal interest rates. This inflation buffer will also contribute to safeguard
monetary policy’s room for manoeuvre during downturns. While all this is already underlying our
definition of price stability from the beginning, the arguments supporting this choice have even
gained relevance. Indeed, compared to that period the steady state real rate – often referred to as
the  natural  rate  –  has  dropped  and  that  is,  I  think,  one  of  the  important  features  of  the  new
normal.
This new normal will come with new instances of lower bound incidence. So, central banking of
the future should be prepared for such situations and be capable to deploy all tools which we
now have labelled unconventional monetary policy. Active use of the central bank balance sheet
and forward guidance will very likely become more standard instruments in our toolkit. That of
course  implies  that  we  should  be  operationally  ready  to  use  them.  More  importantly,  it  also
implies that we must manage these tools carefully during the normalisation phase, so as to fully
safeguard  their  effectiveness  for  the  future.  In  that  sense  it  is  important  that  we  stick  to  the
conditionality  we  have  introduced  in  our  forward  guidance  formulation.  That  does  not  only
facilitate reaching our aim today; it is also an investment in our capacity to use forward guidance
in the future.
Let me now move to the second domain which will be prominently part of central banking of the
future, namely financial stability. While we are still somehow in the process of dealing with the
consequences of the credit bubble, it became clear from the outset that just cleaning is no longer
an option going forward. Hence a bunch of policy initiatives has been undertaken to mitigate risks
and enhance the resilience of the financial system. New standards for regulation and prudential
supervision were introduced in the form of more demanding capital and liquidity requirements
and the resilience of financial institutions is now also assessed by means of stress-testing. On
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
top of that, with macroprudential policy, a new policy domain has been created. It is natural to
see central banks playing an important role here, given their knowledge of the financial system
and their macro reflex typically adopted in the monetary policy domain. That is a clear trend we
see worldwide since the crisis.
Obviously, being more active in the financial stability domain comes with new challenges and, to
some extent, also with new risks for central banks. Despite considerable progress made in the
macroprudential  policy  domain,  additional  research  on  its  transmission  mechanisms  is  still
needed.  Such  research  must  also  address  the  issue  of  interactions  with  monetary  policy.  I
claimed  earlier  that  monetary  policy  should  keep  its  primary  focus  on  price  stability  and  that
prudential policies should act as the first line of defence against financial instability. That setting
indeed  comes  closest  to  Tinbergen’s  ideal  world  where  two  distinct  policy  instruments  are
available  for  two  different  objectives.  Still,  it  would  be  naive  to  think  that  monetary  and
macroprudential  policy  are  two  fully  independent  instruments,  as  they  both  act  through  the
financial system. So, I think the future of central banking also lies in learning more about possible
interactions,  complementarities  and  scope  for  effective  coordination  between  monetary  and
macroprudential  policy,  without  blurring,  though,  the  distinction  between  the  different  policy
domains, their respective mandates and accountability frameworks.
I would like to flag one more challenge in this domain, which will have an impact on the future of
central  banking.  Part  of  the  argumentation  of  having  prudential  policy  as  the  first  actor  in  the
financial stability domain rests on its capability to be more targeted, while monetary policy is often
seen as too blunt an instrument for these purposes. However, this more targeted nature tends to
come with more pronounced distributional effects. Moreover, financial stability will always be a
shared responsibility where fiscal authorities have their role to play. For these reasons, tensions
could arise when these instruments are given to independent central banks. But at the same
time, there are also forces pushing towards allocating them to independent institutions. Doing so
indeed  allows  coping  with  the  so-called  inaction  bias,  which  in  this  case  may  be  quite
pronounced precisely as a result of the targeted, and therefore fairly visible, way these policies
work. I do not think we have already reached a new steady state on this, and institutional settings
may still evolve depending on further experiences gained in this field. By the way, they now differ
quite a bit across jurisdictions which is an indication that the search for the optimal set-up has
not yet come to an end.        
Contributing to the smooth functioning of our payments systems is the third pillar on which future
central banking will rest. While often having been a less visible task, it is nonetheless crucial for
fostering trust in money. This dimension nowadays gets a lot of more attention than in the past,
in  view  of  technological  advances  and  progressing  digitalisation.  New  financial  players  –  so-
called Fintechs – often focus their activities on payments services. Evidently, the Fintech agenda
is  a  wider  one  which  affects  the  entire  financial  system  and  which  central  banks,  of  course,
monitor closely from a financial stability perspective. Moreover, digitalisation and new ways of
producing and consuming will have a strong impact on the entire economy. They will drive many
macroeconomic  variables  and  questions  on  the  new  way  of  functioning  of  the  economy  are
popping up, be it from the point of view of measurement or from a more conceptual perspective.
Hence, these developments will also shape a new environment for monetary policy. Still, it is in
the payments sphere that the technological advances have already had their strongest impact on
central  bank  activities. And  that  will  not  change  anytime  soon.  The  future  of  central  banking
therefore will heavily depend on central banks’ ability to keep up with innovation and digitalisation.
One specific phenomenon here, which has drawn a lot of attention lately, is the emergence of
so-called  crypto  currencies.  If  successful,  these  alternatives  could  threaten  our  monopoly  of
issuing money and therefore also our ability to conduct monetary policy. Being moreover out of
the control of prudential supervision, success of these crypto currencies could also endanger
financial stability. That is why we monitor these developments closely. However, given their still
limited  scope,  I  do  not  see  pronounced  risks  at  the  current  juncture.  Moreover,  the  intrinsic
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
features of crypto currencies – their inherent volatility, particularly – implies they perform poorly
as far as the traditional functions of money are concerned, in turn explaining why their success is
limited.  Still,  we  should  not  be  complacent.  Only  to  the  extent  that  central  banks  will  be
successful on all three fronts I have mentioned, they should not fear outside competition. And at
the  same  time,  central  banks  should  be  open-minded  with  respect  to  the  new  technologies
underlying these developments, as they can potentially be of use for themselves.
Somewhat  related  to  this,  the  idea  has  been  floated  that  central  banks  could  issue  their  own
digital currency. Let me be clear from the outset, a central bank digital currency is conceptually
fundamentally different from the so-called crypto currencies. It would just be another form to hold
the same money. While being electronic in nature, it would in terms of risk characteristics, for
instance,  be  very  similar  to  the  banknotes  we  issue.  Here  too,  central  banks  should  be  open
minded and carefully weigh pros and cons of possibly going this way. On the pro side, different
motivations are put forward, ranging from offering an alternative for disappearing cash, to move
away from the system of fractional banking or circumventing the lower bound constraint.  On the
con  side,  there  are  concerns  regarding  the  structural  changes  it  would  imply  for  the  banking
sector, the possibility of having pronounced digital bank runs and the risk of a structurally longer
central bank balance sheet and hence a more pronounced allocative role for central banks.  Any
steps towards a CBDC should therefore be subject fo careful consideration, and further research
is warranted.
I have done the tour of the most important domains in which central banks will be active in the
future  and  I  have  highlighted  to  what  extent  they  may  differ  from  what  was  done  in  the  past.
Before concluding, I would like to make three final observations of a general nature on the way
central banks will function.
First, with the degree of globalisation we have seen so far and the strong interlinkages between
economies in both the real and the financial spheres, I do think that the international dimension
will become still more prominent for the central banking of the future. While mandates continue to
be geared towards domestic objectives, one’s actions can spill over to other economies, which
in turn can generate spillbacks for the own economy or financial system. As a minimum, this
calls  for  an  enhanced  exchange  of  information  about  what  is  going  on  in  the  respective
jurisdictions, if not for more active policy cooperation. The Bank of International Settlements in
Basel  plays  already  an  important  role  in  this  respect  and  this  is  likely  to  become  more
pronounced in the future.
Second,  we  see  worldwide  that  central  banks  have  come  under  increased  scrutiny  since  the
crisis. While initially their prompt reaction to the crisis was widely applauded, support for later
actions has weakened and some of them are openly challenged. Calls to restrain the discretion
of  central  banks  are  openly  made.  I  see  several  reasons  for  this.  First,  a  lot  of  the  crisis
resolution  de  facto  fell  on  the  shoulders  of  central  banks.  That  forced  them  to  stretch  the
interpretation of their mandates, the backlash of which is felt now. It also implied overburdening
the central bank and a suboptimal reaction to the crisis, giving rise to the impression that central
bank  action  was  not  effective.  On  top  of  that,  many  of  the  policy  actions  were  new  and  not
always  well  understood.  They  generated  a  lot  of  concern,  for  instance  regarding  the  risk
implications of the balance sheet policies and the distributional effects of the asset purchases,
claimed  to  be  regressive  in  terms  of  income  and  wealth  distribution  –  a  claim  wich  however
abstracts from the strong macroeconomic effects the asset purchases had as these benefit, via
the  job  creation  they  entail,  to  the  most  vulnerable  group  in  society,  namely  the  unemployed.
Finally,  the  broadening  of  central  banks’  remit  into  the  financial  stability  domain  has  also
contributed to it, while at the same time complicating somehow the accountability framework.  
To counter these forces, central banks have to be excellent policy makers. For that a profound
knowledge of the economy and the financial system is needed. The future of central banks will
therefore very much rest on their ability to be adequate knowledge centres. At the same time,
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
transparency  must  be  enhanced  and  appropriate  accountability  frameworks  are  needed.
Increased communication efforts will have to be made to explain policy actions, not only to the
more informed audience of financial markets participants but also to the wider public. The skill to
translate central bankers’ knowledge into non-technical terms has to be developed.
imposed  by 
Finally, just like every other enterprise, central banks must adapt their ways of working to the
standards 
in.  Non-hierarchical,
multidisciplinary work processes should unlock the knowledge now sometimes contained in local
silos. Enhanced diversity of staff should both improve the quality of work and increase society’s
association with the central bank and its policies.
the  changing  environment 
they  operate 
I  conclude.  Price  stability,  financial  stability  and  promoting  the  smooth  functioning  of  the
payments system will also in the future govern most of central banks’ actions.It is the task of
central banks, also in the future, to foster trust in money in each of these domains. This trust is
not something which falls from heaven; it has to be built, and maintained, on a daily basis. While
technical know-how of experts is of course essential, on its own it is not enough. The stability of
money is a common good and deserves a quasi-constitutional status. In other words, it is a deep
and  precious  fundamental  which  must  be  safeguarded  under  all  circumstances,  as  a
prerequisite for welfare, but also for freedom and fairness. Therefore, it has to rest on strong
societal  underpinnings  and  be  shielded  from  the  volatility  or  even  arbitrariness  resulting  from
short-termism. Thus, it is fully justified to allocate this goal to institutions which have this stability
as their primary task and which are accountable for achieving it. That is precisely the mission of
central banks, also in the future.
I thank you for your attention and I wish you a pleasant stay at this conference. 
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
