   REMARKS BY THE SECOND DEPUTY GOVERNOR, MRS. ELSIE ADDO 
AWADZI, AT THE JOY FM FINANCIAL SECTOR FORUM ON NOVEMBER 1, 
 2018 
 
Opening remarks 
 
The stability and integrity of our financial system should be of utmost important 
to everyone and the economy as a whole. Banks and other institutions that take 
deposits  are  regulated  to  help  ensure  that  they  remain  safe  and  sound  to 
perform their critical role in the economy.  
 
As  you  know  the  BoG  has  undertaken  a  number  of  reforms  recently  and 
continues  to  strengthen  the  system.  I  look  forward  to  sharing  some  of  these 
reforms with you, and to hearing your thoughts on the reform process so far and 
going forward. 
 
Qs & As 
 
 
Q.  What is the current state of affairs in Ghana’s banking sector? 
 
The banking sector is generally strong and continues to be profitable, judging 
from a number of key indicators. For example:  
  total assets continue to increase; 
 
  profitability remains high; 
 
 
 
Q.   BoG has carried out a number of reforms recently. Why is BoG 
industry CAR of 19% compared to required minimum of 10%; and 
the quality of bank loans continues to improve, with a reduction in NPLs.  
finally cracking the whip after doing nothing for a long time 
 
Indeed, BoG has initiated a number of reforms over the last year and half to 
make the banking sector stronger and more resilient. Key among these reforms 
are: 
   The revocation of licences of 7 failed banks, and the appointment of receivers 
for these banks; 
1 
      Strengthening the regulatory framework through a number of new Directives 
on a number of key issues such as capital, corporate governance, 
provisioning for loans, and others; 
  A renewed focus on risk-based supervision of banks to help identify problems 
sooner than later; 
  Stronger enforcement of our Laws and Directives; 
 
Increasing public awareness to help the banking public make prudent banking 
decisions. 
 BoG  is  committed  to  ensuring  that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  it 
regulates,  remain  safe  and  sound  and  engage  in  practices  that  protect  the 
deposits  of  their  clients  as  well  as  ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  safe  and 
stable for all users. BoG has demonstrated this commitment by the bold steps it 
has taken so far, as difficult and painful as some of them have been. 
 Q.   Were the actions taken against the 7 defunct banks necessary? 
Why were they taken? 
 
  The BoG’s recent actions were necessary to ensure that banks that failed 
were made to exit the market in an orderly fashion and without disruptions to 
our financial system. Failed banks become serious sources of risk for the 
entire financial system and the economy as a whole, and must be made to 
exit before they collapse the whole system. What happens to the financial 
system affects everyone! 
 
  The defunct banks had reached a point where they were no longer able to 
operate as banks. 4 of the 7 had been found to be significantly 
undercapitalised as of the 2015/16, and subsequently became insolvent when 
their capital was further impaired due to bad loans and other irrecoverable 
assets.  The other 3 defunct banks obtained their licenses by false pretences 
through the use of suspicious and non-existent capital, which rendered them 
significantly undercapitalized compared to the minimum of GHS 120 mn they 
were required to have.  
 
  Underlying these failures were a pattern of poor corporate governance 
practices, insider dealings, misreporting, and other practices which put 
depositors’ funds at risk. 
In taking these actions, BoG sought to: 
  protect the deposits (about GHS11 billion) held by these defunct banks; 
  ensure that these defunct banks exited the market in an orderly fashion 
without creating disruptions to the rest of the system; and 
  allow stronger institutions to operate and support the economy.  
2 
  Q. What has been the impact of the BoG’s actions against the failed 
banks on the financial sector and beyond? 
 
  BoG’s  actions  against  the  failed  banks  and  Government’s  decision  to 
guarantee the deposits of the 7 banks and the creation of CBG  have helped 
to  mitigate  what  could  have  been  severe  adverse  consequences  from  these 
failures.  When  banks  fail,  there  are  usually  a  lot  of  casualties,  which  if  not 
well  managed  could  lead  to  significant  problems  for  the  financial sector  and 
the economy. 
 
  The interventions of the BoG and MoF: 
   Protected  about  GHS  11  billion  in  customer  deposits,  including  deposits 
and  placements  of  other  financial  institutions  (banks,  savings  and  loans, 
RCBs,  MFIs,  insurance  firms,  securities  firms  and  fund  managers,  and 
pension fund managers); 
 
  Minimized  job  losses  by  saving  some  3,500  or  70%  of  appx  5000 
employees of the defunct banks; 
 
The banking sector reforms have boosted the confidence of local and 
international investors and other market players in the BoG’s role as regulator, 
and have contributed to the recent upgrades to Ghana’s credit rating from S&P 
from B- to B.  
 
Q.  The clean-up has been costly to the tax payer. How will this be 
recovered if at all? 
 
  The clean-up costs were necessary policy interventions to help mitigate the 
 socio-economic impacts of the failure of the banks.  
 
It is important that the costs of these interventions which were borne by 
taxpayers, are recovered to the extent possible through recoveries from 
debtors, shareholders, and related and connected parties who took money 
from the defunct banks.  
 
  The receivership processes are ongoing, and the receivers are making great 
strides in their recovery efforts. Amounts in excess of 400 Million Cedis have 
so far been recovered by the Receivers of the 2 banks closed last year. 
 
  Dossiers on all seven banks have been handed over to EOCO for 
investigations and possible prosecutions by relevant State agencies.  
 
3 
     BoG’s own internal investigations into the conduct of Bank of Ghana officials 
have begun with the establishment of the Office of Ethics and Internal 
Investigations. Any officials (current and former) found culpable will neither 
be spared nor shielded by Management.  
Q.   Any lessons so far? 
 
Trust and confidence in the financial system are critical. As the saying goes, trust 
comes on foot and leaves on horseback! All parties must work towards 
preserving the trust that customers repose in them. 
Q.  What about the specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Sector? 
There are signs of distress with some institutions not paying 
depositor claims. Is BoG planning to act against these 
institutions? If so, how soon? What are the estimated clean-up 
costs? 
 
BoG continues to assess the condition of the SDI sector. Institutions that do not 
meet prudential requirements will be closed. BoG will ensure that any such action 
is managed carefully to mitigate any potentially adverse socio-economic impacts. 
 
Q.  What is next for BoG? 
  We are working with all stakeholders to rebuild confidence in our banking 
sector. There are great opportunities ahead for the industry to drive Ghana’s 
economic growth agenda, and we expect to see banks positioning themselves 
for these opportunities.  
 
  Following the new regulatory requirements we have introduced, we expect to 
see better capitalized banks, more transparency in the quality of assets held 
by banks, stronger corporate governance and risk management practices, 
and a new focus on maintaining the confidence of customers.  
 
  On our part, we are strengthening our regulatory and supervisory capacity 
through improved systems, processes, accountability, and training, to enable 
our supervision staff better monitor banks’ performance and conduct, and 
ensure that banks take prompt corrective action to address emerging risks.  
 
  We are moving ahead with implementation of the deposit protection scheme 
established under the Ghana Deposit Protection Act, 2016 (Act 931) as 
amended, to provide a safety net for vulnerable depositors in the event of a 
bank failure.  
4 
 Q.  What should be the structure of financial sector regulation going 
forward. 
 
Currently, there are different regulatory agencies with mandates to regulate 
different parts of the financial sector. Each of these agencies have the requisite 
understanding of their respective sectors and should work on improving their 
own effectiveness as may be needed.  
 
More cooperation is also needed among all the regulators. This will help ensure 
that each regulator has visibility on the other parts of the financial system and 
has a clear understanding of how their actions and the actions of their licensees 
affect other parts of the system and vice versa.  
 
 
Closing remarks 
 
  Let me conclude by reassuring everyone that the BoG is carrying out the mandate it 
has under law to ensure the safety and soundness of banks and other deposit-taking 
institutions, to protect depositors’ funds, and to promote integrity and stability of the 
financial system. 
 
  BoG  is  committed  to  supporting  the  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  that  are 
playing by the rules of the game. 
 
  We are working together with all stakeholders to build a resilient banking sector that 
has  the  trust  and  confidence  of  everyone  and  that  support  the  national  economic 
growth agenda. 
  5 
