The FinTech Inn conference, 08/11, Vilnius  
 Good Morning, Dear Colleagues, experts and believers in financial innovation! 
I’m delighted to see so many members of the Lithuanian FinTech community and international guests 
gathered here today.  
On my way to this conference, I had a thought: people say that private markets are the locomotives of 
change  moving  towards  progress  faster  and  better.  And  that  is  the  reason  why  private  sector 
initiatives  tend  to  dictate  new  trends  and  behavioural  patterns,  while  authorities  can  only  do  their 
best to try and keep up.  
Such a perception often seems to reflect reality. Yet this is not quite the case when talking about the 
FinTech situation in Lithuania. I will not be overly modest in this regard: surely, it was the regulator 
who  was  the  frontrunner  in  leading  this  process.  Today,  the  Bank  of  Lithuania  keeps  pace  with  the 
latest innovations - and often is at least half a step ahead. Indeed, it is the very nature of Fintech to 
modify the rules of the game, including those that have existed between the market and the regulator 
for decades.  
We  deemed  last  year  as  the  year  of  breakthrough  in  FinTech  in  our  country,  with  the  number  of 
licences granted tripling. In light of the ongoing interest, we can reasonably assume that this wave will 
continue  this  year  as  well  –  and  perhaps  even  in  the  year  after.  In  my  humble  opinion,  this  might 
suggest that we are not only doing something new and modern, but also that we are doing it right.  
To be more precise, a few years ago, we set ourselves a goal: the Bank of Lithuania would act not only 
as a supervisor (which is always part of our duty) but as a financial sector partner as well. Today, we 
offer  to  FinTech  companies  one  of  the  quickest  and  most  flexible  licencing  regimes  in  Europe.  Our 
consultations facilitate the start up of new businesses. We have opened our payment infrastructure to 
non-banking institutions, and now FinTech companies can directly, without intermediaries, access the 
entire  SEPA  area  through  the  CENTROlink  platform.  The  freshly  launched  ‘regulatory  sandbox’ 
provides favourable conditions to construct and test innovative business models while enabling us to 
upgrade our own array of regulatory tools. 
I  could  go  on  about  the  benefits  of  the  regulatory  environment  in  Lithuania.  But  I  will  stop  here 
because many of you know them, or perhaps have already taken advantage of them. Instead, I will 
explain why we are working so hard.  
I must admit that we are creating favourable conditions for the development of FinTech not because 
of  our  blind  love.  Quite  the  contrary  –  we  offer  something  that  I  would  call  a  “partnership  of 
convenience”, as we have a clear and measurable interest. We are aiming for two things: first, tighter 
competition,  and  then,  its  possible  outcome –  a  better  price-quality  ratio  for  consumers.  In  other 
words, we are moving forward with an incentive to achieve greater public benefit.  
Are we achieving our aims? Are we satisfied with our results?  
The answer is both yes and no. 
Yes,  because  FinTech  has  managed  to  loosen  the  grip  of  stagnation.  Let’s  take,  as  one  remarkable 
example among many, the emergence of mobile payment platforms. This innovation has changed the 
face of the sector. Furthermore, market developments are also reflected by the growing share of non-
banking  institutions  in  electronic  transfers.  Consumers  increasingly  choose  innovative  payment 
applications because of their convenience, tailored to the specific consumer needs – something that 
traditional market players do not always deliver. 
What  are  we  not  satisfied  with?  In  our  view,  the  opportunities  have  not  yet  been  fully  exploited – 
neither those provided to the FinTech sector nor those that the sector offers to the public. The level 
of competition remains insufficient, while the market share of innovative financial institutions has a 
definite potential for expansion. On top of this, Lithuanian consumers often receive financial services 
that are less attractive than those offered in other markets. In short, we still have plenty of room to 
grow.  Therefore,  the  Bank  of  Lithuania  will  seek  to  further  ensure  a  FinTech-friendly  regulatory 
environment  and  will  consistently  promote  not  only  the  quantitative  growth  of  this  sector,  but –  I 
would like to emphasize – qualitative progress as well.  
That is what we are hoping for when giving you a huge credit of trust. 
Such  trust,  however,  does  not  mean  that  we  turn  a  blind  eye.  Although  the  Bank  of  Lithuania  is  a 
financial  sector  partner,  I  wish  to  reiterate  that,  as  designated  by  the  law  and  the  citizens,  it  is  a 
supervisor as well. 
This  means  that  criteria  of  transparency  and  integrity  will  remain  crucial  in  the  future,  and  we  can 
uphold  these  principles  employing  the  tools  provided  by  FinTech  as  well.  We  are  committed  to 
maintaining  a  high  bar  in  terms  of  quality –  our  goal  is  not  the  greatest  number  of  market 
participants. Rather, our goal is to help the highest quality and most reliable FinTech companies offer 
real solutions that produce added value for the public. 
By believing in and supporting you, we have assumed responsibility. Today, we share it together – for 
we all are in the same boat. One of the oars is in the hands of the regulator and the other is in the 
hands of the market participants. Let’s row in the same direction, so that we all move forward with 
confidence and success.  
Thank you. I wish you all a fruitful conference. 
