Philip R Lane: Macroeconomics and banking in Ireland
Address  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Certified  Bank
Director Annual Conference, Institute of Bankers, Dublin, 29 November 2018.
Introduction
 I welcome the opportunity to address the Certified Bank Director Annual Conference. In addition
to taking responsibility for firm-specific strategies and risk management, it is essential that bank
directors  also  understand  the  macroeconomic  environment:  after  all,  the  primary  driver  of  the
aggregate  performance  of  the  banking  sector  will  be  the  overall  state  of  the  economy.  This
should be painfully obvious for an Irish audience: while there were important differences across
individual banks during the boom-bust-recovery cycle, the profits and losses of the banks were
(and remain) highly correlated with the domestic economy.
Accordingly, the first part of this speech will focus on macroeconomic and systemic issues . In
the second part, I will turn to bank-specific factors and, in particular, I will turn my attention to the
expectations of the Central Bank in relation to the duties of bank directors.
The Macroeconomic Environment
1
The Irish economy is currently experiencing a sustained expansion phase. The sectoral pattern
of  growth  is  broadly  based  across  both  export-orientated  sectors  and  domestically-orientated
sectors, with both Irish-owned firms and multinational firms contributing to job creation and new
investment.
As a result, there has been significant increases in employment and income, which has fostered
an uptick in consumer spending. Domestic demand is further supported by the ongoing recovery
across  the  various  investment  categories.  The  projections  for  the  labour  market  continue  to
signal  that  the  economy  is  moving  towards  full  employment,  although  some  extra  capacity  is
possible  through  further  inward  migration  and  increased  participation  in  the  labour  market.
Nevertheless, under the central forecast, capacity is set to tighten further in coming years.
While  recognising  the  positive  baseline  forecast,  the  intrinsic  volatility  of  the  Irish  economy
means  that  there  can  be  sudden  and  sizeable  adverse  shifts  in  fundamentals.  Given  this
volatility, macro-financial risk management should have two aims. First, policy actions should not
amplify pro-cyclical dynamics, if overheating risks in the economy and the financial system are to
be contained. Second, macro-financial resilience requires buffers to be accumulated during good
times that will enable Ireland to cope more easily with future downside shocks.
In  relation  to  the  financial  system,  our  macroprudential  policies  such  as  the  countercyclical
capital  buffer  that  we  triggered  this  summer  -  and  our  mortgage  rules  –  which  we  reviewed
yesterday - are intended to ensure that resilience is enhanced during phases of good economic
performance. The aim is that a more resilient financial system will be better placed to absorb the
impact  of  future  downturns,  with  more  sustainable  funding  positions  and  greater  capacity  to
tolerate a decline in the credit environment.
In this context, as you will all be aware, a key risk is Brexit. Let me focus on two alternative paths
for  the  future  EU-UK  economic  relationship.  One  path  follows  the  withdrawal  agreement.  The
other path is the default option of a hard Brexit, in the absence of any agreement prior to the end
of March 2019.
Compared to the pre-referendum status quo in which the UK was a permanent member of the
EU, the path laid out by the withdrawal agreement entails the post-transition exit of the UK from
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the single market. Even if a long-term customs agreement is ultimately negotiated, this means
the introduction of trade frictions such as regulatory checks for trade in goods between Great
2
Britain and the EU 27 and the inevitable limitations of equivalence regimes for trade in services .
Furthermore,  while  the  common  travel  area  between  Ireland  and  the  UK  will  be  preserved,
restrictions  on  the  free  movement  of  people  between  the  UK  and  the  EU27  will  disrupt  the
operation of labour markets, given the high levels of two-way mobility that have developed over
the last forty years. Beyond the implications for individual citizens, restricted labour mobility will
also  affect  the  dynamics  of  different  industries  (including  the  financial  sector)  in  the  coming
years.  For  instance,  the  productivity  boost  from  the  clustering  of  specialised  talent  pools  in
specific  locations  will  be  undercut  by  the  geographical  dispersion  implied  by  restrictions  on
labour mobility. It will also affect relative business cycle dynamics, given that UK-EU27 migration
serves as an adjustment mechanism in response to asymmetric shocks.
While some of these costs will only kick in after the transition phase concludes, forward-looking
firms, households and investors have already responded in various ways since the referendum.
One major adjustment mechanism has been the significant weakening of Sterling against the
euro, which constitutes a terms of trade decline for UK residents. It is also estimated that UK
firms  have  already  started  to  pull  back  from  EU-orientated  export  strategies,  in  anticipation  of
3
future trade barriers .
More generally, as emphasised by the Bank of England, uncertainty about the final crystallisation
of  Brexit  has  had  a  chilling  effect  on  business  investment  in  the  UK.  In  one  direction,  the
ratification of the withdrawal agreement would provide some guidance to firms as to the general
trajectory  of  the  future  UK-EU27  relationship,  even  if  much  will  remain  uncertain  until  the
negotiations about the post-transition environment are concluded. It follows that the passing of
the withdrawal agreement could  unlock  business  investment  in  the  UK  through  a  reduction  in
uncertainty.  In  the  other  direction,  a  hard  Brexit  would  constitute  a  much  more  disruptive
environment, in view of the lack of clarity about the future UK-EU27 relationship under a hard
Brexit and the absence of a road map as to how this future relationship will be negotiated.
However, as emphasised by ECB President Draghi, it would take significant mismanagement for
financial stability risks to materialise in relation to the identified cliff-edge risks of a hard Brexit, in
view of the clear responsibilities of firms to make contingency plans for a hard Brexit and the
capacity of legislators, regulators and central banks to address residual systemic risks. This has
included a major push by regulators to require that financial firms make preparations for worst-
case scenarios rather than “hoping for the best” . In addition, the shift in regulatory regimes after
the crisis mean that banks now are much better capitalised and, as underlined by the recently-
published EBA stress tests, have a greater capacity to absorb adverse shocks.
4
At the same time, if a hard Brexit generates sharp movements in asset prices and in the Sterling-
euro exchange rate or is associated with a significant macroeconomic downturn in the UK, the
balance  sheets  of  financial  firms  with  exposures  to  the  UK  will  be  affected.  In  assessing
exposures, it is necessary to take a broad view, since the complexity of supply chains mean that
firms  with  only  an  indirect  connection  to  the  UK  economy  will  be  affected,  while  large  and
persistent  currency  movements  can  give  rise  to  new  substitution  options  even  in  sectors
previously sheltered from direct competition from UK rivals.
In relation to financial services, the general nature of the long-term post-Brexit environment is
well  understood:  the  UK  and  EU27  financial  systems  will  be  separately  regulated,  with  each
making its own decisions as to the extent that trade in financial services can be permitted under
equivalence principles.
In the post-Brexit environment, it is unlikely that financial activity will cluster in a single location in
the  euro  area,  since  there  is  no  single  city  sufficiently  predominant  to  lock  in  agglomeration
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
advantages across all segments of the financial sector. This is already evident in the Brexit plans
of firms, with authorisations sought in a range of locations (including Dublin). Still, over the longer
term, the future dynamics of the EU27 financial system could take several directions, given the
“multiple equilibria” nature of the economics of locational choices. In addition, an open question is
whether the decentralisation of the European financial system will impose significant efficiency
costs.
An important factor facilitating the decentralisation of activity within the EU27 is the commitment
to regulatory and supervisory convergence, such that firms can be confident of a regulatory level
playing  field  across  the  EU27.  This  is  most  advanced  in  the  context  of  banking,  through  the
operation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. However, Brexit has also prompted a greater
focus  on  supervisory  convergence  across  the  entire  financial  system,  including  through  the
coordinating role played by EIOPA and ESMA.
Even  with  considerable  reconfiguration  by  firms  to  conform  to  a  post-Brexit  regulatory
environment, there is little doubt that there will continue to be very extensive ongoing UK-EU trade
in  financial  services,  with  associated  intertwining  of  sectoral  balance  sheets  across  the  two
jurisdictions.  Moreover,  a  substantial  proportion  will  take  the  form  of  intra-firm  transactions,
through the internal markets of globally-significant financial institutions. Internal trade within these
institutions enables scale economies to be achieved and also facilitates diversification against
geographical  exposures.  In  view  of  the  common  interest  in  effective  supervision  and  the
maintenance of financial stability, I expect that EU and UK regulators (in partnership with other
global regulators) will continue to work closely together to ensure the prudential management of
the post-Brexit environment.
The Role of Bank Directors
While the macroeconomic environment is important, the performance of the banking sector also
depends  on  structural  and  bank-specific  factors.  Bank-specific  features  that  affect  the
performance of the banking sector include bank size, capital levels, operational efficiency and
5
risk management, amongst other factors .
Bank directors play a critical role in determining the quality of management, operational efficiency
6
and sound risk management, which are significant influences on bank profitability in the data .
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  highlight  our  expectations  of  bank  directors  in  relation  to  three
dimensions: (i) governance and internal controls; (ii) culture and behaviour; and (ii) diversity and
inclusion.
I will draw on lessons from our inspections of governance and internal controls at banks, our
recent report  on  culture  and  behaviour  in  banks  and  our  work  on  diversity  in  the  senior
management of banks.
Let me first address governance. Strong and effective corporate governance in banks is not only
important for commercial success but is a regulatory requirement, since it contributes to a stable
financial  system 
through  rigorous  assessment  of  controls  and  probing  challenge  of
management.
Effective  corporate  governance  depends  on  the  skills  and  experience  of  the  board  and  the
executive directors of banks.
Corporate governance includes procedures, processes and attitudes according to which a firm
is directed and controlled. The internal governance structure specifies the distribution of rights
and responsibilities among the different participants in the firm, including the board of directors,
and it lays down the rules and procedures for decision-making.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
We expect board members to challenge and critically review the propositions, explanations and
information provided by senior management, especially in relation to the risk profile of the firm
and the monitoring of the activities of the firm’s internal control functions, including compliance.
Since 2015, the Central Bank’s Banking Supervision Inspections Division has been conducting
governance and internal control inspections across Irish licensed credit institutions. A number of
common themes have emerged from these inspections that are a cause for concern, given the
pervasive nature of the findings in these areas.
Some of the recurring issues that have been identified in our inspections include:
Deficiencies in board oversight of director and senior management appointments.
Consistent weaknesses in respect of board oversight of key matters, particularly in respect
of ensuring that effective and adequately resourced internal control functions are in place.
Weaknesses in the governance of risk appetite, supported by appropriate reporting to the
board.
Weaknesses  in  the  operation  of  the  second  line  of  defence,  including  inadequate  risk
management  frameworks,  poor  quality  and  governance  of  risk  management  assurance
plans, and incomplete reporting of risk by the Chief Risk Officer to the Board.    
In  addition,  a  number  of  banks  did  not  meet  the  obligations  of  the  Central  Bank’s Corporate
Governance Requirements for Credit Institutions 2015 (‘the Corporate Governance Code’). This
code applies to all credit institutions licensed or authorised by the Central Bank and represents
de minimis obligations placed on credit institutions with respect to governance standards and
practices. The areas of non-compliance include:
Inadequate articulation of the precise roles, responsibilities, and reserve powers of boards
and board committees.
Boards  not  formally  and  robustly  reviewing  their  own  performance,  both  collectively  and
individually.
Boards not ensuring that appropriate and up-to-date succession plans are in place for both
the board and senior management.
Inappropriate membership and attendance at audit committee meetings by the Chairman or
CEO, which can compromise the committee’s independence or effectiveness.
Inadequate oversight or on-going suitability assessments of senior management and other
individuals who may have a material impact on the risk profile of the credit institution.    
Given  this  list  of  deficiencies,  it  is  vitally  important  that  everyone  in  this  audience  clearly
understands your personal responsibility as bank directors in ensuring your firms are effectively
managed, with board members asking the right questions of senior management and ensuring
that decisions are made based on sound information and judgement.
Shining  the  supervisory  spotlight  on  appropriate  governance  and  controls  for  banks  is  one
dimension of the Central Bank’s role . In addition, to ensure that the financial system operates in
the best interests of consumers and the wider economy, we are increasingly focused on the role
of organisational culture in banking.
7
This  summer  we  published  our  report  on  culture  and  behaviour .  The  report  highlights  that
inappropriate cultures were a significant factor not only in contributing to the financial crisis but
also  in  the  tracker  scandal.  The  report  also  underlines  that  the  development  of  consumer-
orientated cultures is far from complete, even if progress has been made (albeit unevenly across
banks) to prioritise the consumer interest in strategy, decision-making and procedures.
8
The report makes clear that there is a significant onus on the boards and senior management of
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
each bank to lead by example and ensure that an effective culture permeates the firm, with this
commitment regularly reinforced with all staff.
Directors can promote a healthy and ethical culture within a bank by:
Promoting a client-centric focus where staff are committed to behaving correctly even when
no one is watching.
Requiring  that  exhibiting  the  expected  behaviours  is  central  in  setting  objectives  and
designing incentives for staff.
Regular reviews to ensure that the culture in practice aligns with board expectations.
Ensuring that all three lines of defence drive culture so that it is embedded in the firm’s risk
management framework.    
From our perspective, we have made clear that we are committed to increasing our supervisory
intensity  in  the  area  of  conduct  risk,  so  that  directors  truly  understand  the  importance  of
embedding a consumer-focused culture throughout their firms and that they can demonstrate
how this translates to fair outcomes for consumers. Boards can expect rigorous challenge from
us on these issues.
Finally, the Central Bank has communicated about how low levels of diversity in key decision-
making roles in banks and other financial services firms can create an environment of excessive
risk taking and inhibit necessary cultural change . While some firms are making progress, more
needs to be done to increase diversity at senior levels. Such diversity can reduce the likelihood of
group-think or overconfidence, increase the level of internal challenge, improve decision-making,
enhance risk management practices, and reduce resistance to external challenge.
9
The Central Bank expects boards and senior management to develop ambitious diversity goals,
including targets and metrics by which they can measure progress. We expect directors to build
pipelines  of  diverse  talent,  and  take  into  account  the  overall  construct  and  functioning  of  the
executive management layer when making appointments. The Central Bank expects boards to
identify and reduce barriers to cultural change and promote diversity and inclusion in all aspects
of the firm’s activities.
Our  previous  research  on  diversity  in  financial  services  and  the  assessment  of  diversity
undertaken within the Behaviour and Culture review shows a lack of gender diversity across the
entire financial system. In the five years to the end of 2017, men had been appointed to more
than nine out of 10 of the most senior and influential roles in the retail banks (Chairpersons, Chief
Executives,  Chief  Finance  Officers,  Heads  of  Business  Lines  and  so  on).  Many  of  these
appointees have similar backgrounds, education and experience.
The  Central  Bank  has  clearly  set  out  our  expectations  of  the  five  retail  banks  as  part  of  the
Behaviour  and  Culture  review.  We  have  required  each  bank  to  submit  an  outcome-focused
diversity strategy supported by an implementation plan by the end of this week. We expect each
plan, at a minimum, to include clear expectations, implementation targets and consider a range
of measures of diversity.
The Central Bank will be undertaking further work in 2019 to drive improvements in diversity and
inclusion across the financial services sector.
In summary, our view is that all banks have more to do in fostering a consumer-focused culture;
improving diversity and inclusion; and meeting the requirements of good corporate governance.
Conclusions
As the primary driver of the aggregate performance of the banking sector will be the overall state
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the economy, it is essential that bank directors understand the macroeconomic environment in
which  they  are  operating.  Therefore,  in  my  remarks  today  I  have  outlined  some  of  the  key
macroeconomic and systemic issues the domestic economy faces, as well as the significant tail
risks. I pointed to the intrinsic volatility of the Irish economy that requires careful macro-financial
risk management, with a primary focus on the accumulation on fiscal and financial buffers that
will allow Ireland to cope more easily with future downside shocks.
Turning to institution-specific determinants of financial sector performance, I then highlighted the
expectations  of  the  Central  Bank  in  relation  to  the  duties  of  bank  directors  with  regard  to
governance  and  internal  controls;  culture  and  behaviour;  and  diversity  and  inclusion.  I
emphasised that bank directors are responsible for ensuring that the banks that they lead are
well  governed  and  develop  organisational  cultures  that  deliver  for  consumers  and  the  wider
economy.
The  next  few  weeks  and  months  will  tell  us  much  about  the  future  EU27-UK  relationship:
however it turns out, the Central Bank of Ireland will be focused on the resilience of the financial
system,  in  order  to  mitigate  the  adverse  impact  of  Brexit  (whether  hard  or  soft)  on  the  Irish
economy.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
This section follows my 19th November speech “Irish Economic Developments: An Update” (Consulate General
of Ireland, New York).
Regulatory  checks  will  also  be  needed  for  goods  moving  from  Great  Britain  to  Northern  Ireland,  given  the
commitment under the withdrawal agreement to ensure no hard border on the island of Ireland.
See Crowley, Meredith, Oliver Exton and Lu Han (2018), “Renegotiation of Trade Agreements and Firm Exporting
Decisions:  Evidence  from  the  Impact  of  Brexit  on  UK  Exports,”  mimeo,  University  of  Cambridge.  Douch,
Mustapha, Edwards T. Huw and Christian Soegaard (2018), “The Trade Effects of the Brexit Announcement
Shock,” The Warwick Economics Research Paper Series 1176.
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  has  been  processing  applications  for  authorisations  of  new  entities  or  the
expansion of activities by existing entities. It is imperative that firms that have not yet activated Brexit plans do so
as soon as possible, given the limited time window before the end of March and the importance of having valid
authorisations for all scenarios.
Kok, Christoffer, Csaba Móré, and Cosimo Pancaro (2015), “Bank profitability challenges in euro area banks:
the role of cyclical and structural factors,” Financial Stability Review 1, European Central Bank.
See  for  example,  Berger,  Allen  N.,  and  David  B.  Humphrey  (1997),  “Efficiency  of  financial  institutions:
International survey and directions for future research.” European journal of operational research 98.2 (1997):
175–212. Molyneux, Philip, and John Thornton (1992), “Determinants of European bank profitability: A note.”
Journal  of  banking  &  Finance  16.6:  1173–117. Athanasoglou,  Panayiotis  P.,  Sophocles  N.  Brissimis,  and
Matthaios  D.  Delis  (2008),  “Bank-specific,  industry-specific  and  macroeconomic  determinants  of  bank
profitability.” Journal of international financial Markets, Institutions and Money 18.2: 121–136. Bikker, Jacob A.,
and Haixia Hu (2001), “Cyclical patterns in profits, provisioning and lending of banks and procyclicality of the
new Basel capital requirements.” Research Series Supervision 39.
For example in the Corporate Governance Requirements for Credit Institutions 
Behaviour and Culture of the Irish Retail Banks, July 2018
See  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  report  on  ‘Demographic  analysis  -Applications  for  Pre-Approval  Controlled
Function (PCF) roles in regulated firms – 2017’
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
