Ravi Menon: Expanding connectivity amidst rising trade tensions
Keynote address by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
the Singapore-China (Chongqing) Financial Summit, Chongqing, 2 November 2018.
 Mayor Tang Liangzhi, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
First,  let  me  thank  the  Chongqing  municipality  for  hosting  this  inaugural  Singapore-China
(Chongqing) Financial Summit.
Your  warm  hospitality,  efficient  arrangements,  and  sumptuous  dinner  last  evening  have
already gotten this Summit off to a very good start.
This year, we are especially pleased to have with us guests not only from Singapore and
Chongqing but also from ASEAN and China’s Western Region. 
This Summit marks a new milestone in the Chongqing Connectivity Initiative (“CCI”).
The  CCI  will  begin  to  play  a  key  role  now  in  strengthening  connectivity  not  only  between
China and Singapore, but between China’s Western Region and ASEAN.
A Troubled Trade Landscape: Asia’s Response
Our efforts to deepen connectivity have taken on added significance amidst the troubled trade
environment we are witnessing globally.
Ongoing trade tensions will pose risks for Asian economies – which rely heavily on global trade.
The immediate impact of the tariffs imposed to-date has been mild; they affect about 2% of
global trade.
They are estimated to shave off about 0.2% points from China’s GDP growth in both 2019
and 2020.
ASEAN’s exposure to US-China trade flows amount to about 0.7% of the region’s combined
GDP on a trade in value-added (“TiVA”) basis.
The effects of the tariffs will likely become more discernible as we go into 2019 - especially if the
coverage of these tariffs is expanded.
Even so, the longer term effects are not expected to be large, as supply chains reconfigure
and production networks adjust.
If  the  current  trade  conflict  persists,  the  more  serious  casualty  is  perhaps  not  trade  but
investment.
Trade conflicts are bad for confidence, and businesses around the world may scale back
investment amidst uncertainty.
A decline in investment will reduce productive capacity, delay technological upgrading, and
compromise productivity growth.
We hope that the trade dispute is resolved through dialogue and compromise and not be allowed
to escalate into a full-fledged trade war.
But while trade tensions have clouded the short term outlook, the Asian growth story remains
intact and offers great promise for the future. 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, the structural trends supporting Asia’s long term growth are still in place.
This includes rising education levels, rapid urbanisation, and a burgeoning middle class all
across Asia.
Yes,  trade  remains Asia’s  life-blood,  but  domestic  demand  is  already  emerging  as  a  key
driver of growth in the region.
Second, Asia is increasingly trading within itself – as a source for imports and a final destination
for exports.
Countries in Asia conduct substantial trade among themselves, in both intermediate inputs
and final goods.
In  trade  in  value-added  terms  (“TiVA”),  more  than  one-third  of  the  exports  from  the  five
economies of Northeast Asia and the eight economies of Southeast Asia  ends up in the
region itself – this is nearly twice their exports to the US.
1
ASEAN in particular is becoming a major economic force in Asia.
It is a US$2.4 trillion market with over 630 million people.
Based on current growth rates, ASEAN is expected to become the fourth largest market
by 2030, behind the EU, China, and the US.
ASEAN has emerged as a key global manufacturing region, with extensive supply chains
linking the individual economies and to China.
ASEAN is the world’s fifth largest manufacturing economy in value-added terms.
So, in the face of rising trade protectionism, it is important for Asian economies to strengthen
trade, investment and infrastructure networks to sustain long term growth.
Indeed,  the  best  response  to  trade  restrictions  is  to  further  liberalise  trade  among  willing
economies.
And this is exactly what Asia is doing.
The Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (“RCEP”) is a good example.
It brings together the ten ASEAN economies and China, India, Japan, Korea, Australia and
New Zealand.
It signals the region’s commitment to freetrade.
Negotiations  are  ongoing,  but  when  successfully  concluded,  the  RCEP  will  create  the
world’s largest trading bloc, covering one-third of global GDP.
And by the end of next month, the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific
Partnership (“TPP-11”) will enter into force.
It is not as big as the RCEP but TPP-11 will eliminate most existing tariffs among the eleven
economies  across Asia  and  Latin America,  simplify  customs  procedures,  and  introduce
strong provisions to boost modern services and a digital economy.
Trade and investment linkages between China and ASEAN, in particular, are deep and have been
growing over the years.
Bilateral trade between China  and ASEAN  has  increased  by  an  average  13%  per  annum
since 2005.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
China is ASEAN’s top trading partner and third-largest source of foreign direct investment.
In short, the fundamentals for growth in ASEAN and China are strong.  
And if we can deepen and broaden the integration between our two regions, it will help soften
the  impact  of  external  trade  protectionsim  and  sustain  Asia’s  dynamism  and  long  term
growth.
Key Achievements of the CCI
Against this broader imperative to strengthen trade and investment connectivity between China
and ASEAN, the CCI has made good progress. 
Mayor Tang has highlighted the key achievements of CCI. Let me highlight just a few examples
which may be of interest to our friends from China here.
Chinese firms continue to benefit from raising capital in Singapore’s financial centre.
As of August this year, 51 CCI qualifying cross-border financing deals worth US$4.2 billion
have been completed.
The scope of cross-border financial services has extended beyond Chongqing to other parts of
Western China, and new channels for cross-border financing have opened up.
China Aoyuan Property Group Limited, a firm from Western China, listed two bonds, totalling
US$700 million on the Singapore Exchange this year.
China’s first cross-border REIT containing outlet malls in the Western Region was launched
on the Singapore Exchange this year, with a US$322 million IPO listing.
Raising  capital  in  Singapore  has  allowed  Chinese  companies  to  diversify  their  investor  base,
taking advantage of Singapore’s S$3.3 trillion pool of assets under management.
And as the largest REIT market in Asia ex-Japan, Singapore can help connect Chinese assets
with a diversified pool of investors, including high net worth individuals from ASEAN and global
sovereign wealth funds.
New Connectivity for New Growth: Western China and ASEAN
The  CCI  has  made  great  strides  in  strengthening  the  collaboration  between  Chongqing  and
Singapore.  Now  is  the  time  for  CCI  to  take  flight,  and  soar  in  reach  of  broader  connectivity
between Western China and ASEAN.  Let me cite four areas where we can do this.
First, building robust channels for SME financing.
ASEAN and the Western Region can work together to develop more innovative SME financing
solutions.
Our financial institutions from both sides have started to collaborate in this area.
One  of  Singapore’s  banks,  OCBC,  has  partnered  Chongqing  Rural  Commercial  Bank  to
provide loans for SMEs in Chongqing.
Lu International, a subisidiary of Lufax under the PingAn Group in China, and other Singapore
institutional investors will be collaborating with Chongqing Financial Assets Exchange to help
micro finance companies issue debt overseas.
Second, diversifying funding channels for outbound Chinese corporates.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Singapore can support the financing needs of Chinese companies expanding into Southeast Asia
and beyond.  
Take  for  example,  the  New  Hope  Group,  an  agricultural  and  food  processing  company
based in Western China. 
It has been raising funds in Singapore for its overseas expansion.
Or companies such as Chongqing Western Modern Logistics Industry Zone Development
Construction and Chongqing Grain Group.
They have issued close to S$1 billion of bonds from Singapore.
Bond issuance by Chinese issuers in Singapore almost doubled in 2017 to reach S$18 billion.
More than 25% of this amount was issued by first-time Chinese issuers in Singapore.
Singapore’ Asian Bond Grant Scheme will help such first-time issuers by offsetting a part of
their typical issuance costs.
Haier  Group,  a  leading  Chinese  consumer  electronics  player,  benefitted  from  this
scheme when it issued a US$1 billion perpetual debt security in Singapore. 
Third, enhancing risk management for Chinese firms.
Chongqing and Singapore can explore joint projects to mitigate the economic impact of natural
catastrophe risks in the Western Region.
One example is through piloting a natural catastrophe insurance pool.
Similar initiatives are underway in Southeast Asia – and we could share experiences. 
In  May  this  year,  ASEAN+3  Finance  Ministers  agreed  to  establish  the  Southeast  Asia
Disaster Risk Insurance Facility (“SEADRIF”), which provides disaster risk financing, and a
regional catastrophe risk insurance pool for participating ASEAN member states. 
Similarly, Chinese investors and developers in Belt and Road projects who are facing unfamiliar
legal, credit, and environmental risks in Southeast Asian markets, can leverage on the insurance
expertise in Singapore to help manage these risks.
A good example is the Belt and Road insurance consortium that was formed in Singapore last
year.
Comprising both Chinese and Singapore insurers, it serves as an avenue to jointly develop
insurance  solutions  to  meet  the  risk  management  needs  of  Chinese  developers  and
contractors.
The  consortium  aims  to  provide  integrated  insurance  solutions  across  multiple  countries,
including for construction, project cargo,  political risk and structured trade credit.  
Thus far, the consortium has pledged US$1.2 billion in insurance capacity for construction
and  project  cargo  risks.  It  has  insured  four  projects,  in  Vietnam,  Indonesia,  Turkey  and
Pakistan. 
2
Fourth, strengthening FinTech collaboration.
There is great scope to leverage on technology to strengthen connectivity between the Western
Region and ASEAN.
 
One  potential  application  of  technology  solutions  is  along  the  Southern  Transport  Corridor
(“STC”) which is being established to connect Western China and Southeast Asia.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
STC can potentially shorten to 1 week the time it takes to transport goods between China
and ASEAN, compared to 2-3 weeks using other routes.
A  successful  STC  will  provide  a  further  boost  to  increase  trade  and  investment  activities
between the two regions.
Beyond reducing physical distance, we should aim to reduce friction in trade processes.
There is friction in clearing customs, handling trade documents, checking for fraud in trade
finance, and ensuring the safety and timely delivery of goods.
This is because  the approach to trade and trade finance is still manual and paper-based.
We need to have end-to-end digitalisation of trade processes. 
Chongqing and Singapore can work together to apply FinTech solutions to make the STC hassle
free, safe, and cost efficient for all stakeholders.
Chongqing’s interest to develop a Fintech experimental and demonstration zone in the Western
Region is thus timely.
The  Fintech  zone  can  serve  as  a  source  of  technology  solutions  for  the  successful
development of the STC. 
Several players have embarked on initiatives in this area.  
For example, VCargo Cloud from Singapore has worked on digitalising the STC’s work
flows  onto  cloud  services,  synchronising  and  sharing  the  information  provided  by
different parties from trade, logistics, and supply chain.
I  am  glad  to  share  that  there  will  be  a  signing  of  a  four-party  Memorandum  of  Understanding
(MoU) later today at the Summit that will catalyse FinTech cooperation between Chongqing and
Singapore.
The  MoU  will  cover  enterprise  and  talent  exchange,  the  establishment  of  an  incubator
platform and a regular communication mechanism.
Under  a  separate  MoU,  OCBC  Bank,  Xiaomi  Inc,  and  Hanhua  Financial  Holding  Co  will
explore Fintech collaboration in the areas of retail and institutional financial services in China.
This  collaboration  will  enable  more  than  300  million  Xiaomi  retail  customers  and
business partners to have access to innovative financial services.
Conclusion
This Summit is a measure of how far we have come, and an aspiration to how much more we
can do together. Let us continue to scale new heights and explore new frontiers of collaboration,
for a more connected and prosperous Asia.
Thank you.
1
2
 China, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong; and Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Philippines, Brunei, Vietnam,
Cambodia, Singapore.
Insurance cover against equipment/goods in transit
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
