Mario Draghi: IMFC Statement
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  thirty-eighth
meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Bali, Indonesia, 12 October 2018.
 The euro area economy continues to expand in a broad-based manner, across countries and
sectors, despite some moderation  following  its  strong  growth  in  2017.  The  economy  grew  by
2.1%  year-on-year  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year.  It  continues  to  exhibit  a  high  level  of
capacity  utilisation,  and  labour  markets  are  tightening  in  several  countries  and  sectors.  The
unemployment rate in the euro area has dropped to its lowest level since 2008, and the number
of people in employment has increased by more than nine million since mid-2013. The latest
economic indicators suggest that, overall, this broad-based growth in the euro area will continue.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  continue  to  underpin  domestic  demand,  which  remains  the
mainstay  of  the  ongoing  expansion.  Private  consumption  is  being  supported  by  employment
gains and rising wages. Business investment has strengthened amid improvements in corporate
profitability, favourable financing conditions and solid demand. In addition, the expansion in global
activity is expected to continue, benefiting euro area exports.
The latest ECB staff projections put annual real GDP growth at 2.0% in 2018, 1.8% in 2019 and
1.7% in 2020. At the same time, uncertainties relating to rising protectionism, vulnerabilities in
emerging markets and financial market volatility have gained more prominence recently.
Headline inflation in the euro area has lately been hovering around 2.0%, somewhat higher than
the  levels  observed  in  the  first  months  of  this  year,  mainly  reflecting  a  higher  annual  rate  of
change in energy prices. While measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted, they
have  been  increasing  from  earlier  lows.  Uncertainty  around  the  inflation  outlook  is  receding.
Looking ahead, underlying inflation is expected to pick up towards the end of the year and then
increase  gradually  over  the  medium  term,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the
continuing economic expansion and rising wage growth. The latest ECB staff projections foresee
annual euro area headline inflation at 1.7% in 2018, 2019 and 2020.
Overall,  recent  developments  vindicate  the  Governing  Council’s  earlier  assessments  of  the
medium-term inflation outlook. Incoming information continues to support our confidence that the
sustained  convergence  of  inflation  to  levels  below,  but  close  to,  2%  will  proceed,  and  will  be
maintained even after a gradual winding-down of our net asset purchases. Accordingly, at its last
monetary  policy  meeting  the  Governing  Council  confirmed  that  it  continues  to  expect  the  key
ECB interest rates to remain at their present levels at least through the summer of 2019, and in
any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to
levels  that  are  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  Governing  Council  also
decided to reduce the monthly pace of the net purchases under the asset purchase programme
(APP) to €15 billion from October until the end of December 2018 and anticipated that, subject to
incoming data confirming our medium-term inflation outlook, net purchases will then end. Finally,
the  Governing  Council  also  confirmed  its  intention  to  reinvest  the  principal  payments  from
maturing securities purchased under the APP for an extended period of time after the end of our
net asset purchases, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity
conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
Significant monetary policy stimulus is still needed to support the further build-up of domestic
price  pressures  and  headline  inflation  developments  over  the  medium  term.  This  support  will
continue to be provided by the net asset purchases until the end of the year, by the sizeable
stock  of  acquired  assets  and  the  associated  reinvestments,  and  by  our  enhanced  forward
guidance on the key ECB interest rates. In any event, the Governing Council stands ready to
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
adjust all of its instruments as appropriate to ensure that inflation continues to move towards the
Governing Council’s inflation aim in a sustained manner.
The financial health of the euro area banking sector has continued to improve. Although showing
a slight decrease from 14.6% at the end of 2017, the aggregate Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of
euro area significant institutions stood at 14.1% at the end of the first quarter of 2018. Banks
have made progress in reducing their stocks of non-performing loans (NPLs). In the first quarter
of 2018, the NPL ratio for euro area significant institutions dropped further, to 4.8%, compared
with 5.9% a year earlier. However, euro area banks’ profitability remains subdued. The average
return on equity of euro area significant institutions declined to 6.6% in the first quarter of 2018,
from 7.1% a year earlier. In this context, EU and national authorities are still following up on a
comprehensive action plan for dealing with legacy asset quality issues, adopted by the Council of
the European Union. We have published guidance to banks on NPLs, including our supervisory
expectations  for  their  prudential  provisioning.  Furthermore,  we  continue  to  devote  significant
attention  to  potential  valuation  issues,  with  a  focus  on  banks  that  have  material  exposures  to
complex financial assets – including but not limited to level 3 assets – through both our off-site
and on-site supervisory processes.
With respect to financial stability more broadly, recent episodes of heightened financial market
volatility have led to only limited contagion across countries and markets. Currently, there is no
indication of excessive credit growth or broad-based asset price misalignments. However, some
sectors  of  the  real  estate  markets  warrant  close  monitoring  in  some  euro  area  countries,  in
particular following up on warnings issued by the European Systemic Risk Board. Furthermore,
developments in the non-bank financial sector require monitoring as well. We expect the national
authorities to remain vigilant and continue to use the macroprudential policy instruments at their
disposal to counteract any emerging risks when necessary. And on our side, we will contribute
within our macroprudential mandate.
An orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union poses a limited overall risk
to the euro area’s financial stability. However, the uncertainty triggered by a cliff-edge Brexit could
have the potential to pose a more significant downside risk to financial stability. We will continue
to  monitor  developments  ahead  of  UK’s  exit  on  29  March  2019.  In  view  of  the  prevailing
uncertainty  about  the  outcome  of  the  negotiations  and  the  ensuing  legislative  and  regulatory
decisions,  the  private  sector  is  primarily  responsible  for  making  adequate  arrangements  to
prepare itself for any scenario.
The positive developments in the euro area are not independent of the global growth momentum.
Open trade, investment and sustainable financial flows play a key role in enhancing productivity,
for  example  through  the  cross-border  diffusion  of  new  technologies  that  drive  efficiency
improvements. These factors need to be underpinned by effective multilateral cooperation, both
in  trade  and  in  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  to  help  avoid  major  disruptions  to  global
financial stability. Preserving openness is crucial if the global economy is to thrive and secure its
growth potential.
Encouraging  multilateral  cooperation  is  a  central  theme  of  the  G20  Eminent  Persons  Group
report. It emphasises the need to firm up global financial resilience and reduce the incidence and
severity  of  crises  in  order  that  countries  do  not  fear  openness.  We  support  discussing  the
proposals of the G20 Eminent Persons Group with an open mind in the coming months.
The ECB supports further strengthening of the Global Financial Safety Net (GFSN) with a strong,
quota-based,  and  adequately  resourced  IMF  at  its  centre.  While  the  first  line  of  defence  for
national and international stability is to have sound domestic policies in place, the IMF’s role at
the centre of the GFSN strongly supports global financial stability.
The  launch  of  the  “Bali  Fintech  Agenda”  developed  by  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  brings
together key considerations posed by member countries with regard to reaping the benefits from
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the fintech phenomenon and addressing its associated risks. Given the cross-border nature of
fintech developments, we support international cooperation, coordination and information sharing
also  among  standard-setting  bodies  and  authorities  while  avoiding  potential  duplicative  and
overlapping efforts.
In the euro area, in order to reap the full benefits of our monetary policy measures, other policy
areas must contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing
vulnerabilities. The implementation of structural reforms needs to be substantially stepped up.
The ongoing broad-based expansion also calls for fiscal buffers to be rebuilt. This is particularly
important in countries where government debt is high and for which full adherence to the Stability
and  Growth  Pact  is  critical  for  safeguarding  sound  fiscal  positions.  The  transparent  and
consistent  implementation  of  the  EU’s  fiscal  and  economic  governance  framework,  over  time
and across countries, remains essential.
In addition, Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) needs to be strengthened, first and foremost by
implementing what has already been agreed and finishing the common projects we have started:
completing  the  banking  union,  strengthening  the  operational  capacity  and  the  role  of  the
European  Stability  Mechanism,  and  deepening  the  capital  markets  union.  Work  needs  to
continue  on  designing  a  fiscal  capacity  that  provides  adequate  macroeconomic  stabilisation
while containing moral hazard. Fiscal rules need to be made more effective. A more complete
EMU will be a better foundation for a stable and resilient euro area economy that contributes to
global economic growth and financial stability.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
