OFFICIAL LAUNCH OF BBS LIMITED PALAPYE BRANCH 
 Keynote Speech 
 
by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 November 26, 2018 
 It  is  an  honour  and  a  great  pleasure  to  join  you  here  this 
morning  for  the  official  opening  of  Botswana  Building  Society 
Limited (BBS), Palapye Branch. Palapye is evidently one of the 
fastest growing villages in the country. Growth, in this instance, 
is  a  function  of  response  to  economic  opportunities,  including 
actual and potential demand for services. I have no doubt that 
the  decision  by  Botswana  Building  Society  to  establish  a 
physical presence here is similarly a realisation of the potential 
to  serve  the  proximate  community,  generate  business  returns 
and be part of the Palapye growth narrative. 
 Distinguished  Guests,  by  way  of  background,  the  Botswana 
Building  Society  is  an  offshoot  of  United  Building  Society  of 
South  Africa,  which  started  operations 
in  Botswana 
in 
November  1971.  It  subsequently  transformed  to  Botswana 
Building Society in December 1976, with a primary mandate to 
provide  housing  finance  against  immovable  urban  property, 
later  extended,  in  1986,  to  cover  rural  areas,  and  indeed 
commercial loans.  
 The  latest  transformation,  from  a  friendly,  mutual  society  to  a 
public  limited  company,  incorporated  in  April  2018,  is  of  great 
significance in many respects. First, it allows broader scope for 
consideration  of  strategy,  sustainable  funding  and  provision  of 
a wider array of services by Botswana Building Society.  In this 
regard,  there  is  greater  potential  to  respond  to  economic 
opportunities, drive operational excellence and capacity to meet 
diverse customer needs; thus enhance the value of services to 
customers,  as  well  as  prospects  for  sustainable  returns  and 
growth. Second, Botswana Building Society  recently placed its 
shares on the Serala platform, which is for unlisted equities, at 
the  Botswana  Stock  Exchange  and  has  shares  of  over  P564 
million.  This  development  provides  yet  another  opportunity  for 
ownership  and  strategic  control  of  a  home-grown,  prudently 
managed  and  profitable  financial  institution  by  Batswana.  The 
expectation of Bank of Botswana is that this transformation and 
growth  will  be  prudently  managed  and  achieved 
in  an 
environment  of  sound  operations,  to  ensure  durable  and 
beneficial impact on the economy.   
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  fitting  to  recognise 
the  growth  and  impact  of  Botswana  Building  Society  on  the 
2 
economic  landscape  and  as  part  of  the  financial  sector  of  this 
country.  Taking  the  twenty  years  to  2017,  the  assets  of 
Botswana  Building  Society  have  increased  at  an  average 
annual  rate  of  13.9  percent.    This  compares  with  an  annual 
growth  rate  of  16.2  percent  for  commercial  banks  and  12.3 
percent  average  annual 
increase 
in  nominal  GDP.  This 
suggests  a  meaningful  contribution  to  the  economic  and 
financial  development  of  the  country.    Dissecting  further,  the 
average annual growth in residential mortgage loans was 14.2 
percent,  compared  to  21.8  percent  for  commercial  banks.  
Another  interesting  comparison  is  that  outstanding  residential 
mortgages by Botswana Building Society as at the end of June 
2018  amounted  to  P2.9  billion,  constituting  31  percent  of  the 
total  of  P9.3  billion  for  the  commercial  banks,  which  for  the 
individual banks, ranged from a smallest value of P2.3 million to 
the largest amount of P3.2 billion.   
 Distinguished  Guests,  this  represents  some  of  the  relevant 
information  that  should  inform  prospective  growth  areas, 
strategic  initiatives,  and  resource  requirements  of  Botswana 
Building  Society,  going 
forward. 
Interestingly,  Botswana 
Building Society Limited is reportedly making efforts to enhance 
its service offering and, therefore, potentially greater impact on 
society  and  the  economy.  In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  underscore 
that, 
to  ensure  an  enduring  and  mutually 
rewarding 
3 
relationship,  businesses  need  to  treat  customers  with  respect 
and  dignity.    To  this  end,  it  is  pleasing  that  Botswana  Building 
Society Limited has, as its motto, “we know you better”, which I 
suppose  means,  a  moral  and  corporate  commitment  that  BBS 
staff  will  give  you  the  respect  and  service  quality  that  you 
deserve, here in Palapye. 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  now  turn  to 
expectations  on  closing  existing  gaps  with  respect  to  housing 
finance,  resource  mobilisation  and  impact  on  welfare  and 
sustained 
increase 
in 
incomes.  First, 
it 
is  germane 
to 
acknowledge  the  low  level  of  housing  finance  in  Botswana 
relative  to  the  size  of  the  economy.    For  example,  residential 
mortgage lending amounts to 21.6 percent of total bank lending 
(including statutory banks); 14 percent of total assets of banks; 
and  only  6.9  percent  of  GDP.    Compared  to  more  mature 
housing markets, these figures are very low.  For example, the 
respective  ratios  for  the  United  Kingdom  are,  70.8  percent  of 
total banking lending; 36.6 percent of total banking assets and 
52.7  percent  of  GDP.  This  demonstrates 
the  gap 
in 
development and the opportunities.   
 Significantly, growth in this area represents an important source 
of  future  income  growth  and  wealth  generation.  This  is  in 
several respects.  For individuals, this relates to the opportunity 
4 
to  invest  earnings  meaningfully,  use  of  the  value  of  houses  to 
generate other economic activities and sources of income, and 
potential for increase in wealth over time, as well as serving as 
a  potent  hedge  against  inflation.    For  the  broader  economy, 
there  are  benefits  in  terms  of  a  continuous  build-up  of  the 
volume and variety of stock of housing, alongside growth in the 
population  and  incomes.    Potentially,  this  could  also  have 
significant  distributional  effects  and,  if  housing  credit  is  more 
inclusive, 
it  can  reduce 
income 
inequality.  Furthermore, 
developed  economies,  with  well-functioning  financial  systems, 
such  as  the  United  States  of  America,  attest  to  the  fact  that 
citizens can access, in a disciplined and beneficial manner, the 
so-called “excess equity” in their mortgaged properties and use 
their houses as ATMs!  Moreover, with unconstrained growth in 
mortgage  finance  and  housing,  there  are  incidental  economic 
opportunities  relating  to  the  construction  industry  and  related 
services, thus contributing to economic diversification.   
 Distinguished Guests, the second point is that such prospects, 
however,  need  support  in  terms  of  a  land  tenure  policy  that 
facilitates  the  use  of  the  various  forms  of  land  and  real  estate 
across the country to secure mortgage financing.  This helps in 
terms  of  both  financing  and  marketability  of  land  and  property 
countrywide,  with 
the  attendant  economic  opportunities. 
Therefore, 
the 
Improvement  of  Land  Administration, 
5 
Procedures  and  Systems  (LAPCAS)  project,  that  should  ease 
constraints  to  using  land  acquired  under  different  tenures  as 
collateral  for  mortgages,  is  a  welcome  development.    In  this 
regard,  it  is  our  expectation  that  BBS  and,  of  course  other 
financial  institutions  in  this  country,  will  respond  positively  in 
providing  affordable  credit  that  the  average  household  in 
Botswana can access.  
 The  third  dimension,  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  is 
that  the  supporting  services  need  to  be  robust  and  sound.  
Among  others,  this  relates  to  professionalism  around  property 
valuations to ensure that the resultant loan financing is aligned 
to  housing  market  realities;  thus  safeguarding  the  interests  of 
both the financier and the customer; respectively, as well as the 
soundness  of  financial  institutions  and  welfare  of  households. 
Going  forward,  the  development  of  a  credible  property  price 
index and enhancement of sharing of credit information through 
well-organised credit bureaux would be helpful.  Therefore, we 
agree  with  the  observation  made  by  the  Centre  for  Affordable 
Housing  Finance  in  Africa,  in  their  9th  Edition  of  The  Housing 
Finance  Yearbook, 
that 
“a  combination  of  a  good 
macroeconomic  environment,  sound  policy,  better  data  and 
increased  access 
to  affordable  credit”  should  spur 
the 
development  of  a  vibrant  housing  market  to  the  benefit  of  a 
large segment of the population.    
6 
Fourth, appropriately structured resource mobilisation is key to 
successful  provision  of  housing  finance  and  related  services.  
Given that housing finance is inherently long-term in nature and 
that  there  is  an  imperative  for  further  growth  in  Botswana,  it 
should  be  supported  by  a  large  pool  of  stable  deposits  and/or 
investments.  This is afforded by attracting a range of small to 
large  deposits,  with  associated 
transactional  and  return 
incentives.  The point here is that active deposit mobilisation is 
critical  for  availing  funds  that  can  be  deployed  to  support 
housing finance without undermining the viability of the financial 
institution.    In  addition,  a  robust  capital  market  that  facilitates 
seamless raising of long-term funds, including corporate bonds 
to suit various needs, is also needed.  It is accepted that, as a 
matter of prudence, we should not burden short-term finance or 
worsen  the  structural  maturity  mismatches  widely  prevalent  in 
the  country’s  financial  system.    Moreover,  there  is  a  need  to 
invest  in  capacity  to  develop  derivative  instruments  that 
facilitate  risk  sharing,  as  well  as  transformation  and  trading  of 
assets  and  liabilities;  thus  alleviate  constraints  to  mortgage 
financing.    Regrettably,  in  this  regard,  the  Botswana  financial 
system  is  way  behind  the  curve  and,  despite  banking  industry 
outcry  about  tight  market  liquidity  in  recent  years,  there  is  not 
much evidence of any innovative and structured products, such 
as  mortgage-backed  securities,  negotiable  certificates  of 
deposit or credit default swaps.     
7 
For  its  part,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  has  entrenched  a  largely 
credible  monetary  policy  framework,  with  inflation  sustained 
within  the  objective  range  of  3  –  6  percent  and  allowing  for 
maintenance  of  relatively  low  interest  rates.    Furthermore, 
effective  regulatory  oversight  and  prudently  managed  financial 
institutions  continue  to  contribute  to  maintenance  of  a  sound 
and  stable  financial  system.    In  this  regard,  well-anchored 
expectations,  premised  on  a  credible  policy 
framework, 
supports  determination  of  term  structure  of  interest  rates, 
relevant for both resource mobilisation and pricing of long-term 
loans.    The  policy  environment  is,  therefore,  conducive  for 
orderly  and  effective  intermediation  and  productive  use  of 
financial  resources;  and  in  the  context  of  the  theme  of  my 
message today, affordable cost of housing finance.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  the  fifth  point,  I  want  to  highlight  is  the 
importance  of  presence  of  institutions  and  access  to  services, 
as  demonstrated  by  the  opening  of  the  Palapye  Branch  of 
Botswana  Building  Society.    Geographical  spread  of  financial 
institutions allows for proximate access to financial services, in 
terms  of  both  acquaintance  and  usage.    This  augurs  well  for 
financial  inclusion.    Thus,  when  people  know  about  the 
existence  and  benefits  of  services  and  facilities,  and  when 
these are accessible in a convenient and cost-effective manner, 
they are more likely to use such services. Increasingly, “virtual” 
8 
presence and access enabled by digital channels has become 
a  viable  platform  for  access  to  services  and  needs  to  be 
harnessed  accordingly.    Overall,  presence  and  accessibility 
enhance  prospects  for  mobilisation  of  financial  resources,  and 
effective demand for housing finance and other beneficial loan 
products;  ultimately  leading  to  increase  in  social  welfare,  as 
well as the broadening and growth of economic activity.  
 I  should,  therefore,  acknowledge  that,  currently,  Botswana 
Building  Society  has  offices  and  branches  in  Francistown, 
Gaborone,  Kasane,  Lobatse,  Maun,  Selibe  Phikwe,  Serowe; 
and  now  Palapye,  in  addition  to  twelve  automated  teller 
machines  (ATMs)  countrywide.    More  significantly,  BBS  has 
and continues to invest in various corporate social responsibility 
projects  worth  millions  of  Pula.  Among  these  projects  are  a 
school library in Letswai Primary School in Zutshwa; computer 
labs at Marapong and Mowana Primary Schools in the Central 
and  North  East  Districts,  respectively,  as  well  as  building  new 
ablution  facilities  and  upgrading  old  ones  at  Molapowabojang 
Primary School.  These investments in educational facilities will 
go  a  long  way  in  contributing  towards  good  education  for  our 
children and this is to be applauded.  
 On  that  note,  let  me  conclude  by  indicating  that  it  is  my 
expectation  that  patronage  and  use  of  financial  services  will 
9 
increase  because  of  this  new  branch.    Thus,  with  relevant 
business  strategies  by  Botswana  Building  Society,  as  well  as 
facilitative  policy  environment,  this  branch  will  foster  and 
sustain financial inclusion and, in turn, the attendant benefits of 
productive  saving  and  use  of  finance,  access  to  payments 
services,  and  broadly,  enhanced  economic  activity.    I  implore 
you all, Palapye  residents, the surrounding areas  and beyond, 
to use BBS and other financial institutions in your area, to save; 
to access and use credit wisely, for the benefit of your families 
and sustainable development of the country.   
 It  is  now  my  honour  and  privilege  to  declare  the  BBS  Limited 
Palapye Branch officially open. 
 I thank you for your kind attention.  
10 
