Mugur Isărescu: Convergence towards euro enlargement
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the
Conference "The Danube Triangle", Bucharest, 25 October 2018.
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Allow me to welcome you to the National Bank of Romania. It is the seventh time that the National
Bank of Romania hosts an ELEC Conference. It started in 2011 with “Renewable energy and
transport infrastructure in the Black Sea Region”, a year later we talked about “Eastern Europe
and the EMU: finding the optimal path for introducing the euro“. In 2013 there was the 3rd edition
of the Danube Financing Dialogue. The following year the dialogue focused on “Agriculture and
environmental  protection  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  their  contribution  to  growth  and
employment“. In 2016 we discussed on “How the EU can generate a virtuous circle in the Black
Sea Region – the case of food and energy security” and last year we debated on “the challenges
for Eastern Europe in the present turmoil in the EU and EMU – persevering in the reforms and
investing for the future”. As one could notice, the topics previously discussed during all ELEC
Conferences have most certainly cast a new light on possible ways to handle the challenges
ahead of us.
The  European  League  for  Economic  Cooperation  has  stood  out,  ever  since  its  foundation  in
1946,  as  an  independent  network  of  business  people  who  put  their  knowledge  and  influence
together to extend European integration. The diversity and independence of its membership have
always  inspired  ELEC  to  ask  the  appropriate  questions  and  formulate  coherent  opinions,
constantly having in mind the European interest.
This  year’s  ELEC  conference  promises  to  be  equally  interesting  as  it  concentrates  on
“Convergence towards euro enlargement” and I am honoured to be one of the keynote speakers.
I  salute  the  close  cooperation  between  government  officials  in  the  region  with  high  European
officials, as well as with the private sector and prestigious organisations such as ELEC.
We should never allow ourselves to lose sight of the fact that these discussions aim to help us
on  a  journey  made  for  the  benefit  of  all. And  it  is  a  journey  that  can  only  be  made  through
constant and diverse dialogue.
Allow  me  to  greet  our  renowned  foreign  guests:  Baron  Bernard  Snoy,  President  of  ELEC
International, Wim Boonstra, President of ELEC Monetary Commission, Mr. Servaas Deroose,
Deputy Director-General, ECFIN, as well as the distinguished speakers and panelists.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The  same  as  the  topics  discussed  in  the  previous  reunions,  “Convergence  towards  euro
enlargement” is highly important and is worth debating at length. Let me start from the fact that
euro adoption by the New Member States is a matter of when, not if, because they do not have
an opt-out clause. The commitment to join the euro area is undeniable, yet how the complex
process of ensuring the prerequisite economic convergence is conducted remains largely at the
discretion of the authorities in candidate countries. In this context, the approach has varied both
across time and across states.
Shortly  after  the  new  Member  States’  accession  to  the  European  Union,  the  assumed  target
dates for euro adoption were very ambitious, although the fulfilment of some of the Maastricht
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
criteria was still a long way ahead at the time. The more prudent stance manifest afterwards
does not necessarily point to the inability or difficulty in complying with the nominal convergence
criteria. Rather, it occurred after the beginning of the global crisis, when some of the benefits of
euro adoption faded away, while the related costs became increasingly visible. We are therefore
witnessing  a  substantially  revised  and  more  comprehensive  approach  to  the  euro  accession
process overall.
As  regards  the  actual  differences  in  countries’  strategies,  for  some  it  might  be  puzzling  that
Bulgaria  is  thinking  of  joining  the  euro  area  sooner  than  Romania.  It  is  true  that  these
neighbouring countries have a lot in common, but there are also other things that set them apart
(not  only  the  Danube!).  Bulgaria  has  a  currency  board  in  place  and  it  is  natural  for  it  to
contemplate euro adoption as a sound exit from this monetary policy arrangement (the adoption
of which, two decades ago, meant half a step towards the euro area). By contrast, Romania
pursues  both  a  floating  exchange  rate  and  a  direct  inflation  targeting  strategy,  the  same  as
Hungary,  Poland  and  the  Czech  Republic  and,  therefore,  the  approach  is  different,  the
changeover  to  the  euro  being  more  complex  in  this  context.  This  is  by  no  means  to  say  that
Romania is sceptical about euro adoption, but merely that it needs a comprehensive view, meant
to ensure an adequate timing of this moment and a successful entry into the euro area.
While we are on the subject, it cannot be overlooked either that the New Member States having
adopted the euro – Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Slovakia, Slovenia – are relatively small countries,
with a different level of real convergence. Referring to countries that are currently in the process
of  adopting  the  euro,  I  myself  am  among  those  who  stress  the  need  for  sustainable
convergence,  being  aware  that,  in  order  to  reap  the  benefits  of  euro  area  accession,  several
essential prerequisites have to be cumulatively met. The fact that nominal convergence criteria
need to be fulfilled in a lasting – not accidental, forced or temporary – manner is just one aspect.
Actually,  the  durability  of  convergence  has  been  set  forth  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  itself  (“high
degree of sustainable convergence” is the exact wording), but this “detail” has been taken too
lightly  for  a  while.  Moreover,  now  it  is  obvious  for  everybody  that  real  convergence  is  also
essential for the sustainability of the entire process of euro adoption.
It  is  true  that  the  opinions  on  the  optimal  level  and  even  on  the  relevance  of  this  factor  for
successfully joining a currency union are quite diverse. However, to attain a certain degree of per
capita income convergence before switching to the euro is essential, as a large convergence
gap  may  complicate  business  cycle  management  in  the  absence  of  independent  monetary
policy. But even the countries that are already euro area members should continue to increase
their level of real convergence. In my opinion, the direction of the real convergence process and
its sustainability and smoothness are just as important as its degree.
Romania has certainly come a long way in terms of economic convergence, a process whose
inception  is  tied  to  the  prospects  of  EU  membership,  witnessing  a  significant  increase  in  per
capita GDP as a share of the euro area average (based on PPS), from 31.7 percent in 2005 to
58.6 percent in 2017. Peer countries recorded a similar trend: Bulgaria went from about 33 to 47
percent, while the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, which started from a more advanced
level, added 9 to 20 percentage points to the same indicator during 2005–2017. However, this
process is still far from completion in these non-euro New Member States.
A smooth convergence path requires a combination of prudent macroeconomic policies (be they
monetary,  fiscal  or  macroprudential),  even  though  in  practice  it  is  difficult  to  build  support  for
such  policies.  In  this  context,  allow  me  to  mention  that  the  concern  of  central  bankers  for
achieving  the  price  stability  objective  is  not  always  consistent  with  the  desideratum  of  fast
economic  growth.  This  sometimes  gives  the  impression  that  central  bankers  are  over-
conservative and limit the stepped-up development of national economies. The fear of inflation
tends to be dwarfed by the desire for quickly-gained prosperity and the central banks’ “obsession
with stability” may be seen as a refusal of progress.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Coming back to macroeconomic policies, in order to increase their effectiveness, they should go
hand  in  hand  with  structural  reforms  aimed  at  providing  for  a  more  flexible  economic
environment,  so  that  their  combined  usage  paves  the  way  for  a  smooth  and  long-lasting
convergence of living standards. In other words, countercyclical policies and structural reforms
are not at odds, but in a relation of complementarity.
In general, structural reforms are critical for strengthening convergence, ensuring durable growth
and  making  the  economy  more  flexible  in  order  to  benefit  from  euro  area  entry,  as  the
advantages  of  euro  adoption  are  not  unconditional.  What  exactly  do  we  mean  by  structural
reforms? As Draghi said in 2017, for many, they describe a pragmatic policy agenda to raise
long-term  growth  and  accelerate  adjustment  to  shocks,  which  is  essential  for  countries  in  a
monetary union; but for others, the term is viewed as a “catch-all” for a wide range of policies,
some of which have potentially negative short-run costs and adverse distributional effects.
One  area  that  would  definitely  benefit  from  the  implementation  of  such  reforms  is  the  labour
market,  at  a  time  when  the  Romanian  one  faces  challenges  that  are  certainly  not  new  or
uncommon. Given our status of an open catching-up economy, within a European Union which
has at its core the free movement of capital and labour, we were bound to end up sooner or later
in  somewhat  of  a  dilemma.  To  be  more  specific,  there  are  various  opinions  in  our  economy
about  where  wages  should  be:  on  the  one  hand,  they  should  be  governed  by  productivity
dynamics, so as not to lead to an erosion of the competitive position, yet on the other hand, they
cannot be significantly below what is available in other economies, as it would simply lead to a
labour force drain, with dramatic consequences if not addressed quickly. We are actually dealing
with  an  emigration  problem  today,  as  more  than  three  million  Romanians  (a  significant
percentage of the population) have left their homeland for other EU Member States.
In order to mitigate this, wages should go up. As noted above, the only way to do that without
upsetting competitiveness is to boost productivity. This can be done along a number of avenues,
many of them involving, however, a significant amount of time (for example, one cannot solve the
population-aging problem overnight).
Foreign  direct  investment  in  recent  years  helped  total  factor  productivity,  but  employers  are
currently being challenged by the shortage of labour force, in part determined precisely by the
significant  emigration.  As  a  result,  we  can  even  talk  now  about  discouraged  employers,  as
opposed to the periods that follow a crisis, when the employees are the discouraged ones. Thus,
we have ourselves another dilemma: ensuring that wage levels are compatible with attracting
investors, but acknowledging that, at least in certain areas, wages need to come up at present, in
order to mitigate the labour force drain, which affects the private and public sector alike. The key
is, in my opinion, to increase wages at an adequate, sustainable pace, so as to ultimately benefit
from an improved living climate reflected in a higher purchasing power, but also from preserved
macroeconomic  equilibria,  as  well  as  higher-quality  public  goods  –  roads  in  particular  –,
because, after all, wages are not the only part of the emigration story.
Speaking  about  roads,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  infrastructure  is  essential  for  connecting
different regions of Romania and promoting cohesion. This is all the more important that, even
though  EU  membership  has  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  country-level  real  convergence,  the
development gaps across the regions of the New Member States, including in Romania, have not
diminished significantly.
Let me conclude by recalling the words that Otmar Issing said during a dinner speech on his
leaving  the  ECB,  back  in  2006,  when  things  seemed  to  move  into  the  right  direction  all  by
themselves: “We were all privileged to participate in a historically unique experiment: the creation
of a new currency for Europe. We had to manoeuvre through uncharted waters and we may not
yet have arrived in the Promised Land”. It is obvious that for a smooth economic catch-up it is
important to maintain a long-term perspective and to implement coherent policies and reforms.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Past achievements in nominal and real convergence, while significant, do not guarantee future
success  (for  instance,  joining  other  countries  in  the  middle-income  trap  is  a  real  danger). A
realistic  and  balanced  approach  to  euro  adoption  implies  that  it  should  be  steered  taking  into
consideration absolutely all relevant elements for the sustainability of economic convergence. It
is the only way we can safely sail to the port of destination…
Thank you for your attention and I wish you lively, yet equally fruitful debates!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
