 SPEECH 
SPEECH BY GOVERNOR LARS ROHDE  
AT THE ANNUAL MEETING OF  
FINANCE DENMARK 2018 
 
  
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
   
 
3 December 2018 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
In an age when partnerships are discontinued, and walls are built be-
tween countries, I find it important to focus on the considerable ad-
vantages to our society and its continued development which rule-based 
international cooperation offers. 
I have chosen to talk about three topical issues which, in their separate 
ways, relate to cross-border cooperation and which are essential to fi-
nancial stability in Denmark. They are: anti-money laundering, crisis reso-
lution of mortgage credit institutions and the banking union.    
But first I would like to express my appreciation of the good cooperation 
we have had in many areas. You contributed strongly to the process of 
connecting the Danish krone to TARGET2-Securities. It is a great step 
forward that Danish banks are now able to settle securities via the single 
European settlement platform.  
Many of you have also helped to launch Kronos2, and we have jointly 
achieved significant results in the Payments Council. In the FSOR, we have 
increased the cyber resilience of the financial sector, and we have agreed 
to perform sophisticated tests of the resilience of the individual institu-
tions in the coming years – known as the red team tests. 
 Unfortunately, money laundering has been on everyone's lips in 2018. A 
simple search in Infomedia shows that the Danish word "hvidvask" has 
been used four times as frequently this year as in 2017. 
Side 1 af 6 
  We have witnessed extensive misuse of the financial infrastructure for il-
legal activities. There has been and still is a need to strengthen efforts in 
this area.  
At Danmarks Nationalbank we are interested in this issue because money 
laundering can jeopardise financial stability. Customer and investor con-
fidence  is  an  essential  prerequisite  for  providing  financial  services.  So, 
loss of confidence can be very harmful for a bank. If confidence in a single 
participant is eroded, this may rapidly have an impact on the rest of the 
sector.  
The  reputation  of  the  authorities  and  the  country  may  also  be  severely 
affected. This became very clear to me at the IMF Annual Meeting in Oc-
tober when I received many enquiries about the money laundering chal-
lenge in the Danish financial sector.  
Banks  play  a  key  role  in  the  financial  infrastructure.  And  with  this  role 
comes  an  important  social  responsibility.  A  responsibility  for  ensuring 
that their businesses are not used for illegal activities.  
The number of suspicious transactions reported to the anti-money laun-
dering  secretariat  has  soared  in  recent  years.  If  this  continues,  the  au-
thorities  will  face  a  huge  task  in  relation  to  handling  the  volume  of  re-
ports.  
There  are  indications  that  the  lines  of  defence  are  too  far  back.  They 
should  be  reached  long  before  reporting  becomes  necessary.  In  other 
words, the banks should have knowledge of their customers.  
As payment systems have become faster and more efficient, it is of para-
mount importance that the banks have in-depth knowledge of their cus-
tomers.  
It is the role of the authorities to investigate cases of money laundering if 
there  is  suspicion  of  illegal  activities.  But  before  it  comes  to  that,  the 
banks have a responsibility not to engage in customer relationships if the 
real motives of the customers are dubious.  
The  political  agreement  to  strengthen  anti-money  laundering  efforts  in 
Denmark  that  was  concluded  in  the  autumn  was  necessary.  But  money 
laundering  knows  no  borders.  Cross-border  activities  call  for  strength-
ened cross-border supervision in the EU.  
So,  it  is  essential  also  to  enhance  European  cooperation.  That  will  pro-
vide  a  far  better  overview  of  the  activities  of  international  banking 
groups.  And  it  will  also  enable  the build-up  of stronger  competences  in 
this area.  
Page 2 of 6 
   Now I will turn my attention to another topic. Something that I have 
talked about previously. Resolution of mortgage credit institutions. My 
interest in this topic is not purely academic. I myself witnessed the near-
death of a mortgage credit institution in the 90s, and I know that others 
who are present today shared that experience. It made an impression on 
me – and presumably also on you.  
So, I would like to reiterate: one of the key lessons learned from the fi-
nancial crisis was that it must be possible to manage crises in the financial 
sector without the use of government funds. 
It must be possible for the large, systemically important institutions to 
continue in case they experience problems. They perform functions that 
are critical to society and essential to financial stability.  
How do we ensure this? Well, one of the preconditions is that there are 
sufficient owner and creditor funds that can absorb losses, also known as 
eligible liabilities and own funds.  
As you know, Danish mortgage credit institutions have been exempted 
from the minimum requirement for eligible liabilities and own funds, 
MREL. Instead, they must meet a debt buffer requirement. In Danmarks 
Nationalbank's opinion, that is a bad idea. And we still think so, even 
though things have changed since I last addressed you: 
Since then, a legislative amendment has been introduced for SIFIs that 
include mortgage credit institutions. For them, the sum of the MREL and 
capital and debt buffer requirements must constitute at least 8 per cent 
of total liabilities and own funds.  
The amendment is a step in the right direction. However, it does not 
solve the problem; there are still SIFIs for which the requirements are not 
sufficiently high for the institutions to be recapitalised and continued in a 
crisis situation. Furthermore, the problem with the current requirement 
for mortgage credit institutions is that it is not risk-sensitive.  
The MREL is. It increases when risks increase, as they typically do in bad 
times. That is why we need an MREL for mortgage credit institutions.  
And here is the good news. At Danmarks Nationalbank we have calculat-
ed the costs of introducing an MREL for mortgage credit institutions now 
that we have the 8 per cent requirement. And the costs are negligible.  
Page 3 of 6 
  Our calculations show that the sector's total costs will be in the range of 
kr. 100 to 200 million.  
The institutions can finance this by reducing costs or dividend payments. 
If they choose to raise their administration margins instead, we have cal-
culated that the cost is equivalent to an average increase of less than 1 
basis point in administration margins.  
Surely that is a low price to pay for ensuring that mortgage credit institu-
tions can be resolved without jeopardising financial stability and taxpayer 
funds? 
As I see it, this is the right thing to do. I would like to wake up in the 
morning, drink a cup of coffee and know that we make the right choices 
for society.  
Doing away with the exemption will also give the authorities the option 
of using the Resolution Fund if required.   
My final message regarding resolution is this: a precondition for credible 
resolution is that financial institutions can be handled without any knock-
on effect on the sector overall.   
I would like to make it clear that for Danmarks Nationalbank it is of the 
essence that mortgage bonds do not suffer losses. Fortunately, the Bank 
Recovery and Resolution Directive – BRRD – provides a solution: it is pos-
sible to exclude certain liabilities and own funds from being written down 
or converted. That should be the case for mortgage bonds. Instead, 
there must be sufficient eligible liabilities and own funds.  
That is why we should have an MREL for mortgage credit institutions. 
 Anti-money laundering and crisis resolution rules – the two topics I have 
talked about so far – are examples of areas where binding international 
cooperation offers clear advantages.  
The government envisages that next autumn a final decision will be made 
on Danish participation in the banking union.  
What would it mean in terms of anti-money laundering and resolution of 
failing banks and mortgage credit institutions if Denmark joins the bank-
ing union, we might ask.    
Page 4 of 6 
  About anti-money laundering, supervision will still be a matter for the na-
tional authorities.   
When it comes to crisis resolution, the single insurance element of the 
banking union is important, but the probability that it will be invoked is 
very low.  
However, there are a number of other good reasons why Denmark 
should join the banking union.  
The union has not been established for the sake of the banks but to serve 
the interests of citizens, firms and financial stability. And it is a further de-
velopment of the single market for financial services, which strengthens 
competition.  
For some banks, this increased competition may not be an advantage. 
But for citizens and firms it is a clear advantage.  
The ECB's Single Supervisory Mechanism, SSM, has now existed for four 
years and has proved to be a strong and capable supervisory authority.  
The SSM can bring together strong skills and analytical powers. This is 
necessary for effective supervision of the largest banks, which are com-
plex, operate across borders and use sophisticated models.  
The SSM does not necessarily give the banks more latitude. But it under-
pins financial stability. In this context, the parallel to anti-money launder-
ing is also relevant. The cases we have seen illustrate that international 
activity requires a response in the form of close and binding international 
collaboration between authorities.  
The greatest change if Denmark joins the banking union will be that Dan-
ish banks will be subject to the SSM supervisory practices. The impact will 
be most direct for the large banks, which will be supervised by the ECB 
via instructions to the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority. The smaller 
banks will still be supervised by the Danish Financial Supervisory Authori-
ty within a framework defined by the ECB. 
Participation in the banking union will give Denmark a say in relation to 
the single supervisory practice via participation in the ECB's Supervisory 
Board. And via the ECB we will have a voice and influence in the Basel 
Committee and the Financial Stability Board, which are key bodies in the 
design of financial regulation.  
Page 5 of 6 
  Those who are against Danish participation in the banking union often 
argue that Danish taxpayers and bank customers risk footing the bill if 
banks in e.g. Greece or Italy fail.  
At Danmarks Nationalbank we have studied this aspect closely. The heart 
of the matter is the joint liability of banking union participants and the 
likelihood that it will be invoked.  
Our reply is that the structure of the banking union means that joint liabil-
ity will apply only in very extreme loss scenarios. The joint liability is a 
kind of insurance against disaster, it will not result in regular flows of 
funds between banking union member states. 
We are not the only ones who are concerned about ending up with bills 
that others ought to pay. The very structure of the banking union and the 
practice that has characterised the euro area member states' handling of 
the euro debt crisis reflect precisely these concerns.  
Very large and very influential euro area players share our views and will 
ensure that we do not move too far in the wrong direction. 
Reluctance to transfer funds between member states has been seen in 
connection with the crises resolved within the banking union until now. 
Most recently, we have seen that Italy has provided government support 
– but without the use of funds from other member states.  
The joint liability which is already part of the banking union in the form of 
the Single Resolution Fund, SRF, being built up also contains protective 
elements. This means that a loss scenario must reach a very late stage 
before the SRF can be activated. 
And finally, it has also been established that a single deposit insurance 
scheme will apply in connection with extremely large losses only. Irre-
spective of how this single deposit insurance scheme is designed. 
This does not mean that the single insurance elements do not matter. But 
it means that they should not be conclusive arguments for or against 
Danish participation in the banking union. 
Let me sum up what I have said by emphasising that rule-based interna-
tional cooperation is the best solution to cross-border challenges. Not 
least for a small country like Denmark. 
Thank you. 
 Page 6 of 6 
