Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus: Re-envisioning financial stability - the
path forward
Opening remarks by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Central Bank of Malaysia’s Financial Stability Conference "Re-
envisioning Financial Stability – The Path Forward", Kuala Lumpur, 23 October 2018.
 Let me begin by extending a very warm welcome to the distinguished speakers, policymakers
and participants who have joined us this morning at Bank Negara Malaysia’s Financial Stability
Conference.  This  is  the  first  time  that  the  Bank  is  organising  this  conference  and  we  are
honoured  to  have  among  us  individuals  with  deep  experience  and  insights  to  share  their
perspectives on the important topic of financial stability.
Over the next one and a half days, we will take a closer look at financial stability in a post-crisis
world – how far we have come, what we have learned and the considerations moving forward. In
my remarks, I hope to set out what I see as priorities for financial stability authorities, anchored
on  what  we  have  learned  from  the  crisis  and  our  own  experiences  in  implementing  financial
stability reforms. Many of these ideas are not new. But in order for us to move forward, it is also
important to take stock of what we’ve achieved so far, while critically re-examining the lessons
that we have drawn in recent years. For this, it is useful to start from the global financial crisis.
Ten  years  have  passed  since  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008.  In  the  words  of  the  famed
American economist, Paul Samuelson, “what we know about the global financial crisis is that we
don’t know very much”. And so, policymakers around the world continue to direct their energies
towards searching for signs of the next crisis, and preparing themselves to deal with it when it
comes.
But as you can imagine, when there is much that we still do not fully understand, this is far from
straightforward.
The conundrum here is that the next crisis will likely come from where we least expect it. Our
understanding  of  the  sources,  drivers  and  transmission  channels  of  systemic  risk  remains
incomplete. While many had warned of pressures building in the subprime mortgages industry
before the crisis hit, few, if any, had imagined the scale and impact of the blow up on the global
financial system or economy.
Our challenge isn’t just a question about where, but when a crisis is going to strike and how it will
spread. And therefore when, how and with what instrument policymakers should act.
The  permutations  presented  by  these  questions  alone  in  any  single  economy  are  almost
boundless. Add to that, financial systems that have become far more complex and the relentless
pace of technological advancements, and one quickly gets a sense of the daunting challenges
facing  authorities  who  are  tasked  to  maintain  financial  stability.  Or  even  engender  some
sympathy from those who believe that there should be much less regulation.
With that in mind, I would like to suggest four strategic priorities for financial stability authorities
as we navigate an uncertain future.
First, authorities need to remain vigilant. While the global financial system is now on a stronger
footing, the IMF reminded us that near-term risks to global financial stability have risen modestly,
while medium term risks remain elevated. Emerging economies face mounting pressures that
continue  to  see  more  volatile  capital  flows.  Tightening  financial  conditions  may  also  expose
financial fragilities that have been created over an extended period of easy monetary conditions.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition, structural changes in the financial system are giving rise to new risks, including those
presented by a growing shadow banking system and fintech players which might not fall within
the  regulatory  net.  Roboadvisors,  algorithmic  trading  and  other  automated  trading  platforms
powered by AI also have the potential to induce highly disruptive procyclical market behaviour,
notwithstanding  their  substantial  benefits  in  reducing  transaction  costs  and  increasing  market
liquidity. And of course, there are cyberthreats with the global cost of cybercrime projected to
reach $2 trillion in 2019.
Both the tools and coverage of surveillance activities to support financial stability have evolved
significantly in the post-crisis period. It is imperative that authorities continue to build on this to
capture current and future emerging risks. The good news is that with the rise of big data and
new technologies, authorities have the capacity to achieve what was not possible before to keep
a pulse on developments affecting the financial system.
Second,  authorities  must  continue  to  develop  and  deepen  their  understanding  of  risk
transmission. Approaches to quantify the immediate, direct impact on institutional resilience are
now reasonably well developed. However, further work remains in mapping out the second and
higher order effects on the broader financial system and economy. Authorities need to continue
pushing the envelope to advance the development of more holistic approaches to systemic risk
assessments. This needs to be able to capture propagation channels and feedback loops not
just  among  entities  within  the  financial  system,  but  also  across  the  domestic  and  global
economy.  An  understanding  of  structural  changes  driving  such  interlinkages  will  become
increasingly critical.
Third,  authorities  must  have  a  broad  policy  toolkit  for  responding  to  financial  stability  risks.  In
recent years, central banks and other authorities responsible for financial stability have had their
mandates  clarified  and  powers  strengthened  for  this  purpose.  This  is  however  by  no  means
assured in many other countries where financial stability authorities continue to face significant
limitations in their ability to act, in particular, during a crisis.
In  Malaysia,  the  enactment  of  new  central  bank  legislation  in  2009  accorded  Bank  Negara
Malaysia  with  strengthened  surveillance  powers,  along  with  broad  powers  to  implement
measures to avert risks to financial stability. This included powers to resolve non-viable financial
institutions and powers to direct specific institutions running systemic risks to take measures to
reduce  those  risks.  These  powers  are  in  addition  to  the  Bank’s  regulatory  and  supervisory
powers over banks and insurers.
Having such powers is useful in a crisis. But the ability to operationalise them can be a whole
different matter that requires greater attention to forethought and scenario-planning.
Fourth,  authorities  need  to  increase  policy  agility.  Every  crisis  or  financial  stability  issue  is
different, and each requires a different policy response. The pressure will be on authorities to be
able to respond to an infinite variety of problems, which are very rarely understood clearly at the
onset, and which often evolve rapidly.
Going forward, long-standing policy frameworks are likely to come under increasing pressure,
simply because they are not built to respond to the intensity and pace of change taking place in
the  financial  system.  I  believe  the  solution  lies not  in  building  new  frameworks,  but  in
strengthening institutional foundations which allow for more nimble frameworks to emerge. Such
foundations  include  clear  decision  authorities,  credible  analysis  to  support  decision-making,
effective  policy  feedback  loops  and  strong  monitoring  and  accountability  frameworks.  Equally
important is the ability to react to unplanned events given the inherent difficulties in predicting
market behaviour, especially further out in time.
Managing financial stability will ultimately require authorities to walk a fine balance.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The need for surveillance to extend beyond traditional boundaries of financial services can make
it  harder  for  authorities  to  “stay  within  their  lanes”.  This  can  be  further  complicated  when  the
primary responsibility for financial stability is not always clearly defined.
More authorities today have acquired expanded powers to access information and respond to
financial  stability  risks.  Even  where  there  is  a  single  authority  charged  with  the  mandate  for
financial stability, such powers will tend to rely on a system of regulation and supervision over
different  actors  in  the  financial  system  that  is  often  discharged  by  different  authorities,  using
different instruments and approaches.
Ensuring  effective  coordination  across  such  a  system  depends  on  a  number  of  factors.
Institutional  set  ups  such  as  inter-agency  arrangements  –  of  which  there  are  many  good
examples – are important and clearly even necessary. But they are not a sufficient condition for
effective coordination. The most important factors for effective coordination are more likely to be
internal  ones  –  the  submission  of  institutional  agendas  to  a  higher  collective  goal,  an  internal
resolve to overcome inherent conflicts, and the organisational flexibility to move in a common
direction with others.
In increasing their agility to shift gears where required, authorities must also find ways to do so
while  preserving  the  credibility  and  predictability  of  policy.  Shorter  policy  cycles  and  more
frequent  adjustments  in  response  to  developing  risks  can  make  this  significantly  more
challenging.
Communicating financial stability policies effectively will be key. This is incredibly difficult to do,
particularly to a broad and diverse audience who are more likely than before to be affected by
policies  that  are  directed  at  managing  financial  stability  risks.  The  challenges  are  further
compounded by the reality that the vast majority of the public prefer to receive information not
through traditional channels but through secondary sources, including social media.
Authorities are responding in a number of different ways. Some have increased the frequency of
published financial stability reviews, while making them more readable and easy to understand.
Others  have  taken  their  message  directly  to  the  masses  by  supplementing  official  financial
stability  communications  with  multi-faceted  media  campaigns.  Authorities  have  also
strengthened  industry  and  inter-agency  platforms  for  communicating  information  on  financial
stability developments.
What  is  clear  is  that  communications  has  become  an  integral  part  of  the  management  of
financial stability. And it goes beyond increasing the effectiveness of a particular policy response
to  emerging  risks.  It  is  essential  to  the  integrity  of  financial  stability  policies over time,  and  to
public confidence in the institutions that are responsible for implementing them.
In a more globalised financial system, authorities also face increasing pressures to conform to
global  standards,  many  of  which  were  not  designed  with  institutions  that  have  no  or  limited
activities beyond their domestic borders in mind. Global standards are also often ill-equipped to
respond to specific conditions in domestic financial systems that differ significantly in their stage
of development and vulnerabilities to risks. The more inclusive process to global standard setting
is  therefore  very  much  welcomed  and  needs  to  be  further  enhanced  through  continued  open
dialogue  and  support  for  implementation  approaches  that  are  more  responsive  to  unintended
consequences at a jurisdictional level.
Today, the Bank will communicate its intention to extend the observation period for the Net Stable
Funding Ratio, or NSFR, in Malaysia for another year to 2020. This takes into account the Bank’s
intention to conduct further on-site assessments to validate the maturity and robustness of the
liquidity  and  funding  practices  of  banks,  and  uneven  progress  in  implementation  at  the  global
level.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Bank remains committed to implementing the NSFR requirements as part of overall liquidity
standards  applicable  to  licensed  banks  in  Malaysia. At  present,  all  banks  maintain  adequate
liquidity buffers against short term liquidity stress, and the vast majority of banks already report
NSFR levels above the minimum 100% based on observation data.
Let me now draw my remarks to a close. The task of financial stability authorities is to prepare
for the worst, and work for the best. There are rarely easy fixes to the issues that we face, but
also no shortage of diverse experiences to draw from and to guide our path. It is my hope that
this  conference  will  serve  to  generate  useful  discussions  that  will  help  inform  our  own
preparations  to  confront  any  eventuality,  and  strengthen  our  conviction  that  being  prepared  is
better than being right.
On that note, I look forward to the discussion and insights that will emerge over the coming days.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
