Jens  Weidmann:  Securing  stability  -  challenges  from  the  low
interest rate environment
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 8th EIOPA (European
Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority)  Annual  Conference,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  20
November 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to thank you for inviting me to your Annual Conference. It is a great pleasure to speak
before such a distinguished international audience.
These days, we often look back at the events of ten years ago, in the autumn of 2008, when the
financial crisis dramatically came to a head. And with good reason – after all, we’re still grappling
with the fallout of the crisis even now.
I, too, would like to take this chance to recall an event from that time and briefly look back on the
life  of  an  extraordinary  person.  On  1  November  2008,  Jacques  Piccard,  one  of  the  most
important explorers of the deep sea, passed away. His name is chiefly associated with a great
adventure: diving to the deepest part of the world’s oceans.
Together  with  his  father,  he  had  designed  a  new  kind  of  submersible,  named  the  Trieste.
Jacques Piccard and his companion Don Walsh used this vehicle in 1960 to become the first
people to dive to the bottom of the Mariana Trench, a descent of almost 11,000 metres.
Their journey took more than four hours, the pressure on the vessel increasing with every metre.
To get an idea of what this would have felt like at the bottom of the sea, imagine three SUVs
stacked on top of each other and balanced on your toe. But the Trieste withstood the enormous
pressure and returned its passengers safely from the ocean bed to the surface.
Jacques Piccard’s record has never been broken. No person has ever dived deeper since then.
Why  am  I  telling  you  this?  What  does  this  legendary  diver  have  to  do  with  the  topics  we’re
addressing today? Allow me to keep you in suspense a little longer and I will reveal the answer a
few minutes from now.
In  the  meantime,  I  would  like  to  address  some  challenges  for  insurers  that  arise  from  the
persistent low interest rate environment. When contemplating where real interest rates will be
heading,  the  so-called  natural  rate  of  interest  may  provide  some  insights.  I  will  focus  on  this
concept from a monetary policy perspective.
2 Lessons learned from the crisis
But first, let’s return to the autumn of 2008. In the past few weeks, reports on the events of that
time have mostly centred on the demise of the investment bank Lehman Brothers. That was a
game-changing  moment  –  there’s  no  question  about  that.  But  it’s  easy  to  forget  that  the  US
insurance corporation AIG was also on the brink of collapse at the same time.
AIG was a company with more than 76 million customers in about 140 countries. But AIG was
not  only  much  larger  than  Lehman  Brothers.  It  was  so  heavily  interconnected  with  the  entire
financial system that its insolvency would have shattered confidence in already fragile financial
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
markets.
The unforeseeable consequences of a possible AIG bankruptcy compelled policymakers to take
action.  Just  one  day  after  the  Lehman  Brothers  bankruptcy,  the  US  government  jumped  in  to
save AIG.
With that in mind, one key lesson learned from the financial crisis is that, in terms of risks to the
stability  of  the  financial  system,  it  would  be  short-sighted  to  look  only  at  banks.  Rather,  all
financial intermediaries need to be adequately regulated and effectively supervised. This applies
also, and especially, to insurance undertakings.
We’ve  already  made  great  strides  here.  Under  the  European  supervisory  regime,  Solvency  II,
capital requirements are now explicitly risk-based. Additional capital buffers act in a similar way
to flu vaccinations: they don’t just protect the individual, but also prevent others from becoming
infected.
Insurers with more capital are more robust in themselves and thus render the financial system
as  a  whole  more  resilient  at  the  same  time.  So  the  current  regulatory  regime  for  insurance
corporations  is  already  helping  to  mitigate  systemic  risk.  However,  it  was  designed  from  a
microprudential angle.
We should also take a system-wide perspective. Insurers could act as systemic amplifiers due
to their high degree of interconnectedness with the financial system.
If insurers respond to shocks in a similar way, this can lead to contagion effects. For instance,
Insurers  may  decide  to  stop  holding  certain  asset  classes.  The  sale  of  assets  into  a  falling
market  could  amplify  the  initial  fall  in  asset  prices.  By  doing  so,  the  insurance  sector  could
reinforce or pass on shocks to the rest of the financial system as well as to the real economy.
I find it a welcome development, then, that both EIOPA and the ESRB have taken up this issue
and  turned  to  discussing  the  system-wide  perspective  and  the  potential  need  for  additional
instruments in the insurance sector. Their reflections will be channelled into the review of the
Solvency II Directive.
Macroprudential tools for insurance companies could prevent a collective build-up of exposures
or dampen amplifiers to avoid spillovers to other sectors. As the Bundesbank pointed out in its
latest Financial Stability Review, two examples of instruments under discussion in international
1
fora are insurer-specific systemic capital add-ons and countercyclical capital buffers.
Three  aspects,  I  believe,  are  particularly  crucial  in  this  context.  First,  insurers  are  not  banks.
They  are  exposed  to  different  types  of  risks  –  underwriting  risk,  for  example.  Moreover,  the
vulnerability even to the same risk type may differ depending on the business model of financial
firms. Therefore, macroprudential instruments cannot simply be copied one to one from banking
system to insurers.
Second, we have to take the macroeconomic repercussions into account. After all, regulation is
always an act of balancing. On the one hand, regulatory reforms aim to improve the resilience of
the financial system as a whole. On the other hand, regulation could suppress market activities
that foster efficiency, innovation and growth. A system that tries to prevent crises at all costs
would very likely not fulfil its macroeconomic function.
And  third,  when  developing  new  instruments,  we  should  always  consider  the  interplay  with
existing regulations and interdependencies with other parts of the financial system. Claudio Borio
recently warned of possible evasive action, saying that macroprudential instruments “can leak,
i.e. they are subject to regulatory arbitrage (…) possibly pushing activity into the darker corners of
2
the financial system”.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Such leakages are typically the result of too narrow interventions in the sense that they were
designed  to  target  very  specific  market  segments  or  activities. As  a  result,  the  scope  of  the
macroprudential tool could easily be circumvented. For example, in Malaysia tighter loan-to-value
limits on mortgages were only imposed on mortgages to individuals. That led to a surge in home
3
purchases by firms which were specifically established to bypass the restrictions.
To  avoid  arbitrage  or  migration  of  risks  between  sectors,  the  scope  of  measures  employed
needs to be broadened. The aim is always to look at the bigger picture of the financial system. In
sum, regulation needs to strike a balance between adequately addressing sector-specific risks
and ensuring consistent rules across sectors.
3 Insurers in the low interest rate environment
Ladies and gentlemen
Regulation  with  high  requirements  on  the  risk  management  is  necessary,  but  increases  the
administrative  burden  and  short-term  costs  for  insurers.  In  contrast  to  that,  its  benefits  in  the
form of financial stability only unfold in the long term.
However, new regulation is not the only challenge currently facing insurers in Europe. There is
also the matter of advancing digitalisation. New competitors such as fintechs are entering the
market. Established insurers need to adjust to stay successful. They must be prepared for new
customer expectations on communication, reachability and responsiveness.
Nonetheless,  insurance  companies  can  benefit  from  digitalisation  by  taking  advantage  of
opportunities  to  raise  flexibility  and  productivity  and  simplify  processes.  Big  data  analysis,  for
example, can improve the assessment of risks and fraud detection.
Over the next few years, the insurance market is likely to experience high innovation momentum
and even fiercer competition. Insurers are therefore well-advised to adapt to new technologies
where there is a sound business case for doing so.
Another  challenge  facing  insurers  is  the  low  interest  rate  environment,  which  is  putting  many
established  business  models  to  the  test. A  “low-for-long”  interest  rate  scenario  would  lead  to
depressed net cash flows and solvency ratios, and thus to greater risk of insolvency, as a recent
BIS paper confirms. The report also shows that such a scenario would ultimately be harder on
4
insurers and pension funds than on banks.
But  an  abrupt  interest  rate  hike  also  harbours  risk,  as  Mark  Feodoria  and  Till  Förstemann
highlighted  in  a  Bundesbank  Discussion  Paper.   Let’s  take  the  example  of  life  insurers.  In
Germany, surrender options allow policyholders to liquidate their investments early and receive
the policy’s surrender value. The amount does not depend on current market interest rates, but
rests on paid-in premiums at a guaranteed rate of return (adding profit participation).
5
If interest rates rise, the value of insurers’ asset holdings will fall. Beyond a critical company-
specific interest rate level, the guaranteed surrender values exceed the market value of the asset
holdings. This increases the incentive for policyholders to surrender their policies and reinvest
the proceeds at higher yields.
But an upsurge in policy lapses would mean considerable liquidity outflows for insurers. To meet
their policyholders’ claims, they could be forced to offload their assets, which might accelerate
the fall in bond prices, driving up interest rates even further.
This  can  be  more  than  a  merely  hypothetical  scenario.  Surrender-driven  runs  on  insurance
companies have occurred in the past  In 1997, in the wake of the Asian currency crisis, market
interest  rates  in  Korea  shot  up  from  just  over  12%  to  around  30%  within  one  year.  This  saw
6
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
monthly surrender rates for pension products climb as high as 4%. In 2008, one of Belgium’s
largest insurance companies faced a severe surrender-driven liquidity crisis. The impact of the
financial  crisis  had  pushed  the  market  value  of  the  insurer’s  asset  holdings  so  low  that  the
company needed to raise €1.5bn in new capital. In the end, the government stepped in to halt the
flow of redemptions.
Both incidents had a relatively minor impact on the wider financial system. However, we cannot
take such an outcome for granted for the future. Liquidity risk in the life insurance sector and its
interconnection with interest rate risk should, therefore, remain on the radar screen of insurance
companies and their regulators.
So what we’ve learned so far is that both persistently low interest rates and an abrupt hike in
interest rates can pose serious problems for insurance undertakings. And this observation brings
us  back  to  Jacques  Piccard’s  intrepid  diving  expedition,  which  I  mentioned  in  my  opening
remarks.
In today’s low interest rate environment, you could say that insurers are a lot like divers: For a
while, they are fine in the deep. But if the dive lasts longer than expected, they risk running out of
oxygen  at  some  point.  On  the  other  hand,  coming  back  up  too  quickly  can  result  in
decompression  sickness.  Divers  who  surface  from  very  deep  water  too  quickly  can  suffer
serious symptoms. At worst, these can be life-threatening. Divers are therefore advised to make
a slow but timely ascent to the surface. It’s probably safe to say that many insurers are hoping
that a similar scenario will unfold with respect to interest rates – in other words, a gradual rise.
4 Natural rate of interest
Ladies and gentlemen,
The  evolution  of  interest  rates  concerns  us  all  –  insurance  companies  and  monetary
policymakers alike.
Whenever the future level of interest rates is discussed, attention quickly turns to central banks.
Amongst other reasons, this is because of the special role they have been playing in responding
to  the  financial  crisis.  Central  banks  all  over  the  world  took  extraordinary  measures,  pushing
policy rates to zero, providing excess liquidity, and purchasing assets on a large scale. In doing
so, they contributed to a low interest rate environment that persists in the euro area to this day.
Ten years on from the peak of the financial crisis, we may have emerged from serious crisis
threat, but the Eurosystem’s monetary policy stance remains exceptionally expansionary. The
anticipated end of net asset purchases marks only the beginning of the exit from the ultra-loose
monetary policy. It is the first step on a path of normalisation which will last several years.
What does this mean for insurers and pension funds which depend on capital markets rates?
Needless  to  say,  interest  rates  will  pick  up  as  monetary  policy  gradually  returns  to  normal.
However, monetary policy does not dictate the levels of capital market rates at the end of this
process.
Real long-term interest rates are crucially determined by saving and investment decisions made
by households and enterprises. And even in an imaginary world without a financial sector, a rate
of interest would emerge.
Indeed, beyond the recent period of low interest rates, we have witnessed a considerable decline
in real yields on long-term government bonds in major advanced economies since the start of the
1980s. Owing to its persistence and outreach, this decline is often attributed to secular or global
forces.  In  particular,  a  recent  study  points  to  lower  trend  growth  as  a  major  factor,  which  is
possibly linked to demographic changes.7
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given the decline in the actual real rate of interest, numerous studies suggest that the so-called
natural rate has also decreased in recent decades – that is, the real interest rate at which the
goods market is in equilibrium and prices are stable.
This rate may have important implications for monetary policy. In particular, the natural rate is
often seen as an important benchmark for the monetary policy stance. If the key interest rate less
the  expected  inflation  rate  is  below  this  interest  rate,  monetary  policy  is  expansionary,  as  it
provides incentives for consumers to purchase more and for enterprises to step up investment
and output.
Therefore,  the  natural  rate  may  be  an  important  anchor  for  monetary  policy  to  achieve  its
objective of price stability – at least from a more theoretical perspective. Simply put, if monetary
policy tracks the natural rate in the medium term, it will likewise stabilise inflation in the medium
term.
Importantly, this implies that a depressed natural rate of interest would pose serious challenges
for monetary policy to stabilise the economy and achieve price stability. Monetary policy would
see its policy rates come up against the lower bound more and more frequently. This might raise
calls for a change in monetary policy strategy (a higher inflation target, for example) or a change
in policy instruments (such as asset purchases).
However, before jumping to conclusions, we have to take studies pointing to a trend decline in
the natural rate with all due caution. This rate cannot be observed directly. We have to rely on
models  and  econometric  methods  to  estimate  it.  And  the  estimated  level  varies  greatly
depending on the method and data used. On top of that, it can often only be gauged with very
wide uncertainty bands.
Over 80 years ago, the American economist John H. Williams put it in a nutshell: “The natural
rate is an abstraction; like faith, it is seen by its works. One can only say that if the bank policy
succeeds in stabilizing prices, the bank rate must have been brought in line with the natural rate,
8
but if it does not, it must not have been.”
What  is  more,  ultra-expansionary  monetary  policy  compressed  long-term  interest  rates  for  a
prolonged period of time, which may feed into estimates of the natural rate.
In  addition,  many  methods  fail  to  take  account  of  the  risk  dimension  that  prevails  in  the  real
economy. They often use as a starting point yields on government bonds which are regularly
deemed  riskless.  But  the  concept  of  the  natural  rate  refers  to  characteristics  of  the  real
economy, so it would be appropriate to apply a risk-bearing return on capital.
Taking this observation on board and analysing returns on equity or total capital, say, we see a
9
different picture. There’s no sign of any long-term downward trend.
All in all, a study carried out by the Bundesbank comes to the following conclusion.
 A robust
monetary policy strategy should not lean too heavily on the concept of the natural interest rate,
but should regard it instead as one of many indicators for evaluating the monetary stance whilst
remaining aware of its limitations.
10
And that is a good stance to take for another reason, too – the use of the natural interest rate as
a policy benchmark is based on the assumption that the natural rate is independent of policy.
This  proposition  has  recently  again  been  called  into  question.  Economists  at  the  Bank  for
International  Settlements  (BIS)  point  out  that  economic  developments  are  determined,  among
other things, not just by business cycles but also by financial cycles.
In  particular,  a  financial  crisis  can  dampen  the  output  path  of  an  economy  persistently.
Consequently, the BIS economists write: “To the extent that monetary policy (…) can influence
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  financial  cycle,  it  too  may  have  a  persistent  impact  on  the  economy’s  long-run  path,  and
hence also on real interest rates.”
11
The impact of this finding extends far beyond the use of the natural interest rate as a benchmark
for  monetary  policy.  It  also  raises  the  issue  of  whether  monetary  policymakers  should  focus
more  of  their  attention  on  the  financial  cycle. As  we  have  witnessed,  financial  crises  have  a
considerable  impact  on  macroeconomic  outcomes  and,  ultimately,  on  central  banks’  ability  to
guarantee price stability. Since the financial cycle is longer than the business cycle, this comes
down to extending the policy horizon.
Jacques-Yves Cousteau, the pioneer of modern underwater diving, was well aware that it is often
a good idea to take the longer-term view, too. Speaking in 1992, he said: “We are living in an
interminable succession of absurdities imposed by the myopic logic of short-term thinking”.
12
Taking a longer-term perspective on inflation, central banks might be compelled to act on the
build-up of financial imbalances, even if they pursue only the single objective of price stability.
This would also help to reduce asymmetric responses by monetary policy.
I am convinced that monetary policy should have a symmetrical effect over the entire economic
cycle. In a downturn, policymakers must respond vigorously; but in an upswing, when risks in the
financial sector can build up, they must also be able to tighten the reins again as needed.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
A  golden  rule  for  divers  is:  don’t  exceed  the  maximum  time.  I’d  say  that’s  good  advice  for
speakers, too. So I will now bring my speech to a close.
Our financial system is much more stable today than it was ten years ago. A large number of
weaknesses have been addressed and reforms initiated. Now our task is to make sure that the
rules we have created are applied consistently.
The former Chairman of the Fed, Paul Volcker, recently cautioned that “financiers are slipping
back into bad habits, chasing chicanery and lobbying to loosen regulation”.
 We should take his
remarks seriously. There is a danger that the lessons learned from the crisis could be thrown to
the winds as the memory of the crisis fades.
13
There’s no denying that the financial crisis and its repercussions were bad. But it would be even
worse if we learned nothing from it.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Deutsche Bundesbank, Makroprudenzielle Instrumente im Versicherungssektor, Finanzstabilitätsbericht 2018,
pp 102–103.
C Borio, Macroprudential Frameworks – Experience, Prospects and a Way Forward, BIS speech, June 2018.
BIS, Financial stability implications of a prolonged period of low interest rates, CGFS Papers, No 61, July 2018.
Bank for International Settlements, Annual Economic Report 2018, p 68.
M Feodoria and T Förstemann, Lethal lapses – how a positive interest rate shock might stress German life
insurers, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 12/2015.
Geneva Association (2012), Surrenders in the Life Insurance Industry and their Impact on Liquidity, August 2012.
The study also points to an increase in the convenience yield for safety and liquidity, as the real interest rate on
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
safe and liquid securities is considered. See M Del Negro, D Giannone, M P Giannoni and A Tambalotti (2018),
Global Trends in Interest Rates, NBER Working Paper No. 25039.
J H Williams (1931), The Monetary Doctrines of JM Keynes, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 45(4), 547–
587.
R Caballero, E Farhi and P-O Gourinchas (2017), Rents, Technical Change, and Risk Premia. Accounting for
Secular Trends in Interest Rates, Returns on Capital, Earnings Yields, and Factor Shares, American Economic
Review: Papers & Proceedings 107(5), pp 614–620. M Marx, B Mojon and F R Velde (2017), Why Have Interest
Rates Fallen far Below the Return on Capital, Banque de France Working Paper No. 630.
Deutsche Bundesbank, The natural rate of interest, Monthly Report, October 2017.
C Borio, P Disyatat and P Rungcharoenkitkul (2018), What anchors for the natural rate of interest?, mimeo.
Los Angeles Times, “As Population Grows, People Will Live ‘Like Rats', Cousteau Says”, 6 June 1992.
Financial Times, “Volcker sets a challenge for the next generation”, 26 October 2018.
8
9
10
11
12
13
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
