Carolyn Wilkins: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening statement by Ms Carolyn A Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at
the press conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 24
October 2018.
 Good morning. Governor Poloz and I are pleased to be here to talk about today’s interest rate
announcement and our Monetary Policy Report (MPR). Before we turn to your questions, let me
take a couple of minutes to give you an idea of the most important issues that came up during
Governing Council’s discussions.
We started by noting some very positive developments. The Canadian economy continues to
operate  near  its  capacity,  and  growth  is  relatively  broad-based  across  sectors  and  regions.
Meanwhile, inflation is close to our target. What stands out is that, even with today’s increase in
the policy rate to 1.75 per cent, monetary policy remains stimulative. In fact, the policy rate today
is still negative in real terms; that is, once you adjust for inflation.
Given this context, it is natural that our discussion centred on the main factors driving economic
activity and inflation over our projection horizon, and the appropriate pace for returning the policy
rate to a neutral stance. Let me remind you that our estimate of neutral is in a range—currently 2
1/2  to  3  1/2  per  cent.  It  is  a  range  rather  than  a  point  estimate  because  the  neutral  rate  is
unobservable and can change over time.
Let me talk about our assessment of inflation developments. Inflation was running near the upper
end of our 1 to 3 per cent target range in July and August, a little higher than we had expected in
our  July  MPR.  As  we  said  at  our  last  interest  rate  announcement  in  September,  the  staff
assessment was that most of this surprise came from one component of the consumer price
index:  airfares.  They  judged  that  this  component  would  be  volatile  over  the  coming  months
because of methodological changes  by  Statistics  Canada.  Staff  were  right.    The  most  recent
data, released just last Friday, show that inflation fell back to 2.2 per cent in September, due in
large  part  to  a  reversal  of  the  airfare  component.  We  could  see  further  volatility  from  this
component in coming months.
Importantly, our core measures of inflation remain firmly around 2 per cent. This is consistent
with  an  economy  that  is  operating  at  capacity.  This  episode  shows  just  how  critical  it  is  to
distinguish between the volatile elements of inflation and more persistent, underlying pressures.
Labour markets are so far showing little signs of wage pressures. Even with the unemployment
rate near its lowest point in 40 years, underlying wage growth is running at around 2.3 per cent.
This is a backward-looking indicator, and we project wage growth to pick up in the year ahead.
Companies that we spoke to in our autumn Business Outlook Survey (BOS) expect wage gains
to pick up over the coming quarters. They also told us that capacity pressures remain elevated
and that labour shortages are increasing.
Governing Council spent a considerable amount of time discussing the implications of the recent
US–Mexico–Canada  trade  agreement  (USMCA).  The  USMCA  is  good  news  because  it  will
reduce  an  important  source  of  uncertainty  that  has  been  holding  back  business  investment.
Remember that we have been marking down our investment outlook because of this uncertainty.
We know from our latest BOS, which was completed before the agreement was reached, that
business  investment  plans  were  already  quite  positive.  Firms  told  us  they  were  looking  to
increase  capacity  and  productivity  to  take  advantage  of  a  strong  US  economy.  So,  given  the
agreement, we have reversed some of that mark down of investment. To be prudent, we did not
remove all of it, because we want to see how firms actually adjust their investment plans. This
prudence  is  also  because  we  know  that  competiveness  challenges  are  also  weighing  on
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
investment.
The approval of the LNG project on the West Coast adds to the good economic news, although
its  impact  is  somewhat  offset  by  lower  commodity  prices.  Overall,  the  projected  investment
profile is higher than it was in July, increasing both actual growth and the economy’s potential to
expand in a non-inflationary way.
However, the protectionist trade actions, particularly those involving the United States and China,
were  also  top  of  mind  for  us  as  they  are  still  weighing  on  the  global  outlook.  We  have
incorporated  in  our  forecast  the  expected  effects  of  tariffs  imposed  to  date,  as  well  as  the
dampening effects on confidence from threats of future measures. All told, we estimate that this
amounts to a drag on the global economy of 0.3 per cent by the end of 2020. That is a big cost –
it adds up to more than US$200 billion.  
This  represents  a  two-sided  risk  for  Canadian  monetary  policy.  There  is  a  possibility  that  the
United States and China find a path to ease or resolve this trade conflict. This would be positive
for  global  trade  and  investment,  and  for  Canada.  However,  the  conflict  could  worsen,
jeopardizing  important  global  value  chains.    This  would  surely  reduce  long-term  growth  and
prosperity globally, although the overall implications for inflation would be uncertain.
Closer to home, Governing Council has been assessing how people are adapting to both higher
interest rates and the changes to mortgage underwriting guidelines implemented earlier this year.
We have seen that households are adjusting their budgets largely as expected. We understand
that  this  can  be  difficult,  particularly  for  those  who  are  highly  indebted.  At  the  same  time,
employment and incomes continue to grow, which can help to cushion the adjustment process.
Further,  the  quality  of  new  debt  is  improving  and  housing  activity  is  moderating  to  a  more
sustainable level. All of this is making the economy more resilient, and reduces the chances of
painful outcomes for many people further down the road. The rule changes also appear to have
helped  take  the  wind  out  of  the  sails  of  speculators  in  some  markets,  which  reduces  the
pressure on housing affordability. Overall, while financial system vulnerabilities are still elevated,
the fact that they have stabilized and edged down in a number of respects is positive.
There is an updated analysis of these household issues in Box 4. More detail will be published
about the effects of the underwriting guidelines on borrowing on the Financial System Hub that
we will launch in a couple of weeks. The Hub is designed to be a place on our website where we
can  post  our  analysis  of  current  financial  system  vulnerabilities  and  risks  in  a  manner  that  is
accessible to a wide audience.
Given all these factors, Governing Council agrees that the policy interest rate will need to rise to a
neutral stance in order to achieve the inflation target. You may have noticed that we have not
used  the  word  “gradual”  to  describe  the  pace  of  policy  adjustments.  This  is  to  avoid  the
impression that we are following a preordained, mechanical policy path. The appropriate pace for
interest  rate  increases  will  depend  on  Governing  Council’s  assessment  at  each  fixed
announcement date of how the outlook for inflation and related risks are evolving. In particular,
Governing  Council  will  continue  to  take  into  account  how  the  economy  is  adjusting  to  higher
interest rates, given the elevated level of household debt. While the focus of many commentators
tends to be on the downside risks, it is also possible that strong consumer confidence builds on
solid job and income growth, and leads to greater-than-expected consumption. We will also pay
close attention to global trade policy developments and their implications for the inflation outlook.
Again, we need to bear in mind that this risk is two-sided.
With that, Governor Poloz and I would be happy to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
