John C Williams: Moving toward "normal" US monetary policy
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Joint  Bank  Indonesia-Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Central
Banking Forum, Nusa Dua, Indonesia, 10 October 2018.
 Thank  you  and  good  morning.    It’s  a  pleasure  to  speak  at  the  Central  Banking  Forum  co-
organized by Bank Indonesia and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  This is our second
joint conference, and I am very much looking forward to the exchange of ideas and views on
important economic issues affecting our regions.  At the outset, I would like to thank Governor
Perry and Bank Indonesia for their leadership and support in sponsoring this conference, amid
what I am sure has been a very busy time with the IMF/World Bank meetings.  Let me also say
that our thoughts and hearts go out to everyone affected by the recent devastating earthquake
and tsunami.
In my remarks, I will focus on the outlook for U.S. monetary policy.  The good news is that on the
10th anniversary of the worst days of the global financial crisis, the U.S. economy is doing very
well.    From  the  perspective  of  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate  of  maximum  employment  and  price
stability, quite honestly, this is about as good as it gets.  As a result, the Fed has naturally been
moving toward more “normal” monetary policy.
And that brings me to a theme of my remarks today:  What does “normal” monetary policy look
like going forward?  Before I say even one more word, I should stress that what I have to say
represents  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
(FOMC) or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.
Strong, Strong, Strong
My view on the U.S. economy is well summarized by the most recent FOMC statement, in which
variations on the word “strong” appeared five times in describing the U.S. economy.   Central
bank  communication  can  be  difficult  at  times,  but,  at  least  in  this  case,  our  message  is  very
clear.    Indeed,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  attained  its  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum
employment and price stability about as well as it ever has.  Most indicators point to a very strong
labor market—including an unemployment rate of 3.7 percent—and inflation is right on target. 
1
With fiscal stimulus and favorable financial conditions providing tailwinds to the U.S. economy,
the outlook is for more strong growth.  Let me put some hard numbers to that:  I expect real GDP
to increase by around 3 percent this year and by 2.5 percent in 2019.  Assuming this forecast
comes to fruition, this will be the longest expansion in U.S. history based on data going back over
150 years.  This above-trend pace of growth should lead to continued solid job gains and further
declines  in  the  unemployment  rate.    I  expect  the  unemployment  rate  to  edge  down  to  slightly
below 3.5 percent next year, the lowest level in nearly 50 years. 
In keeping with this strong economic outlook, I expect price inflation to move up a bit above 2
percent.  Importantly, I don’t see any signs of greater inflationary pressures on the horizon.  This
is all very good news, especially in the context of the slow recovery and low inflation that has
persisted in the years since the financial crisis.  
In light of the progress we’ve made on our monetary policy goals, the FOMC has been in the
process  of  gradually  normalizing  monetary  policy  for  the  past  few  years.    Looking  forward,  I
continue  to  expect  that  further  gradual  increases  in  interest  rates  will  best  foster  a  sustained
economic expansion and achievement of our dual mandate goals. 
Since first raising rates from near-zero back in December 2015, the FOMC has continued to
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
raise the target range for the federal funds rate as the economy has improved and moved toward
our maximum employment and 2 percent longer-run inflation objective.  Our most recent rate
increase  came  in  late  September,  when  the  FOMC  set  the  target  range  between  2  and  2.25
2
percent.  
Throughout,  we’ve  repeatedly  stressed  that  we  foresaw  this  to  be  a  process  of  gradual
normalization,  reflecting  the  balancing  of  risks  to  reaching  our  goals.    In  particular,  downside
risks to the achievement of our employment and inflation goals amid very low interest rates were
compelling arguments for a relatively cautious and predictable approach to policy.  This proved
its worth:  The U.S. economy continued to expand at a healthy pace even as the Fed raised rates
numerous times.
For those who follow the Fed closely, you’ve noticed that the FOMC has been slimming down its
statements of late and using less forward guidance about the future path of policy.  In this vein,
the  FOMC  in  its  recent  statement  removed  language  indicating  that  monetary  policy  remains
accommodative.  Let me make clear, these more concise statements do not signify a shift in our
monetary  policy  approach.    Instead,  they  represent  the  natural  evolution  of  the  language
describing  the  factors  influencing  our  policy  decisions  in  the  context  of  the  strength  of  the
economic outlook and inflation being near our 2 percent longer-run goal.   
3
These changes in our communication of policy views are a sign that we are nearing the end of
the  process  of  normalizing  monetary  policy  and  are  inching  closer  to  conducting  normal
monetary policy. Arguably, it’s been a long time since monetary policy was normal, so it’s worth
describing what “normal” looks like in some detail.  
At its most basic level, monetary policy-making will remain the same:  The path of interest rates
will continue to be guided strategically by our dual mandate objectives and shaped tactically by
the data and their implications for the economic outlook.  We’ll continue to be transparent about
our thinking about the economy and monetary policy.
But, changing circumstances call for some changes in how the FOMC communicates its policy
views. Now that interest rates are well away from zero and the economy is humming along, the
case for strong forward guidance about future policy actions is becoming less compelling.  For
one, the future direction of policy will no longer be as clear as it was during the past few years. 
When interest rates were extremely low, it was obvious that the direction for rates was upward,
toward more normal levels, and our forward guidance reinforced that point.  At some point in the
future, it will no longer be clear whether interest rates need to go up or down, and explicit forward
guidance about the future path of policy will no longer be appropriate.
In addition, as we have moved far away from near-zero interest rates, it makes sense to shift
away from a focus on normalizing the stance of monetary policy relative to some benchmark
“neutral” interest rate, often referred to as “r-star.”  Now, I have spent a good deal of my career
studying  r-star  and  I  find  it  to  be  a  useful  concept  for  describing  the  economy’s  longer-run
behavior.
Having said that, at times r-star has actually gotten too much attention in commentary about Fed
policy.  Back when interest rates were well below neutral, r-star appropriately acted as a pole
star  for  navigation.    But,  as  we  have  gotten  closer  to  the  range  of  estimates  of  neutral,  what
appeared to be a bright point of light is really a fuzzy blur, reflecting the inherent uncertainty in
measuring r-star.     More  than  that,  r-star  is  just  one  factor  affecting  our  decisions,  alongside
economic and labor market indicators, wage and price inflation, global developments, financial
conditions, the risks to the outlook… the list goes on and on. 
4
I’ve talked a lot about normalizing our policy around interest rates.  In addition, about a year ago
we started the process of gradually reducing the Fed’s balance sheet as we work to unwind the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
asset  purchase  policies  put  in  place  during  the  crisis.    In  the  now-standard  Fed  practice  of
communicate, communicate, and communicate, we published detailed plans well in advance on
5
how  we  would  gradually  and  predictably  reduce  the  balance  sheet.     This  process  has
6
proceeded smoothly without creating undue market disruption or volatility.
With balance sheet normalization well underway, the Fed is studying the question of what exactly
the new normal looks like.  We have indicated that we plan to shrink the balance sheet to the
smallest size consistent with the efficient and effective conduct of monetary policy—and that, in
7
the long run, the asset side of the balance sheet will consist primarily of Treasury securities.
 That’s our strategy, but its execution will depend on the operating framework of monetary policy,
among other factors.
Here, the Fed basically has two choices.  We could return to a system similar in spirit to that
used before the financial crisis, in which the supply of reserves in the banking system was kept
relatively scarce, and the interest rate was set by adjusting reserves on a frequent basis through
open market operations.  Alternatively, we could continue with the system that we’ve been using
since  the  crisis,  in  which  bank  reserves  are  abundant  and  the  federal  funds  rate  target  is
achieved  through  adjustments  to  administered  rates.    This  approach  is  working  very  well  at
controlling interest rates and has proven to be easy to communicate and adaptable to changing
market conditions.   The Fed will be looking closely at these options in the coming months and
will subsequently make a decision on the future operating framework.  And, as is our standard
practice, we will be sure to communicate our thinking and decisions on this issue as soon and
as thoroughly as practicable. 
Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy
8
So far, I have described the economic and monetary policy outlook from the perspective of the
U.S.  economy  and  policy.  This  should  not  be  surprising  given  that  the  Fed’s  mandate—as
defined by the U.S. Congress—concerns domestic economic conditions.  Of course, that does
not  imply  that  one  can  view  the  U.S.  economy  and  our  policy  actions  in  isolation  from  global
economic and financial developments.  Far from it.
In today’s highly interconnected global economy and financial system, international developments
affect the U.S. economy, and our policy actions in turn impact the rest of the world.  Therefore,
we devote considerable effort to monitoring and analysis of developments around the world to
understand  how  our  actions  affect  the  global  economy  and  indirectly  feed  back  to  our  own
economy.    These  considerations  play  an  important  role  in  my  thinking  about  the  economic
outlook and the appropriate path for monetary policy, as well as how we best communicate our
perspectives and plans.
Moreover,  we  actively  engage  with  international  counterparts  in  a  range  of  forums,  such  as
today’s.  These exchanges help us understand economic and financial conditions affecting our
respective regions and provide opportunities to share perspectives and insights.  A key lesson
about  policy-making  in  an  interconnected  world  is  that  transparency  and  open  lines  of
communication are critical to minimizing misunderstanding, market disruption, and volatility that
can  interfere  with  our  common  goals  of  having  strong  and  stable  economies.    As  I  have
mentioned  a  number  of  times  already,  effective  communication  that  provides  clarity  and
predictability to our policy actions is a critical component of successful policy-making. 
Conclusion
Monetary  policy-making  has  perhaps  never  been  more  challenging  than  it  was  following  the
financial crisis.  But, as we move toward more “normal” conduct of monetary policy, we must not
rest  easy.    We  will  confront  our  own  fair  share  of  future  challenges.    The  most  important
monetary policy challenge in the United States today is sustaining the long economic expansion
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
without  allowing  risks  to  grow  that  ultimately  undermine  economic  prosperity.    Whatever  the
future  may  bring,  I  will  be  guided  by  our  dual  mandate,  a  heavy  dependence  on  data,  and  a
steadfast  commitment  to  transparency.    Such  an  approach,  in  my  view,  will  help  support
prosperity both in the United States and abroad. 
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See FOMC Statement and Implementation Note, September 26, 2018.
See FOMC Statement and Implementation Note, September 26, 2018.
See FOMC Statement and Implementation Note, September 26, 2018.
See Jerome H. Powell, Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy, August 24, 2018.
See FOMC issues addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, June 14, 2017.
See Simon Potter, Confidence in the Implementation of U.S. Monetary Policy Normalization, August 4, 2018.
See Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, as adopted effective September 16, 2014.
See Simon Potter, Confidence in the Implementation of U.S. Monetary Policy Normalization, August 4, 2018.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
