John  C  Williams:  Monetary  policy  strategies  for  a  low-neutral-
interest-rate world
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the 80th Plenary Meeting of the Group of Thirty, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, New York City, 30 November 2018.
As prepared for delivery
 I would like to start by thanking Tharman for the invitation to participate in this panel of esteemed
current and former policymakers.  I am also pleased to continue the long tradition of hosting the
Group of Thirty at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and very much look forward to this
morning’s discussion.
In my remarks, I will focus on the following question:  What long-run monetary policy strategy is
best  suited  to  anchor  inflation  expectations,  foster  price  stability,  and  promote  maximum
employment?    I  emphasize  the  phrase  “long-run”  because  I  will  focus  on  the  features  of  a
systematic  policy  framework,  rather  than  tactical  policy  decisions.    This  topic  is  not  only  of
academic interest:  As was recently announced, the Federal Reserve is embarking on a review
of its long-run monetary policy framework.   I will argue that the global decline in the neutral rate
of  interest  over  the  past  quarter  century  poses  significant  challenges  to  maintaining  well-
anchored inflation expectations in a standard inflation-targeting regime.  I will then lay out some
alternative  policy  strategies  that  have  the  potential  of  providing  a  solid  anchor  for  inflation
expectations—even with a very low neutral interest rate—while preserving broad continuity with
current inflation-targeting practice.  Now that I am already way out on a limb, I should emphasize
that my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market
Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.
1
As  a  starting  point,  it’s  useful  to  travel  back  in  time  to  the  1980s  and  1990s,  when  inflation
targeting was introduced.  The problem at the time was high and variable inflation that contributed
to macroeconomic instability and unmoored inflation expectations, which in turn fueled high and
variable  inflation.    To  break  this  vicious  cycle,  numerous  central  banks  instituted  inflation
targeting, or variants thereof, with a focus on bringing inflation down to a low level and fostering
the establishment of stable, well-anchored inflation expectations.
This strategy worked extraordinarily well in the decade preceding the global financial crisis, as
central  banks  were  able  to  achieve  remarkably  low  and  stable  inflation,  leading  to  a  positive
feedback loop between low inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations.
Today, we face an altogether different set of problems stemming from a very low neutral interest
rate—that  is,  the  short-term  real  interest  rate  consistent  with  an  economy  operating  at  its
potential alongside low and stable inflation.  Ironically, the problem we need to solve these days is
the risk of inflation that is persistently too low, rather than too high. 
Today’s low neutral interest rates reflect the culmination of trends extending back 25 years.  A
quarter  century  ago,  a  typical  estimate  of  the  neutral  rate  in  the  United  States  was  2  or  2½
percent—consistent  with  historical  averages  over  the  preceding  half  century.    Since  then,
however, there has been a clear downward trend in neutral interest rates in the United States and
2
other advanced economies, with current estimates ranging from 0 to 1½ percent.
Three main global trends appear to account for the bulk of the decline in the neutral rate over the
past quarter century.    One is demographics: populations are aging as people live longer and
birth rates have fallen. The second is productivity growth, which has slowed around the world.
3
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The third is the heightened demand for safe and liquid assets, which has led to a wider wedge
between  yields  on  safe  government  securities  or  central  bank  reserves  and  yields  on  riskier
assets such as corporate bonds.
Importantly,  the  onset  of  these  trends  preceded  the  global  financial  crisis  and  they  have
continued even as countries have recovered.  Although there is a great deal of uncertainty about
the neutral rate, and conditions may change, a reasonable assumption is that it will remain low—
4
not far from current levels—for the foreseeable future.
What  does  a  low  neutral  rate  mean  for  monetary  policy  and  the  anchoring  of  inflation
expectations?  When a recession hits, central banks may not be able to reduce interest rates
well  below  their  neutral  level  to  stimulate  the  economy  as  warranted  because  of  the  effective
lower bound on nominal interest rates.  This shortfall of monetary accommodation would result in
less  desirable  economic  outcomes  during  the  recession  and  recovery.    In  particular,  inflation
would typically undershoot its desired target during these episodes.  The persistence of below-
target inflation rates in many advanced economies over the past decade is a testament to this
dynamic.
As  a  result  of  the  inherent  asymmetry  introduced  by  the  lower  bound  on  interest  rates,  an
inflation-targeting central bank could experience inflation that is below target, once we consider
the average inflation rate over periods when policy is constrained and those when it is not.  With
inflation on average below the target level, inflation expectations will likely slip below the target
5
rate as well.
A simple example helps illustrate this problem.  Say that 80 percent of the time, the lower bound
on  interest  rates  does  not  constrain  policy  and  the  central  bank  aims  for  a  2  percent  target
inflation rate.  During these “good” times, an inflation-targeting central bank aims to keep inflation
near 2 percent.  But, 20 percent of the time, the economy falls into a recession that’s severe
enough  that  the  lower  bound  constrains  policy.  Assume  that  during  these  periods,  inflation
averages only 1 percent.  So, 80 percent of the time inflation averages 2 percent and 20 percent
of  the  time  inflation  averages  1  percent.    The  resulting  average  rate  of  inflation  is  about  1.8
percent.  As a consequence, inflation expectations are likely to become anchored at the long-run
average of 1.8 percent, below the desired 2 percent target.
But, that’s not the end of the story.  This downward shift in inflation expectations has a second-
round effect on real interest rates, the economy, and inflation.  When policy is constrained by the
effective lower bound, the downward shift in inflation expectations raises the real interest rate,
further diminishing the degree of monetary stimulus, making the downturn worse and reducing
inflation  even  more.    Even  in  times  when  policy  is  not  constrained,  the  expectation  of  below-
target inflation in the future affects current decisions, putting additional downward pressure on
inflation.  In other words, monetary policy is always swimming upstream, fighting a current of too-
low inflation expectations that interferes with achieving the target inflation rate.
A number of alternative monetary policy frameworks have been proposed that aim to tackle the
problems associated with the lower bound on interest rates.  Although they differ in many ways, it
is useful to divide these proposals into three broad categories.  The first option is to maintain the
basic framework of inflation targeting and to rely on a combination of aggressive conventional
and  unconventional  policy  actions  when  facing  economic  downturns  to  limit  the  deleterious
effects  of  the  lower  bound.    This  carries  with  it  the  risk  that  inflation  expectations  become
anchored at too low a level.
The second option is “average-inflation targeting,” whereby the central bank purposefully aims to
achieve an above-target inflation rate in “good” times when the lower bound is not a constraint. 
Properly  designed  and  implemented,  such  an  overshoot  can  offset  the  inflation  undershoot
during “bad” times so that the longer-run average inflation rate and inflation expectations are in
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
line with the target.
The  third  option  is  price-level  targeting,  including  its  various  offshoots,  such  as  nominal  GDP
targeting  and  temporary  price-level  targeting.    In  such  a  regime,  the  central  bank  commits  to
keep  the  price  level  near  a  steadily  growing  target  path.    Like  average-inflation  targeting,  this
strategy promises to overshoot the target inflation rate in “good” times to make up for the inflation
undershoot when policy is constrained.
In  theory,  both  average-inflation  and  price-level  targeting  can  solve  the  problem  of  anchoring
inflation  expectations  at  the  target  rate  while  maintaining  a  low  inflation  target  rate  amid  low
neutral rates.  Although price-level targeting is a bigger leap from inflation targeting than average-
inflation targeting, each can be implemented in ways that are very similar to standard inflation
targeting, either in terms of forecast-targeting or a policy rule.   Importantly, neither will likely be
effective in practice unless communicated clearly and carried out consistently over time.  More
broadly,  all  of  these  proposed  strategies  face  potential  costs  and  benefits—in  terms  of
macroeconomic  performance,  communication,  and  robustness  to  uncertainty—which  require
careful study.  
6
In  considering  alternative  monetary  policy  strategies,  academic  experts,  policymakers,  and
others from around the world have an important part to play, sharing and discussing ideas and
comparing experiences to help all of us to think through these issues.  This process of careful
study  and  discussion  proved  highly  valuable  during  the  development  and  implementation  of
inflation targeting in decades past, and will be equally valuable in the present debates.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See Federal Reserve to review strategies, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its mandate of
maximum employment and price stability, November 15, 2018.
Shigeaki Fujiwara, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo, Developments in the Natural Rate
of Interest in Japan, Bank of Japan Review 2016-E-12 (October 2016); Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and
John  C.  Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants, Journal of
International Economics, Volume 108, Supplement 1, pp. S59–S75 (May 2017); Thomas Laubach and John C.
Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux, Business Economics, Volume 51, Issue 2, pp. 57–67
(July 2016); John C. Williams, Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World, FRBSF Economic Letter 2016–23 (August
15, 2016).
Carlos Carvalho, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio, Demographic Transition and Low U.S. Interest Rates,
FRBSF  Economic  Letter  2017–27  (September  25,  2017);  Marco  Del  Negro,  Domenico  Giannone,  Marc  P.
Giannoni,  and  Andrea  Tambalotti, Safety,  Liquidity,  and  the  Natural  Rate  of  Interest,  Brookings  Papers  on
Economic Activity, Spring 2017.
John C. Williams, The Future Fortunes of R-star: Are They Really Rising? FRBSF Economic Letter 2018–13 (May
21, 2018).
Thomas M. Mertens and John C. Williams, What to Expect from the Lower Bound on Interest Rates: Evidence
from Derivatives Prices, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 865 (August 2018).
John  C.  Williams, Preparing for the Next Storm: Reassessing Frameworks and Strategies in a Low R-star
World, FRBSF Economic Letter 2017–13 (May 8, 2017).
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
