  30.10.2018 
 Welcome address 
Banco de España-SUERF Conference “Financial Disintermediation and the 
Future of the Banking Sector” 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Good morning. I would like to welcome you to the conference “Financial disintermediation 
and the future of the banking sector”, hosted by the Banco de España and co-organised 
with SUERF. 
Let me start by thanking our colleagues from SUERF for their participation and involvement 
in the conference. SUERF is a unique institution that has been very successful in creating 
an active network of academics, financial practitioners and policymakers for the analysis 
and  discussion  of  monetary  and  financial  issues.  Its  outreach  is  achieved  through  the 
organization of international events,  such as today´s conference,  publications and  a very 
active sponsoring of research. 
It is well known that capital markets in Europe are less developed than in the United States. 
This is related to the more significant role played by banks in Europe for the provision of 
funding to firms than their US peers. To illustrate this, let me give you some figures. In 2017, 
the ratio of financing through fixed-income securities to total debt financing was 12% in the 
euro area versus 43% in the United States. Also, the ratio of equity market capitalisation 
over  the  domestic  credit  provided  by  banks  to  the  private  sector  was  almost  four  times 
larger in the United States than in the euro area at the end of 2016 according to the latest 
data provided by World Bank DataBank. 
There is not a consensus in the academic literature on what source of financing has a higher 
contribution to financial stability and economic growth.1 On the one hand, banks, through 
their interaction with firms, manage private information which benefits the allocation of credit 
and favors a better and cheaper access of firms to financing when the bank-firm relationship 
is well developed.2  
On the other hand, liquid and efficient financial markets offer the possibility of allocating 
households’ savings to long-term projects without the need of monitoring these savings.  
Although financial intermediaries and markets have been generally considered as alternative 
and  competing ways of overcoming  frictions  between  savers  and investors,  they  can be 
also considered as complementary sources to achieve an optimal allocation of capital. In 
fact, there is some evidence in the economic literature that a proper diversification of firms’ 
funding leads to more investment3 and to a lower vulnerability to financial shocks.4 These 
results  suggest  that  financing  structures  based  exclusively  in  one  of  the  two  sources  of 
funding are probably suboptimal.  
Certainly, the experience of the recent global banking crisis clearly shows that firms relying 
only  on  bank  financing  had  more  difficulties  in  their  access  to  external  funding  than 
companies with a richer diversification of their liabilities. This problem was even more acute 
in the case of those firms, mainly SMEs, that relied in only a limited number of lenders facing 
 1 Beck, T., and Levine, R. (2002) “Industry growth and capital allocation: Does having a market- or bank-based system 
matter?”, Journal of  Financial Economics, 64, 147 – 180; Gambacorta, L., Yang, J., and Tsatsaronis, K. (2014) “Financial 
structure and growth”, BIS Quarterly Review, March 2014, 21 - 35. 
2 López-Espinosa, G., Mayordomo, S., and Moreno, A. (2017) “When does relationship lending start to pay”, Journal of 
Financial Intermediation, 31, 16-29. 
3 Tengulov, A. (2016) “The Impact of Borrowing Diversity on Firm Value, Financing and Real Decisions”, Working Paper 
SSRN 2361401. 
4 De Fiore, F. and Uhlig, H. (2015) “Corporate Debt Structure and the Financial Crisis”, Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking, 47, 1571‑1598. 
 3/6 
 financial problems since their ability to switch to a new lender was not always easy due to 
asymmetric information problems.5 
Given the generally low level of diversification of liabilities of European firms, and the risk 
this poses for the corporate sector to face shocks affecting the bank lending channel, there 
seems to be some room for a higher role of capital market financing in Europe. 
Moreover,  European  financial  markets  not  only  are  less  developed  than  their  US 
counterparts but they are also less integrated. Apart from the aforementioned implications 
in  terms  of  the  low  diversification  of  firms’  financing  sources,  this  situation  has  also 
implications  for  the  ability  of  households  and  firms  to  hedge  against  country-specific 
sources of risk to smooth income, consumption or investment growth.  
The evidence for United States shows that cross-ownership of assets all over the country, 
and especially equity securities, has played a key role in smoothing state-specific shocks6. 
By contrast, this mechanism is less powerful in Europe since the cross-border ownership of 
assets is still limited.  
The project of the Capital Markets Union (CMU) aims at the developing and integration of 
capital markets in Europe. In my view, the CMU project is an important step forward to reach 
the goal of correcting some structural deficiencies of the EU capital markets in terms of their 
relative underdevelopment and fragmentation. 
CMU Action Plan was launched in 2015 by the European Commission by setting out a list 
of over 30 actions and related measures to establish the building blocks of an integrated 
capital market in the European Union by 2019. So far the implementation of these measures 
has been slow. 
In any event, in recent years the role of European capital markets as a source of funding for 
firms has increased. For example, the ratio of financing through fixed-income securities to 
total debt financing has grown from 8% in 2007 to 12 % in 2017. A similar trend has also 
been observed in other advanced economies including the United States.  
Understanding  the  driving  forces  of  this  trend  is  important  in  order  to  assess  its  main 
implications. Some factors are possibly of a transitory nature. Among these factors are the 
post-crisis monetary policies and their implementation. In particular, the introduction in mid-
2016  of  the  Corporate  Sector  Purchase  Programme  (CSPP)  as  part  of  the  ECB  Asset 
Purchase  Programme,  has  contributed  to  lower  the  cost  of  firms’  financing  through  the 
issuance of fixed-income securities relative to the cost of bank funding, thus encouraging 
 5 See Bentolila, S., Jansen, M., and Jiménez, G. (2017) "When Credit Dries Up: Job Losses in the Great Recession", 
Journal of the European Economic Association, 16, 650–695, and Martínez-Pagés, J. (2014) “Impact of restructuring 
plans on lending to non-financial corporations” Economic Bulletin Banco de España, July – August 2014. 
6 See Special feature A “Financial integration and risk sharing in a monetary union”, in Financial Integration in Europe, 
ECB, April 2016 and Box 1 “What could enhance private financial risk sharing in the euro area?” in Financial Integration 
in  Europe,  ECB,  May  2018.  See  also  Asdrubali,  P.,  Sorensen,  B.  and  Yosha,  O.,  (1996)  “Channels  of  interstate  risk 
sharing: United States 1963-1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 1081-1110; Athanasoulis, S. and van Wincoop, 
E. (2001) “Risk sharing within the United States: What do financial markets and fiscal federalism accomplish?”, Review 
of Economics and Statistics, 83, 688-698.  
4/6 
  large companies to switch bank financing to bond financing. A recent Banco de España’s 
research paper documents that this programme also had a positive side effect on the access 
of  SMEs  to  funding  given  that  banks  reallocated  the  credit  previously  granted  to  bond 
issuers to smaller firms that do not have access to financial markets.7 
Among  the  more  permanent  factors  that  could  have  contributed  to  the  recent  trend  of 
financial  disintermediation  is  the  introduction  of  the  new  global  banking  regulation  as  a 
reaction to the financial crisis. The new regulation aims to improve primarily the resilience 
of banks to shocks and will have a positive impact on overall financial stability. However, as 
it  has  been  documented  in  some  papers,  these  regulatory  measures  might  also  reduce 
somewhat the ability of banks to compete in the intermediation of some financial flows8.  
But going forward, it is still under debate at the global level to what extent elements of the 
new regulatory framework should be also applicable to some non bank financing channels, 
as  long  as  they  might  share  with  banking  activities  similar  underlying  risks  to  financial 
stability, such as maturity transformation and high leverage. If finally applicable, this might 
imply a more level playing field between banking and non bank intermediation. 
Another permanent factor that is contributing to the development of capital markets in the 
EU is the launch of new markets such as the alternative stock and fixed-income markets 
aimed  at  attracting  medium-sized  companies,  although  the  size  of  these  markets  is  still 
relatively small. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  these  changes  in  the  structure  of  financial  markets,  in 
combination  with  the  emergence  of  new  technological  advances,  pose  a  challenge  for 
banks.  Particularly  so  against  the  current  background  of  low  profitability  of  the  banking 
systems in Europe. 
The  arrival  of  new  technologies  has  reduced  the  barriers  to  entry  in  certain  traditional 
banking activities, creating the possibility for new competitors to banks, such as the FinTech 
companies, to access bank customers in a highly dynamic manner for a relatively modest 
investment outlay9.  
But the new technologies do not only pose threats for banks, they also offer opportunities 
for them in terms of potential efficiency gains. One example is the application  of artificial 
intelligence and the systematic use of large databases with real-time information and a high 
degree of disaggregation (commonly known as big data) for both their commercial business 
and for regulatory compliance. 
Apart from the potential efficiency gains for banks and for the financial system as a whole, 
the application of some of the new technologies in the financial sector could bring other 
 7  Arce,  O.,  Gimeno,  R.,  and  Mayordomo,  S.  (2017)  “Making  room  for  the  needy:  The  effects  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
Corporate Sector Purchase Programme”, Banco de España Working Paper No. 1743. 
8 See Aiyar, S., Calomiris, C. W., and Wieladek, T. (2016) “How does credit supply respond to monetary policy and bank 
minimum capital requirements?”, European Economic Review, 82, 142-165, Fraisse, H., Lé, M., and Thesmar, D. (2015) 
“The  real  effects  of  bank  capital  requirements”,  HEC  Paris  Research  Paper  No.  FIN-2013-988,  De  Jonghe,  O., 
Dewachter. H.. and Ongena, S. (2016) “Bank Capital (Requirements) and Credit Supply: Evidence from Pillar 2 decisions”, 
National Bank of Belgium No 303. 
9 For detailed evidence on how P2P platforms compete with banks, see de Roure, C., Pelizzon, L., and Thakor, A. (2018) 
“P2P Lenders versus Banks: Cream Skimming or Bottom Fishing?”, SAFE Working Paper No. 206. 
 5/6 
 benefits for the society, including a greater financial inclusion by reducing intermediation 
costs, which would improve the access to funding of households and SMEs. 
In any case, at this stage, the ultimate impact of new technologies on the structure of the 
financial  system  is  highly  uncertain  as  it  will  depend  on  different  factors  including  the 
regulatory treatment of the new players.10 
Today´s conference will cover all these issues related to the recent changes in the structure 
of financial markets and their implications for the banking system. We have the privilege to 
have as speakers experts in those areas from academia, policy makers, think tanks and the 
banking  industry.  I  am  sure  that  we  will  have  a  very  productive  debate  and  that  we  will 
improve our understanding of these issues. 
Finally, allow me to express once again my gratitude to the co-organizers of this event for 
making the conference possible, and to wish all the participants a very fruitful meeting and 
a pleasant stay in Madrid. 
And without further due, let me now introduce our first speaker, Governor Philip Lane. It is 
a special honor for us to have him here today. He is especially suited to be our first Keynote 
Speaker in this event because he has a profound knowledge of economy and finance, as a 
result of his long and prestigious career as an academic, as well as a brilliant policy-maker.  
His keynote speech today will verse about “Trends and Cycles in Financial Intermediation”.  
Philip, you have the floor...  
  10 For more information on the impact of FinTech on the finance industry see Philippon, T., “The FinTech opportunity”, 
NBER Working Paper, No 22476, 2016; and Huang, Y., Shen, Y. Wang, J. and Guo, F. , “Can the internet revolutionise 
finance in China?”, in Song, L., Garnaut, R., Fang, C. and Johnston, L. (eds.), China’s new sources of economic growth: 
reform, resources, and climate change, Australian National University Press, 2016, pp. 115-138. 
6/6 
 