Mario Draghi: Europe and the euro 20 years on
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at Laurea Honoris Causa in
Economics by University of Sant'Anna, Pisa, 15 December 2018.
 Next month, we will celebrate the 20th anniversary of the launch of the euro.
The two decades in which the euro has existed have perhaps been exceptional. The first was the
culmination of a 30-year upswing in the global financial cycle, while the second saw the worst
economic and financial crisis since the 1930s. But, exceptional as they were, these two periods
can teach us some useful lessons about what still needs to be done.
Monetary  Union  has  succeeded  in  many  ways,  but  it  has  not  delivered  the  gains  that  were
expected in all countries. This is partly the result of domestic policy choices and partly the result
of Monetary Union being incomplete, which led to insufficient stabilisation during the crisis.
The way ahead, therefore, is to identify the changes that are necessary to make our Monetary
Union work for the benefit of all member countries.
We need to make these changes as soon as possible, but we also need to explain why they are
important to the people of Europe.
The rationale for one market, one money
The Single Market is often seen simply as an expression of the globalisation process, which over
time has even eliminated exchange rate flexibility. But the Single Market and globalisation are not
the same thing.
Globalisation has led to higher overall welfare for all economies, and for emerging markets in
particular. But it is now clear that the rules that accompanied this process were not sufficient to
prevent it from causing severe distortions. Open markets have heightened economic insecurity
for people exposed to intensified competition, and added to their sense of being “left behind” in a
world where the great wealth created has been concentrated in a few hands.
From  the  outset,  however,  the  Single  Market  was  designed  to  reap  the  benefits  of  openness
while also tempering its costs for the most vulnerable; to promote growth while protecting the
people of Europe from the injustices of untrammelled free markets. This was undoubtedly also
the vision of Jacques Delors, the architect of the Single Market.
The Single Market was conceived during a period of weakness in the European economy. Annual
growth had averaged just 2.2% from 1973 until 1985 in the 12 countries that would go on to form
the euro area , down from 5.3% between 1960 and 1973. Growth potential had also fallen from
about 5% per year at the beginning of the 1970s to around 2% per year by the beginning of the
following decade.
1
The typical response of governments to low growth was to increase fiscal deficits. From 1973 to
1985, public deficits in the euro area 12 averaged 3.5% of GDP, while in Italy the average was
9% of GDP. Unemployment rose from 2.6% in 1973 to 9.2% in 1985 for the euro area 12. In Italy,
it climbed from 5.9% to 8.2% over the same period.
But the EU had a powerful tool at its disposal to raise growth: the common market. 
One reason that growth potential had decelerated was that intra-EU trade growth had stalled in
the early 1970s, because the common market covered mainly intermediate goods where growth
  1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
was already saturated. Trade in sectors with high R&D and skill content was restricted by non-
2
tariff barriers, preventing productivity spillovers.
 The  Single  Market  offered  a  way  to  remove  these  barriers,  reverse  the  decline  in  economic
potential, and bring more people back into work.
Yet the Single Market was never just about this. It also aimed to protect people from some of the
costs of the changes that would inevitably arise. This, in turn, would create a more favourable
political environment for advancing the process of European integration, following the setbacks of
the 1970s.
Unlike the wider process of globalisation, the Single Market allowed Europe to impose its values
on economic integration – to build a market that, to the extent possible, was free but just. Product
rules  could  be  used  to  protect  consumers  from  lax  standards  in  other  countries,  and  protect
producers  from  unfair  competition. And  production  rules  could  be  used  to  protect  workers  by
putting a floor on “social dumping” and upholding labour standards.
This is why the launch of the Single Market agenda in the mid-1980s went hand in hand with a
strengthening of common rule-making in the EU and of powers of judicial review. The opening of
markets  was  accompanied  by  the  creation  of  a  strong  European  authority  to  safeguard  fair
competition;  product  standards  became  tighter,  with  the  introduction  of  the  geographical
indication protections for specific foods, for example. And safeguards central to the European
social model were progressively embedded in EU law, in areas where the EU had the power to
act.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights has prevented a “race to the bottom” in terms of workers’
rights.  Legislation  was  adopted  to  curtail  unfair  labour  practices,  such  as  the  revision  of  the
Posted  Workers  Directive  this  year.  EU  legislation  also  protects  those  in  less  secure
employment.  One  example  is  the  Directive  on  part-time  work  in  1997,  which  sought  equal
treatment  for  part-time  and  fixed-term  employees.  Last  year  the  EU  institutions  endorsed  the
European Pillar of Social Rights to support equal opportunities and access to the labour market,
fair working conditions, social protection and inclusion.
EU legislation has not led to a complete harmonisation of labour protections across Europe. But
it has meant that the gap in labour standards across countries has gradually narrowed, even as
lower-income countries have joined the EU. Research finds a process of upward convergence in
significant areas of social expenditure in the EU since 1980, although this has tailed off in recent
years.  The same cannot be said at the international level.
3
But the Single Market required greater exchange rate stability than a free trade area, and this
resulted in significant trade-offs for economic policy. These were well-articulated by Tommaso
Padoa-Schioppa in his famous “inconsistent quartet”.  If European countries wanted to have the
benefits of managed open trade, they could not simultaneously have capital mobility, independent
monetary policy and fixed exchange rates.
4
Governments  initially  responded  to  this  conundrum  by  maintaining  fixed  exchange  rates  and
introducing  capital  controls  on  short-term  flows,  which  allowed  a  degree  of  monetary  policy
autonomy.  But  as  financial  integration  deepened  and  capital  controls  were  progressively
eliminated during the 1980s, fixed exchange rates became unsustainable.
Due to the international financial storms raging at the time, the countries that had pegged their
currencies  to  the  Deutsche  Mark  (DM)  within  the  European  Monetary  System  (EMS)  had  to
periodically decide either to maintain an independent monetary policy and devalue, or to maintain
parity with the DM and lose any sovereignty over their monetary policy.
Given the frequency with which policymakers had to make these decisions, some countries lost
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
both the benefits of exchange-rate stability and their monetary policy independence. The social
costs were high. This process came to an end with the ERM crisis in 1992-3, when it ceased to
be credible for countries entering a recession to follow German interest rate rises.
At the same time, devaluing repeatedly was becoming incompatible with the deep Single Market
that countries were trying to build.
Indeed, the prevailing view on devaluations was captured well by Nobel laureate Robert Mundell,
who  developed  his  theory  of  optimal  currency  areas  in  the  belief  that, “I  could  not  see  why
countries that were in the process of forming a common market should saddle themselves with a
new barrier to trade in the form of uncertainty about exchange rates”.  Exchange rate flexibility
would have undermined the Single Market in two ways.
5
First, it would have weakened incentives for firms to raise productivity, because they could have
lifted  competitiveness  –  if  only  temporarily  –  by  devaluing  rather  than  increasing  output  per
6
head.  Yet Europe had witnessed time and again that such actions did not lead to lasting welfare
gains.
From the launch of the EMS in 1979 to the ERM crisis in 1992, the Italian lira was devalued seven
times against the DM, losing around half of its value cumulatively vis-à-vis the German currency.
Yet  average  annual  productivity  growth   in  Italy  was  lower  than  in  the  euro  area  12  over  this
period,  Italy’s  GDP  growth  rate  was  roughly  the  same  as  that  of  its  European  peers,  and  its
unemployment rate went up by 1.3 percentage points. At the same time, consumer prices in Italy
8
grew cumulatively by 223%, compared with 103% in the euro area 12.
7
Second, support for the Single Market would be undermined in the long run if firms that did invest
in  raising  productivity  could  be  deprived  of  some  of  the  benefits  by  “beggar-thy-neighbour”
behaviour  through  competitive  devaluations  in  other  countries.  Open  markets  would  not  have
lasted.
Europe had experienced the problems created by exchange rate flexibility in the 1960s with the
common  agricultural  market.  Absent  a  single  currency,  the  common  agricultural  policy  was
based  on  prices  quoted  in  units  of  account.  But  successive  currency  crises,  in  particular  a
revaluation  of  the  DM  and  a  devaluation  of  the  French  franc  in  1969,  jeopardised  trust  in  the
market, as the farmers affected demanded compensation for their losses.
The  issue  was  smoothed  over  by  introducing  monetary  compensatory  amounts  to  mitigate
sudden changes in farm prices caused by abrupt adjustments in exchange rates. But the system
proved  difficult  to  implement  and  sustain  as  it  was  virtually  impossible  to  avoid  distortions  of
9
production and trade, which poisoned intra-Community relations.
So, faced with an “inconsistent quartet” of policy choices, a single currency provided, at least in
principle, a way to resolve them. It would allow countries to maintain stable exchange rates and
therefore benefit from openness within the Single Market, while managing as far as possible its
costs.
Not  all  countries  that  had  joined  the  Single  Market  also  joined  the  euro,  of  course.  Some
countries, such as Denmark, pegged their exchange rates to the euro. For other countries, the
Single Market represented the gateway to the euro. Five additional countries  joined the euro in
its first decade and three more in its second, but other smaller economies have stayed out so
far.
10
Finally, there is the United Kingdom, the only large economy inside the Single Market that chose
to  stay  out  of  the  euro  area.  The  United  Kingdom  is  a  particular  case,  not  only  for  political
reasons but also for structural reasons, such as the relatively low exchange rate pass-through it
11
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
had in the past.
The benefits of one market, one money today
We  should  consider  what  gains  have  been  made  as  a  result  of  having  one  market  with  one
money.
With the euro protecting the Single Market, trade growth has increased, with intra-EU exports
rising  from  13%  of  EU  GDP  in  1992  to  20%  today.  Intra-euro  area  trade  has  risen  both  in
absolute  terms  and  as  a  share  of  total  trade  with  advanced  economies ,  even  as  emerging
market economies have entered the global market. Foreign direct investment (FDI) flows within
Europe have also grown , with inflows from the rest of the EU to Italy increasing by 36% from
1992 to 2010.
12
13
14
Behind the growth of intra-EU trade lies perhaps an even more important development, which is
the  much  closer  intertwining  of  European  economies  through  the  deepening  of  value  chains.
Since  the  start  of  the  2000s,  supply  chain  linkages  between  countries  within  the  EU  have
intensified at a faster pace and were more resilient during the crisis, compared with their supply
chain linkages with countries outside the Single Market.
15
The  removal  of  customs  barriers  as  part  of  the  Single  Market  agenda  has  facilitated  multiple
border crossings during the production process. Europe-wide standards have boosted intra-EU
value  chains  by  providing  more  certainty  for  firms  about  the  quality  of  production  in  other
countries and encouraging the fragmentation of the production process that is typical of value
chains.
 And the single currency has further enhanced the process by eliminating the costs of
foreign exchange payments and settlements and of hedging exchange rate risk.
16
Participation  in  these  value  chains  has  brought  gains  for  all  countries,  especially  in  terms  of
productivity  spillovers.  The  imported  inputs  used  in  value  chains  generate  a  tangible  boost  to
productivity.
  And  higher  productivity  in  turn  leads  to  higher  wages.  Integration  within  value
chains is associated with an increase in hourly compensation for all skill groups.
17
18
Moreover,  integrating  into  value  chains  has  improved  risk-sharing  among  European  countries,
since it has allowed the gains (and losses) of trade with the rest of the world to be more evenly
spread. Within the EU, close to 20% of export-supported jobs are located in a country other than
the one that exports the final product.
19
Around  half  a  million  Italian  workers  are  involved  in  the  production  processes  of  companies
located  in  other  EU  countries  that  export  to  the  rest  of  the  world.
  Italian  firms  themselves
participate  strongly  in  global  value  chains  and  this  is  positively  associated  with  labour
productivity.
20
21
It is often this link to value chains that allows in particular the SMEs that are so typical of Italy’s
manufacturing sector to survive and grow. In a world that is increasingly dominated by scale, this
permits Italy to retain one of its fundamental characteristics. Italy, through the Single Market and
the single currency, is deeply integrated into the European production process.
The closer intertwining of European economies has had two significant effects on exchange rate
relationships for euro area countries
First, the cost of not being able to devalue within Monetary Union has fallen. ECB analysis finds
that misalignments of real effective exchange rates are smaller – albeit more persistent – for
euro  area  countries  than  those  between  advanced  economies  or  countries  linked  by  pegged
exchange rates, and these misalignments have actually become smaller in the second decade
of EMU relative to the first decade.
22
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  same 
23
the  short-run  benefits  of  competitive
time,  value  chains  have  blunted 
At 
devaluations.
 Since exports contain a greater share of imports, any boost to external demand
associated  with  a  hypothetical  devaluation  is  now  offset  by  higher  input  costs  from  imported
intermediates.  As  a  result,  participation  in  value  chains  has  been  found  to  reduce  the
responsiveness of export volumes to movements in the exchange rate.
24
So, any country hypothetically looking to devalue to regain competitiveness would have to do so
to a much larger extent than was necessary in previous decades. And devaluations of such size
would not only threaten the existence of the Single Market. They would also result in a substantial
loss  of  welfare  within  the  country  carrying  out  the  devaluation  owing  to  the  greater  negative
impact it would have via higher import prices. And studies on non-EU countries suggest that the
welfare loss would be greatest for the poorest in society, since poorer households tend to spend
a larger share of their income on tradeable goods than richer households.
 This is also typically
the case in euro area countries.
25
But  does  being  outside  the  euro  provide  additional  benefits  in  terms  of  monetary  policy
sovereignty? This is not so obvious.
First,  the  single  currency  has  actually  allowed  countries  to  regain  monetary  sovereignty
compared  with  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes  of  the  past.  Decision-making  over  monetary
policy, which effectively belonged to Germany under the EMS, is now shared among all euro area
countries. And the size of euro financial markets has made the euro area less vulnerable to US
spillovers, even as global financial integration has accelerated.
Second, it is worth noting that the supposed advantages of monetary sovereignty – such as the
ability to engage in monetary financing of government spending – do not appear to be valued
highly by countries that are members of the Single Market but not the euro. Such countries have
a weighted average public debt of 68% of GDP (44% of GDP if the United Kingdom is excluded),
compared with 89% for countries that use the single currency.
In any case, as the history of Italy has shown, monetary financing of government debt did not
lead to real long-term benefits.
 In periods where debt monetisation was more common in Italy,
such as in the 1970s, maintaining a growth rate similar to its European peers required repeated
devaluations. Inflation reached unsustainable levels and hit the most vulnerable in society.
Convergence and divergence in the euro area
26
But  if  it  is  true  that  the  supposed  advantages  associated  with  the  freedom  of  being  outside
Monetary  Union  belong  to  a  memory  that  has  been  obscured  by  time  and  the  dramas  of  the
recent crisis, it is also true that in some countries various benefits that were expected from EMU
have not yet materialised.
It was not mistaken, and nor is it today, to expect higher growth and employment to emerge from
the  “culture  of  stability”  that  Monetary  Union  would  bring  about.  But  it  was  inconceivable  that
joining  Monetary  Union  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  achieve  this.  We  needed  and  continue  to
need much more.
To the founders of EMU, it was clear that establishing a well-functioning monetary union would be
a long and gradual process. Historical experience suggested that opening markets could lead to
differentiated gains, with some regions profiting more than others. This had been the experience
of both Italy and Germany after unification in the 19th century.
27
Several  euro  area  countries  have  achieved  significant  convergence,  particularly  the  Baltic
countries,  Slovakia  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  Malta  and  Slovenia.  In  these  countries,  the  gap
between real GDP per capita and the euro area mean has been reduced by around one-third
28
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
28
since 1999.
Greece – have on balance been unable to close the gap considerably.
 Others that also started far from the euro area average – such as Portugal and
But such divergences are not exclusive to the euro area. GDP per capita in the richest state in
the United States is around twice that of the poorest state, which is roughly the same gap as in
the  euro  area.
  And  the  dispersion  of  growth  rates  across  euro  area  countries  has  fallen
considerably  over  time  and,  since  2014,  has  been  comparable  to  the  dispersion  across  US
states.
29
So what has driven the different convergence trajectory of countries, and how much is it related
to membership of the euro? Convergence can be thought of in two ways.
The  first  is  convergence  of  real  GDP  per  capita levels.  This  is  a  long-term  process  which  is
driven by factors such as rates of FDI, productivity growth and institutional quality. Such factors
can  be  fostered  by  sharing  a  single  currency,  but  they  are  not  determined  by  it.  Domestic
policies, structural and institutional reforms, and contributions from EU structural funds are what
play a crucial role here.
The  second  concept  of  convergence  relates  to growth rates,  i.e.  how  much  business  cycles
across countries are synchronised, especially when major shocks hit. This is determined more
by monetary union membership, since the design of a monetary union affects the capacity of
countries to adjust and stabilise demand during recessions.
In the case of Italy, we see both long-term and cyclical factors at play. Between 1990 and 1999 –
that is, before the introduction of the euro – Italy already had the lowest cumulative per capita
GDP growth of the original euro area members. From 1999 to 2008, it again had the lowest per
capita GDP growth of all euro area members. From 2008 to 2017, it recorded the second lowest
cumulative growth, behind Greece. And, if we look further back, the growth we saw in the 1980s
was borrowed from the future, having been based on debt that was left for future generations to
bear.
So, low growth in Italy is a phenomenon that dates back a very long time before the euro. This is
a supply-side problem, which is clear if one looks at regional performance. There is a correlation
between GDP per capita in different Italian regions and some structural indicators, such as – just
to take an example – the ease of doing business index compiled by the World Bank: the values
for the poorer regions are generally lower than those of richer regions.
At the same time, the fact that Italy – and other countries – diverged further from the euro area
average during the crisis highlights two important points. First, that structurally weaker countries
are more vulnerable to economic slowdowns than others; and second, that our Monetary Union
remains incomplete in some key respects.
There is a fair amount of evidence that countries that implemented decisive structural policies
recovered faster from the crisis than others. In countries that made such changes, the labour
market is now more responsive to growth,
 and the improved economic conditions have led to
gains  in  employment.
    But  alongside  structural  policies,  different  layers  of  protection  are
necessary to ensure that countries can stabilise their economies during crises.
30
31
Without appropriate backstops at the euro area level, individual countries in a monetary union
can  be  exposed  to  self-fulfilling  dynamics  in  sovereign  debt  markets.  Such  overshooting  can
aggravate adverse debt dynamics in downturns, inducing procyclicality in national fiscal policies,
as we saw in 2011-12. Typically, sovereign borrowing costs should fall in a recession, but at that
time  economies  representing  one-third  of  euro  area  GDP  saw  their  borrowing  costs  become
positively correlated with risk aversion.
 The result was a lack of stabilisation that harmed both
growth and fiscal sustainability.
32
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
So it is the structurally weaker countries that most need EMU to have instruments to diversify the
risk  of  crises  and  counteract  their  effect  on  the  economy.  I  have  talked  before  about  how
countries like Italy, which had been weakened by decades of low growth and had no fiscal space
when the crisis began, saw a crisis of confidence in government debt turn into a credit crisis with
major repercussions for employment and growth.
33
Deepening private risk-sharing through financial markets is one key element in preventing such
events  from  recurring.  In  the  United  States,  around  70%  of  shocks  are  mitigated  and  shared
across the individual states through integrated financial markets, whereas in the euro area the
share is only 25%.
 It is therefore also in the interest of the weaker countries in the euro area to
complete banking union and to proceed with the construction of a genuine capital market.
34
But national budgets will never lose their function as the main stabilisation tool during crises. In
the  euro  area,  around  50%  of  an  unemployment  shock  is  absorbed  through  the  automatic
stabilisers in national public budgets, significantly more than in the United States.
 The use of
automatic stabilisers, however, depends on countries not being constrained by their debt level.
So the necessary fiscal space will have to be created again so that budget interventions can be
made in the event of a crisis.
35
Yet  national  fiscal  policies  also  need  a  complement  at  the  European  level.  We  need  an
institutional  architecture  that  gives  all  countries  the  necessary  support  to  ensure  that  their
economies are not exposed to procyclical market behaviour during downturns. This will only be
possible  if  the  support  is  temporary  and  does  not  constitute  a  permanent  transfer  between
countries, which would result in a failure to put in place the necessary fiscal consolidation, let
alone the fundamental structural reforms needed for a return to growth.
Conclusion
It is not a technocratic desire to see convergence across countries and the smooth functioning of
Monetary Union that has led me to frequently mention the importance of structural reforms in
recent years. Each country has its own reform agenda, but such reforms are the only way to
create  the  conditions  for  sustainable  growth  in  wages,  productivity  and  employment  and  to
underpin our welfare state.
In  large  part  these  measures  have  to  be  undertaken  at  the  national  level,  but  they  can  be
supported at the European level by the recent decisions to launch an instrument for convergence
and competitiveness.
However,  to  tackle  future  cyclical  crises,  the  two  layers  of  protection  against  shocks  –  the
diversification  of  risk  through  the  private  financial  system  on  the  one  hand,  and  public
countercyclical support through national budgets and the fiscal capacity of the EU budget on the
other – need to interact in a complete and efficient manner.
The more progress we make in completing the banking union and capital markets union, the less
urgent  –  although  still  necessary  –  it  becomes  to  construct  a  fiscal  capacity,  which  could  at
times serve to complement national stabilisers. Inaction on both fronts heightens the fragility of
Monetary Union in times of great crisis and the divergence between countries increases.
It is clear that completing Monetary Union is the best way to prepare the transition to a form of
union that is more complete. Monetary Union, a necessary consequence of the Single Market,
has  become  an  integral  and  defining  aspect  –  with  its  symbols  and  its  constraints  –  of  the
political project whose central aim is a Europe that is united in freedom, peace, democracy and
prosperity.
It was an exceptional response – or to paraphrase Robert Kagan  an anti-historical response –
to a century that had seen dictatorships, war and misery, and in that respect was not dissimilar
36
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
to previous centuries. A unified Europe was part of that world order, itself the result of exceptional
circumstances, which followed the Second World War.
The intervening years have confirmed the rationality of the choices made at the European and
the global level. The challenges that have arisen have become ever more global in nature and
need to be tackled together, not alone. And this is even more true for Europeans, both at the level
of their individual nations and for the continent as a whole: rich but relatively small; strategically
exposed, militarily weak.
Yet today, for many, the memories that inspired those choices seem distant and irrelevant, and
the  rationale  behind  them  has  been  undermined  by  the  misery  created  by  the  great  financial
crisis of the past decade. It does not matter that we are emerging from the crisis. Elsewhere in
the world, the fascination with illiberal prescriptions and regimes is spreading; we are seeing little
steps back in history.
And this is why our European project is even more important today. It is only by continuing to
make progress, freeing up individual energies but also fostering social equity, that we will save it
through our democracies, with a unity of purpose.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal and
Spain.
See  Study  Group  appointed  by  the  Commission  and  presided  by  Padoa-Schioppa,  T.  (1987),  ”Efficiency,
stability, and equity: a strategy for the evolution of the economic system of the European community: a report”.
See Caminada, K., Goudswaard, K. and Van Vliet, O. (2010), “Patterns of Welfare State Indicators in the EU: Is
there  Convergence?”, Journal  of  Common  Market  Studies,  48(3),  pp.  529–556;  Paetzold,  J.  (2012),  “The
Convergence of Welfare State Indicators in Europe: Evidence from Panel Data”, Working Paper No 201204,
University of Salzburg; Athanasenas, A., Chapsa, X. and Michailidis, A. (2015), “Investigating Social Protection
Convergence in the EU-15: A Panel Data Analysis”, European Research Studies Journal, vol. 0(2), pp. 79–96.
See Padoa Schioppa, T. (1982), “Capital Mobility: Why is the Treaty Not Implemented?”, in Padoa Schioppa, T.
(1994), The Road to Monetary Union in Europe (Oxford: Clarendon Press).)
Mundell, R., “Optimum Currency Areas”, luncheon speech at Tel Aviv University, 5 December 1997.
See  Eichengreen,  B.  (2007),  “The  European  Economy  since  1945,  Coordinated  Capitalism  and  Beyond”,
Princeton University Press.
Real GDP per hour worked.
Reference period is 1979–1991, excluding Italy.
European  Commission  (1980),  “Reflections  on  the  Common Agricultural  Policy” , Bulletin  of  the  European
Communities, Supplement 6/80.
Greece was one of the original signatories of the Maastricht Treaty but only joined the euro area in 2001.
See, for example, Campa, J.M and Goldberg, L.S. (2002), “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices: A
Macro or Micro Phenomenon?”, NBER Working Paper, No. 8934.
Euro area plus Australia, Canada, Denmark, Japan, Sweden, United Kingdom and United States.
Carril-Caccia, F. and Pavlova, E. (2018), “Foreign direct investment and its drivers: a global and EU perspective”,
Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB.
Percentage increase of five-year centred average.
Schmitz,  M.,  Fidora,  M.  and  Gunnella,  V.  (2017),  “The 
macroeconomicanalysis of the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB.
impact  of  global  value  chains  on 
the
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
Blind,  K.,  Mangelsdorf, A.,  Niebel,  C.  and  Ramel,  F.  (2018),  “Standards  in  the  global  value  chains  of  the
European Single Market”, Review of International Political Economy, 25(1), pp. 28–48.
See, for example, Halpern, L., Koren, M. and Szeidl, A. (2015), “Imported Inputs and Productivity”, American
Economic Review, 105(12), pp. 3660–3703.
Schmitz et al. (2017), op. cit.
European Commission (2018), “Fact Sheet”, 27 November.
European Commission (2018), “Exports Mean Jobs, Italy”.
Agostino, M., Giunta, A., Scalera, D. and Trivieri, F. (2016), Italian Firms in Global Value Chains: Updating our
Knowledge”, Rivista di Politica Economica, vol. VII-IX/2016.
Fidora, M., Giordano, C. and Schmitz, M. (2017), “Real exchange rate misalignments in the euro area”, Working
Paper Series, No. 2108, ECB.
Devereux, M. and Yetman, J. (2014), “Globalisation, pass-through and the optimal policy response to exchange
rates”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 49(PA), pp. 104–128.
See Amiti,  M.,  Itskhoki,  O.  and  Konings,  J.  (2014),  “Importers,  Exporters,  and  Exchange  Rate  Disconnect”,
American  Economic  Review,  104(7),  pp.  1942–1978;  Swarnali, A.,  Maximiliano, A.  and  Michele,  R.  (2017),
“Global value chains and the exchange rate elasticity of exports”, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 17(1), pp.
1-24; Rodnyansky, A. (2018), “(Un)Competitive Devaluations and Firm Dynamics”, mimeo.
See Cravino, J. and Levchenko, A. (2017), “The Distributional Consequences of Large Devaluations”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 107, No. 11, November.
Fratianni, M. and Spinelli, F., A Monetary History of Italy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997.
See  Toniolo,  G.  (1990),  “Economic  Problems  of  the  Unification”  in An  Economic  History  of  Liberal  Italy,
Routledge; Study Group appointed by the Commission and presided by Padoa-Schioppa, T. (1987), op. cit.
Diaz del Hoyo, J., Dorrucci, E., Frigyes, F.H. and Muzikarova, S. (2017), “Real convergence in the euro area:a
long-term perspective”, Occasional Paper Series, No. 203, ECB, December.
Adjusted for purchasing power in euro area countries and excluding Luxembourg and Ireland.
Based on a static relationship between changes in the employment rate and percentage changes in GDP for
the period between the first quarter of 1999 and the second quarter of 2015. The period of recovery analysed is
from the second quarter of 2013 to the second quarter of 2015. See the article entitled “What is behind the
recent rebound in euro area employment?”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB, 2015.
See Banco de España (2015), “Competitive adjustment and recovery in the Spanish economy”, Annual Report,
Box 2, pp. 39–63; Vansteenkiste, I. (2017), “Did the crisis permanently scar the Portuguese labour market?
Evidence from a Markov-switching Beveridge curve analysis”, Working Paper Series, No. 2043, ECB, April; and
Sestito, P. and Viviano, E. (2016), “Hiring incentives and/or firing cost reduction? Evaluating the impact of the
2015 policies on the Italian labour market”, Questioni di economia e finanza (Occasional Papers),  No.  325,
Banca d’Italia, March.
As measured by the VIX index (ECB calculations).
See  Draghi,  M.  (2018),  “Risk-reducing  and  risk-sharing  in  our  Monetary  Union”,  speech  at  the  European
University Institute, Florence, 11 May.
European Commission estimates. See Nikolov, P. (2016), “Cross-border risk sharing after asymmetric shocks:
evidence from the euro area and the United States”, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Vol. 15, No. 2.
Dolls, M., Fuest, C., Kock, J., Peichl, A., Wehrhöfer, N. and Wittneben, C. (2015), “Automatic Stabilizers in the
Eurozone:  Analysis  of  their  Effectiveness  at  the  Member  State  and  Euro  Area  Level  and  in  International
Comparison”, Centre for European Economic Research, Mannheim.
Kagan, R. (2018), The Jungle Grows Back, Penguin Random House.
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
