    
PLATFORM FOR DISCUSSION   
Speaking note 
 
 
 
SPEAKER:               Anita Angelovska Bezhoska, Governor 
 
DATE:                    5-7 September 2018 
 
LOCATION:             Vienna, Austria 
      
NATIONAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF MACEDONIA 
 
info@nbrm.mk 
www.nbrm.mk 
    INVESTMENT AND FINANCE, CHALLENGES FOR THE CESEE REGION  
 This  Speaking  note  was  prepared  for  the  EUROFI  Financial  Forum,  2018,  organised  in 
association with the Austrian EU Council Presidency 
   Contributors to the note: Ana Mitreska, Biljana Jovanovikj, Tanja Jakimova and Neda Popovska - 
Kamnar 
 
 
Department: Monetary Policy and Research  
 
 1 
  Investment and Finance, Challenges for the CESEE Region 
 1.  Investment in CESEE – historical perspective and recent developments 
 The investment in spurring growth and supporting productivity and efficiency of an economy 
is  a  well-known  principle.  The  larger  the  investments,  the  higher  the  potential  to  grow.  Yet,  the 
investment function is dependent on many factors such as expectations of investors, the already existing 
capital  stock,  the  general  business  environment,  the  level  of  demand,  technological  progress,  the 
possibility to invent and innovate, the leverage level, and the access to finance.  
Before  the  outburst  of  the  global  crisis,  investment  was  an  important  growth  driver  in  the 
CESEE  region,  though  the  growth  was  not  sufficient  to  provide  for  stronger  capital 
accumulation. Notwithstanding the heterogeneity among  countries, prior to the crisis, investment was 
an  important  contributor  to  the  overall  growth,  supported  by  large  capital  inflows,  which  propelled  the 
productivity of the economies, as well. The solid growth in general, including the inflows of foreign capital 
and  rising  investments,  was  a  combined  effect  of  the  reform  processes  in  these  countries,  and  the 
extremely conducive global environment. Low interest rates, liquidity glut, expansion of global trade and 
global  value  chains  were  global  features  that  supported  investment  growth  in  the  region.  Hence,  the 
share  of  investment  in  GDP  was  rising  prior  to  crisis  (close  to  10  p.p.  in  2008  compared  to  2000), 
reaching around 30% of GDP in 2008, well above the rule of thumb benchmark of 25%. Yet, according to 
the  IMF  (2016),  given  the  easy  pre-crisis  funding  conditions  and  low  initial  capital-labor  ratio,  “CESEE 
would  have  been  expected  to  have  much  higher  rates  of  capital  accumulation  than  what  they  actually 
had”. One reason for this might be that the financial flows  fueled consumption  as well, thus precluding 
stronger growth of saving and investment.   
Chart 1: Share of investments in GDP, in % in 
constant terms) 
Chart 2. Capital flows, net in % of GDP 
Source: Eurostat, IMF and NBRM calculations. 
 
   With  the  occurrence  of  the  crisis,  investment  ratios  plunged  across  the  board,  and  despite 
the more recent recovery, the level of investment in most of the countries is still below the 
pre – crisis maximum. The crisis was accompanied by rising uncertainty, increased risk premium, and 
most  importantly,  sharp  reversal  in  the  external  financing.  The  region  has  been  shielded  partially  from 
 2 
the sudden stop, given the FDI dominance as a stable financing, and the contained bank deleveraging, 
amid regional initiatives (Vienna  Initiative in particular). Yet, some of the countries were also caught  by 
the  crisis  in  the  middle  of  rising  vulnerabilities,  excessive  leverage  in  particular,  which  precluded  faster 
recovery of the investment rates. The level of investment, ten years after the emergence of the crisis, is 
below  the  pre-crisis  maximum  in  the  EU  as  a  whole,  and  in  the  CESEE  region  as  well.  Exception  is 
countries such as Macedonia, Poland, and Estonia recently, where investment pattern was different, and 
the current level is above the pre-crisis one.  
Chart 3: GDP and demand components, 2008=100 
Source: Eurostat and NBRM calculations. 
 At  the  current  juncture,  an  important  question  is  whether  such  slow  post-crisis  investment 
recovery should  be  perceived as  a natural cyclical adjustment, or  are there some structural 
forces  that  also  play  role?    Investment  spending,  in  theory  and  in  practice,  is  highly  pro-
cyclical  and  more  volatile  than  GDP.  In  general,  this  holds  for  the  CESEE  region,  as  well. 
Therefore, there is no doubt that significant part of the observed slowdown in investment demand in the 
CESEE  region  after  the  crisis  is  cyclical  in  nature.  In  addition,  simple  analysis  of  relative  volatility  of 
investment points out to a decline in volatility of investment in the period after the crisis, which could be 
an indication of an unsustainable investment boom in CESEE region before the crisis.    
     3 
Table 1: Pro-cyclicality and relative volatility of investment 
 Nevertheless, the observed slowdown in investment activity is persistent  which might have 
negative impact on growth potential of CESEE region. Investment flows define capital dynamics by 
renewing  and  augmenting  capital  stock,  which  in  turn  is  one  of  the  determinants  of  potential  growth. 
Lower investment also implies faster depreciation and lower maintenance of capital stock. For the CESEE 
region,  data  shows  significantly  smaller  capital  growth  in  the  post-crisis  period  (the  only  exception  is 
Macedonia1). Though the decline/significantly depressed growth in TFP is the key factor for the observed 
slowdown in potential growth across the region, slower capital accumulation also played a role. 
Chart  4:  Capital,  TFP  and  potential  GDP  before  and  after  the  crisis  (average  growth  rates  across 
countries, in %) 
 Source: World Bank, The Conference Board Total Economy Database and NBRM calculations. 
Apparently,  the  region  is  in  need  to  boost  investment  growth,  catch-up  with  the  pre-crisis 
level, and narrow some of the existing gaps. As, not only has investment been lower compared to 
the  pre-crisis  period,  but  also  some  of  the  international  institutions  assess  their  level  to  be  below 
estimated benchmarks, which are consistent with the features and the development level of the region. 
For instance, EBRD in its Transition Report (2015-2016)2 provides estimates for the investment shortfalls 
in some of the countries in the region. The estimates are perceived as conservative, as they do not reveal 
the needed investment level. They rather reflect the investment level consistent with the one pertinent to 
comparable countries. The estimates reveal shortfall, meaning that after the crisis, the investment in the 
                                                           
1 The only exception is Macedonia, given the strong investment cycle after  the crisis, driven by public investments and structural 
reforms in the export segment. 
2 Transition report 2015-2016 “Rebalancing Finance”, European Bank for reconstruction and development. 
 4 
region  is  lower  than  in  the  peer  countries,  in  the  range  of  around  3  to  6  percentage  points  of  GDP. 
Similar  inference  is  drawn  by  the  IMF  (2016)3,  pinpointing  post-crisis  gaps  in  the  capital  stock  in  the 
CESEE region compared to estimated benchmarks, being reflection of lower savings rates in the region, 
narrower borrowing space after the crisis and lower return on investment. This notion is confirmed with 
the data on the real capital stock in the region, as well, which is around 40% of the EU-28 average, with 
the SEE region lagging behind significantly. Though this ratio is rising, yet it clearly indicates large scope 
for improvement.  
 
Chart 5: Real capital stock, per capita in CESEE region vis-à-vis EU28 
Source: Penn World Table, version 9.0 and NBRM calculations 
  2.  Investment financing  
 Many  policy  measures  for  unleashing  investment  growth  are  suggested  in  this  context. 
Boosting  saving  rates  of  the  corporate  sector  in  the  region  by  enhancing  incentives  for  reinvesting 
earnings, rather than distributing dividends, supporting household savings by putting stronger emphasis 
on Pilar II and III pension schemes. Enhancing productivity and hence return on investment has 
been  heavily  debated  issue  for  the  region  for  many  years,  as  well.  Many  structural  and  institutional 
bottlenecks  in  the  region  have  been  frequently  pinpointed  as  hurdles  for  higher  productivity  and 
investment.  Those  are  institutions,  governance,  human  capital,  innovation,  with  the  access  to 
financing being mentioned as an important constraint, as well. 
                                                             
3  Central,  Eastern,  and  Southeastern  Europe  -  How  to  Get  Back  on  the  Fast  Track?,  Regional  Economic  Issues  May  2016, 
International Monetary Fund.  
 5 
Chart 6: National and domestic saving rates, averages 
for 2000-2017 period (% of GDP) 
  Source: Eurostat and NBRM calculations 
 
  When  it  comes  to  financing,  a  matter  that  we  focus  on  more  closely  further  in  the  note, 
important issues come to fore. First, what are the main segments where large investment needs are 
in place, thus requiring priority in allocating finance and alleviating access to it?   To tackle this question 
we  will  discuss  more  thoroughly  the  investment  structure.  The  second  matter  of  interest  is  how  to 
reconcile the current large investment needs of the region, with the already high leverage level, both in 
the private and public sector, as well. This will be also discussed further in the note.  
Structural  decomposition  of  investment  in  CESEE  countries  vis-à-vis  EU  points  to  CESEE 
countries  having  larger  share  of  investment  in  non-residential  construction,  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  in 
machinery, transport equipment and ICT equipment. This structural characteristic is connected with two 
historical  episodes  –  first,  the  transition  process,  when  large  investment  was  needed  to  replace  and 
renew the outdated infrastructure and second,  large  capital inflows in the form  of FDI before the  crisis 
triggered increase in the imports of machinery and equipment goods. On the other hand, CESEE region 
faces  potential  weaknesses  in  the  part  of  investment  activity  connected  with  intellectual 
property,  innovation  and  R&D.  Namely,  in  all  CESEE  countries,  there  is  a  gap  in  investment  in 
intellectual property, which, in turn creates critical support for more dynamic increase in productivity and 
value added, boost economic growth and real convergence. For the whole region, the gap vis-à-vis EU is 
around 9 p.p., for the period 2000-2008, and 10 p.p, for the period 2009-2017, but for some countries it 
is even larger (e.g. for Albania the difference is around 17 p.p. in the share of intellectual property vis-à-
vis the EU share). 
     6 
Chart 7: Investment categories, difference vis-à-vis the EU in the share of the respective category in total 
investment (p.p.) 
 Source: Eurostat and NBRM calculations. 
Another  important  aspect  in  the  investment-growth  nexus  is  the  infrastructure  quality  and 
spending  on  infrastructure.  Do  CESEE  countries  spend  enough  on  infrastructure?  World 
economic  forum  indicators  show  infrastructure  quality  gap  between  CESEE  region  and  EU-28  in  the 
period 2017-2018 - the quality of infrastructure in the CESEE region, is around 4.3 on average, whereas 
the same index for the EU-28 is 5.14. The picture is very similar if one looks at the data on stock of public 
capital, which reflects to a large extent the availability of infrastructure – stock of public infrastructure in 
CESEE  countries  in  2015  is  around  60%  compared  to  EU-28  stock.  According  to  both  indicators,  SEE 
region  has  largest  infrastructure  gaps  in  the  group.  EBRD5  concludes  that  current  spending  on 
infrastructure in CESEE region “are low by historical standard” and that “infrastructure spending needs to 
rise by at least half a percentage point of GDP, unless significant improvements can be made in terms of 
the cost-efficiency of infrastructure spending”.  
                                                             
4 NBRM calculations based on World Economic Forum estimates (2017-2018 edition). 
5 Transition report 2015-2016 “Rebalancing Finance”, European Bank for reconstruction and development. 
 7 
Chart 8: Quality of infrastructure in CESEE region vis-à-vis EU 28 
Quality of infrastructure index (difference in p.p.) 
Real public capital stock, per capita, % of EU-28 
  Source: World Economic Forum, IMF Investment and Capital Stock Dataset (2017) and NBRM calculations. 
 
Complementary  and  equally  important  question  is  whether  CESEE  countries  invest  in  cost-
effective, viable and long-term growth supportive projects. Largest part of infrastructure projects 
in CESEE region is publicly financed (60-70% in transition countries, compared with 15 to 60% in the EU-
15  economies6).  This  is  problematic  because  of  two  reasons  –  first,  public  resources  may  become 
insufficient  for  infrastructure  financing,  given  the  tight  fiscal  constraints  and  rising  public  debts  and 
second, in practice, very often, public investment decisions are not guided by economic rationale which 
might  lead  to  inefficient  and  unproductive  projects.  Improvements  in  fiscal  institutions,  fiscal  rules, 
public-private  partnership,  foreign  financing  partly  in  the  form  of  grants,  improvements  in 
public  investment  management  frameworks  are  some  of  the  possible  “remedies”  that  might  generate 
improvements in the infrastructure in the CESEE region.  
  3.  SMEs’ investment activity and access to finance 
Apart from the needs for investment in infrastructure, as mentioned above, apparently what 
the  region  is  also  in  need  of  are  the  investments  in  more  technologically  advanced  and 
innovative segments, investments that are very often led by SMEs, or start-up companies. In 
order to grow and to be economically productive, this sector  needs stable sources of financing. Without 
access to  finance SMEs  are unable to invest,  which impairs their capacity to  improve  productivity, raise 
competitiveness,  promote  innovation,  generate  employment,  and  contribute  to  economic  growth  and 
development. And the importance of the SMEs sector is continually increasing. According to some studies, 
majority of enterprises globally are SMEs, accounting for approximately more than a half of private sector 
employment. In fact, the latest data on SMEs in the EU, as well as some of the countries in the region, 
confirm the importance of  this sector in terms of the  number of  companies, its share in the total value 
added, as well as in the total employment.  
                                                             
6 Transition report 2015-2016 “Rebalancing Finance”, European Bank for reconstruction and development. 
 8 
Chart 9: The importance of SMEs 
   To  depict  more  closely  the  state  of  the  SMEs  and  the  own  perception  of  their  business 
environment, in the next section we will focus on the results of the Survey on the Access to 
Finance  of  Enterprises  (SAFE  survey  of  the  EC  and  the  ECB).  The  Survey  itself  pinpoints  the 
concentration of SMEs in trade and services (around 70% on average, both for the EU and the region), 
with many of the companies not having export of goods and services in their total turnover (around half 
of surveyed companies). The survey data also indicate that SMEs from the EU and the region face rather 
similar challenges in terms of the main perceived obstacles in doing their business. Finding customers and 
availability of skilled labor seem to be the main issues of the SMEs from the European Union and from the 
region.  Thus,  7-8%  of  the  companies  perceives  access  to  financing  as  the  most  important  current 
problem,  but  there  are  countries,  Macedonia  in  particular,  where  this  percentage  is  higher  (13%),  and 
with a similar weight compared to most of the other obstacles7.   
                                                             
7 Survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE), September to October 2017 
 9 
Chart 10: The most important problems that the SMEs are currently facing with 
(Average 2015-2017, % of the total number of surveyed companies) 
 Source: Survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE), EC and ECB. 
 
Despite  the  fact  that  according  to  the  Survey,  access  to  finance  itself  is  not  the  major 
impediment  for  the  SMEs,  it  is  still  an  important  caveat.  And  going  under  the  surface  and 
dissecting  the  sources  of  financing,  one  can  note  important  structural  features. First,  bank-
related products remained the most relevant source of financing for SMEs compared with market-based 
instruments. The SMEs from the European Union and from the region do not differ much  in terms of the 
main sources of financing.  Around half of the European SMEs and from the region agree that the most 
relevant source for financing are the bank related products (credit line, bank overdraft, bank loans) and 
leasing  or  hire  purchase.  Also,  companies  from  the  region  and  the  European  Union  use  grants  or 
subsidized bank loans and retained earnings (one third of the companies) as source for financing. On the 
other  hand,  market-based  instruments,  such  as  equity  and  debt  securities,  and  factoring  are  less 
considered potential source of financing.  
 Chart 11: Relevance of different sources of financing 
Source: Survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE), EC and ECB. 
 Second, for those companies that external finance seems to be important caveat, the main causes are 
related to the inadequate  collateral, high costs  and complex procedures. Both notions bring to  the  fore 
  10 
the need to discuss the state of play and the potential for financing with alternative instruments through 
capital markets. 
Chart 12: The most important limiting factors for external financing 
(Average 2015-2017, % of the total number of surveyed companies) 
Source: Survey on the access to finance of enterprises (SAFE), EC and ECB. 
 4.  Capital markets in CESEE – potential source for finance 
  Although greatly used, the traditional sources of finance, such as government financing for infrastructure, 
or  financing  through  domestic  banks  of  SMEs  might  be  either  limited  in  size,  or  constrained  by  some 
structural  impediments.  Hence,  these  sources  might  not  be  sufficient  to  close  financing  gaps.  In  this 
context, capital markets can have significant role for bridging the existing gaps. Benefits of 
developed capital markets are well known. They could complement banks as a source of financing 
and could: 1) unlock more investment for all companies, especially SMEs and for infrastructure projects, 
2)  attract  more  investment  to  the  region  through  external  financing,  and  3)  make  the  financial  system 
more  stable  and  resilient  by  opening  up  a  wide  range  of  funding  sources8.  Thus,  capital  markets  have 
potential to foster growth.  
Despite  the  continuous  progress,  capital  markets  in  the  CESEE  region  still  lag  behind  the 
more  advanced  EU  countries.  In  most  of  the  countries  in  the  region,  the  financial  system  is  bank-
based.  Capital  markets  in  CESEE  countries  have  expanded  significantly,  since  they  were  originally 
created9. Despite the growth from the low base, and given the impact of the global crisis on the market 
growth momentum, the capital market depth (listed shares and bonds) in the region is hovering around 
50% of GDP, far below the EU average for 2008-2016 of around 200% of GDP. Similar is the assessment 
of  the  region  on  the  financial  market  development  in  the  Global  Competitiveness  Report.  The  region  is 
positioned in the middle of the scored countries, and the SEE region has the poorest ranking. While some 
of the reasons for the low capital market development might be linked to demand factors (dominance of 
                                                           
8 EU Green paper on capital markets, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52015DC0063&from=EN. 
9  Stock  exchanges  were  established  at  different  points  in  the  transition  process:  Bulgaria,  Hungary,  Poland,  Russia  and  Slovenia 
opened  their  stock  markets  in  1990–91;  the  Czech  Republic,  Lithuania  and  the  Slovak  Republic  followed  in  1993;  Latvia  and 
Romania were next in 1995, followed by Estonia in 1996. Turkey’s stock exchange was established much earlier than those of the 
transition countries, in early-1986. 
 11 
SMEs  that are more prone to bank credits), some of the causes are related to  supply-side  factors.  And 
when  discussing  the  latter  group  of  reasons,  commonly  four  important  aspects  are  highlighted:  1)  the 
role  of  equity;  2)  the  role  of  institutional  investors;  3)  household  preference  for  bank  deposits  and  4) 
regulatory environment. 
 
When  it  comes  to  equity,  a  large  distance  compared  to  the  EU-28  average  is  visible  in  the 
area of financing through local equity market and venture capital availability, with a rank of 90 
and  74  (EU-28  average  rank  is  61  and  55).  Yet,  concerning  the  availability  of  venture  capital,  some 
CESEE countries (the Baltics, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Bulgaria, Macedonia) score rather well, reflecting 
the public support and a favorable regulatory environment. “This is encouraging given the importance of 
this financing channel for start-ups and innovative companies”. 
 
Chart 13: Financial market development, ranking based on the Global Competiveness Report 
     Source: World Economic Forum. 
Equity markets in the region are quite shallow, with a stock market capitalization averaging 
around 15% of GDP, compared to the EU-28 average of close to 70% in 2016. Positive outliers 
in this context are countries such as Croatia (43% of GDP)  or Poland (close to 30% of GDP). Similar is 
the inference when it comes to private equity, which is considered an attractive source  of financing for 
young firms, or companies not listed on the stock exchange. It is a model that enables risk-sharing, and 
fosters management and operational efficiency. The main role of private equity is to fill the gap between 
internally  generated  financing  and  conventional  market  sources,  such  as  bank  loans  and  public  equity. 
Unlike most stock market investments, equity investment enables shareholders to adopt a long-term and 
hands-on approach in their investee companies, fostering sound corporate governance and transparency, 
making appropriate contributions to business strategy and optimizing management. Crucially, however, it 
also  contributes  to  the  transfer  of  skills  and  has  positive  demonstration  effects  in  terms  of  the 
development of local capital markets and competitive market-oriented behavior10. These modalities such 
                                                           
10 EBRD Transition report 2015-2016. 
 12 
as,  venture  capital,  crowdfunding,  business  angels,  are  relatively  modest  in  the  CESEE,  although  the 
same holds for the EU as well, where private equity has a share of around 0.3% in GDP. Debt market in 
the  region  is  larger  compared  to  the  equity,  averaging  around  50%  of  GDP,  which  is  still  much  lower 
compared to the EU-28 average of close to 160%. Yet, dominant part of this market segment is related 
to government securities, while the corporate issuance remains modest. In fact, in most CESEE countries, 
corporate bond markets remain small, or even nonexistent. 
Chart 14: Stock and debt market capitalization 
  Source: ECB and central bank websites. 
  To  recap,  the  region  needs  to  mobilize  finance,  which  amidst  burdened  government  financing  and 
structurally  difficult  access  to  bank  finance  for  new  and  innovative  companies,  requires  further 
development  of  the  capital  markets  and  more  diversified  portfolio  of  financial  instruments.  One  of  the 
key  questions  going  forward  is  where  the  potential  for  financing  might  come  from.  The 
potential  of  capital  markets  is  usually  determined  by  the  domestic  institutional  investor 
base. Traditional institutional investors (pension funds, investment funds and insurance companies) are 
present in all CESEE countries, but mostly in the government bond-market segment. However, their role 
in  the  CESEE  region  is  smaller,  compared  to  the  EU  as  a  whole,  and  there  is  a  lot  of  variation  across 
countries. For instance, assets of insurance undertakings and pensions, as a share of GDP, stood roughly 
at 33% in Croatia, compared to 6% in Romania.  
Chart 15: Banking sector assets and assets of institutional investors (pension funds, insurance 
corporations and investment funds) in CESEE countries, as % of GDP  
Source: ECB, OECD statistics. 
  13 
Another  aspect  linked  to  the  potential  of  institutional  investors  and  relevant  in  the  context 
of capital markets development are household saving preferences. Large part of financial wealth 
of households in CESEE countries  is invested in bank deposits. This is especially the case of Macedonia 
and Croatia (with 55% and 62% of total financial assets, respectively) with most CESEE countries staying 
above the EU average (30%). Subsequently, equity, insurance and pension investments are below the EU 
average.  There  are  some  notable  exceptions  (Estonia,  Bulgaria,  Hungary  and  Lithuania)  with  share  of 
equity and investment fund shares in total financial assets of 52%, 42%%, 40% and 40% respectively. 
Broadening the financial knowledge of households and raising their awareness of the possible investment 
alternatives, might provide support to institutional investors.  
Chart 16: Households` financial assets  
    Source: Eurostat  
 
Even if the potential of institutional investors is large or underutilized, allocating their funds 
to  cover  the  financing  gaps  requires  tailored-made  financial  instruments.  “These  groups  of 
investors are more likely to be interested in investments in fixed income instruments, given their potential 
to  deliver  long  stable  cash  flows  with  attractive  yields,  but  potentially  with  less  volatility  than  equity 
options”. Instruments that can be used for this purpose are: 1) corporate bonds issuance (by SMEs and 
SME lenders), 2) securitization structures (project bonds on infrastructure side and loan securitization on 
the SME side), 3)  covered bonds (mainly for SMEs financing), and 4) debt funds (for infrastructure and 
SME related assets). Given the low level of development of capital market structures in CESEE countries, 
connecting  SMEs  financing  needs  with  the  funds  of  bank  and  non-bank  investors  via  securitization  of 
SMEs loan seems to be viable solution, thus assisting banks in their ability to fund and distribute  a risk. 
Although  in  some  of  the  countries  banks  do  not  face  funding  problems,  SME  securitization  allows  for 
transformation  of  SMEs  loans  that  have  low  liquidity  into  tradable  securities.  This  creates  secondary 
market, for SMEs loans, but also contributes to the general market development.  
The need for deeper and more developed capital markets, to complement traditional sources 
of  financing  and  support  investment  and  innovation  is  common  feature  for  the  region.  Yet 
many  country  specifics  are  in  place,  and  this  makes  proposing  “one-fit  all”  solutions  very  difficult. 
Following  the  findings  of  the  Vienna  initiative  group  on  capital  market  development11,  and  the  way  the 
obstacles and solutions are schematized, several conclusions can be drawn. 
                                                           
11 Report by the Working Group on Capital Markets Union, March 2018. 
 14 
First,  CESEE  countries  must  develop  comprehensive  policies  and  strategies  aimed  at 
addressing  the  financing  gap  in  infrastructure  and  SMEs  financing.  Strategies  should  include  a 
clear  assessment  of  the  role  that  capital  markets  in  general  and  institutional  investors  in  particular  can 
have,  along  with  the  measures  necessary  to  use  the  potential.  In  practice,  challenges  of  mobilization 
institutional  investors  to  infrastructure  and  SMEs  financing  are  complex,  and  addressing  them  requires 
participation of many public entities in coordination with the public sector.  
 
Second, conducive regulatory environment is an important prerequisite for the development 
of  capital  markets.  The  perception  of  the  level  of  investors`  protection  and  the  degree  to  which  the 
markets are fair and transparent are the key factors that investors take into consideration when investing 
in jurisdiction. That is why a stronger regulatory and supervisory environment, including better protection 
of property rights, creditor rights and information, have all been shown to be positively associated with 
higher level of financial development. In this respect, despite the wide country variation, most of CESEE 
countries are ranked below EU-28 average.  
Chart  17:  Regulation  of  securities  exchanges 
(ranking based on 138 countries, 2016)* 
  Third,  regional  cooperation  regarding  market  infrastructure  can  boost  capital  market 
development.  Significant  efforts  have  been  made  to  linkup  the  national  exchanges  and  harmonize 
legislation and regulation across the entire region, without requiring any country to give up their national 
stock  exchanges  or  their  rights  to  regulate  their  home  markets.  The  so-called  “passporting”  framework 
has  been  put  in  place  that  allows  for  issuers,  investors  and  market  intermediaries  to  operate  in  each 
other’s  national  market,  thereby  creating  a  vastly  larger  ‘common’  market,  without  sacrificing  any 
institutions or independence. The cooperation of stock exchanges in Baltic countries is most advanced. As 
part of Nasdaq OMX group, these countries form the Baltic market12. Further authorities` efforts in CESEE 
countries should address several issues:  1)  strengthening existing  regional alliances  of  stock exchanges 
(Nasdaq  Baltic  Market,  CEESEG,  SEE  Link),  2)  foreign  listing  and  market  access,  3)  Central  Securities 
Depositories  –options  for  regional  connection,  4)  Central  Clearing  Counterparties  for  cross  border 
settlements, 5) Creating regional markets through alignment of national legislations. 
Fourth,  the  role  of  international  financial  institutions  should  also  be  highlighted.  In  the  last 
decades, many IFIs have provided immense support to the region as a whole, through finance, technical 
assistance and expertise. For the specific issues discussed, apparently pure finance is not sufficient. The 
                                                           
12 Nasdaq Baltic Market is the common equities market with harmonized trading rules and market practices, single trading system, 
joint  trading  lists,  harmonized  indexes,  single  membership  and  single  trading  and  settlement  currency,  allowing  investors  easy 
access to all Baltic listed financial instruments through any of the exchanges. 
 15 
so  called  “blended”  funding,  which  combines  provision  of  credit,  grants,  expertise  and  advice,  at  the 
same time, probably is the optimal support for sustained development. 
   16 
5.  Conclusion 
Investment was an important growth driver in the CESEE  region before the outburst of the global crisis. 
However, after the crisis, investment ratios plunged across the board with the level of investment in most 
of the countries still below the pre-crisis maximum. The slow post crisis recovery is rather persistent and 
might have serious negative effects on the potential for growth of the region.  
One of the frequently underlined constraints for more rapid investment growth in CESEE region, among 
others,  is  the  access  to  financing.  Along  this  line,  an  important  aspect  is  how  to  reconcile  the  current 
large investment needs in the region with the already high leverage level, both in the public and in the 
private sector.  
Public  sector  investment  is  usually  concentrated  on  the  infrastructure  segment,  an  area  where  CESEE 
region  has  achieved  substantial  progress  in  the  last  two  decades.  However,  indicators  still  pinpoint  to 
existence  of  significant  gaps  compared  to  EU-28  in  this  area.  Improvements  in  fiscal  institutions,  fiscal 
rules,  public-private  partnership,  foreign  financing  partly  in  form  of  grants,  improvements  in  public 
investment  management  frameworks  are  some  of  the  possible  “remedies”  that  might  generate 
improvements in the infrastructure in the CESEE region.  
When it comes to the private sector, the focus has been put on innovative companies, which can fill the 
gaps  in  more  sophisticated  investments  that  can  elevate  the  potential  growth  of  the  economies.  Given 
the  more  limited  access  to  banking  finance  for  this  corporate  segment,  alternative  sources  of  financing 
are  being  explored,  which  requires  concerted  policy  and  private  sector  action  in  further  and  stronger 
development of financial markets and mobilizing available finance in a more efficient way.  
  Bibliography 
1.  Transition  Report  2015-2016  “Rebalancing  Finance”,  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and 
Development. 
2.  Central,  Eastern,  and  Southeastern  Europe  -  How  to  Get  Back  on  the  Fast  Track?,  Regional 
Economic Issues May 2016, International Monetary Fund. 
Winds  of  Change:  Investment  in  Central,  Eastern  and  South  Eastern  Europe,  European 
Investment Bank, September 2017. 
3.  The Western Balkans: Reviving up the Engines of Growth and Prosperity, World Bank Group, 
2017. 
4.  Report by the Working Group on Capital Markets Union, 2018, London. 
5.  Iorgova, S., Ong L.L., (2008), “The Capital Markets of Emerging Europe: Institutions, Instruments 
and Investors”, IMF working paper No. 08/103, International Monetary Fund. 
6.  Capital Market Instruments to Mobilize Institutional Investors to Infrastructure and SME Financing 
in Emerging Market Economies: Report for the G20, World Bank, Washington, DC, 2015. 
7.  Opportunities and Constraints of Market-Based Financing for SMEs, OECD Report to G20 Finance 
Ministers and Central bank Governors, OECD, 2015. 
8.  Report on Financial Structure, ECB, 2017. 
9.  Financial Systems in Western Balkans – Present and Future, World bank, Washington, DC, 2016. 
10.  Wright, W., Suarez, J., Mc Ghee, P., and P., Bax, L., (2016) “The Benefits of Capital Markets to 
High Potential EU  Economies: Analysis of the Growth  Opportunity for  Capital  Markets in Central 
and Eastern Europe, Association for Financial Markets in Europe (AFME). 
 17 
11.  Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises (SAFE), Analytical Report, European Commission, 
2017. 
12.  Small vs. Young Firms across the World Contribution to Employment, Job Creation, and Growth, 
Policy research working paper No. 5631, World Bank, 2011. 
  18 
