Yves  Mersch:  TIPS  and  the  future  of  innovative  retail  payment
solutions in Europe
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the TIPS launch event, Frascati (Rome), 30 November 2018.
 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
Today  we  celebrate  the  launch  of  TARGET  Instant  Payment  Settlement  (TIPS),  a  new
component of the Eurosystem’s TARGET Services.
Since the launch of the euro in 1999, the Eurosystem has greatly contributed to reshaping the
European market infrastructure.
The Eurosystem’s first step was to integrate and consolidate large-value payments. The first-
generation TARGET system, and its successor TARGET2, provided a single platform for real-
time  gross  settlement  for  euro  payment  transactions  related  to  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary
policy operations, as well as bank-to-bank and commercial transactions.
Second,  TARGET2  Securities  harmonised  post-trading  services  for  financial  instruments,
bringing an end to complex cross-border settlement procedures and the problems caused by
different settlement practices across countries.
In  launching  TIPS,  the  Eurosystem  is  acknowledging  the  changing  reality  that  digitalisation  is
erasing the borders between wholesale and retail. TIPS enables payment service providers to
allow their customers to transfer funds across Europe in real time and around the clock, every
day of the year.
Work on developing and implementing TIPS started in June 2017 and the project was completed
on time, on schedule and on scope. We can be justly proud of launching TIPs today and have
good reason to celebrate. Banca d’Italia has been a strong partner in euro area infrastructure
platforms since the introduction of the euro, and continues to be committed to the ever-closer
integration of euro area economy for the common good.
The building blocks for retail payments innovation in Europe
With  TIPS,  we  now  have  three  strong  building  blocks  in  place  for  unleashing  the  potential  for
retail payments innovation in Europe.
First,  we  have  standardisation  and  harmonisation  of  business  rules.  The  SEPA  instant  credit
transfer scheme provides the common basis for the roll-out of innovative end-user solutions for
retail payments. One year after its launch, more than 2,000 payment service providers from 16
different countries have joined the scheme, proving their commitment by following the Euro Retail
Payments  Board  guidance  on  instant  payments.  This  number  represents  roughly  half  of  the
payment service providers and we expect that the other half will follow as soon as possible.
Second,  we  have  a  state-of-the-art  market  infrastructure.  TIPS  is  a  truly  domestic  market
infrastructure for pan-European instant payments with settlement in central bank money. There
are flexible options for interaction with TIPS, allowing different kinds of market actors to access
the platform in different roles. Using TARGET2 as a basis, TIPS can provide wide reach and
scale,  tapping  into  an  established  network  of  over  1,700  participants  and  more  than  51,000
addressable Business Identifier Codes (BICs).
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, we have a sound legal basis. The revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2) provides
the legal framework for retail payments innovation by setting rules for third-party payment service
providers. PSD2 enhances consumer protection and increases security for payment services.
But it is not yet fully implemented.
With these three strong building blocks in place, there is little excuse for not using this potential to
provide pan-European services. Let me be clear: it is not sufficient for banks to simply adopt the
scheme and connect to TIPS in order that their customers may receive instant payments.
And  neither  is  it  sufficient  to  only  provide  the  core  SEPA  instant  credit  transfer  as  a  faster
alternative to the SEPA credit transfer. What is required is to tap into the potential of growing
payment volumes and the opening-up of the payments market to new service providers under
PSD2. We invite all payment service providers to offer solutions that meet customers’ needs for
immediate  (or  nearly  immediate)  payment  services,  e.g.  for  e-commerce  or  person-to-person
mobile payments.
Our  experience  is  that  the  foundations  laid  by  European  institutions  are  often  exploited  by
multinationals from outside Europe. The market for online payments in Europe is not dominated
by European payment service providers but by international providers such as PayPal, which use
the  pan-European  SEPA  credit  transfer  and  SEPA  direct  debit  schemes  as  a  basis  for  their
consumer-friendly  services.  Other  big  international  players  such  as  Google, Apple,  Facebook
and  Amazon  are  also  offering  payment  services  with  pan-European  reach,  some  of  which
involve joint ventures with individual banks at national level. At the same time, Chinese payment
service  providers  such  as  Alipay  and  Tenpay  are  advancing.  What  is  preventing  European
payment service providers from catching up?
The future of retail payments services in Europe
The  way  we  pay  and  want  to  pay  in  Europe  is  changing.  Many  consumers  are  moving  to  e-
commerce and ever more e-retail payments are made from mobile phones. Consumers expect
pan-European services that are safe, efficient and easy to use.
PSD2 sought to facilitate innovative retail payments services by further levelling the playing field
for new players. However, this objective seems to have met with resistance from banks, which
are  taking  a  defensive  attitude  regarding  technical  access  for  new  and  innovative  third-party
service providers. Such resistance limits the ability of European fintech companies to provide
innovative, efficient and customer-friendly solutions. Moreover, we are often told that pressure on
margins  is  increasing.  Some  European  providers  are  following  a  self-defeating  strategy  by
setting  higher  prices  for  euro  area  solutions  than  their  non-European  counterparts  charge  for
non-euro area solutions. But as I have stated before, the current growth in payment volumes may
offset some of the pressure. Furthermore, instant payment solutions are a viable alternative to
cards in e-commerce.
We need to see a shift of mindset in Europe regarding the role of payments. We need to look at
payments from a more strategic perspective rather than focusing purely on operations. There is
no such thing as a free lunch. The overhaul of existing internal systems and procedures required
to move retail payments from batch-processing into the real-time universe is an investment.
However,  in  evaluating  the  necessary  expenditure  for  modernising  payment  service  providers’
internal payments infrastructure, we must consider that it will not only benefit payments but also
all  the  products  and  services  that  banks  can  offer  to  their  customers.  In  a  world  increasingly
dominated by open banking, payments are an anchor for customer relationship management and
a key driver for cross-selling.
To  successfully  compete  with  international  providers  of  innovative  retail  payment  solutions,
European payment service providers urgently need to bring their internal systems up to par.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusions
With  the  launch  of  TIPS,  the  Eurosystem  has  laid  the  groundwork  for  innovative,  customer-
friendly retail payment solutions for the benefit of European citizens. European payment service
providers  must  make  use  of  the  opportunities  offered  by  Europe’s  state-of-the-art  market
infrastructure  rather  than  leaving  the  field  to  international  players.  This  has  nothing  to  do  with
protectionism. On the contrary, as long as they fulfil the regulatory requirements, we remain open
to global players. But we need to address the reasons for the scarcity of major European players
in the payments market. If there is a lack of investment capacity for overhauling internal legacy
systems that do not seamlessly function in a real-time payments era, we should not shy away
from pooling resources and volumes and creating bigger players. Focusing on national markets
alone would be a step backward. We have to think global and seek to develop global solutions
that are based on European open governance and use European infrastructure.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
