      CENTRAL BANK OF NIGERIA 
 AN ADDRESS BY 
 GOVERNOR GODWIN I. EMEFIELE, CON  
AT THE 2018 ANNUAL BANKERS’ DINNER 
CONTINENTAL HOTEL, VICTORIA ISLAND 
LAGOS  
30 NOVEMBER 2018 
     Address at the 2018 Annual Bankers’ Dinner  
Gov. Godwin Emefiele, CON 
Lagos, 30 November 2018 
  Opening Pleasantries— Good evening distinguished 
ladies and gentlemen. It is indeed a pleasure to be with 
you this evening, and to use this occasion to step back 
from  the  day-to-day  concerns  of  inflation,  external 
reserves and exchange rate, to consider a number of 
the deep-seated, long term factors shaping Nigeria’s 
economy. I am also delighted at the opportunity to once 
again  address  a  gathering  of  eminent  personalities, 
which  includes  critical  stakeholders  in  our  nation’s 
financial sector, as well as members of the Chartered 
Institute of Bankers of Nigeria.  
 
2.  Before  I go  any  further  with my  address, please 
permit me,  to specially thank the leadership of the 
2 
 3. 
Institute  of  Bankers  of  Nigeria 
Chartered 
; 
particularly  Dr Uche Olowu, Mr Seye Awojobi and 
their team, for their relentless efforts to ensure the 
success of today’s event. I want to also extend my 
profound gratitude to the Managing Directors/Chief 
Executive Officers of our banks and other financial 
institutions who have found time to be here despite 
their very busy schedules.  
I must not forget to accord honour to whom it is 
due.    Permit  me,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  to 
congratulate Dr Uche Olowu on his well-deserved 
election  as  the  President  and  Chairman  of  the 
Governing Council of this great institute. I also wish 
to thank the immediate past President, Prof. Segun 
Ajibola and the outgoing Council members for their 
outstanding performance, and total commitment to 
the pursuit of the vision and mission of the institute. 
I  sincerely  thank  each  and  every  one  of  you  for 
your respective roles in making this institute one of 
the leading professional bodies in the country.  
3 
 4.  Likewise, I welcome my colleagues from the CBN, 
especially  the  Deputy  Governors,  Departmental 
Directors,  Special  Advisers,  Special  Assistants, 
and other senior management of the Bank who are 
here present. And to everyone here seated I say: 
thank you for coming. 
5.  When I addressed this gathering five years ago, I 
acknowledged that a night such as this should not 
be dominated by excessive speeches. It should be 
a  time  to  dine,  merry  and  unwind  after  a  hectic 
year. Though I am mindful of the need to allow you 
relax and enjoy the conviviality, it will be a great 
disservice to you and to our dear nation if I failed to 
adequately  draw  your  attention  to  key  economic 
and  financial  developments,  both  historical  and 
expected.  
 
6.  Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, my address 
this  evening  is  focused  on  “Strengthening  the 
4 
 7. 
inaugural  address 
Economic Recovery Process in Nigeria”. I am 
pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  share  my 
perspective  on  some  of  the  key  issues  that  the 
Nigerian economy has faced over the past 3 years, 
which includes the factors that led to the economic 
recession  in  the  1st  quarter  of  2016,  and  the 
measures we took at the Bank along with the Fiscal 
authorities  to  support  our  recovery  from  the 
recession by the 2nd quarter of 2017.  
In  my 
to  Nigerians  after 
assuming  office  as  the  Governor  of  the  Central 
Bank of Nigeria in June 2014, I indicated that my 
mandate would be to ensure that the Central Bank 
of Nigeria is more people focused, as its policies 
and programs would be geared towards supporting 
job  creation  and  fostering  inclusive  growth,  in 
addition to key macroeconomic concerns such as 
inflation and exchange rate stability. This idea of a 
people  focused  central  bank  is  more  relevant 
today,  given  the global headwinds  we  face  as  a 
5 
 nation  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  remains 
committed  to  supporting  measures  that  would 
wean the nation from its dependence on imported 
goods; your Central Bank today is more committed 
to  creating  wealth  and  putting  in  place  strong 
policies  for  creating  jobs  for  our  growing  youth 
population; your Central Bank today  is ever more 
committed to promoting a more stable and resilient 
financial system.  
 
8.  Several economic and financial experts continually 
attempt to analyse and pre-empt the policy actions 
of the CBN. To the extent that these endeavours 
are  based  on  rational  expectations,  we  wholly 
welcome 
their 
conclusions  are  incongruent  to  ours.  As  I  have 
always  maintained,  I  am  not  surprised  at  this 
outcome 
those  analysts, 
unfortunately,  rely  on  limited  or  utterly  incorrect 
information.  Let  me  reiterate  that  the  CBN  will 
the  effort.  Notably,  some  of 
since  most  of 
6 
 always  act  in  good  faith,  with  the  best  available 
information and in cognizance of current economic 
conditions,  to  pursue  price  and  financial  system 
stability, support job creation on a massive scale 
and  ensure  a  more  inclusive  growth  in  the 
economy.  After  a  wave  of  scathing  criticism  that 
trailed  some  of  our  past  policies,  many  of  these 
measures  are  today  being  widely  applauded  as 
brilliant 
As 
policymakers,  our  perspectives  are 
typically 
different  from  many  talking  heads,  as  our  data, 
information sources and outlook remain superior. I 
therefore enjoin our critics to avoid being hasty in 
their condemnation of our policies. Some policies 
take time to bear fruit. 
conscientious 
actions. 
and 
9.  Let  me  at 
this  point  briefly  explain 
the 
macroeconomic and geopolitical contexts in which 
the  Central  Bank  and  the  nation  have  been 
operating.  
7 
 A Quick Overview 
10. On 
the  global  scene,  a  number  of  recent 
developments have noticeably impacted outcomes 
and  outlooks  especially 
in  emerging  market 
economies including Nigerian. These include: 
i.  Rising  global 
and 
unfortunately 
interest  rate  due 
imbalances  and  vulnerabilities 
to  sustained 
tightening  stance  in  advanced  economies  which 
heightened 
consequently 
fragilities, 
in 
emerging markets. The Fed fund rate was raised 
steadily to 2.25 percent in September 2018 with a 
promise for one more hike before the end of 2018 
and  three  more  in  2019.  Similarly,  the  Bank  of 
England raised its policy rate in August 2018 for the 
first  time  since  2008.  Some  emerging  markets 
economies, including India, Indonesia, Mexico and 
Turkey have also raised interest rates in response 
to that shock; 
ii.  The  consequent  huge  capital  flow  reversals  in 
emerging markets that led to immense pressures 
8 
 on exchange rates, FX reserves, and sharp losses 
in  the  capital  markets.  Argentina,  Brazil,  South 
Africa,  Turkey  and  Russia  have  already 
depreciated their currencies significantly due to this 
shock; 
iii.  Uneven  fluctuations  in  the  international  prices  of 
commodities including crude oil, gold, cocoa, etc. 
After  hitting  $86  per  barrel  in  October  2018,  oil 
prices have dropped by over 30% as at November 
25, 2018;   
iv.  Profound geopolitical and trade tensions (including 
between US and China, US and Iran, Russia and 
Western economies etc.) which are impacting the 
dynamics of global trade and consequently the flow 
of capital;  
v.  The rising incidence of protectionism, nationalism, 
and  anti-globalization  especially  in  the  western 
hemisphere; and 
growth 
vi.  Uneven 
economy 
global 
the 
of 
accompanied by a tepid short-term outlook.  
9 
  
11. What are the likely implications of these issues on 
Nigeria? And what steps can we take to avoid a 
repeat  of  the  economic  slowdown  that  occurred 
between  2016  and  2017?  Given  the structure  of 
our economy, CBN’s attention is primary focused 
on three factors, including;  
•  One, rising trade tensions between the US and 
China could taper global growth, and by extension 
demand for commodities such as crude oil 
•   Second, how to ensure that Nigeria’s economy is 
insulated from the adverse consequences facing 
emerging and frontier markets, due to rising rates 
in the United States. 
•   Third, what is the likely impact on the crude oil 
market from the sharp rise in US oil production, 
which currently stands at 11.7m barrels per day 
and is likely to rise to over 14m barrels in 2 years? 
10 
 12. As  you  may  recall,  Nigeria’s  political-economy 
experienced  significant  challenges  over  the  last 
few  years  revealing  its  structural  deficiencies 
particularly  with  regards  to  its  dependence  on 
crude  oil,  as  a  major  source  of  its  revenue  and 
foreign exchange, as well as over dependence of 
our  people  on  imported  items  even  when  these 
goods could be produced locally. The 60 percent 
decline in crude oil prices between 2015 and 2016 
helped  shape  the  trajectory  of  our  economy, 
ultimately triggering the economic recession in Q1 
of 2016.   
Road to Recovery 
13. The country’s overdependence on crude oil for FX 
revenue meant that shocks in the oil market were 
transmitted  entirely  to  the  economy  via  the  FX 
traders  who 
markets  as  manufacturers  and 
required forex to purchase their inputs as well as 
goods,  were  faced  with  a  depleting  supply  of 
11 
 foreign exchange in the country. The impact of this 
decline on our reserves was evident in the rise in 
the value of the US Dollar relative to the Naira; and 
a  rise  in  the  Consumer  Price  Index  due  to  the 
increase in the cost of imported inputs and goods. 
In a bid to contain rising inflation and to cushion the 
impact  of  the  drop  in  FX  supply  on  the  Nigerian 
economy, the Bank took three bold steps; 
14. First, The  CBN  tightened  money supply in  order 
contain  inflation  while  improving  yields  in  local 
bonds,  which  attracted  the  attention  of  foreign 
investors. Second, we analyzed our import bill and 
encouraged  manufacturers 
local 
their  raw  materials,  by 
options 
restricting access to foreign exchange on 41 items. 
Third, the Investors and Exporters FX(I&E) window 
was  introduced,  which  allowed  investors  and 
exporters to purchase and sell foreign exchange at 
the prevailing market rate. 
to  consider 
in  sourcing 
12 
  
15. The  impact  of  these  three  measures  led  to  an 
increase  in  foreign  exchange  inflows  into  the 
country;  Transactions  in  the  I&E  FX  window 
reached $24 billion ($6 billion net inflows) in 2017 
and  Nigeria’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  rose  to 
over $48billion at the end of May 2018 from $23bn 
in October 2016 
Foreign Exchange Reserves ($billion) 
 50.0
 42.5
 35.0
 27.5
 20.0
 Jan-16
Jul-16
Jan-17
Jul-17
Jan-18
Jul-18
Jan-19
Jul-19
Jan-20
Jul-20
Jan-21
Jul-21
Jan-22
Jul-22
 
16.  With improved availability of foreign exchange, the 
exchange rate at the I&E FX window has remained 
stable  over  the  past  12  months  and  the  parallel 
market  exchange  rate  premium  has  narrowed 
significantly.  At  the  BDC  segment,  we  saw  a 
13 
 in  February  2017 
significant  appreciation  of  the  Naira  from  over 
NGN525/US$ 
to  about 
NGN361/US$ today. Rates at the I&E window also 
appreciated from nearly NGN382/US$ in May 2017 
to just over NGN360/US$. 
 
NGN – USD Convergence Across the Various Markets 
400.
375.
350.
325.
300.
27/11/20
07/03/21
15/06/21
23/09/21
01/01/22
11/04/22
20/07/22
28/10/22
NGN Spot
NIFX Index
NAFX Index
6m NDF
  
17. GDP:  After  five  quarters  of  uninterrupted  GDP 
contraction (beginning from 1st Quarter of 2016), 
the economy exited from the recession during the 
second  quarter  of  2017.  The  recovery  has  been 
14 
 sustained  for  five  consecutive  quarters.  Though 
the pace of GDP growth slowed from 1.95 percent 
in the first quarter of 2018 to 1.50 percent in the 
second  quarter,  short-term  outlook  continued  to 
strengthen  with  average  growth  projections  of 
about 1.9 percent for 2018 
 
Quarterly Growth in GDP Y-on-Y
3.50
2.00
0.50
-1.00
-2.50
 Q3
2016
Q2
2016
Q4
2015
Q1
2016
Q2
2018
Q1
2018
Q4
2017
Q3
2017
Q2
2017
Q1
2017
Q4
2016
Q3
2015
 
18. The  measures  taken  by  the  CBN  also  had  an 
impact  on  inflation.  Following  a  period  of  rising 
inflationary pressure which peaked at 18.7 percent 
in January 2017, the Nigerian economy witnessed 
15 
 eighteen straight months of disinflation, as inflation 
dropped  to  11.1  percent  in  July  2018.  A  slight 
uptick to 11.25 percent was, however, recorded in 
October 2018 due to rising food prices. 
Inflation Year-on-Year
20.00
15.00
10.00
5.00
Jan-17
May-17
Sep-17
Inflation
Jan-18
MPR
May-18
Sep-18
  
19. Activities 
in 
the  manufacturing  sector  also 
witnessed  significant 
improvement  between 
August  2016  and  August  2018,  as  the  Primary 
Manufacturing  Index  rose  from  a  low  of  42%  in 
August  2016  to  57%  in  August  2018.  This 
development was attributed to sustained supply of 
foreign exchange and stability of the naira. 
16 
  
20. We  were  also  aware  that  in  order  to  ensure 
sustainable  growth,  efforts  must  be  made  to 
address  factors  that  constrained  the  growth  of 
businesses in Nigeria. This led to the set-up of the 
enabling business committee PEBEC, chaired by 
His  Excellency  the  Vice  President.  PEBEC  was 
mandated  to  unlock  bureaucratic  constraints  to 
doing business in Nigeria. The CBN and PEBEC 
worked  together  to  improve  access  to  credit  for 
underserved  Nigerians,  through  the  set-up  of  a 
National Collateral Registry and the passage of the 
Credit Bureau Act. As a result of these initiatives in 
addition to other reforms, Nigeria moved up by 24 
points in the World Bank’s 2017 Doing Business 
Rankings. (145 from 167 in 2016) 
 17 
 
Key Takeaways 
21. The  ongoing  global  tensions  as  well  as  the 
economic recession in 2016 provided us with some 
key lessons on some of the steps we need to take 
if  we  intend  to  improve  the  wealth  base  of  the 
the  nature  of 
nation.  Our  understanding  of 
Nigeria’s domestic imbalances indicates that two 
key factors accentuated our vulnerability to global 
shocks.  The  first  is  the  diminished  total  factor 
productivity in Nigeria due to a low and inadequate 
is  our 
infrastructural  base.  The 
overdependence on imports for both capital goods 
and domestic consumption.  
second 
22. With  regards  to  the  inadequate  infrastructural 
base, I am aware of ongoing efforts being made by 
the fiscal authorities in constructing critical roads 
networks  such  as  the  2nd  Niger  Bridge,  Lagos  – 
Ibadan Highway, Abuja – Kano road network, and 
the rail lines between Port-Harcourt -  Maiduguri, 
18 
 Itakpe  -  Ajaokuta  and    Lagos  –  Kano.  These 
measures  will  go  a  long  way  in  reducing  the 
logistics  cost  of  doing  business  in  Nigeria,  while 
opening up new markets for farmers, traders and 
manufacturers. 
23.  With regards to our overdependence of imports, 
the  economic  recession  triggered  mainly  by  the 
drop in crude oil prices, only strengthened the case 
for  the  need  to  move  from  a  nation  wholly 
dependent  on  consumption,  to  a  nation  that 
produces  a  large  proportion  of  what  it  needs, 
particularly in areas where the resources or inputs 
needed for production are widely available across 
the  country.  This  thought  process  shaped  our 
decision  to  impose  the  restriction  on  access  to 
forex for 41 items that can be produced in Nigeria.  
discourse 
particularly on whether the restriction on access to 
foreign  exchange  for  41  items  is  driving  local 
considerable 
24. There 
been 
has 
19 
  production, with some nay-sayers stating that it has 
constrained  productivity  and  growth 
the 
in 
economy.  Based  on  our 
research 
internal 
conducted at the Central Bank of Nigeria, there is 
strong support that the recovery of our economy 
from the recession may have been much weaker 
or even negative, without the implementation of the 
restriction on 41 items. Our research supports the 
conclusion that the combination of the restriction 
on 41 items along with other measures imposed by 
the fiscal and monetary authorities has helped to 
promote the recovery. Any attempt to reverse the 
course  of 
this  actions  may  have  untold 
consequences  on  the  growth  trajectory  of  our 
economy particularly in our push to diversify and 
restructure 
fact, 
recommendations are being made to the CBN that 
the list of 41 items be expanded to include other 
additional items that can be locally produced. 
economy. 
our 
In 
20 
into 
this  policy 
to  venture 
 
25. Second, many entrepreneurs are taking advantage 
the  domestic 
of 
production of the restricted items with remarkable 
successes  and  great  positive 
impact  on 
employment. The dramatic decline in our import bill 
and the increase in domestic production of these 
items attest to the efficacy of this policy. Noticeable 
declines  were  steadily  recorded  in  our  monthly 
food import bill from US$665.4 million in January 
2015 to US$160.4 million as at October 2018; a 
cumulative  fall  of  75.9  percent  and  an  implied 
savings of over US$21 billion on food imports alone 
over  that  period.  Most  evident  were  the  97.3 
percent cumulative reduction in monthly rice import 
bills, 99.6 percent in fish, 81.3 percent in milk, 63.7 
percent in sugar, and 60.5 percent in wheat. We 
are glad with the accomplishments recorded so far. 
Accordingly, this policy is expected to continue with 
vigor  until  the  underlying  imbalances  within  the 
Nigerian economy have been fully resolved; 
21 
  to 
26. Development finance: In continued recognition of 
our role as an agent of development and aimed at 
ensuring  self-sufficiency 
reduce  Nigeria’s 
the  CBN 
excessive  dependence  on  imports, 
invigorated its development finance activities. We 
have maintained a particular focus on supporting 
farmers,  entrepreneurs  as  well  as  small  and 
medium  scale  businesses,  through  our  various 
the  Anchor 
intervention  programs  such  as 
Borrowers Program, Nigeria Incentive-Based Risk 
Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (NIRSAL) 
and  the  National  Collateral  Registry.  The  CBN 
recently introduced the Real Sector Support fund; 
a  facility  meant  to  provide  cheap  funding  at  no 
more than 9 percent to new projects in the Agric 
and  Manufacturing  sectors;  aimed  at  boosting 
output and creating jobs.  
 
22 
 27. In  the  agriculture  sector,  the  Anchor  Borrower 
that  Nigeria 
Programme  (ABP)  has  ensured 
emerged  from  being  a  net  importer  of  rice  to 
becoming a major producer of rice, supplying key 
markets  in  neighboring  countries.  As  at  October 
2018, a total number of 862,069 farmers cultivating 
about  835,239  hectares,  across  16  different 
commodities,  have  so  far  benefited  from  the 
Anchor  Borrowers  programme,  which  has 
generated 2,502,675 jobs across the country. 
Anchor Borrowers Program 
 700,000
 600,000
 500,000
 400,000
 300,000
 200,000
 100,000
 -
2015
2016
NO. OF FARMERS (862,069)
23 
2017
JAN- NOV. 14, 
2018
NO. OF HECTARES (873,053)
   28.  It is in light of the success of the Anchor Borrowers 
Program  with  regards  to  cultivation  of  rice  and 
maize  that  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  in its 
last  meeting  on  the  21st  of  November  2018 
recommended that the Anchor Borrowers program 
be  applied  to  other  areas  such  as  palm  oil, 
tomatoes and fisheries to mention a few. 
 
29. Our efforts at supporting small scale farmers and 
SMEs is based on our awareness of the critical role 
they can play in supporting our economic recovery 
and growth, as well as in creating job opportunities 
for  millions  of  Nigerians.    So  far,  the  CBN  has 
through its MSME fund disbursed over N100Billion 
to the MSME sector, but we still feel a lot can be 
done.  Under 
the  Bankers 
Committee, the sum of over N60 billion has so far 
been set aside under the AGSMIES fund to fund 
Micro Small and Medium enterprise businesses in 
the  auspices  of 
24 
 the Agriculture and Manufacturing sectors of our 
economy. The CBN recognizes that the greatest 
challenge confronting MSME’s and local farmers is 
access  to  credit,  and  that  to  unlock  the  growth 
potentials  in  our  country;  these  groups  must 
access  funding  seamlessly.  In  response  to  this 
challenge, the CBN will in due course take action 
that will directly bring Banking services to the rural 
communities  through  the  licensing  of  a  national 
Micro Finance Bank, which will have a presence in 
thereby 
all 
supporting  the  channeling  of  credit  to  our  rural 
communities. We will continue to explore ways, in 
partnering  with  the  fiscal  authorities,  on  how  we 
can  best  provide  farmers  and  SMES  with  the 
support they need to expand their operations.  
 
local  governments 
in  Nigeria, 
30. The other day when I visited an unnamed popular 
supermarket  in  Lagos,  there  was  a  big  contrast 
between my visit to the shop 5 years ago, and my 
25 
 visit  in  November.  What  was  apparent  was  the 
huge increase in the number of made in Nigerian 
processed goods that were being sold in this store; 
From locally produced rice to well packaged ready 
to use tomato stew, dried fruits and also cassava 
chips. As I walked round the shop I could see the 
huge potential of Nigerian entrepreneurs, as they 
developed products which could compete with their 
peers  in  other  climes.  I  could  also  imagine  the 
number  of  people  who  are  being  employed  by 
these entrepreneurs to support production of these 
goods.  For  us  to  grow  as  a  nation,  we  must 
continue to encourage these businesses as they 
do  more  than  just  provide  goods,  they  help  to 
sustain the vitality of the communities in which they 
live and work. 
31. Financial Inclusion – Cognizant of the fact that 
close to 40% of adult Nigerians do not have access 
to  financial  services,  the  bank  implemented  a 
series of steps that will help drive our efforts aimed 
26 
 at  building  a  more  financially  inclusive  society. 
Some  of  these  measures  include  the  Agent 
Banking Guidelines and the Shared Agent Network 
Facility  (SANEF),  both  of  which  are  intended  to 
in 
deepen  penetration  of  agent  networks 
underserved  locations  across  the  country.  The 
recent  launch  of  the  policy  on  Payment  Service 
Banks in October 2018, is an additional step aimed 
at leveraging on the distribution networks of non-
bank  entities,  such  as  Fast-Moving  Consumer 
Goods companies, Fintechs, and Mobile Network 
Operators, in providing financial services to under-
served communities. With these schemes in place, 
we believe that over the next 2 years, over 80% of 
Nigerians will have access to financial services.  
 
32. Credit Allocation: As part of its long-term strategy 
for strengthening the Nigerian economy, the Bank 
established  initiatives  to  resolve  the  underlying 
challenges  to  long-term  GDP  growth,  economic 
27 
 productivity, unemployment and poverty that had 
pervaded  the  economy  over  the  past  decades. 
Hence, the CBN established the Credit Bureau and 
the National Collateral Registry to improve access 
to  credit  in  the  domestic  economy.  We  believe 
these measures will help to instil a stronger credit 
culture and unlock access to finance for deserving 
Nigerians, including those who may not have fixed 
assets to provide to banks as collateral.  
 
33. Furthermore, to spur bank lending to high-impact 
sector, the Bank, at its July 2018 MPC, pledged to 
refund  CRR  to  banks  under  certain  conditions. 
Banks  that  bring  proposal  for  funding  of  new 
projects or expansion of existing ones in agriculture 
and manufacturing sectors will, accordingly, qualify 
for  CRR  refund  of  up  to  100  percent.  It  is  our 
expectation that banks would use this opportunity 
to expand credits to the real sector.  
 
28 
 
34. Risk Based Supervision: The recent weakening 
of the Naira, following the shift to a more flexible 
foreign exchange mechanism, impacted somewhat 
on  the  balance  sheets  of  domestic  banks.  To 
guarantee  financial  stability  as  Nigeria  continues 
with flexible exchange rate system, the CBN took 
a number of steps, including:  
o Monitoring  compliance  of  supervised  institutions 
with 
exchange  management 
framework issued in June 2016 through our risk-
based  supervision  methodology,  which  also 
involved reviewing international trade and foreign 
exchange operations of local banks;  
foreign 
the 
o Monitoring the financial position and performance 
of supervised institutions; 
o Assessment  of  the  risk  profile  and  governance 
management practices of banks 
o In the event of major deteriorations on any key risk 
indicator,  we  engaged  with  the  affected  bank  in 
29 
 order  to  mitigate  concerns  and  shore-up  their 
capital base. 
 
35. As I have always emphasized, it is our collective 
duty to ensure that the potentials and prospects of 
the  Nigerian  economy  is  optimally  realized.  The 
ongoing  economic  recovery  requires  the  joint 
efforts and wise counsel of everyone seated here, 
if we must make giant strides forward. The CBN is 
more determined now than ever to remain at the 
forefront of the effort to ensure that the rebound is 
not overturned.  
 Peer Review of Emerging Market Economies 
36. Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  assessing  Nigeria’s 
recovery efforts and performance, it is essential to 
conduct a comparative assessment of our peers. 
Strikingly, it will be discovered that Nigeria did not 
fare  badly  vis-à-vis  other  emerging  market 
30 
 economies  like  Brazil,  South  Africa,  Turkey,  and 
Argentina, that had similar economic experiences. 
 
37. Amidst 
the  growing  challenges,  Nigeria  has 
managed  to  keep  real  GDP  growth  positive  and 
has avoided a double-dip recession in contrast to 
some other emerging markets economies. 
 
38. In comparison and following its 2016 contractions, 
the South African economy recorded a double-dip 
recession with renewed contractions of 2.6 and 0.7 
percent in the first and second quarters of 2018, 
respectively.  In  Argentina,  though  the  economy 
was  in  recession  throughout  2016,  moderate 
upticks which peaked at 1.9 percent quarter two of 
the 
2017  ended 
Argentinian  economy  shrank  by  4.0  per  cent  in 
quarter  two  of  2018,  bringing  the  country  to  the 
brink of another recession. 
recession.  However, 
that 
 31 
 39. The  Brazilian  economy  had  been  in  recession 
since  2015  and  only  emerged  from  it  the  first 
quarter of 2017 with a growth rate of 1.0 percent. 
Since  then  the  growth  has  slowed  progressively 
until the last quarter of 2017 when growth remained 
flat.  However, 
is  gradually 
rebounding  and  has  recorded  0.1  and  0.2 
percentage  growth  rates  in  the  first  and  second 
quarters of 2018.  
the  economy 
led 
 
40. Given  rising  yields  in  advanced  markets,  capital 
outflows  from  emerging  markets  have  increased 
tremendously.  This  has 
to  substantial 
exchange  market  pressures  in  many  emerging 
markets  with  FX  reserves  falling  about  25.2 
percent in Argentina, 9.6 percent in Turkey, and 2.1 
percent in South Africa since the beginning of the 
year.  Also,  significant  currency  depreciation  was 
recorded in Argentina (by 101 percent), Turkey (43 
percent), Brazil (19 percent), Russia (19 percent) 
32 
 and India (16 percent); even as the naira remained 
stable.(-.006%) 
 
Currency against the US Dollar (2018)
Argentina
Turkey
Brazil
India
Indonesia
Russia
Nigeria
0%
 -125%
-100%
-75%
-50%
-25%
 
41. As a matter of fact, a recent Bloomberg data on 
financial market performances shows that Nigeria 
bond  market  remains  one  of  the  most  attractive 
investment  destinations 
the  Bloomberg’s 
Emerging-Market  Local-Currency  Government 
Bonds 
index,  which  covers  major  emerging 
markets  such as Nigeria, South Africa, Argentina, 
China,  and  Russia,  in  the  2nd  Quarter  of  2018, 
Nigerian  local  bonds  topped  the  chart  with  an 
-In 
33 
 average total return of 3.2%  in dollar returns(The 
index  covers  Nigerian  Government  Bonds  with 
maturities from 2019 to 2037) . The total return is a 
combination of the price changes in the bonds over 
the 2nd Quarter of 2018, the interest returns and the 
changes in the currency.  
  
42. Nigeria's dominance over this period was due to 
the stability of the I&E FX rate and the yields being 
high by emerging-market standards. Investors are 
also sure that they can exit their positions if they 
want,  which  has  been  crucial  in  driving  other 
investors into the market.   
34 
  Outlook and Policy Thrust for 2019 
43. Global growth projections both for 2018 and 2019 
have been revised downward to 3.7 percent from 
the  3.9  percent  earlier  projected.  Growth 
momentum in US is projected to remain strong as 
fiscal  stimulus  continues  into  2019.  In  emerging 
markets, growth forecasts are revised downward 
for Argentina, Brazil, Iran, Turkey, and South Africa 
reflecting country-specific factors, uncertainties in 
the  financial  conditions,  and  rising  geopolitical 
tensions as well as higher oil import bills. 
 
44. In  light  of  the  current  developments  in  both  the 
global  and  domestic  economies,  and  based  on 
extensive simulations, the CBN is of the view that 
the  short-term  outlook  of  the  Nigerian  economy 
remains good. We expect that: 
•  Monetary  policy  stance  will  remain  judicious, 
research driven, adequate and supportive of the real 
35 
 to  balance 
is  delicately  set 
economy  subject  to  underlying  fundamentals.  The 
current  tight stance  is  expected  to  continue in the 
near-term,  especially  in  view  of  rising  inflation 
expectations  and  exchange  market  pressures. 
Though we will act to appropriately adjust the policy 
rate in line with unfolding conditions and outlooks, 
the  CBN  will  continue  to  ensure  that  the  policy 
the 
interest  rate 
objectives of price stability with output stabilization; 
•  GDP:  With  favorable  oil  price  developments  and 
continued efforts at driving indigenous production in 
real  sector  activities,  especially 
high-impact 
agriculture and manufacturing, GDP is expected to 
pick-up in the remaining two quarters of 2018. This 
will  be  buoyed  by  the  anticipated  budgetary  and 
electioneering spending in the near-term. From 1.5 
percent in quarter two of 2018, growth is projected to 
quicken to 1.7 percent in quarter three and 1.9 by the 
fourth quarter; 
36 
 
•  Inflation:  Inflation  expectations  are  rising  on  the 
backdrop  of  anticipated  politically-related  liquidity 
injections.  For  the  rest  of  2018  and  towards  mid-
2019  Nigeria’s  rate  of  inflation  is  projected  to  rise 
slightly  to  about  11.4  percent  and  then  moderate 
thereafter; 
•  Exchange  Rate:  Though  the  CBN  has  so  far 
managed  to  maintain  exchange  rate  stability,  the 
current capital flow reversals from emerging markets 
is  expected  to  continue  to  exert  considerable 
pressure  on  market  rates.  This  pressure  could  be 
amplified by the forthcoming elections, especially as 
the political market place heats up. Notwithstanding 
these pressures, the CBN is determined to maintain 
its stable exchange policy stance over the next few 
months  given  the  relatively  high  level  of  reserves. 
Gross stability is projected in the FX market given 
increased  oil  related  inflows  and  contained  import 
bill.  I  will  like  to  make  it  categorically  clear  that 
37 
 “sustaining  a  stable  exchange  rate 
is  of 
overriding importance to us even as we continue 
to put measures in place to shore up reserves”; 
•  BOP: Overall our balance of payments is expected 
to remain positive in the short-term. Hoping that oil 
prices continued to recover, we expect the Current 
Account Balance to strengthen even further. This will 
be supported  by improved  non-oil  performance as 
diversification efforts begin to yield results to reduce 
undue imports.  
•  Supporting  Domestic  Production:  Given 
the 
remarkable  success  that  has  been  achieved  in 
stimulating  domestic  production  of  goods  such  as 
rice,  cassava  and  maize,  as  a  result  of  the 
restrictions placed by the CBN on access to forex  for 
41 items,  the CBN intends to vigorously ensure that 
this  policy  remains  in  place,  and  additional  efforts 
to  block  any  attempts  by 
would  be  made 
and 
unscrupulous 
parties(both 
individuals 
38 
 limited 
the  banks 
to  prohibiting 
corporates)  that  intend  to  find  other  avenues  of 
accessing forex, in order to import these items into 
Nigeria.  The  CBN’s  Economic  intelligence  and 
Banking  Supervision  Departments  will  work  very 
hard  with  the  EFCC  to  expose  and  sanction  any, 
bank,  company  or  Fx  operator  that  colludes  with 
unscrupulous individuals / companies to undermine 
the policy on 41 items. Such sanctions will include, 
but  not 
from 
maintaining any bank accounts for such institutions 
or persons in Nigeria.  
Given the global and domestic headwinds we face 
as  a  nation,  and 
is  being 
experienced  in  the  crude  oil  market,  we  have  no 
other option, as leaders interested in the progress of 
our nation, but to work very hard to spur job creation 
by reviving agricultural and industrial activities in the 
country. If we continue to support the growth of small 
holders farmers, as well as help to revive palm oil 
refineries, rice mills,  cassava and tomato processing 
the  volatility 
that 
39 
 factories, you can only imagine the amount of wealth 
and jobs that will be created in the country; These 
could include new set of small holders farmers that 
will be engaged in productive activities; new logistics 
companies  that  will  transport  raw  materials  to 
factories,  and  finished  goods  to  the  market;  new 
storage  centres  that  will  be  built  to  store  locally 
produced goods; additional growth for our banks and 
financial institutions as they will be able to provide 
financial services to support these new businesses; 
and  finally,  the  millions  of  Nigerians  that  will  be 
employed  in  factories  to  support  processing  of 
goods. If we turn a blind eye to the opportunities that 
are  being  created  as  a  result  of  our  policy  on  41 
items, we will be spelling doom for our nation. We 
can  no  longer  afford  to  depend  solely  on  imports 
given  the  size  of  our  population,  and  the  need  to 
create  jobs  for  our  people.  This  is  precisely  the 
purpose  behind  our  intention  to  restrict  access  to 
forex  on  41  items,  and  I  urge  all  stakeholders  to 
40 
 come onboard, as we intend to be vigorous in our 
pursuit of this objective. 
•  Domestic  Credit:  The  Bank  will  explore 
the 
possibility of leveraging technology to enhance credit 
to  critical  sectors  of  the  economy,  especially, 
recently 
agriculture  and  manufacturing.  Our 
announced policy to refund portions of CRR to banks 
that  are  financing  new  projects  (or  expanding 
existing  ones)  in  agriculture  and  manufacturing 
sectors will be intensified and enriched in the coming 
years. This, we believe, will bolster job creation while 
to  correct  Nigeria’s 
supporting  our  agenda 
imbalances and vulnerabilities. 
•  Open to Foreign Investors: As the monetary and 
fiscal  authorities  continue  to  work  tirelessly  to 
support the recovery of our economy, it is important 
to  acknowledge  some  of  Nigeria’s  enduring 
strengths, which offer significant rewards for current 
and  prospective  foreign  investors.  Notwithstanding 
41 
 the  impact  of  the  recession,  Nigeria’s  economy 
remains the largest in Africa by the size of its GDP, 
with  a  very  well  diversified  mix  of  opportunities 
across different sectors, such as ICT, Manufacturing, 
Solid Minerals, Trade and Agriculture. The Central 
Bank and indeed the Federal Government is open to 
foreign investors who are keen to support our efforts 
at  unlocking  the  immense  opportunities  in  our 
economy, knowing that it offers mutual gains to both 
the  investors  and  the  nation.  Investors  can  be 
assured that their investments in Nigeria would be 
duly  protected  by  the  authorities,  as  we  are  fully 
aware of the various advantages they can provide to 
our economy in terms of capital and technological 
know-how. We hereby reaffirm our commitment to 
investors that Nigeria is indeed open for business. 
Conclusion 
45. Distinguished ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to 
conclude  my  remarks  today  with  the  story  of  a 
42 
 revered Mongolian warrior named Genghis Khan, 
who had a falcon that is exceptionally well-trained 
for hunting. The falcon would usually sit meekly on 
the warrior’s arm and would do everything that the 
warrior  commands  —even  when  no  words  were 
spoken.  Khan  loved  this  falcon  and  boasted 
lavishly about the bird’s loyalty. It could see things 
from the skies that humans could not.  
46. On  a  certain  day,  however,  the  warrior  and  his 
entourage  embarked  on  a  hunt.  Despite  the 
group’s best efforts, they found nothing. They had 
stayed in the forest longer than expected, and an 
irate Khan was now desperately tired and thirsty. 
Then,  to  his  delight,  he  saw  a  thread  of  water 
flowing from a rock just in front of him. He took out 
a cup to fill and drink. Just as he was about to raise 
it to his lips, the falcon plucked the cup from his 
hands and spilled it. Once again, he filled the cup 
and the falcon spilled it a second time. Khan, now 
enraged  by  the  intolerable  disrespect,  drew  his 
43 
 sword, and for a third time refilled his cup. As the 
falcon again took flight towards him, Khan, with one 
thrust, killed it.  
 
47. The trickling thread of water had, however, dried 
up by that time. When Khan climbed the rock in 
search of more water he saw that one of the most 
poisonous snakes lay dead in the pool. If he had 
drunk the water, he, too, would have died. It was 
only  then  that  Khan  realized  that  the  falcon’s 
actions had saved his life. Having impetuously and 
impatiently killed a genuinely loyal ally, a distraught 
and abjectly regretful Khan returned to camp with 
the  dead  falcon  in  his  arms.  He  ordered  a  gold 
figurine of the bird to be fabricated with touching 
words engraved unto its wings. But, it was too late; 
the falcon was dead. The damage is irreversible. A 
loyal  and  genuinely  caring  bird  has  been 
impatiently slayed. 
 
44 
 48. Ladies and gentlemen, this story culled from Paulo 
Coelho’s  book  titled  “Like  the  Flowing  River” 
underscores the folly of intolerance and impatience 
especially when we hastily judge certain actions or 
policies  as  unfavorable  in  the  near-term  without 
due  consideration  for  their  long-run  merits.  As  I 
have  reiterated  in  my  earlier  addresses  to  you, 
policymaking  and  leadership  is  not  a  popularity 
context. Many of us in this room understand that, 
as leaders, we have to take seemingly unpopular 
decisions  every  now  and  again  for  the  best 
outcomes.        
Like  the  falcon,  you  must  note  that  policymakers 
usually  have  a  panoramic  view  of  events  given  the 
enormous  array  of  information  and  data  at  their 
disposal;  some  of  which  could  be  considered 
classified. Again, like the falcon, we are dogmatically 
willing to stick-out our necks for what is right even if that 
would  earn  us  instant  and,  sometimes,  irreversible 
condemnation; or even our heads. Like the falcon, we 
45 
 must be bold to do what is right at all times regardless 
of  whether  we  will  be  harshly  castigated  for  those 
actions.  
Once again, I call on all of us, this evening, to set aside 
our complaints, differences and distractions, and let us 
work  together  to  create  a  Nigeria,  where  balanced 
growth and shared prosperity is guaranteed for all. 
As I leave you to digest the moral of that story, ladies 
and gentlemen, let me take my seat and start digesting 
my meal for the evening!   
 
49. I thank you very much for your attention. And thank 
you once again, for being here today. 
 
GODWIN I. EMEFIELE, CON 
Governor, Central Bank of Nigeria 
 
30 November 2018 
46 
