  
 
 
 
 
 
A turning point 
 
Már Gudmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland 
Chamber of Commerce Monetary Policy Meeting, Hilton Reykjavík 
Nordica, 8 November 2018  
 
 
 
 
Mr. Chairman, honoured guests,  
 
Once again,  we gather here at  the  Iceland Chamber of Commerce’s monetary 
policy  meeting,  which  for  years  has  been  held  after  the  Central  Bank  has 
published  its  autumn  forecast  and,  in  latter  years,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee’s  interest  rate  decision.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Chamber  of 
Commerce for continuing this tradition and for giving me the opportunity to talk 
to you about monetary policy.  
 
The economy is now at a turning point, with a strong upswing and below-target 
inflation giving way to weaker growth and increased inflationary pressures.  
 
Underpinning the progress of the past few years were, on the one hand, a vast 
improvement  in  external  conditions,  which  could  be  seen  most  clearly  in 
improved  terms  of  trade  and  a  surge  in  the  number  of  tourists  visiting  the 
country,  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other,  in  economic  policy  that  proved 
successful in historical context, keeping inflation under control and ensuring that 
the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  was  a  shock  absorber  rather  than  a  shock 
amplifier, as has sometimes occurred in the past.  
 
Monetary policy was successful in bringing inflation — and thereafter, inflation 
expectations — back to the target after 2012, without sacrifice costs in terms of 
employment.  Foreign  exchange  market  intervention  and  capital  controls, 
followed  by  the  special  reserve  requirement  on  capital  inflows  into  the  bond 
market and high-yielding deposits, insulated the exchange rate from the effects 
of volatile capital movements, allowing it to develop relatively unhindered and 
in  line  with  underlying  economic  conditions.  The  advantages  of  a  flexible 
exchange rate therefore prevailed, while the disadvantages were mitigated.  
 
This did not make for an uneventful journey, however, because even though the 
equilibrium exchange rate had clearly risen, it is always subject to considerable 
uncertainty at any given time, and the risk of overshooting was genuine. This 
risk may have materialised to some degree, but had the above-mentioned policy 
instruments not been applied, it would have materialised much more strongly, 
 1 
 with the associated risk of an abrupt correction later on, which could have had 
adverse consequences for economic and financial stability.  
 
This economic turning point stems from a turnaround in some of the factors that 
contributed to the upswing. The global economic situation is not as favourable 
to us. Terms of trade are deteriorating and not improving. The rise in tourist visits 
to Iceland has slowed markedly. Therefore, as compared with the last three years, 
growth in export revenues will ease considerably this year and in the  years to 
come. GDP growth will be lower, as will the rise in our real income as a nation, 
no matter what we may decide about nominal pay increases in wage negotiations 
or about how we distribute such increases. This also means that the equilibrium 
exchange rate of the króna has probably fallen in the recent past, which in turn 
may partially explain the recent depreciation of the króna. 
 
The deterioration in external conditions is not good news, of course, but we must 
place  it  in  the  context  of  the  substantial  improvement  that  has  taken  place  in 
recent years. On the whole, however, this turning point is positive in a number 
of ways. The growth rate of the past few years was unsustainable, and it tested 
the capacity limits of the domestic economy.  
 
According to the Central Bank forecast published yesterday, the landing will be 
a soft one. GDP growth will measure 2.6% over the next three years, close to the 
average level that will allow the economy to grow without importing labour. The 
positive output gap will narrow gradually and close by the end of the forecast 
horizon, which is in 2021. There will be virtually full employment for the entire 
period, and purchasing power will continue to rise. Inflation will rise above the 
target  in  2019  but  then  remain  close  to  the  target  for  the  rest  of  the  forecast 
horizon,  partly  because  the  forecast  assumes  that  interest  rates  will  rise  when 
inflation does. 
 
Some observers might say that this is too good to be true. It could turn out that 
way, of course, but that would be because known or unknown risks not included 
in the forecast had materialised.  
 
There  are  so  many  things  that  could  happen  in  this  regard.  There  could  be 
economic policy mistakes; for instance, if the Central Bank’s real rate declines 
more  than  is  justified  by  fundamentals,  or  if  fiscal  policy  provides  a  similar 
stimulus.  Were  this  to  happen,  the  output  gap  would  remain  open  longer  and 
inflation would be higher. The correction, when it came, would be steeper, and 
the adverse impact on GDP growth would be more pronounced.  
 
The  markets  could  undershoot  or  overshoot,  derailing  the  economy  at  least 
temporarily. External shocks could strike as a result of trade disputes or further 
increases  in  oil  prices,  and  indeed,  the  alternative  scenario  in  the  most  recent 
Monetary Bulletin includes just such factors. Wage negotiations could result in 
broad-based pay rises far larger than the already sizeable ones provided for in 
the Bank’s forecast. The inflation outlook would then deteriorate, which would 
call for interest rate hikes. GDP growth would weaken as a result, perhaps even 
ending in a contraction.  
 
 2 
 But there is always some uncertainty in both directions, and naturally, we could 
end up on the receiving end of positive shocks that improve the situation. But 
under these conditions,  it is  likely that the risk to GDP growth  is  tilted to the 
downside. 
 
In this connection, it is important to remember that we have seldom, if ever, been 
as well prepared for adverse shocks as we are now. Our external assets exceed 
our external liabilities. Our international reserves are close to an all-time high 
and are almost entirely financed domestically. Public and private sector debt has 
fallen steeply relative to income in the past few years. Our banks are robust, with 
high  capital  ratios  and  abundant  liquidity,  and  the  Central  Bank’s  newly 
published stress test indicates that they can withstand much more severe shocks 
than  we  currently  consider  likely.  Unlike  many  other  advanced  countries,  we 
have considerable scope for economic policy to respond to shocks, as Central 
Bank  interest  rates  are  well  above  zero  and  the  government  is  operating  at  a 
surplus and is relatively well positioned with regard to debt. The exchange rate 
of the króna is still strong, although it has fallen in the recent term, and the real 
exchange rate is estimated to be broadly as it was in late summer 2016.  
 
All in all, it can be said that our position is still relatively good, and nothing has 
yet happened to give cause for deep-seated pessimism. 
 
Yesterday the Bank announced a 0.25% increase in its key interest rate, to 4.5%. 
This  rate hike  was decided in  view of economic  developments  and prospects, 
including  those  described  in  the  Bank’s  new  forecast,  and  in  view  of  the 
considerable decline in the Bank’s real rate in recent months, which stems from 
rising  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  One  of  the  factors  the  Monetary 
Policy Committee considers when it assesses the monetary stance is the Central 
Bank’s  real  rate  in  terms  of  various  measures  of  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations. This is illustrated in Chart 1, which shows that the real rate was 
0.8% just before the last interest rate decision. This is lower than in 2013, when 
there was still a considerable slack in the economy. Of course, the progress made 
in anchoring long-term inflation expectations at the target — another term for 
enhancing  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  —  has  made  it  possible,  all  else 
being equal, to keep inflation at target over the medium term at lower interest 
rates than would otherwise be required. But it is questionable whether a real rate 
of less than 1% will suffice for an economy at or above full employment, with 
inflation  already  above  the  target,  with  a  positive  output  gap,  and  with  GDP 
growth that is approaching equilibrium from above. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 Chart 1 
 
  
 
It cannot be said that the interest rate hike took the market by surprise. According 
to the Bank’s survey of market agents’ expectations, published on Monday, most 
respondents expected a 0.25 rate increase before the end of the year. The share 
of respondents who considered the monetary stance too loose had risen steeply 
since August, reaching 40%. And bond market activity in the wake of the rate 
hike did not indicate that the increase was unexpected. 
 
Even so, the rate hike has been criticised by some of the social partners and some 
politicians. This suggests that the Monetary Policy Committee did not explain 
well enough that sometimes it is better to raise rates now so as to avoid a much 
larger rate increase later on. In view of this criticism, I think it appropriate to 
explain this more fully. 
 
In general, Central Bank attempts to keep interest rates as low as possible — but 
as high as necessary — at any given time. What that optimum level is, however, 
depends on conditions, and it changes from one time to another. If Central Bank 
rates  deviate  from  this  optimum,  the  public  will bear  the  expense.  If  they  are 
higher than need be, inflation could fall below target and GDP growth would be 
weaker than it might be otherwise. If they are lower than need be, inflation could 
get out of hand and economic instability could take root. In that case, a much 
larger rate hike would be needed later on. So interest rates that are too high or 
too low do not come without costs to the general public.  
 
In this instance, it should not be forgotten that household mortgages tend to be 
long-term loans, and a majority of them are indexed to the CPI. If inflation is 
kept at target over the long term, these mortgage rates will be lower in the long 
run than they would be otherwise, even though an increase in short-term central 
bank  rates  might  sometimes  be  required.  A  rate  hike  in  the  present  that  is 
consistent  with  current  conditions  contributes  to  lower  interest  rates  further 
ahead. Sometimes this happens very quickly — for instance, short-term central 
bank  rates  rise,  causing  longer-term  rates  to  fall  because  the  rate  hike  results 
immediately  in  lower  inflation  expectations.  There  are  a  number  of  examples 
where a rise in central bank rates leads to lower long-term rates rather quickly.  
 4 
  
In the speech I gave here two years ago, I showed that real interest rates have 
fallen  steeply  in  the  past  two  decades,  both  in  Iceland  and  internationally.  I 
pointed out that the longer inflation expectations remain at target, the longer the 
propensity  to  save  remains  high,  the  more  domestic  debt  levels  fall,  and  the 
longer  we  have  a  positive  net  external  position,  the  longer  this  trend  could 
continue in Iceland. That still applies today. 
 
Last Friday, the Bank announced a reduction in the special reserve requirement 
(SRR) on capital inflows into the bond market and into high-yielding deposits, 
which was imposed in  June 2016. The SRR was lowered because the interest 
rate differential with abroad has narrowed and the exchange rate of the króna has 
fallen. This was fully in accord with repeated statements by the Bank; i.e., that 
the  premises  for  lowering  the  SRR  would  grow  stronger,  other  things  being 
equal, as the interest rate spread narrowed and the exchange rate fell.  
 
When the SRR was introduced in June 2016, capital flows into the bond market 
had  more  or  less  clogged  up  the  interest  rate  channel  of  monetary  policy 
transmission.  As  a  result,  the  effects  surfaced  primarily  in  a  higher  exchange 
rate. Because capital controls on outflows had not yet been lifted at that time, the 
risk existed of an overshooting of the exchange rate, with adverse repercussions 
for  Iceland’s  tradable  sector.  In  addition,  it  was  considered  unfortunate,  and 
actually  unnatural,  that  large  carry  trade  positions  should  accumulate  before 
those  that  had  entered  the  economy  before  the  crash  had  been  released.  The 
exchange  rate  of  the  króna  was  also  rising,  and  rose  even  further  thereafter, 
because of strong tourism-generated inflows through the current account. This, 
of course, had a crowding-out effect on other segments of the tradable sector. If 
this had been compounded by a steep rise in carry trade-related inflows, Iceland 
would have found itself in a more dangerous position, with increased risk of an 
abrupt correction later on and the associated impact on economic and financial 
stability. Because of the recent decline in the exchange rate, this risk has receded, 
and it could even be argued that the risk is currently in the other direction; i.e., 
that excessive pessimism and self-fulfilled expectations of a further depreciation 
in the króna could lead to undershooting. 
 
Chart 2 
 
 
The interest  rate differential  is  still wide, however, as can be seen in  Chart 2, 
particularly the long-term differential, which has only narrowed by 1 percentage 
  5 
 point  (and  much  less,  if  adjustments  are  made  for  CDS  spreads).  It  would 
therefore have been imprudent to lower the SRR to zero now, and furthermore, 
there  is  limited  experience  of  the  impact  of  adjustments  in  capital  flow 
management tools of this type.  
 
However, this does not change the fact that the objective is to keep the SRR at 
zero whenever possible. We have said that this tool should be our third line of 
defence,  after  conventional  economic  policy  (including  intervention  in  the 
foreign exchange market) and conventional macroprudential tools. This is not to 
say  that  the  SRR  is  some  sort  of  emergency  device,  as  distressed  economies 
hardly need worry about excessive voluntary capital inflows.  
 
The capital flow management tool, or CFM, is not a capital control in the sense 
that it restricts or halts certain capital flows explicitly, as was the case during the 
tenure  of  the  comphrehensive  capital  controls  on  outflows.  It  changes  the 
incentives  for  inflows  —  the  shorter  the  investment  horizon,  the  stronger  the 
impact. But this brings some costs with it, in terms of Iceland’s image and the 
effectiveness  of  its  markets,  and  it  would  be  better  to  do  without  the  SRR  if 
possible.  
 
This  prioritisation  of  policy  tools  is  consistent  with  the  position  taken  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). The  IMF has been of the view, however, 
that CFMs of this type should not be applied pre-emptively. This position has 
not been adequately argued, in my opinion. In this context, it should be borne in 
mind that the Fund’s advice to Iceland on CFMs is based on a compromise by 
the IMF Executive Board in connection with the Fund’s Institutional View (IV) 
on this topic. This compromise was difficult and is perhaps  somewhat fragile, 
and therefore, the text of the IV may not be deviated from to any marked degree.  
 
When the report from IMF staff was discussed by the Executive Board last year, 
however, Iceland received considerable support with the application of the CFM. 
Presumably, many saw that the CFM was not being substituted for appropriate 
conventional  economic  policy  (which  the  IV  recommends  against)  but  the 
reverse: it was being used to make conventional economic policy possible.  
 
The IMF does not have jurisdiction in this matter in Iceland; it can only advise. 
That is not the case with the EEA and the OECD, where we still have a special 
exemption from unrestricted movement of capital, and the question of whether 
those  institutions  would view  the  CFM  as  a  macroprudential  tool  or  a  capital 
account restriction has not yet been put to the test.  
 
The bottom  line in  all of this is  that here in  Iceland, we need to  formulate an 
independent  position  on  this  matter,  based  on  in-depth  analysis  and  our  own 
interests.  In  addition,  these  issues  are  garnering  considerable  attention 
internationally  at  present,  including  in  the  wake  of  a  report  by  the  Eminent 
Persons  Group,  requested  by  the  G20  and  presented  in  October  2018.  In  that 
report, it is recommended that the IMF revisit the IV and make it more flexible 
as regards CFMs like that currently in use in Iceland.  
 
 6 
 Honoured  guests:  I  had  not  originally  intended  to  speak  at  such  length  on 
economic developments and prospects and monetary policy conduct, but public 
discourse over the past few days changed that.  
 
I also intended to discuss other changes that, in the long run, could be much more 
important than whether interest rates are currently a few basis points higher or 
lower. These changes fall into two categories. First are the changes that could 
take  place  following  the  Ministerial  Committee’s  decision  this  autumn  to 
commence  work  to  improve  the  interactions  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial  stability  policy  and  to  strengthen  the  framework  and  architecture  of 
macroprudential  policy  and  financial  supervision.  Second  are  the  changes  in 
payment intermediation caused by technological advances, among other factors 
— which, for example, have put the question of a possible electronic króna, or 
rafkróna, on the agenda. I have high hopes for these changes. But discussions of 
them must await another occasion. 
 7 
