Beverly  Hirtle:  The  past  and  future  of  supervisory  stress  testing
design
Remarks by Ms Beverly Hirtle, Executive Vice President and Director of Research of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 2018 Federal Reserve Stress Testing Research Conference,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, 9 October 2018.
 Good afternoon.  It is a real pleasure for me to be here today at the fifth annual conference on
stress  testing  research.   As  many  of  you  know,  I  spent  a  considerable  portion  of  my  career
working  on  stress  testing  issues,  starting  with  the  Supervisory  Capital Assessment  Program
(SCAP) in 2009, through the initial implementation of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and
Review  (CCAR)  and  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  (DFAST)  stress  testing  programs,  as  well  as  my
personal  research  agenda  on  the  impact  of  stress  testing.    And  even  now,  though  my
responsibilities have changed, I remain actively engaged in debates and discussion as the CCAR
and DFAST programs evolve, and as the details of stress test modeling and design evolve with
those programs.
In  fact,  I  want  to  make  this  evolution  the  focus  of  my  remarks  today.    I  will  begin  by  briefly
reviewing how stress testing emerged as a key supervisory policy tool, and talk about how the
original  goals  of  the  SCAP,  CCAR  and  DFAST  stress  tests  affected  modeling  and  design
choices. I’ll then talk about some of the consequences of those choices – in particular, what is
missing or not well-captured in the current approach.  Finally, I’ll suggest some areas where new
research could help push forward the frontier of stress test modeling, both of specific elements
that go into the stress test calculation and of the broader impact of the stress testing programs
implemented here in the United States and elsewhere.  And of course, I need to note that my
remarks today are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
I  believe  that  stress  testing  and  the  CCAR  program  were  the  most  significant  and  impactful
regulatory and supervisory changes coming out of the global financial crisis.  Why do I feel that
way?
To begin, it helps to remember the prevailing environment that generated the first broad-based
supervisory stress tests – the SCAP – in early 2009.  It was a period of significant uncertainty –
uncertainty about the stability of funding markets, about losses at individual institutions and about
losses in the financial system overall.  There was a growing cottage industry in estimating global
and U.S. financial sector losses on mortgages, mortgage-backed securities and other positions,
with  projected  global  losses  ranging  as  high  as  $4  Trillion.     Equity  prices  had  plummeted,
especially for banks, with declines running far ahead of falls in regulatory capital ratios.  As of
September 2008, the tier 1 capital ratios of the five largest U.S. bank holding companies ranged
between  7.5  and  8.9  percent,  well  above  the  then-prevailing  4  percent  minimum  requirement.
Many large banks continued to pay dividends well into 2008, even after government support was
provided to the banking industry via the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), something noted
in the press at the time.    Some have argued that these continued dividend payments reflected
intentional  risk-shifting  from  equity  to  debt  holders,     though  many  institutions  had  stopped
making share repurchases months before,   which does not seem consistent with risk-shifting
behavior.   Alternatively,  in  an  environment  of  considerable  uncertainty,  banks  may  have  been
concerned with the negative market signal that a dividend reduction might send, hesitating to be
the first to take this step.
1
2
3
4
Supervisory  stress  testing  emerged  as  a  policy  solution  to  address  both  backward-looking
regulatory capital ratios and possible first-mover problems facing banks during periods of stress. 
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
By their nature, stress tests are designed to ask “what if” in a forward-looking way.  Stress tests
aren’t  a  prediction  of  future  events  but  rather  hypothetical  exercises  intended  to  assess  the
robustness of a bank’s resources against various potential future bad outcomes.  In this way,
they provide additional insight into the true degree of capital adequacy inherent in a bank’s current
capital position and the risks embedded in its balance sheet, including its ability to continue to
make capital distributions in both baseline and stressed economic conditions.
Further,  by  requiring  banks  to  raise  additional  capital  if  their  stressed  capital  ratios  fell  below
target levels, the SCAP addressed potential first-mover problems associated with banks having
to individually decide to address capital shortfalls – though there was considerable concern at the
time  about  how  market  participants  and  bank  counterparties  would  view  public  supervisory
assessments indicating that certain banks needed to raise additional capital.  In fact, all but one
of the banks required to raise new capital were able to do so, some of them in amounts greater
than the SCAP requirements, suggesting that the SCAP created a “safe” environment for banks
to  enhance  their  capital  positions.  Following  the  SCAP,  the  CCAR  program  embedded
supervisory stress test results into a broader assessment of a bank’s internal capital planning,
providing supervisors both the empirical tools and the regulatory authority to limit distributions in
the face of deteriorating economic and financial market conditions.
After  many  years  of  SCAP  and  CCAR  stress  tests,  the  empirical  approach  embedded  in  the
calculations might feel pre-ordained, but in fact there were many design choices made along the
way.  These include the focus on regulatory capital ratios, the horizon of the stress test and the
calculation of the maximum impact of the stress test within this horizon.  It’s helpful to review
these design choices in light of the goals of the supervisory stress testing regime and to highlight
which banking sector vulnerabilities are well addressed, and not so well addressed, by the tests.
 In reviewing the design choices, it’s also helpful to distinguish between choices about what the
SCAP, CCAR and DFAST stress tests were designed to capture and  how the models measure
key elements of the stress test calculations. 
The first and most significant design choice involved what the tests would measure:  the SCAP
and  subsequent  U.S.  supervisory  stress  tests  measure  the  impact  of  the  stress  scenario  on
regulatory capital ratios.  Other choices were possible, of course.  The tests could have focused
on  modeling  the  market  value  of  assets  or  equity  (similar  to  the  Capital  Shortfall  approach
developed by Acharya et al.   , or attempted to measure the value or cost of debt, or the impact
on credit ratings.  But regulatory capital ratios were a natural choice, allowing the output of the
stress testing exercise to map into the broader regulatory capital regime while addressing the
slow adjustment of those ratios during downturns.
5
The focus on regulatory capital ratios resulted in a cascade of additional design choices.  To
begin, since regulatory capital ratios are based on accounting definitions of earnings and capital,
estimating net income and its flow through to regulatory capital became the focus of the stress
test  calculations.  This  stands  in  contrast  to  approaches  that  concentrate  solely  on  projecting
losses, which were the focus of much of the public discussion prior to the release of the SCAP
results. In practical terms, the net income approach involves recognizing that banks will have
non-credit-related  expenses  and  earn  revenues  even  during  periods  of  stress.    Modeling  so-
called pre-provision net revenue (PPNR) was one of the innovations introduced in the SCAP and
represented  one  of  the  key  challenges  in  that  exercise  –  and,  I  will  argue,  is  a  continuing
challenge today.
Given the choice to model net income and regulatory capital ratios, another set of design choices
concerns the horizon over which net income is calculated and how cumulative changes in net
income over this horizon are incorporated into regulatory capital ratios.  The SCAP assumed a
two-year forward horizon, while the subsequent CCAR and DFAST stress tests have assumed a
9-quarter  forward  horizon.     Other  supervisory  stress  test  regimes  have  made  different
assumptions – for instance, the European stress tests use a three-year forward horizon.     An
6
7
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
alternative choice would be to project losses and income over the full lifetime of a bank’s loans
and other assets.  Estimating lifetime losses on particular fixed portfolios of loans and securities
was arguably the prevalent approach during the financial crisis period.     But in a stress testing
context, the lifetime loss approach presents practical difficulties given the varying maturities of
different types of assets, as well as the greater uncertainty inherent in more distant future points. 
At  the  time  of  the  SCAP,  we  judged  that  a  two-year  horizon  was  long  enough  to  capture
significant losses while remaining within what could reasonably be projected conditional on the
9
macroeconomic scenario.
8
10
Closely  related  to  the  scenario  horizon  question  is  how  cumulative  losses  and  revenues  are
incorporated to calculate post-stress capital ratios.  The DFAST and CCAR stress tests adopt a
“walk-through-time” approach, in which net income and capital ratios are calculated on a quarter-
by-quarter basis throughout the stress test horizon.
   An alternative approach would be to apply
cumulative losses and revenues in a single, instantaneous shock – this was what was done in
the SCAP.  While the two approaches might be assumed to produce roughly consistent results,
the walk-through-time approach may better capture true vulnerabilities, especially in cases where
negative net income quarters come early in the stress test horizon but revenues accrue most
strongly  in  subsequent  quarters.    The  instantaneous  shock  approach  implicitly  recognizes
revenues from later in the horizon as offsets to losses that occur early in the horizon and thus
may overstate true capital resources. The tradeoff is that the walk-through-time approach implies
a degree of precision about the quarter-by-quarter pattern of losses and revenues that might be
beyond the capabilities of existing modeling technology (this was the judgment at the time of the
SCAP).
But  the  walk-through-time  approach  requires  further  assumptions,  particularly  regarding  the
evolution of the balance sheet.  These assumptions range from how to capture maturing loans
and securities; what to assume about prepayments; what new lending occurs over the horizon
(including replacement of maturing or prepaid positions); and whether to assume that the bank is
actively managing its exposures by additional hedging, changes in the credit composition of its
portfolios, or restriction of credit supply. 
Although  some  of  the  implementation  details  differ,  the  SCAP  and  DFAST/CCAR  supervisory
stress tests made broadly similar assumptions on these issues.  The guiding assumption is that
a  bank’s  balance  sheet  and  the  nature  of  its  exposures  do  not  change  over  the  stress  test
horizon.  The supervisory estimates do not embed behavioral responses to the stress scenario,
including  additional  risk  mitigation  or  changes  in  business  strategy.
      Further,  maturing
positions  are  assumed  to  be  replaced  on  a  like-for-like  basis,  maintaining  the  overall  credit
characteristics  of  the  starting-date  portfolios.
    Importantly,  banks  are  assumed  to  maintain
credit supply even as economic conditions in the hypothetical scenario deteriorate.  This is a
policy judgment reflecting the objectives of the supervisory stress test regime.
  The implication
of these choices is that the stress test results are conditional not just on the stress scenario but
also on the policy choices embedded in the exercise, rather than being an historically unbiased
projection of banks’ behavior under stressed economic and financial market conditions.
11
12
13
These assumptions have been implemented in different ways in different supervisory stress test
exercises:  in SCAP, the balance sheet was assumed to be fixed over the stress test horizon; in
the recent DFAST and CCAR stress tests, supervisory models have been used (these models
actually tend to result in growth in the balance sheet over the stress test horizon)
 ; and in the
currently proposed Stress Capital Buffer (SCB) approach, the balance sheet would once again
be held fixed.
14
My discussion thus far has focused on what the stress tests measure. But there is a second set
of  design  choices  about how  the  stress  scenario  impacts  will  be  modeled.    To  begin,  capital
ratios  are  measured  separately  for  individual  institutions,  with  no  attempt  to  capture  dynamic
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
interactions,  spillovers  or  specific  cross-firm  exposures.  Similarly,  outcomes  for  the  banking
sector do not interact dynamically with the macroeconomic scenarios, which are inputs to the
calculations. As a result, the calculations are “stand alone” in the sense that the outcomes for
any individual institution are independent of those for others in the set of stress-tested firms. 
Results for the banking system are therefore simply the sum of results for individual institutions,
rather than capturing interactions among them.
15
The stand-alone approach reflects the microprudential objectives of the various U.S. supervisory
stress test programs, along with practical considerations.  While the SCAP and CCAR/DFAST
stress tests programs have strong macroprudential elements  , in each case the results have
also  been  used  to  make  firm-specific  supervisory  judgments  about  capital  adequacy.    This
individual firm application pushes towards measurement approaches that capture more detailed,
firm-specific characteristics. At the same time, fully dynamic models that capture interactions
and  exposures  among  firms  or  that  build  in  feedback  from  banking  sector  outcomes  to  the
macroeconomic  scenario  can  be  informationally  demanding,  computationally  intensive  and,  at
the  stage  of  model  development  prevailing  during  the  SCAP  and  early  phases  of  the
CCAR/DFAST  regime,  generally  would  have 
level,  “industry  average”
assumptions about the performance of banks under the hypothetical stressed conditions.  Thus,
the  stand  alone  approach  was  in  many  ways  the  only  practical  choice  at  the  time  the  initial
supervisory stress tests were conducted.
involved  higher 
A  final  set  of  design  choices  affecting  how  stressed  capital  ratios  are  measured  involves  the
actual models that produce the estimates of net income and capital.  The models used in the
CCAR and DFAST supervisory stress tests are developed and implemented by supervisors –
they are almost entirely independent of stress test models used by banks.  This is something
that  has  evolved  over  time.  The  SCAP  results  were  based  on  a  variety  of  sources,  including
projections  made  by  the  banks,  simple  supervisory  models,  and  historical  data  on  bank
performance.  The  blending  of  sources  reflected  that  the  SCAP  was  the  first  broad-based
supervisory stress testing program, conducted in a crisis environment, with significant learning
along the way.  
Over time, supervisory estimates have become increasingly independent from the projections
made by banks.  Supervisors and economists in the Federal Reserve System have developed
models  to  capture  the  impact  of  the  stress  scenarios  on  various  elements  of  net  income,
including different categories of loans and securities, interest and non-interest income, non-credit
expenses and balance sheet evolution, as well as the flow through of net income to regulatory
capital.  This  was  a  policy  choice  intended  to  provide  consistency  of  treatment  across  banks
involved in the stress tests and to counteract any incentives banks might have to understate the
impact of the stress scenario.  Bank-specific elements – which, as noted above, are critical to
the  microprudential  policy  objectives  of  the  CCAR  and  DFAST  programs  –  are  introduced  by
using detailed data provided by each participating institution.  Thus, results for individual banks
vary  based  on  the  characteristics  of  their  balance  sheet  and  business  focus,  but  not  due  to
differences in the way particular net income or capital elements are modeled.
Other  choices  are  possible,  of  course,  principally  the  choice  to  make  greater  use  of  bank-
generated  stress  test  results  as  a  way  of  capturing  institution-specific  factors,  as  is  done  in
supervisory stress testing programs in some other jurisdictions.  The European stress tests, for
instance,  are  based  on  estimates  made  by  the  participating  banks,  subject  to  a  variety  of
constraints on modeling assumptions and detailed review by supervisors.
16
What I hope you take away from this review of the what and the how of stress testing is that the
SCAP, CCAR and DFAST programs have involved a series of inter-connected design choices,
most of which were intended to address the objectives of the stress test exercises, but none of
which were inevitable or pre-ordained.  Collectively, these design choices have implications for
what the stress tests capture, as well as what they miss. I want to share a few thoughts about
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the latter before turning to some suggestions for how additional research could help.
The most obvious place to start discussion of “what’s missing?” is to note that the SCAP, CCAR
and DFAST programs are by design capital stress tests and do not directly assess other areas
of  institutional  or  financial  sector  vulnerability,  such  as  liquidity,  funding  or  firesale  risks.    The
current supervisory stress testing regime does address these risks indirectly, to the extent that a
banking sector with more robust capitalization is less likely to experience liquidity stresses, runs
and the resulting firesales.  And, through the Federal Reserve’s Supervisory Liquidity Analysis
and  Review  (CLAR)  program,  large  complex  banking  companies  are  subject  to  separate
supervisory stress testing of their liquidity resources. But the current regime does not explicitly
integrate capital and liquidity stress testing at the firm level, nor does it attempt to assess the
probability or impact of a firesale of banking sector assets.  Nor, given the focus on capital, does
the  regime  address  firm-specific  or  systemic  issues  related  to  resolution,  when  the  shock  to
capital is large enough that the bank can no longer survive. 
In large part, the focus on individual institutions – the “stand-alone” design choice – accounts for
this outcome.  As already noted, the CCAR/DFAST stress tests do not incorporate cross-bank
exposures in a dynamic way, nor is there feedback between the outcomes for the banking sector
and the macroeconomic scenario.  A stress testing regime that incorporated these feedbacks,
including the potential for liquidity pressures, bank runs, and firesale risk, would be considerably
more  complex  to  implement,  and  would  likely  involve  a  greater  degree  of  abstraction  and
simplification – and thus less “precision” – than the current supervisory capital stress tests. 
In  that  regard,  the  drive  for  precision  and  accuracy  at  the  individual  institution  level  –  and  the
resulting complexity of the supervisory models and extensive firm-specific data inputs needed to
run  the  models  –  has  created  other  challenges.    Perhaps  the  most  notable  of  these  is  that
generating the supervisory projections is resource- and time-intensive, which limits the number
of scenarios that can be assessed during any particular CCAR cycle.  Some have suggested
that  stress  testing  would  be  more  effective  if  many  supervisory  scenarios  were  examined,
instead of just a few.  Any individual scenario could miss important risk exposures at individual
banks  or  in  the  sector  as  a  whole.    Turning  that  thought  around,  a  single  scenario  might  not
uncover true capital vulnerabilities at all institutions.  The bank-generated scenarios that are part
of  the  CCAR  program  are  certainly  an  important  channel  to  address  concerns  about
idiosyncratic  risk,  as  banks  are  meant  to  self-identify  the  scenarios  that  would  be  especially
stressful for them.  But running multiple common supervisory scenarios could provide a more
robust  assessment  of  the  capital  strength  of  the  broader  banking  industry,  at  least  as
represented by the firms taking part in the CCAR and DFAST programs.
How  can  research  help  address  these  issues  and,  more  generally,  improve  the  overall
supervisory  stress  testing  regime?    I  want  to  suggest  two  general  areas  of  research  –  one
tactical and the other much bigger picture and strategic. 
The tactical area is research that helps improve supervisory models.  First, developing additional
ways of projecting revenues and non-credit expenses in stressed environments is a particularly
ripe area for additional work, in my view.  As I noted, an important innovation in the SCAP was the
recognition  that  a  comprehensive  stress  test  focused  on  net  income  needed  to  incorporate
projections of interest and non-interest income and non-interest expense.  While a number of
models already existed for making such projections – for instance, those used by banks in their
budgeting  and  planning  processes  –  these  were  nearly  all  calibrated  to  produce  projections
assuming business as usual conditions, rather than the stressed environment assumed in the
SCAP.  The SCAP PPNR projections were thus based on stylized supervisory models that used
available historical data on bank performance during recessions.  Since then, the supervisory
PPNR models have become considerably more sophisticated, but at their heart, they continue to
rely  on  historical  outcomes  for  revenues  and  expenses,  rather  than  fully  incorporating  the
fundamental drivers of those outcomes at the business line level.  Additional research and data
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
collection  on  these  fundamental  drivers  and  their  performance  under  stress  could  make  the
PPNR projections more robust to changing business strategies and focus.
A second tactical research area concerns measuring model risk.  To begin, how do we assess
errors  from  models  intended  to  capture  performance  under  stressed  conditions  when  those
conditions  have  not  yet  been  realized  and  might  not  be  in  the  historical  data?    How  can  we
assess  the  uncertainty  or  margin  of  error  around  loss  and  revenue  projections  derived  from
models that can be quite complex, often involving multiple estimation steps?  Further, since the
final stress test calculations are derived from the combination of projections from many different
(often  multi-step)  models,  how  do  we  assess  the  error  around  the  ultimate  calculation  of
stressed  capital  ratios?    How  do  we  measure  correlation  in  model  errors  in  a  tractable  and
practical way?  How much model risk owes to the decision to develop complex models for many
individual  pieces  of  the  net  income  and  regulatory  capital  ratio  calculations  instead  of  using
simpler, “top down” estimation approaches?
A  final  tactical  research  area  involves  this  last  point  –  the  role  of  simpler,  easier  to  estimate
models of net income and its key components.  Federal Reserve modeling teams have already
developed a set of these “benchmark” models that produce loss and revenue estimates as a
comparison  to  the  projections  from  the  more  sophisticated  and  complex  production  models. 
Creating more of these models – including multiple benchmarks for an individual loss, expense
or revenue component, benchmarks that cover the full range of detailed net income elements,
and benchmarks at higher levels of aggregation – would enable more robust assessments of
supervisory results both across institutions and over time.  Further, growing deviations between
benchmark and production projections could highlight emerging (or declining) areas of risk.  In
this regard, a related area of research could address optimal ways for supervisory to assess the
signal  when  benchmark  and  production  model  results  deviate  significantly  from  one  another.
Finally,  these  simpler  models  could  potentially  form  the  basis  of  a  more  dynamic,  system-
focused stress test analysis that builds in the linkages and feedbacks not currently captured in
the CCAR and DFAST stress testing programs. 
This is a short list of what I see as some important tactical issues in supervisory stress test
modeling.    But  I  also  want  to  highlight  some  bigger  picture  issues  where  additional  research
could help guide the evolution of the supervisory stress testing regime.  Recall that I framed my
discussion  by  arguing  that  supervisory  stress  testing  emerged  from  the  experience  of  the
financial crisis to address both the backward-looking nature of regulatory capital requirements
and  potential  first-mover  problems  that  an  individual  bank  might  face  in  cutting  dividends  or
raising new capital during periods of emerging stress.  If that’s the case, how well has the stress
testing  regime,  as  incorporated  into  the  SCAP  and  now  the  CCAR  and  proposed  Stressed
Capital Buffer approaches, addressed these problems?  Is the approach working?  Does it stand
up?
It is easy to see that banks have more regulatory capital now than before the financial crisis. 
There  is  a  growing  body  of  literature  that  examines  the  impact  of  stress  testing  and  other
changes  to  regulatory  capital  requirements  (Basel  2.0,  2.5  and  3.0)  on  lending  to  various
categories of borrowers.  This is an important area of research, but in my view, it is somewhat
incomplete  in  its  focus.    To  begin,  studies  that  focus  on  lending  by  banks  participating  in  the
CCAR/DFAST  stress  tests  ignore  the  possibility  of  substitution  of  this  activity  to  non-stress-
tested banks or to non-banks.  This substitution effect could have significant consequences for
both current economic activity and for systemic risk, channels that are important to understand in
assessing the full impact of the programs.  Some studies have looked more broadly at these
substitution  effects,  but  more  work  here  –  especially  substitution  into  the  non-bank  sector  –
would be very helpful.
Further,  examining  how  lending  has  been  impacted  in  the  current  economic  environment  of
strong economic activity does not quite provide the full picture, as it does not address whether
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
these programs will be successful in mitigating spillovers, credit contractions and other negative
outcomes during periods of stress.  In assessing the costs and benefits of stress testing and
other post-crisis regulations, it seems critical to assess not just current impact but outcomes
over the cycle – something that is a challenge during a period of recovery and growth.  
A  related  set  of  questions  concerns  how  stress  testing  affects  the  cyclicality  of  capital
requirements  and  what  degree  of  cyclicality  is  appropriate.    The  Basel  countercyclical  capital
buffer is the primary supervisory tool to implement regulatory capital requirements that vary over
the credit cycle, but stress testing has cyclical elements as well.  Both stress scenario design
and the starting condition of banks’ balance sheets – the credit characteristics of the loan and
securities  portfolios,  the  extent  of  currently  non-performing  loans,  exposures  from  trading  and
counterparty positions – can result in differences in stress test severity over the cycle.  What is
the  optimal  degree  of  cyclicality  for  the  stress  testing  regime?  How  does  cyclicality  of  stress
testing interact with other cyclical elements, such as the countercyclical capital buffer and the
incoming current expected credit loss (CECL) approach to loan loss provisioning?  How should
the piece fit together?
17
Finally, one concern that has been raised about the Federal Reserve’s approach to stress testing
and integration into the CCAR program is that of “model monoculture” – the idea that banks will
be incented to develop models that mimic the Fed’s models rather than developing their own
independent approaches.
      Significant  commonality  in  modeling  approaches  in  the  banking
system could result in banks adopting similar risk exposures and hedging techniques, exposing
the sector to additional systemic risk and potential future instability. How do we measure this
risk?    What  should  we  think  about  differences  (and  similarities)  between  bank-generated  and
supervisory  stress  test  results,  both  for  a  particular  stress  test  cycle  and  over  time?    What
disclosure  and  transparency  policies  about  supervisory  models  can  address  these  concerns,
while still supporting insight and credibility into the DFAST and CCAR stress testing programs?
These  are  big  questions  to  which  I  do  not  have  answers.    But  they  are  the  questions  that
challenge policymakers as the regulatory and supervisory regime put in place following the crisis
is  re-examined  and,  appropriately,  evolves  in  the  wake  of  that  re-examination.   A  disciplined
analytical approach to these topics is critical in weighing future design choices, such as those
made during the initial implementation of SCAP, CCAR and DFAST stress testing.  Research on
these topics could make substantial and meaningful contributions.
I appreciate the opportunity to talk about these issues and hope that my discussion spurs some
ideas and new research.  Thank you.
1234567891011121314151617
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
International  Monetary 
www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2015/09/28/04/53/sores042109c
“Global 
Financial 
Fund. 
 Stability  Report.” 
 April 
2009. 
David S. Scharfstein and Jeremy C. Stein. “This Bailout Doesn’t Pay Dividends.” The New York Times. October
21, 2008.
Viral V. Acharya, Irvind Gujral, Nirupama Kulkarni and Hyun Song Shin. “Dividends and Bank Capital in the
Financial Crisis of 2007–2009,” NBER Working Papers 16896, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
Beverly  Hirtle.  “Bank  Holding  Company  Dividends  and  Repurchases  during  the  Financial  Crisis.”  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 666, March 2014.
Viral Acharya,  Robert  Engel  and  Matthew  Richardson.  “Capital  shortfall:    a  new  approach  to  ranking  and
regulating system risk.” American Economic Review, 102 (3) (2012), pp. 59–64.
The  9-quarter,  rather  than  two  year,  horizon  provides  a  two  year  forward  horizon  after  the  one-quarter  gap
between the “as of” date of the stress test and when robust data on banks’ balance sheets, off-balance sheet
exposures, and income are available.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
European  Banking  Authority.  “2018  EU-Wide  Stress  Test:    Methodological  Note.”  November  17,  2017. 
www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/2106643/2018+EU-wide+stress+test+-+Methodological+Note.pdf
for 
See, 
www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2015/09/28/04/53/sores042109c
instance, 
International  Monetary  Fund. Global  Financial  Stability  Report.  April  2009.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2009. “Supervisory Capital Assessment Program:  Overview
of Results.”  May 7, 2009. www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/files/bcreg20090507a1.pdf
The exception to this approach is for the global market shock on trading and counterparty positions, which is
assumed to occur instantaneously in a single quarter. 
Sales, purchases and acquisitions that have been contractually agreed by but not consummated by the start of
the stress test are incorporated into the projections, however.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. “Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2018: Supervisory Stress Test
Methodology  and  Results.”    June  2018. www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2018-dfast-methodology-
results-20180621.pdf.
Daniel K. Tarullo. “Stress Testing after Five Years.” Remarks at the Federal Reserve’s Third Annual Stress
Testing Symposium. June 24, 2014.  www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/tarullo20140625a.htm. 
In the initial years of CCAR and DFAST stress testing, balance sheet projections made by the banks were used
in the supervisory estimates.
Beverly  Hirtle,  “Structural  and  Cyclical  Macroprudential  Objectives  in  Supervisory  Stress  Testing.”  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.  June 22, 2018. www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2018/hir180622
European  Banking  Authority.  “2018  EU-Wide  Stress  Test:    Methodological  Note.”  November  17,  2017. 
www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/2106643/2018+EU-wide+stress+test+-+Methodological+Note.pdf
Til Schuermann. “The Fed’s Stress Tests Add Risk to the Financial System.”  Wall Street Journal. March 19,
2013. www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/files/bcreg20090507a1.pdf
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
