REMARKS  BY  JAVIER  GUZMÁN  CALAFELL,  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO,  AT  THE  “POLICY  DIALOGUE:  GLOBAL  FINANCE 
EXPLORATION”. 
INTERNATIONAL  FINANCE  FORUM  2018  ANNUAL 
CONFERENCE “NEW GLOBALISATION: A PATH TO THE FUTURE”. Guangzhou, 
China, November 24, 2018.1 
Let  me  start  by  expressing  my  appreciation  to  the  organizers  for  the 
opportunity to participate in this 2018 edition of the IFF Annual Conference. 
Following  a  period  of  strong  inflows  in  2017  and  early  2018,  nonresident 
portfolio  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  started  to 
reverse  in  late-April  this  year,  with  bond  and  equity  fund  withdrawals 
accumulating to date about US$28 billion. This has responded to a spike in risk 
aversion, reflected in a series of waves of uncertainty over the year in response 
to  a  combination  of  developments.  The  latter  include  upward-trending 
interest  rates  in  the  US,  a  surge  in  trade-related  tensions,  geopolitical 
developments, a deceleration of the Chinese economy, the decline in key stock 
markets, heightened political and policy uncertainty in a number of EMEs, as 
well as sharp declines in oil prices to levels not seen in about a year, among 
others.  As  a  result,  financial  conditions  in  these  economies  have  shown  a 
significant  tightening  which,  according  to  some  estimates,  is  comparable  to 
that experienced during the taper tantrum episode of 2013.2  
In the face of mounting pressures, the immediate policy response in EMEs has 
relied mainly on a couple of tools. First, monetary policy has in general turned 
more restrictive, with reference rates increasing sharply in specific instances 
                                                           
1 The  views and opinions  expressed in this document  are the sole responsibility of the  author  and do  not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a whole. 
2 International Monetary Fund (2018): Global Financial Stability Report, October. 
1 
 where  conditions  deteriorated  more  severely  owing  to  persistent  external 
vulnerabilities and perceived idiosyncratic risks. Secondly, the exchange rates 
of many EMEs have adjusted in response to these shocks, with some of these 
currencies receiving support from foreign exchange intervention, either in the 
spot market of via derivatives.  
Among  the  factors  explaining  the  reversal  of  capital  flows  and  consequent 
tightening in broader EME financial conditions, monetary policy normalization 
in the United States is particularly noteworthy. Naturally, higher interest rates 
in the US can be expected to represent a drag on capital flows towards EMEs. 
Notwithstanding some recent easing, market repricing of upside risks for the 
future trajectory of the federal funds rate in previous months led to outward 
pressures stronger than formerly anticipated. In fact, more than 40 percent of 
the estimated outflows from EMEs  in the year through the  third quarter of 
2018  that  can  be  attributed  to  external  factors  was  explained  by  increased 
market expectations about the Federal Reserve policy rate.3 
It is worth to highlight that global financial conditions remain accommodative 
in  relation  to  historical  standards,  albeit  tighter  than  a  year  ago.  There  are 
many factors at play behind such an outcome and their interrelationships are 
complex. However, two stand out in this respect. First, the tightening bias at 
the global level that may derive from interest rate increases by the US Federal 
Reserve  is,  at  least  partially,  countered  by  the  persistent  degree  of 
accommodation pursued by the central banks of other major AEs, in what has 
turned out to be a divergent monetary normalization cycle in these countries. 
                                                           
3 International Monetary Fund (2018): Global Financial Stability Report, October. 
 2 
Secondly, in the United States, domestic financial conditions actually loosened 
even as the monetary policy rate started to increase in December 2015 and 
the  Federal  Reserve began  unwinding  its  balance  sheet  in  October  2017.  In 
fact,  financial  conditions  in  that  country  started  to  tighten  only  around  the 
beginning of 2018.  
Needless  to  say,  such  an  outcome  runs  counter  to  intuition.  However,  it  is 
important  to  bear  in  mind  that  an  economy’s  financial  conditions,  broadly 
defined, are the result of the interplay of a large number of variables whose 
impact may work in opposing directions. In the particular case of the United 
States, the strengthening of the short-term growth outlook, resulting partly 
from the fiscal stimulus underway, may have raised expected corporate profits 
and  thus  supported  asset  prices  through  most  of  the  run-up  to  the  sharp 
market  corrections  of  recent.  This  effect  was  likely  reinforced  by  the  cross-
border impact of large-scale asset purchases by central banks in Europe and 
Japan,  hence  stimulating  demand 
for  higher-yielding  US  securities.  
Furthermore, the tightening effects of monetary policy actions in the US may 
have been hindered by a gradual and in general predictable pace of increase 
in interest rates in that country.  
In view of the difficulties inherent to trying to predict market movements, even 
more  so  in  the  context  of  unprecedented  circumstances  such  as  the  ones 
prevailing at present, it is not at all clear how rapidly global financial conditions 
will tighten as the Federal Reserve and other major central banks continue (or 
embark in) their respective policy normalization cycles. To some observers, the 
recent  adjustments  in  international  financial  markets  (rising  interest  rates, 
declining stock indices, and depreciating currencies vis-à-vis the US dollar) are 
3 
 a  welcome  development  as  they  are  consistent  with  a  strong  economic 
outlook,  reduced  risks  of  deflation  in  some  AEs  and,  in  general,  a  thus-far-
successful  exit  from  the  massive  monetary  accommodation  of  the  decade 
following  the  outburst  of  the  crisis.4  However,  the  risk  of  a  sudden,  sharp 
tightening in financial conditions cannot be discarded.  
At  the  current  economic  and  political  global  juncture,  a  number  of  factors 
increase significantly the risk of a potentially disruptive scenario. Among these, 
it  is  worth  highlighting,  first  and  foremost,  the  possibility  of  surprises  in  AE 
monetary policy normalization. This is particularly worrisome in the case of the 
US,  where  notwithstanding  downward  adjustments  in  market  expectations 
about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates  following  the  recent  market  rout, 
inflation  could  surprise  to  the  upside  as  a  result  of  ongoing  fiscal  stimulus 
measures implemented in the context of an economy operating at, or near, 
full  capacity,  in  addition  to  price  pressures  that  may  derive  from  increased 
import  tariffs.  Secondly,  market  sentiment  might  be  adversely  affected  by 
increased political and policy uncertainty in a wide range of economies, both 
advanced and emerging. At the top of these concerns is the further escalation 
(or,  at  least,  the  persistence)  of  global  trade  tensions,  especially  between 
China and the US, whose broader implications can well go beyond the specific 
sectors that to date have been targeted. Thirdly, confidence on the resilience 
and credibility of policy frameworks in EMEs may erode, as  external shocks 
combine with existing vulnerabilities in many of them and growing concerns 
about central bank independence in some particular instances.  
                                                           
4 See, for instance, Stephen S. Poloz (2018): “Making Sense of Markets”, remarks before the Canada–UK 
Chamber of Commerce, 5 November. 
4 
 In addition, challenges of a structural nature may complicate matters further. 
First, as noted above, the context in which monetary policy normalization in 
the  US  and  other  AEs  is  taking  place  is  unprecedented,  making  in  turn  its 
potential ramifications difficult to assess and foresee. For one, interest rates 
had  never  been  so  low  for  this  long,  while  the  unwinding  of  the  stimulus 
provided by unconventional monetary policy measures adopted at such a large 
scale remains untested. In light of these and other uncertainties, including the 
ones related to  the characterization and definition of “normalcy” itself, it is 
evident  that  the  potential  for  policy  mistakes  is  sizable.5  On  the  one  hand, 
adjusting policy too fast may, among other risks, prompt disruptive responses 
in  international  financial  markets  with  adverse  implications  for  the  real 
economy, both at the domestic and international levels. On the other hand, 
moving too slow may encourage the continued accumulation of debt as well 
as the buildup of risks and vulnerabilities in the financial sector. 
Secondly, on account of the greater financial integration across markets and 
economies  that  has  been  brought  about  by  globalization,  the  control  of 
domestic  financial  conditions  by  policy  makers  may  prove  to  be  quite 
challenging. As per some estimates,6 about 20 to 40 percent of the observed 
variation  in  domestic  financial  conditions  can  be  explained  by  a  single, 
common factor, namely global financial conditions, an effect that tends to be 
larger  (over  60  percent  in  some  instances)  in  EMEs. The  situation  is  further 
complicated by the fact that local financial conditions tend to react faster and 
more  strongly  to  external  shocks  than  to  adjustments  to  the  domestic 
                                                           
5 Bank for International Settlements (2018): “Monetary Policy: A Narrow Normalization Path”, Chapter II of 
Annual Report, June. 
6 International Monetary Fund (2017): Global Financial Stability Report, April. 
5 
 monetary policy stance. Furthermore, it is not rare to  see external  financial 
conditions  being  driven  to  a 
larger  extent  by  factors  other  than 
macroeconomic  conditions,  such  as  abrupt  swings  in  investor  sentiment, 
financial  contagion,  or  regulatory  changes,  where  the  tools  available  to 
counter them may be more limited or ineffective. 
Thirdly, the global financial structure has undergone profound changes in the 
post-crisis  years,  that  remain  to  be  fully  tested  in  situations  of  widespread 
stress. One of them relates to evidence suggesting an increased segmentation 
of  market  liquidity,  and  the  consequent  risk  that  lower  levels  of  liquidity 
enhance  the  potential  for  wide  fluctuations  in  asset  prices  and  financial 
instability. In this respect, it is important to bear in mind that the abundant 
liquidity  resulting  from  overly  expansionary  monetary  policies  in  AEs  is 
anticipated  to  decline  significantly  in  coming  years.    Another  change  is  the 
increased presence of foreign investors in local EME bond markets. It is true 
that the level of risk is a function of the type of investor, with large institutional 
investors showing in general a higher degree of stability. It is also the case that 
at the end, both foreign and domestic investors will have a similar reaction to 
episodes of acute turmoil. However, it can also be argued that  nonresident 
holders  of  domestic  assets  may  be  more  sensitive  to  the  impact  of  shocks, 
especially  in  those  cases  where  we  see  a  significant  share  of  investors 
operating through mutual funds and exchange traded funds.  
In  light  of  the  above,  it  is  clear  that  EMEs  should  stand  ready  to  face  the 
materialization of these and other risks. While isolation from changes in global 
financial  conditions  is  unfeasible,  the  evidence  clearly  shows  that  domestic 
policies do make a crucial difference. As in previous episodes of turmoil, during 
6 
 the current one global investors have differentiated among EMEs on the basis 
of their economic fundamentals and other idiosyncratic factors.7 For instance, 
the deterioration of indicators of creditworthiness and currency depreciations 
have been sharper in countries facing more important economic and political 
challenges. Similarly, although estimations of correlation of the idiosyncratic 
component of market exchange rates, or more generally of contagion among 
different EMEs, have increased recently, they remain at low levels.  
It would be both naïve and unfair, however, to assume that EMEs will be able 
to overcome these challenges by themselves. Global financial stability is a very 
complex  task,  and  therefore  its  attainment  and  preservation  is  a  shared 
responsibility that requires coordinated efforts from all the parties involved. 
The role of AEs in this task is paramount to its fulfillment.  Indeed, a careful 
communication of monetary policy decisions, a proper evaluation of spillover 
effects, strong support for the creation of an adequate global financial safety 
net,  and  even  coordinated  policy  action  whenever  needed,  among  other 
actions, should be key ingredients of this cooperative approach.  
AEs have a clear responsibility for the current state of the world economy and 
therefore  they  should  assume  an  equally  important  role  in  overcoming  the 
consequent challenges. But beyond this, it is evident that they have a lot to 
gain  from  a  solid  performance  of  EMEs  and  stable  financial  markets  at  the 
global level. 
                                                           
7 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2018): OECD Economic Outlook 2018, Issue 2, 
November. 
7 
 It  should  suffice  to  recall  that,  by  virtue  of  their  growing  importance  and 
integration  into  the  global  economy  and  financial  system,  the  scope  for 
spillovers  from  EME  shocks  into  AEs  has  risen  over  the  past  decades  to 
significant  levels.  According  to  IMF  estimates,  more  than  a  third  of  the 
variation  in  AEs  stock  market  returns  and  in  their  exchange  rates  in  recent 
years can be traced to  spillovers from EMEs.  Moreover, given the extent of 
financial  market  integration  and  the  particular  features  of  international 
financial  markets  at  present,  financial  volatility  in  EMEs  may  be  widely 
transmitted even in the absence of crisis or near-crisis episodes.  
In other words, policy makers in AEs need to carefully consider not only the 
consequences of their policy decisions on EMEs, but also the risk of spillbacks 
from EMEs as a result of policy actions in AEs.  
The implications for international policy cooperation are evident.  
 8 
