An address by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the National Payment System Department’s 
annual end-of-year cocktail function 
   Kleinkaap Boutique Hotel, Centurion 
5 November 2018 
 
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, colleagues. 
 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the annual National Payment System 
Department’s (NPSD) cocktail function. 
 
This has been a year in which we had more reason to celebrate, as 2018 marked the 
20-year anniversary of the South African Multiple Option Settlement (SAMOS) system. 
Also of significance was the fact that the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) RTGS system, previously known as the SADC Integrated Regional Electronic 
Settlement System (SIRESS), turned five this year. 
 
Consequently, my address will firstly reflect on the journey of the SAMOS and SADC 
RTGS systems, respectively, focusing on highlights and also outlining the goals that 
we plan to achieve. Thereafter, I would like to reflect on the opportunities offered by 
financial technology (fintech). 
 
The SAMOS system 
 
In April 1994, the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) launched a project to reform 
the  South  African  national  payment  system  (NPS)  and  formulated  a  strategy  that 
would enable South African banks and other intermediaries in the payment system to 
align  the  needs  of  the  domestic  economy  with  developments  in  the  international 
community. 
 Page 1 of 10 
A  strategy-formulation  team,  consisting  of  representatives  of  the  SARB  and  the 
banking  community,  was  established,  and  a  collaborative  consensus-building 
approach was adopted. The SARB acted as facilitator and, in a period of 14 months, 
produced the first draft of the document titled  The South African national payment 
system: framework and strategy, commonly known as the Blue Book. 
 
A  number  of  projects  were  initiated  to  realise  the  envisaged  goals  of  the  NPS 
framework,  as  documented  in  the  Blue  Book.  One  of  the  key  projects,  and  the 
cornerstone of the new payment processing infrastructure, was a project to implement 
a  new  RTGS  system  that  would  enable  settlement  between  participating  banks  in 
central bank money with finality and irrevocability. 
 
On 9 March 1998, the SAMOS system was implemented, on time and within budget. 
Considering  the  complexity  and  multi-organisational  nature  of  the project,  this  was 
indeed a remarkable achievement. 
 
The  new  settlement  arrangements  facilitated  by  the  SAMOS  system  placed  South 
African  settlement  practices  on  par  with  international  best  practice  and  presented 
many  opportunities  to  the  banking  and  non-banking  sectors.  Among  others,  these 
included: 
• 
the enablement of open access and participation of all the registered South African 
banks in the system; 
the provision of facilities to participating banks to monitor their exposures in real 
time by having access to balances in settlement and intra-day-loan accounts, as 
well as a view of the utilisation of collateral; 
the enablement of the SARB, through various system facilities, to ascertain when 
banks in the system are experiencing difficulty in meeting their payment obligations, 
and  the  ability  to  provide  early-warning  signals  of  a  potential  systemic  crisis 
(resulting in the SARB being able to proactively take steps to address a potential 
systemic crisis); 
the  achievement  of  payment  settlement  finality  through  the  SAMOS  system, 
providing an opportunity to synchronise the delivery of scrip after confirmation of 
payment, thereby creating a safe and secure financial markets environment; and 
the enablement of payer-to-beneficiary fund transfers in real time. 
Page 2 of 10 
      
The SAMOS system has evolved over the years, adapting to market needs through 
the  implementation  of  improvements  that  have  optimised  liquidity  utilisation  and 
collateral  management,  embracing 
international  best  practice,  and  providing 
monitoring facilities for regulators within the central bank to effectively execute their 
mandates. 
 
The SARB is currently working with the payment industry to replace the existing RTGS 
system  with  a  new-generation  RTGS  solution  that  will  address  current  business 
functionality  and  cater  for  evolving  business  and  technical  requirements.  Some  of 
these requirements stem from advances in the fintech field and related innovation, 
regulatory changes, as well as the ever-evolving business landscape. The new system 
must  enable  modular  design,  quicker  development  turnaround  times,  and  reduced 
time to market for changes in the payment environment and cater for multi-currency 
functionality. The new system will offer rich message content utilising the ISO1 20022 
message standard. 
 
The South African banking industry has shown that it has the capacity, both in terms 
of  business  knowledge  and  in  terms  of  technology  skills,  to  progress  our  payment 
system. NPS stakeholders have not only contributed skills; they have also had to make 
substantial investments in back-office systems and technology to enable them to fully 
participate in the system throughout the years. 
 
The opportunity for banks and non-banks to cooperate and collaborate to leverage the 
potential of the SAMOS system ushered in the dawn of a new era in the provision of 
payment products and services. 
 
The SADC RTGS system (formerly SIRESS) 
 
The SADC RTGS system, formerly known as SIRESS, was developed as a catalyst 
to support the regional financial integration agenda towards the realisation of SADC’s 
aim of facilitating trade and investment in the region. Prior to the implementation of the 
                       
1 International Standards Organization 
 Page 3 of 10 
regional  cross-border 
transactions  were  settled  via 
SADC  RTGS  system, 
correspondent banking arrangements, which are prone to counterparty risk, lags in the 
settlement of these transactions on a T+1 or T+2 basis, and short cut-off times. 
 
The system was implemented through a public-private partnership between central 
banks and the commercial banking industry. The role that other partners played in the 
project – partners like the Finmark Trust, the European Union, the World Bank, the Bill 
and Melinda Gates Foundation, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) – is also 
appreciated and valued. 
 
The  system  currently  settles  transactions  for  82 participating  banks  drawn  from 
14 countries across the SADC region. Since July 2013, it has settled over 1.2 million 
cross-border  transactions  and  a  cumulative  peak  value  of  R5 trillion,  which  was 
reached in October 2018. 
 
A project is currently underway to replace the SADC RTGS platform with a solution 
based on modern technology, which will provide, among other things, multi-currency 
capabilities,  flexible  settlement  windows  per  currency,  and  re-engineered  business 
processes to support the possible future business needs that could utilise distributed 
ledger technology (DLT). 
 
Vision 2025 
 
It is imperative that we continue to build on our legacy in our quest to enhance the 
safety, efficiency and accessibility of the NPS in a manner that promotes competition 
and minimises risk to the payments ecosystem. As outlined in Vision 2025, we will 
pursue  this  objective  by  leveraging  technological  developments  to  extend  the 
availability of digital payment services to all sectors of society while meeting domestic, 
regional and international requirements for the benefit of all members of South African 
society. 
 
The  NPS  affects  the  lives  of  all  South  Africans.  Essentially,  it  exists  to  serve  the 
economy and, through it, the people of South Africa. It is a crucial enabling factor for 
 Page 4 of 10 
economic  activity  among  consumers  and  businesses.  Payment  systems  can,  for 
example, enable seamless links to public transportation. 
 
A  recent  study  by  Visa  titled  The  cashless  cities:  realising  the  benefits  of  digital 
payments2  reveals  that,  should  Johannesburg  reach  a  state  where  100%  of 
transactions are digital, the city would gain just under US$500 million in net benefits 
cumulatively  for  consumers,  business and  government  per  year. The  study  further 
suggests  four  main  long-term  benefits  over  the  next  15 years:  an  increase  in 
employment,  an  increase  in  the  gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  and  marginal 
increases in wages and productivity. 
 
The emergence of fintech, the Fourth Industrial Revolution and the continuing shift 
from  the  industrial  to  the  digital  economy  all  hold  significant  benefits  and  could 
materially contribute towards lifting the growth potential of our economy. I would like 
to  demonstrate  this  by  referring  to  examples  of  other  countries  that  have  not  only 
embraced technology, but that are reaping the fruits from their foresight. 
 
The potential of fintech 
 
According to Financial Sector Deepening Africa, a development finance organisation, 
fintech is expected to contribute at least US$40-150 billion3 to sub-Saharan Africa’s 
economic output by 2022. In a similar vein, Accenture’s Pivoting with AI report4 states 
that embracing artificial intelligence, in-process automation and augmenting human 
capabilities  could  potentially  double  the  size  of  South  Africa’s  economy  in  a  few 
decades. However, the most compelling evidence for the potential of fintech comes 
from some small countries in Europe and many from the East. The Digital Revolution 
has increased the growth potential in these countries. 
 
 
                        
2 Compiled by evidence-based economics research firm Roubini ThoughtLab based on 2016 data and 
published in 2018 
3 https://techcentral.co.za/fintech-seen-adding-150-billion-to-africas-gdp/83628/ 
4 https://www.accenture.com/za-en/_acnmedia/PDF-85/Accenture-Pivoting-With-AI-POV-Brochure.pdf#zoom=50 
 Page 5 of 10 
Estonia 
 
A country leading the charge in embracing fintech and setting the pace towards the 
digital economy is Estonia. It is a small country, with minimal natural resources. 
 
In 2018, there are only three things you cannot do online: get married, get divorced, 
and buy real estate. Everything else largely happens digitally. 
 
Estonia has introduced e-identity, digital signatures, e-Residency and i-Voting. The 
Estonian  Entrepreneurship  Growth  Strategy  2020  outlines  the  strategy  for  the 
Estonian economy  for  the  next  seven  years, focusing  on  three  main  challenges  in 
order  to  increase  the  wealth  of  Estonia:  increasing  productivity,  stimulating 
entrepreneurship, and encouraging innovation. 
 
Allow  me  to  quote  some  resounding  statistics  marking  the  success  of  some  of 
Estonia’s efforts. 
 
Savings and efficiency: 
At least 2% of GDP is saved due to the collective use of digital signatures. 
Every year, 840 years of working time is saved thanks to data exchange. 
The time to establish a business has been reduced from 5 days to 18 minutes. 
• 
• 
• 
 
Financial indicators: 
 
• 
• 
• 
 
e-Government indicators: 
 
• 
• 
• 
  98% of Estonian companies are established online. 
99% of banking transactions are online. 
95% of tax declarations are filed online – it takes only 3 minutes! 
98% of Estonians have a national identity card. 
Over 30 000 people have applied for e-Residency. 
Over  30%  of  Estonian  voters  from  116  countries  use  i-Voting  in  Estonian 
elections. 
Page 6 of 10 
 
Healthcare: 
 
• 
• 
• 
97% of patients have countrywide-accessible digital records. 
99% of prescriptions are digital. 
There are 500 000 queries by doctors and 300 000 queries by patients every 
year. 
 
These are just some examples of how a small country can gain competitive advantage 
by embracing digital enablers that lay a foundation to rapidly move towards the digital 
economy. 
 
Singapore 
 
Another good example is Singapore. Singapore has adopted a Smart Nation policy, 
which  means  that  they  embrace  technology  in  all  their  processes  and  encourage 
technological innovation and adoption. 
 
The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) has identified 10 enablers to shift towards 
the digital economy. One of these, similar to Estonia and India, is the ability of citizens 
to store their basic identification electronically. In Singapore, this initiative is called 
MyInfo. 
 
MyInfo is a one-stop data repository that saves time in not having to capture basic 
information over again. It is a single online personal data platform. It includes your 
personal information, such as your unique identification number, name, gender, age 
etc. It can also include your education, employment and income information. Such 
access enables quicker completion of digital online artefacts by using the application 
programming interfaces (APIs) of MyInfo. 
 
The  MAS  has  also  released  its  Industry  Transformation  Map  (ITM)  for  financial 
services. Their vision is to be a leading global financial centre in Asia. The ITM aims 
to achieve real value-added growth of 4.3% and productivity of 2.4% annually in the 
 Page 7 of 10 
financial sector. The ITM also aims to create 3 000 new jobs in financial services and 
an additional 1 000 new jobs in the fintech sector annually. 
 
China 
 
Digitisation has also reshaped financial services in China. Less than a decade ago, 
the Chinese e-commerce retail transaction value accounted for less than 1% of the 
global value. This figure has risen to almost 40% today as a result of the efforts by 
giant fintech firms such as Alibaba, Tencent and Baidu.  
 
In 2016, mobile payments for goods and services in China totalled US$790 billion – 
11 times  more  than  in  the  United  States.  Research  by  the  IMF5  shows  that  a 
1 percentage point growth in the digitalisation of China’s economy is associated with 
a 0.3 percentage point growth in its GDP.  
 
The examples from Estonia, Singapore and China signal the potential of fintech and 
the  shift  towards  a  digital  economy.  They  are  also  examples  of  the  role  that 
governments  and  central  banks  can  play  in  creating  an  enabling  environment  for 
fintech. 
 
There are predictions that such efforts can add significantly to the GDP of an economy. 
Some  anecdotal  estimates are  between 0.5%  and  1.5%  of  GDP. Toomas  Hendrik 
Ilves, a former President of Estonia, has signalled how such results could be achieved. 
He has emphasised: “It is not about focusing on the technology itself; it is about the 
political will, vision, policy, laws and regulations … in that order.”6  
 
The potential in South Africa 
 
In South Africa, economic growth has been stagnant. The issues of growing inequality, 
rising unemployment and increasing poverty are major challenges.  
 
                       
5 https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2018/09/asia-digital-revolution-sedik.htm  
6 http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2018/03/trenches.htm  
 Page 8 of 10 
I would suggest that it is not only time that we do something differently; it is time that 
we  do  things  digitally.  The  financial  services  industry  has  strong  potential  and 
capability  to  come  together  and  collaborate towards  building  and  influencing  shifts 
towards a digital economy. To name a concrete example, Project Khokha provided a 
glimpse of this potential to work together, embrace new exponential technologies, and 
jointly explore future opportunities. It is time that we leverage this strength in working 
jointly for the greater good of SA Inc. 
 
At  the  inaugural  workshop  of  the  Intergovernmental  Fintech  Working  Group  in 
April 2018, the participants highlighted that a South African digital identity may result 
in increased financial inclusion and deepening by making it easier for South Africans 
to  access  financial  services.7  This  provides  just  one  opportunity  for  the  respective 
authorities and the industry to possibly pursue in order to build a digital foundation and 
contribute towards the longer-term digital well-being of South Africans. The workshop 
also highlighted the need for a national innovation policy framework. I would suggest 
that  such  a  policy  would  equally  contribute  towards  a  vision  and  an  enabling 
framework propelling a digital economy. It could be one aspect of helping us to improve 
our position on the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index.8 We have 
dropped from being ranked 49th in 2015/16 to being 61st in 2017/18. 
 
Aligned  to  Vision  2025  and  centred  on  leveraging  innovations  in  the  fintech 
environment,  the  SARB  will  host  a  workshop  next  year  for  regulators,  overseers, 
policymakers and government that will focus on unlocking any inefficiencies within our 
current processes and platforms to stimulate economic growth.  
 
The workshop will provide an opportunity for parties to gain deeper insights into the 
various  innovations  available,  including  open  banking  and  APIs,  and  will  take 
advantage  of  the  SARB’s  relational  capital  to  start  a  debate  and  craft  a  national 
strategy that will journey South Africa into the digital future.  
 
                       
7http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/8641/IFWG%20Reports
ml%205%20July%202018.pdf  
8 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GCR2017-
2018/05FullReport/TheGlobalCompetitivenessReport2017%E2%80%932018.pdf  
 Page 9 of 10 
The workshop, while designed to facilitate a unified vision around our digital future, is 
also intended to form the foundation on which the annual Innovation and Cybersecurity 
Conference will further expand. 
  
Closing 
 
The SARB would like to thank all of you for the role that you have played in creating 
this world-class payment system, and hopes that you will also join us as we collectively 
continue in our endeavour to design and create a better NPS for all.  
 
I would like to conclude with a quote from Adam Smith: “No society can surely be 
flourishing and happy of which by far the greater part of the numbers are poor and 
miserable.”  
 
I  modestly  add  to  this  by  saying:  embracing  fintech  and  moving  towards  a  digital 
economy holds the potential for growth and collective prosperity. 
 
Thank you. 
 Page 10 of 10 
