François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  The  consequences  of  Brexit  for  the
French and European financial sectors
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the
Autorité  de  contrôle  prudentiel  et  de  resolution  (ACPR),  at  the  ACPR  conference,  Paris,  23
November 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I am delighted to welcome you along with Bernard Delas to this new conference organised by the
ACPR, which this morning will focus on the consequences of Brexit for the financial sector. This
issue is admittedly constantly evolving in line with current events... I welcome the agreement that
was reached between the European negotiators and their British counterparts last week and we
all hope that it will pass through the stages to come and ultimately be finalised. However, in a
context that remains uncertain, we must be cautious: even if we hope to avoid it, we must also
be ready for a possible no deal scenario. The ACPR and the Banque de France are preparing for
this eventuality to ensure the smooth functioning of the financial system. That will be my first
point and for that reason I will discuss it using the conditional. I would then like to look beyond
Brexit to see how we can transform some of today’s difficulties into opportunities for the future
and build a more integrated “financial Eurosystem”.
**
I. In the short term, effectively manage the risks of Brexit
As part of their tasks, the ACPR and the Banque de France closely monitor two main types of
risk associated with the prospect of Brexit: those that could threaten financial stability and those
that could undermine customer protection. It is important to avoid the cliff-edge that would arise
from a No Deal Brexit. The economic consequences would naturally be far more serious for the
United Kingdom than for the rest of the European Union. At this stage, our analysis, like that of
the  ECB,  which  as  you  know  jointly  carried  out  an  in-depth  technical  study  with  the  Bank  of
England,  has  not  identified  any  major  risks  to  financial  stability.  In  the  words  of  Mr  Draghi:  “It
would  really  take  an  extraordinary  amount  of  lack  of  preparation  to  materialise  the  financial
stability  risks  that  might  come  from  a  hard  Brexit.   The  clearing  of  interest  rate  derivatives
nevertheless deserves particular attention, as the UK clearing houses have a virtual monopoly in
the sector. In the event of a No Deal Brexit and without taking any specific measures, this could
represent  a  systemic  risk.  Therefore,  should  it  unfortunately  be  necessary,  we  support  the
solution adopted by the European Commission to temporarily recognise the equivalence of the
UK legislative framework under EMIR 1 and to authorise the United Kingdom’s clearing houses to
continue providing clearing services to European financial institutions until EMIR 2 comes into
effect. But this would obviously have to be a temporary solution, for a period of no more than a
year or so, and would also have to be tied to a strict timetable for the adoption of EMIR 2. We
now  hope  that  the  European  institutions  manage  to  finalise  this  “security  clause”  as  soon  as
possible. 
1
Our primary focus of attention today would then concern the protection of customers that have
taken  out  contracts  with  UK  firms,  particularly  in  the  insurance  sector.  It  is  of  course  the
responsibility of the insurance industry itself to actively prepare for the consequences associated
with  the  loss  of  EU  passporting  rights. And  the  majority  of  the  major  players  have  taken  the
necessary steps. Some of them have already been granted authorisations by the ACPR which is
also  currently  assisting  more  than  50  institutions  from  all  sectors  with  the  relocation  of  their
activities. But we are keeping an especially close eye on the small and medium-sized players,
particularly the smaller investment firms, as well as electronic money and payment institutions.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
An ACPR  study  conducted  in  July  2018  found  that  only  24%  of  investment  firms  and  22%  of
electronic  money  and  payment  institutions  operating  under  the  freedom  to  provide  services
regime wished to obtain authorisation by the end of 2018.
We  must  therefore  be  ready  to  deal  with  situations  where  UK  firms  may  not  have  already
transferred  their  activities.  In  this  respect,  it  would  clearly  be  preferable  to  have  European
legislation to ensure that every relevant issue is dealt with in a harmonised manner. However, if
need be, and as a backstop, the enabling legislation adopted by the Senate and coming before
the National Assembly on 10 and 11 December would allow us to take the steps in France to
secure  legal  protection  for  households  and  companies.  We  would  therefore  suggest  the
introduction of a tailored transition regime that, for the run-off management of contracts, allows
UK firms to continue the activities they initiated under the European passport, provided that they
submit a liquidation plan to the ACPR. We hope that these transitional rules will be incorporated
into  the  ordinances  and  that  they  will  confer  similar  powers  to  those  existing  under  EU
passporting rights upon the ACPR. This would be the trade-off for the continuity thus provided.
 
II. Beyond Brexit, building a financial Eurosystem
Clearly, Brexit is, and will remain, bad news not only for the United Kingdom, but for Europe as
well.  But  to  a  certain  extent  it  can  also  represent  an  opportunity  to  restructure  the  European
financial system. We have an effective monetary Eurosystem consisting of the ECB and the 19
national central banks; we have the legal framework for a single financial market and – in part – a
Banking Union; we have an exceptional savings capacity – one of the highest in the world – with
2
an annual flow of EUR 400 billion in euro area financial savings in the second quarter of 2018.
However,  as  yet  we  do  not  have  a  “financial  Eurosystem”,  made  up  of  stronger  and  pan-
European financial institutions and shared market infrastructures. Let’s be clear: there will not be
a single City for the continent, but rather an integrated polycentric network of financial centres,
with  specialisations  based  on  areas  of  expertise.  A  polycentric  system  of  this  nature  can
function, as illustrated by the United States: New York’s financial centre is favoured by corporate
and investment banks, Chicago’s financial centre handles futures, while Boston specialises in
asset management.
Paris is well qualified to become the “market hub” of this new European constellation. Our capital
hosts four of the euro area’s eight global systemically important banks, the top life and non-life
insurance  sector  and  asset  management  industry,  one  of  the  leading  bond  markets  and  the
largest continental commercial paper market with NEU-CP. It is also the biggest private equity
investor 
including
the  Banque  de  France  and  the ACPR,  are  working  together  to  facilitate  the  dissemination  of
sound  and  safe  financial  innovations  and  to  foster  the  scaling  up  of  sustainable  finance.
Moreover,  Paris  offers  the  leading  source  of  highly  qualified  financial  services  personnel.
Consequently, many global banks have already decided to transfer the majority of their market
activities to Paris.
in  continental  Europe. 
financial  authorities, 
the  French 
In  addition, 
This new system will require a single rulebook implemented in a harmonised manner. And we
are close to achieving it in the banking sector, but we are not quite there in the insurance sector.
It is thus necessary to further strengthen the role of the European supervisory authorities, and
France supports – although it remains a little too alone in doing so – the Commission’s proposed
reform  of  the  ESAs.  For  example,  EIOPA  must  be  allowed  to  create,  at  its  own  initiative,
cooperation platforms to better supervise entities whose activities mainly involve cross-border
transactions performed under the freedom to provide services regime. EIOPA’s role as a neutral
mediator in the internal model approval process at group level must also be reinforced, without
giving it direct power in the approval process, which would undermine its neutrality. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This “financial Eurosystem” will also require shared infrastructures within the Union capable of
offering services beyond the confines of the euro area: examples such as T2S and TIPS, the
new interbank instant payment settlement system, both multi-currency services, show us that it
is possible. We must also deal with the question of private monopolies in the clearing sector. We
must ensure that critical key players do not become “too big to fail”. Of course, by its very nature
clearing  is  an  activity  that  generates  major  economies  of  scale,  and  thus  encourages
concentration. But greater competition is absolutely necessary to stimulate financial innovation.
Fortunately, LCH SA will centralise repo transactions at the beginning of 2019. More generally,
we would like to see the development in Paris of an enhanced and extended clearing services
offering in the area of interest rate derivatives. 
More  broadly,  Brexit  represents  an  opportunity  for  Europe  to  effectively  transform  its  own
savings,  in  order  to  enhance  its  ability  to  finance  the  real  economy:  what  I  call  the  Financing
Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation.  This  involves  better  steering  the  euro  area’s  abundant
savings  to  absorb  shocks  within  the  euro  area  more  effectively  and  to  meet  investment  and
innovation needs in fields such as digital technology, energy transition and the equity financing of
SMEs. In practice, the creation of a true Financing Union requires the acceleration of the Capital
Markets Union and the completion of the Banking Union. The second pillar on the resolution of
failing banks is more important still than a possible common deposit guarantee scheme. And it is
essential to remove barriers for pan-European banks. This was the policy agenda of the Franco-
German declaration in Meseberg in June 2018: but I insist on the urgent need to make it a reality
today. The response to Brexit should be the economic and financial strengthening of the euro
area:  if  we  remained  mired  in  technical  nit-picking  with  self-satisfaction  from  some,
disparagement  from  others,  and  distrust  on  all  sides,  we  would  not  only  have  missed  an
opportunity, we would, collectively, have failed in our duty.
 I would like to conclude on that note. The unity demonstrated by the EU27 in their Brexit position,
behind their negotiator, Michel Barnier, who has done a remarkable job, has been impressive.
And everyone now better appreciates – at least in the sense of what they would miss – all the
advantages  offered  by  our  Europe  and  our  common  market.  This  political  desire  to  “protect”
must now unfold into an ambition to “construct”, to build a more effective Europe. Thank you for
your attention. 
1
2
European Central Bank press conference, 25 October 2018.
Four-quarter cumulative flows.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
