Anita  Angelovska  Bezhoska:  The  importance  of  savings  for
investment growth
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
Macedonia, on the occasion of the World Savings Day - celebration of the Macedonian Banking
Association, Skopje, 30 October 2018.
 Dear Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It  is  a  great  honor  and  pleasure  for  me  to  address  you  at  today's  event  marking  the  World
Savings Day - a day that banks and financial institutions around the world dedicate to promoting
saving and raising awareness of the public about the benefits it brings. The saving is undoubtedly
important from the aspect of both, individual and overall economic progress and maintenance of
the  macro  financial  stability.  For  each  individual,  or  family,  it  is  the  principal  and  the  most
important step towards providing financial stability in a long run. By saving, we protect ourselves
from unpredictable changes in the personal income dynamics, we more efficiently plan the long-
term investments and we build sound foundations for maintaining stable finances throughout the
lifetime.
Saving is also beneficial for the entire society, as it is one of the key factors which the economy’s
investment  level  depends  on,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  boosting  the  long-term  economic
potential. Usually, a significant portion of the savings is channeled into the banking system thus
providing stable sources of financing to domestic banks, which is particularly important for the
bank-centric  financial  systems,  such  as  the  Macedonian  one,  where  the  banks  act  as  major
financial intermediaries. At the same time, solid domestic savings rates rationalize the needs of
the  economy  for  external  funding,  which  means  reduced  exposure  to  sudden  changes  in  the
capital  flows  dynamics,  i.e.  reduced  sensitivity  to  shocks  from  the  external  sector.  The  latest
economic  crisis  clearly  illustrates  the  risks  of  excessive  indebtedness  and  excessive
dependence  on  external  financing,  which  further  emphasizes  the  importance  of  domestic
savings, which has proven to be a more stable source of funding.
1
Having in mind all the benefits of saving, it is my pleasure to conclude that Macedonian citizens
are cultivating a savings culture in the banking sector. In the last 10 years, total deposits have
grown at a rate of around 8%, on average, on an annual basis, which contributed to an increase
in savings  by about 10 p.p. at the level of 55% of GDP in 2017. The fact that the deposit growth
was registered in conditions of the global crisis and more economic and political shocks proves
the high confidence of the citizens in the banking sector, which remained stable, sound, highly
capitalized and liquid throughout the entire period, showing high capability for successful handling
of shocks. Higher growth in the denar deposits and the acceleration of growth of the long-term
savings is especially positive, which strengthens the banks' capacity for long-term placements
and the support for investment projects. The deposit growth provided a solid basis for increase in
the lending activity and deepening of financial intermediation  by around 8 p.p. in the past ten
years to the level of 48% of GDP in 2017.
2
3
However, despite the positive trends, the need for further increase in the total domestic savings
is evident, which is a common feature of the CESEE countries. Thus the IMF analysis of May
2016   mainly  indicates  "insufficient"  domestic  savings   in  CESEE  countries,  i.e.  the  average
savings rate (as a difference between gross domestic product and consumption) of about 20%
of GDP, which is lower than the current investment rate, lower than the estimated optimal rate of
investment (25% of GDP), as well as the rate in countries with a relatively faster process of real
convergence in the past (28% of GDP). The rate of total domestic savings is particularly low in
4
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the SEE countries, where in 2017, on average, it is 17% of GDP, including in the Republic of
Macedonia where it is close to the average in the region.
The  relatively  low  domestic  savings  are  an  obstacle  for  stronger  investment  support,  partly
explained by the fact that, even after more than 25 years from the beginning of the transition, the
level  of  accumulated  capital  per  capita  in  most  CESEE   countries  is  still  relatively  low,
corresponding  to  about  one-third  of  the  levels  in  developed  European  economies.  In  RM  the
capital level per capita is lower than the average of the EU-28 countries, and it equals around
24%. Moreover, as in most countries, even in our country the gap is deeper in the part of the
private accumulated capital than in the public capital.
5
However, according to the dynamics, a characteristic of the Macedonian economy is that, unlike
most  of  the  economies  in  the  region  which  registered  significantly  reduced  investments  (an
average of about 10 p.p. in GDP) in the post-crisis period, until 2017 in our country their share
registered an increase. This was underpinned by the stable inflow of foreign direct investment,
the country's investments in infrastructural projects, and more important, through relatively solid
and  sound  credit  support.  The  credit  support,  however,  was  enabled  through  the  continuous,
albeit gradual, growth of the total domestic savings, including savings in the banking system.
Looking  ahead,  there  is  no  doubt  for  a  need  of  investment  growth,  meaning  an  undisputed
necessity  for  encouraging  domestic  savings  in  order  to  reduce  the  gap  between  domestic
savings and investments. Otherwise, the gap will need to be financed to a significant extent by
external sources, although such conditions are not unusual for developing countries, which, in
conditions of limited domestic resources, are directed towards the use of external sources for
supporting  investment  and  economic  growth.  It  is  also  important  that  the  lack  of  domestic
savings in one part is compensated by the high inflows of private transfers, which are maintained
at a relatively high level in the Macedonian economy, which is close to the level of the domestic
savings  rate.  In  addition,  the  structure  of  financial  flows  from  abroad  shows  larger  funding
through FDI inflows, which mitigates the risks to external sustainability. However, debt financing
is  also  mounting,  attributed  by  both  public  and  private  sector.  Although,  according  to  most
indicators of external indebtedness, Macedonia is still in the "safe zone", the growth of external
debt is undoubtedly a signal for additional vigilance by policy-makers, which is especially true for
developing countries.
Bearing  in  mind  that,  despite  the  positive  developments,  the  domestic  savings  rate  in  the
Macedonian  economy  remains  below  the  average  and  among  the  lower  rates  in  the  CESEE
countries,  an  active  contribution  from  all  counterparties  is  necessary.  For  banks,  this  means
continuous  improvement  of  the  offer  of  savings  products,  which  will  be  price-competitive,  but
also adjusted to the needs of the "ordinary" depositor and keeping-up with the challenges of the
modern  life.  In  this  context,  I  would  also  mention  the  savings  that  are  still  out  of  the  official
channels  and  whose  attraction  and  channeling  into  official  financial  channels  can  significantly
increase financial intermediation. Let's not forget the potential of the non-banking financial sector,
which through a more active promotion and financial education of citizens on alternative forms of
saving,  can  contribute  to  the  mobilization  of  additional  savings  from  the  households.  The
development of the institutional investors creates a base for the development of the domestic
capital market and increasing its importance as a financial intermediary in the economy. The role
of  the  institutions  is  also  important.  We,  as  the  National  Bank,  within  our  competencies,  will
continue to support the savings in the future period as well, by further maintenance of the macro-
financial  stability  and  prudent  regulations,  maintaining  a  safe  and  sound  banking  sector,
contributing to maintenance of the confidence in the financial system, which is a key prerequisite
for domestic savings.
Finally,  let  me  congratulate  you  all  the  employees  in  the  banking  sector  in  the  Republic  of
Macedonia  on  the  World  Savings  Day,  31  October,  and  wish  you  a  success  in  future  by
attracting more deposits and their efficient channeling in productive investments that will bring
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
benefits to the society as a whole.
Thank you!
1
2
3
4
5
Measured by the share of the total deposits of the non-financial entities in the GDP.
Measured by the share of total gross loans of non-financial entities in GDP.
IMF Regional Economic Issues, Central Eastern and Southeastern Europe – How to Get Back on the Fast Track,
May 16.
Refers to the total domestic savings calculated as a difference of GDP and consumption, expressed as a
percentage of GDP.
Slovenia and the Czech Republic are exception.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
