Yves Mersch: Climate change and central banking
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Workshop  discussion  "Sustainability  is  becoming  mainstream",  Frankfurt  am  Main,  27
November 2018.
 “Grey, dear friend, is all theory,
1
And green the golden tree of life.”
Goethe, J. W. (1808), Faust. Eine Tragödie.
This quote from “Faust” by Frankfurt-born Johann W. Goethe is already 210 years old. But it aptly
sums  up  the  current  public  debate  on  “green  finance”  –  financial  instruments  that  support
solutions for climate change.
Indeed, governments, companies, banks and public bodies have been coming under mounting
pressure  from  interested  sections  of  the  public  to  transform  their  strategies  and  make  them
more climate-friendly, a process sometimes disrespectfully referred to as “green washing”.
So it is hardly surprising that loud demands are also being made for central banks to contribute
towards solving the identified problems.
By no means do I want to be the “spirit, ever, that denies”.  But in this concrete instance, the
situation is clear: finding – or financing – the solution to the problems of climate change appears,
at first glance, somewhat remote from the primary mandate of a central bank.
2
But let’s turn to the present to explain this verdict in more detail.
Macroeconomic effects
It is not enough to link to newspaper reports, nor to quote a World Economic Forum report, that
has ranked climate risks as both high-impact and high-likelihood events  in order to create a new
4
mandate or objective for a central bank.
3
Is there convincing evidence for us to adjust our monetary policy strategy because increased
risks  of  more  frequent  and  more  devastating  future  climatic  events  could  influence  economic
dynamics  in  the  medium  term,  the  monetary  policy  horizon?  The  non-quantified  increased
probability and causality in such events may only hold implications for short-term developments,
which do not influence the conduct of monetary policy.
One  can  also  establish  the  general  assumption  that  climate  change  may  have  more  longer-
lasting impacts on potential output and relative prices, but these will also have less bearing on
the conduct of policy.
The economic literature on the impacts of climatic shocks is relatively new and less developed
than for other types of economic shock. Does it contain useful insights? Conclusions that while
the  short-term  impact  on  output  is  generally  negative,   the  overall  impact  in  the  medium  and
longer term is less certain,  suggest that climatic events are hardly relevant for monetary policy
as the monetary policy impacts are similar to those associated with other major shocks like wars
or disruptive technological innovation.
5
6
Climate events can affect both supply and demand in the economy. Destruction in the near term
can affect production and weigh on aggregate wealth over the longer term. Was the cold weather
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
at the start of this year solely responsible for the temporary fall in investment and consumption
across the northern hemisphere? But the rebuild period can also lead to a demand surge that
puts  upward  pressure  on  activity.  Effective  institutions  and  legal  frameworks,   including  solid
8
building codes, the quality of governments and access to credit and insurance,
7
can all influence the ultimate impact, while even slight differences in geographic location can play
a significant role.
Overall, the impact of climatic disasters on inflation in advanced economies appears relatively
limited. While storms and droughts may increase food prices in the near term, the effect is short-
lived and is typically reversed within a year. Moreover, inflation in other parts of the index can fall,
9
offsetting the overall impact.
Monetary policy certainly has sufficient tools to stabilise inflation over the medium term, i.e. a few
years. But it may bring a greater degree of short-term volatility in output and inflation.
The  relatively  localised  impact  of  climatic  events  or  other  shocks  might  have  implications  for
fiscal  policy,  with  revenues  typically  falling  and  spending  rising.
  This  can  worsen  debt
sustainability.
  But  making  strong  assumptions  based  on  the  empirical  evidence  so  far,
particularly given the uncertainty, would be hazardous.
10
11
Yet the ability of fiscal policy to mitigate the impact plays an important role in the region’s long-run
recovery.  It  would  be  prudent  policy  to  advise  countries  to  prepare  themselves  for  a  potential
future  increase  in  climatic  events  by  reducing  public  sector  debt  and  creating  greater  fiscal
space. But are other risks like demographic change not better identified? How are they related to
climate  change? And  how  should  a  central  bank  with  a  limited  geographical  remit  respond  to
events affecting the planet as a whole? Where does endogeneity end and exogeneity begin?
If  understanding  the  effects  of  climate  change  –  which  occurs  over  countless  decades  or
centuries  –  on  economic  developments  over  a  horizon  of  three  to  five  years  is  complex,
anticipating its long-term effects on monetary policy is harder still.
Some observers anticipate reductions in the productive capacity of the real economy.
 Firms
shifting  production  because  higher  temperatures  or  rising  sea  levels  render  their  current
locations  uninhabitable  could  represent  a  significant 
industrial  change.  But  simplistic
assumptions  do  not  reflect  the  reality  of  multiple  equilibria.  Each  change  also  creates
opportunities  and  unleashes  creative  thinking.  Will  productivity  growth  suffer  if  firms  divert  a
greater share of their investment towards repair and replacement of existing capital rather than
towards research and development? Should this capital allocation be in public or private hands?
12
One can accumulate a large number of one-sided assumptions and conclude that these would
together depress the trend growth rate of the economy. And weak long-term growth expectations
could in turn lower the natural rate of interest, pushing down the rate at which monetary policy is
accommodative.  We  should  remain  open  to  all  information  and  assumptions  but  also  not
underestimate the uncertainty of our knowledge.
Looking  at  inflation,  the  debate  tends  to  centre  on  the  effects  of  energy  price  inflation  on  the
overall  index,  although  other  prices  may  well  be  affected  by  climate  change  too.  The  EU
reference scenario of 2016  suggests that household electricity prices will rise over the coming
decades. Others have suggested that the low marginal cost of renewable energy could lead to
falling energy prices in the longer term, with lower volatility than at present.
13
None  of  these  relative  price  changes  have  impeded  the  ECB’s  ability  to  deliver  on  its  price
stability  mandate.  Nor  is  it  reasonable  to  assume  that  changes  in  relative  energy  prices  –  in
either direction – will do so in the future. Credible monetary policy, conducted by an independent
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
central bank, anchors overall inflation expectations. The bigger threat to price stability over the
long run does not lie in relative price changes, but rather in a loss of independence by central
banks  following  a  situation  in  which  they  have  they  ventured  far  into  a  political  agenda  with
distributional consequences.
Financial stability
Let me now look at the channels through which climate change can impair financial stability. The
work done by the Financial Stability Board’s Taskforce on Climate Related Financial Disclosures,
the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  various  central  banks  within  the  Eurosystem  and
elsewhere endeavours to identify potential risks and vulnerabilities.
The analysis identifies three principal sources of risk: first, the physical risk from exposure to
climatic events; second, the sharp adjustments in asset prices arising from discretionary policy
interventions;  and  third,  investors  being  so  caught  up  in  the  euphoria  over  “green”  financial
assets that they fail to adequately price in their risks. The absence of any agreed definition or
standard about what is “green” and what is “sustainable” is however the biggest shortcoming so
far.
The  first  risk  mainly  falls  on  insurers,  who  need  to  continuously  monitor  and  assess  risks  to
ensure capital adequacy. The ECB is, however, explicitly excluded from supervising insurance
firms under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The banking sector may also
be affected, to the extent that climatic events affect the physical collateral underpinning lending.
Where individual banks have loan portfolios concentrated in particular geographic locations, the
risk  of  failure  is  increased.  Moreover,  the  overall  economic  impact  of  that  failure  could  be
magnified by any remaining interlinkages between banks and sovereigns.
Transition risk occurs because the path to a low carbon environment is not smooth. City-wide
bans on diesel cars and the fallout from Dieselgate have driven down car makers’ equity prices
while also reducing the prices for second-hand diesel cars, detracting from their collateral value.
In this case we need to assess social responses such as the recent street protests in France.
Third-quarter GDP growth in Germany was negative following the sharp slump in production as
car  makers  adapted  to  new  emission  tests.  While  this  episode  appears  to  be  short-lived,  it
illustrates the impact that regulation can have on activity and asset values.
14
Third, undervaluation of risks in new green financial products could lead to price bubbles. I call
this  channel  the  Ponzi  risk  of  green  finance.
  We  never  know  exactly  where  –  but  the  next
bitcoin mania is always lurking somewhere around the corner. Experience has taught us that you
can only properly identify an asset price bubble once it has burst. And certainly a central bank
should not try to prick an inflating speculative bubble with the blunt sword of monetary policy – the
collateral damage to the economy and inflation could be too severe. By the same token, central
banks must not contribute to inflating such a bubble.
Mitigating risks through green financing
But combating the potential economic disruption from climate change goes beyond reacting to
events once they occur. Taking steps to reduce carbon emissions and investing in infrastructure
can help limit their future impact.
Economic theory points to a role for public policy to intervene to correct market failure in cases
where the private sector does not fully take into account the social cost of its activities. A carbon
tax  incentivises  the  private  sector  to  find  efficient  ways  of  reducing  pollution.
  However,  the
issue of how to distribute the burden associated with this incentive is socially divisive.
15
From  a  socially  optimal  perspective,  green  investments  may  also  be  underfinanced  if  market
participants make investment decisions based on excessively short horizons. Moreover, scale,
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
liquidity  and  reliable  benchmarks  can  considerably  improve  market  functioning.  Public  sector
intervention at the creation of such markets can provide the right framework to help kick start
private-sector involvement.
The  European  Investment  Bank  issued  the  world’s  first  green  bonds  in  2007,  listed  at  the
Luxembourg stock exchange. Further issuance has provided volume to the market. Today, more
than 160 green bonds list on the LuxSE. Certification and incentives are also in place, but the
issue of international recognition is still unresolved.
As  a  AAA-rated  issuer,  the  EIB  helps  provide  a  benchmark  for  calculating  yield  curves  and
spreads  in  the  green  bond  market.  The  European  Commission’s  work  on  standardised
definitions,  classifications  and  reporting  requirements  should  help  increase  transparency,
discourage  “green-washing”  and  improve  market  pricing.  These  initiatives  now  appear  to  be
bearing fruit, with the private sector issuing more green bonds in recent years.
But while there may be a role for such public sector initiatives at the European level, the ECB’s
narrow mandate curtails its ability to contribute – a fact that, I think, is not always well understood
by  our  critics  on  the  subject.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  some  people  say  that  we  could
contribute: first, through our asset purchase programme (APP) and second, through our role as
banking supervisors.
The Treaty has granted us independence in choosing the best monetary policy instruments to
use in fulfilling our mandate for price stability. But that independence is not a carte blanche to act
arbitrarily. Our use of monetary policy tools needs to be necessary, suitable and proportionate to
achieving  our  aim,  while  respecting  the  principles  of  an  open  market  economy  with  free
competition.
 Going beyond these strict conditions would erode our legitimacy, which could in
turn threaten our future independence and reduce our ability to achieve our mandate over the
long term.
16
So where do green bonds fit into the APP? Purchases and reinvestments under the APP are
temporary  and  are  undertaken  to  preserve  price  stability.  As  such,  purchases  have  to  be
calibrated  to  achieve  the  maximum  impact  on  output  and  inflation,  which  means  purchasing
bonds issued by a wide range of economic sectors without distorting the relative asset prices.
Carbon-intensive sectors accounted for nearly half of the bonds eligible for the corporate sector
purchase  programme  (CSPP)  at  its  inception.  Excluding  these  bonds  would  have  limited  the
CSPP’s coverage, making it less effective. In other words, the exclusion of these sectors would
limit the tool’s suitability for its primary purpose of ensuring price stability.
Moreover, focusing purchases on green bonds would run counter to the requirement to respect
the workings of an open market economy and be tantamount to industrial policy. The APP is a
tool for macroeconomic stabilisation, not for microeconomic reallocation. Deviating from market
neutrality and interfering with economic policy risks exposing the ECB to litigation. It is not up to
the central bank but to elected governments to decide which industry is to be closed and when.
As central bankers, we have to respect and implement legitimate decisions in this context. And
the effectiveness of monetary policy has been bolstered by abstaining from normative judgments
on the morality of markets and industries.
Of course, under the principle of market neutrality, we have also purchased green bonds. We
currently  hold  around  24%  of  eligible  publicly-issued  green  bonds  and  around  20%  of  private
sector green bonds. In both cases, the proportion is in line with our share of holdings in the total
CSPP-eligible universe.
Beyond  our  primary  mandate  for  price  stability,  it  is  worth  remembering  that  we  are  not
regulators, neither for financial markets nor for banks. The ECB carries out banking supervision
within the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) under the Capital Requirements Regulation and
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Directive, adopted by the Council of the EU and the European Parliament, with further regulations
set  by  the  European  Banking Authority.  We  are  not  free  to  vary  the  capital  requirements  of
supervised  banks  to  take  into  account  their  climate  risks,  or  to  encourage  climate  finance.
Indeed, when ECB Banking Supervision, acting within its supervisory mandate, issued guidance
on non-performing loans earlier this year, this generated tensions with regulators, who felt the
guidance strayed into the territory of legislation. But we are ready to bring in our experience if so
requested, in particular if it were suggested to strengthen or broaden disclosure obligations, for
example.
Nonetheless, climate risks have been identified in ECB Banking Supervision’s risk assessment
for 2019 and will be among the topics covered in the qualitative discussions held with banks on
an individual basis.
The  ECB  will  continue  to  carry  out  our  democratically  delegated  functions  as  set  out  in  the
Treaty. Should a greater groundswell of support for environmental action cause bank regulators
to modify the regulatory framework under which the SSM operates, supervisors must of course
adjust their actions and implement the legal requirements accordingly.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Climate  change  poses  the  risk  of  considerable  social  costs  and  economic  disruption.  The
challenges of climate change are social issues. The analysis and choice of possible solutions,
including suitable instruments and their financing, require rigorous political debate. And no matter
which path a society takes, the potential changes can have serious effects on sectors, regions,
the  distribution  of  income  and  wealth,  and  generations  over  time.  Economically,  there  will  be
relative winners and losers. It is therefore the responsibility of elected representatives to decide
on the best solutions.
Central banks are explicitly excluded from such political debates. In view of the central banks’
almost  limitless  financial  power,  politicians  would  come  under  too  much  temptation  to  use
monetary policy to achieve short-term political goals, a situation that could undermine the task of
preserving the purchasing power of money. That is why, in most jurisdictions, monetary policy
has been transferred to technocrats who are independent of politics and are bound to fulfil a strict
and  unambiguous  mandate  to  guarantee  price  stability.  In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  this  “de-
politicisation” has constitutional status.
At  the  same  time,  even  an  independent  central  bank  does  not  operate  in  a  vacuum.
Technological  progress, 
regulatory
requirements by legislators influence the environment in which monetary policy operates.
tensions  and,  of  course, 
innovations,  geopolitical 
However,  monitoring  and  analysing  the  extent  to  which  climate  change  or  other  shocks  may
affect  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  the  economic  cycle,  the  soundness  of  individual
banks  and  financial  stability  as  a  whole,  and  how  they  interact,  is  part  of  our  forward-looking
approach.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Goethe, J. W. (1808), Faust. Eine Tragödie.
Goethe (1808), ibid.
World Economic Forum Global risks report 2018.
Stern report: unionsforenergydemocracy.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/sternreview_report_complete.pdf
Noy, I (2009), “The macroeconomic consequences of disasters”, Journal of Development Economics, 88(2):
221–231.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Strulik, H & T Trimborn (2018), “Natural disasters and economic performance”, Environmental and Resource
Economics, forthcoming .
Noy (2009), op cit.
von Peter, G & von Dahlen, S & S Saxena (2012), “Unmitigated disasters? New evidence on the macroeconomic
cost of natural catastrophes”, BIS Working Papers 394, Bank for International Settlements.
Parker, M (2018), “The impact of disasters on inflation”, Economics of Disasters and Climate Change, 2(1): 21–
48.
Noy, I & A Nualsri (2011), “Fiscal storms: public spending and revenues in the aftermath of natural disasters”,
Environment and Development Economics, 16(01): 113–128.
Klomp, J (2017), “Flooded with debt”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 73(PA): 93–103.
E.g. McKibbin, W & Morris, A & Panton, A & P Wilcoxen (2017), “Climate change and monetary policy: Dealing
with  disruption” CAMA Working Papers 2017–77, Centre for Applied Macroeconomic Analysis, The Australian
National University.
EU reference scenario 2016: energy, transport and GHG emissions trends to 2050, Publications Office of the
European Union, Luxembourg.
A Ponzi scheme is an investment scam that promises high returns with low risk for investors. It generates
profits for early investors by attracting new ones. However, at some point there won’t be enough money and no
new investors, and the bubble bursts.
Nordhaus,  W  (1993),  “Rolling  the  ‘DICE’:  an  optimal  transition  path  for  controlling  greenhouse  gases”,
Resource and Energy Economics, 15(1): 27–50.
See Mersch, Y. (2016), “Monetary policy in the euro area: scope, principles and limits”, Speech by Yves Mersch,
Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the Natixis Meeting of Chief Economists, Paris, 23 June.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
