interaction  between  monetary  policy  and
Peter  Praet:  The 
macroprudential policy
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
Money,  Macro  and  Finance  Research  Group  Conference  on  the  Resilience  of  the  Global
Financial Architecture, London, 27 September 2018.
 I would like to thank John Hutchinson for his support in the preparation of this speech.
Introduction
A decade on from the start of the global financial crisis, which led to the biggest drop in economic
activity  in  euro  area  economies  since  the  second  world  war,  the  euro  area  is  currently
experiencing a broad-based expansion. Looking ahead, significant monetary policy stimulus is
still  needed  to  support  the  gradual  build-up  of  price  pressures  for  the  sustainable  return  of
inflation to levels below, but close to, 2%. At this stage of the recovery, the main risk to price
stability would be a significant slowdown in growth that could originate from rising protectionism,
vulnerabilities in emerging markets and a global repricing of risk.
The crisis has brought about a major overhaul of the regulatory, supervisory and macroprudential
frameworks  in  Europe.  While  this  is  expected  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  systemic  financial
vulnerabilities taking root and morphing into a crisis, we should acknowledge that we are still in a
transition phase. Some major elements of the new frameworks still have to be implemented or
finalised, and legacies from the previous crisis are still present. Furthermore, some areas of the
financial system are still not yet adequately covered by regulation, for example leverage in the
non-bank financial sector.
In my remarks today, I would like to elaborate on the interaction between monetary policy and
macroprudential  policy.  I  will  first  review  the  conceptual  framework  for  monetary  policy  and
financial  stability  and  then  look  at  how,  at  this  stage  of  the  cycle,  macroprudential  policy  and
monetary policy can best complement each other in the pursuit of their respective objectives.
Monetary policy and financial stability
Price  stability  and  financial  stability  are  tightly  interconnected  and  mutually  reinforcing;  in  the
longer-term,  each  is  a  necessary  –  but  not  sufficient  –  condition  for  the  other.  Price  stability
contributes to the efficient allocation of resources in the real economy, thereby supporting long-
term  growth. A  stronger  and  more  stable  macroeconomic  environment  contributes  to  healthy
household and business balance sheets, thereby fostering financial stability.
However, history abounds with cases where financial vulnerabilities were built up in good times,
while market participants overly discounted the likelihood of adverse shocks. Financial instability
is basically the result of market failures, which should be addressed by regulation (covering the
time  and  cross-section  dimensions  of  financial  stability).  Deficient  regulation  can  lead  to
excessive leverage and maturity transformation, which may in turn result in funding fragilities and
systemic vulnerability. Weak design of crisis management frameworks may also lead to ex ante
excessive risk-taking in the private sector (e.g., “too-big-to-fail” behaviours) and, in cross-border
crises, to a lack of trust and free-riding behaviours by crisis management authorities, amplifying
the initial shock.
Since  the  1970s,  the  frequency  of  financial  instability  episodes  has  increased  globally.  This
prolonged  trend  appears  to  coincide  with  the  gradual  undoing  of  the  post-war  financial  and
regulatory  structures.  The  shift  towards  less  stringent  financial  regulation,  combined  with
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
in 
financial 
incentive  structures
breakthroughs 
underpinning the financial industry. This is likely to have been a primary cause of the episodes of
financial instability that punctuated the global economic history of the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s
1
and reached a climax with the global financial crisis.
innovation,  has  profoundly  altered 
the 
To prevent the emergence of such bad outcomes, a sound, system-wide approach to financial
regulation is of the essence. But what is the role of monetary policy? Can monetary policy be
conducted in a way that reduces the likelihood of financial instability? The long-running debate on
these issues within academic and policy-making circles can be broadly broken down into three
2
different viewpoints.
The first is the “pre-crisis consensus” view, which argues that monetary policy should maintain a
relatively  narrow  mandate  of  price  stability,  leaving  financial  stability  to  prudential  authorities.
Under this view, the monetary authority should only take financial stability concerns into account
in so far as they affect the outlook for price stability and economic activity. The second view is to
“lean–against–the–wind”,  i.e.  that  as  price  stability  may  not  be  sufficient  for  financial  stability,
central  banks  should  lean  against  the  emergence  of  financial  imbalances  by  tightening  the
monetary policy stance over and above the level necessary to bring inflation back to target over a
policy horizon that is generally understood to be around two years. The third view is that “financial
stability  is  price  stability”.  Proponents  of  this  view  advocate  a  more  radical  change  in  the
objective of monetary policy, arguing that financial stability and price stability are so intertwined
that one cannot distinguish between the two.  Under this view, both standard and non-standard
monetary policies are in the first place attempts at stabilizing the financial system, addressing
malfunctioning financial markets and smoothing the monetary transmission process.
3
While  all  these  viewpoints  recognise  the  important  interplay  between  financial  stability  and
monetary policy in pursuit of price stability, their relevance ultimately depends on (i) the weight to
be  attached  to  the  “risk-taking”  channel  of  monetary  policy,  (ii)  the  strength  of  the
macroprudential framework and (iii) the policy strategy of the monetary authority, especially as
regards its policy horizon.
The risk-taking channel
Monetary  policy  contributes  to  financial  stability  by  smoothing  business  cycles  and  anchoring
inflation expectations. Monetary policy works through its effects on intertemporal substitution and
risk  appetite.  By  lowering  risk-free  rates,  monetary  policy  increases  the  attractiveness  of
investments  projects  which  would  not  have  been  profitable  under  tighter  financing  conditions.
When the central bank wants to exert downward pressure more directly on long-term interest
rates, it can absorb duration risk from the market by purchasing securities of relatively longer
maturity. This frees up more risk-bearing capacity for investors, which they can redeploy towards
bearing different types of risk, including equity and credit risk.
In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  restoring  risk  appetite  has  been  a  key  condition  for
stimulating  economic  activity.  And  as  inflation  convergence  proceeds  only  slowly,  continued
monetary stimulus is still needed today. This begs the question whether the persistent monetary
accommodation that is needed for inflation convergence could bring about excessive risk-taking
and contribute to financial stability risks down the road.
Risks to financial stability can build up when low interest rates interact with distorted incentives in
the financial sector, which arise from information frictions in credit markets and externalities that
have  not  been  properly  addressed  by  regulation  and  supervision.  Key  financial  vulnerabilities
include excessive dependence on unstable short-term funding, too much leverage, inadequate
capital provision for risk exposure and a weak underwriting of loans.
Macroprudential policy
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The regulatory and supervisory overhaul that took place in the aftermath of the crisis aims to
ensure high-level resilience in the financial system, contain the inherent pro-cyclicality within the
financial  system  and  take  into  account  systemic  negative  externalities  and  system-wide
feedback loops. By design, this should limit excessive risk-taking in the financial sector resulting
from periods of accommodative monetary policies.
The  creation  of  a  macroprudential  framework  with  its  own  objectives,  authorities  and  tools
provides  an  important  complement  to  monetary  policy.  In  the  long  term,  the  complementarity
naturally arises because the respective objectives are intertwined and one cannot be achieved
without the other. At the same time, they complement each other equally well in the short term.
When asset prices, leverage, financial exuberance and strength of the economy and inflationary
pressures move in the same direction, monetary policy and macroprudential policy typically pull
in  the  same  direction  too.  On  the  other  hand,  when  financial  imbalances  increase  amid  an
environment  characterised  by  relatively  muted  inflation,  the  twin  goals  of  price  stability  and
financial stability can be best achieved by resorting to two separate instruments, in line with the
4
Tinbergen principle.
While  more  restrictive  monetary  policy  may  be  able  to  lean  against  the  build-up  of  financial
imbalances, targeted macroprudential measures are typically a more efficient way of addressing
their  causes.  This  is  especially  relevant  in  the  euro  area,  given  its  multi-country  composition.
Macroprudential measures can be targeted to specific member countries to address the build-up
of local imbalances, which cannot be addressed in an efficient manner by the single monetary
policy.
The  presence  of  macroprudential  policy  should,  however,  not  lead  monetary  policy  to  neglect
financial stability issues. When the build-up of financial imbalances affects a large part of the
economy, only monetary policy rates have the ability to reach into all “corners of the economy”
(to  borrow  from  Jeremy  Stein’s  remark).   And  when  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances
pervades the economy, monetary policy should stand ready to adopt a leaning-against-the-wind
posture.
The monetary policy horizon
5
In  pursuing  its  price  stability  mandate,  monetary  policy  can  inadvertently  exacerbate  financial
stability  risks.  As  monetary  policy  operates  under  uncertainty,  there  have  been  episodes  of
monetary policy mis-calibration throughout economic history, but the consequences for financial
stability very much depend on the prevailing financial regulatory regimes.
Monetary  policy  mis-calibration  may  lead  to  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  in  particular
when the central bank is faced with a sequence of positive cost-push shocks that curb domestic
price pressures for a prolonged period of time. Think, for instance, of the gradual penetration of
new  technologies  in  recent  decades  –  primarily  the  internet  and  related  digital  technologies  –
which boosted on-the-job productivity, or the emergence of new and cheaper sources of global
production,  which  resulted  from  the  ascent  of  China  as  a  global  manufacturing  hub  and
suppressed import costs for advanced economies.
These factors may bring about low inflation conditions which, if not analysed holistically – i.e.
taking  into  account  the  economic  strength  and  the  financial  exuberance  which  typically
accompany  such  conditions  –  may  encourage  a  looser  monetary  policy  than  would  be
appropriate.  Loose  monetary  policy,  in  turn,  may  reinforce  the  economic  momentum  that  is
already under way, further feed optimism and thus favour the build-up of financial imbalances.
Empirical evidence indeed suggests that stock market booms usually coincide with atypically low
inflation.  The  run-up  to  the  dotcom  bubble  in  the  late  1990s  provides  one  particularly  vivid
6
example of this pattern.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  are  two  responses  to  these  sorts  of  monetary  policy  pitfalls.  First,  an  appropriate
calibration of the monetary policy horizon. Modulating the horizon over which the central bank
aims to achieve its price stability objective depending on the shocks hitting the economy is a
principle of prudent monetary policy. A demand shock calls for a shorter policy horizon; a cost-
push shock calls for a longer one. Importantly, this principle holds only if inflation expectations
remain  firmly  anchored.  Second,  the  central  bank  can  minimise  the  risk  of  mis-calibrating
monetary policy if it broadens the scope of its analysis to an encompassing set of observables,
including monetary and financial variables. This also allows policymakers to monitor signs of the
emergence  of  financial  imbalances  and  to  calibrate  a  “leaning  against  the  wind”  approach  to
monetary policy.
The effects of the ECB’s monetary policy on the economy and the financial system
The  monetary  policy  response  to  the  crisis  has  been  central  in  restoring  the  bank  lending
channel and ensuring very accommodative financing conditions, which has paved the way for the
euro  area’s  recovery  and  continued  expansion.  While  the  pace  of  economic  expansion  has
recently moderated following the strong growth performance in 2017, the economy’s underlying
strength is expected to persist and crystallise at a pace of growth above potential in the coming
years.
Measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted, but have been increasing from earlier
lows. The incoming data continue to support our confidence that the sustained convergence of
inflation to our aim will proceed and will be maintained even after a gradual winding-down of our
net asset purchases.
Overall,  prudence,  patience  and  persistence  remain  the  guiding  principles  for  our  monetary
policy.  Significant  monetary  policy  stimulus  is  still  needed  to  support  the  further  build-up  of
domestic  price  pressures  and  headline  inflation  developments  over  the  medium  term.  The
protracted  period  of  low  interest  rates  that  contribute  to  the  ongoing  economic  expansion
necessary  for  the  continued  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  has  so  far  not  given  rise  to
discernible financial stability risks in the economy as a whole .  In the present environment and at
the current stage of the monetary policy cycle, however, it is important to be mindful that keeping
rates low for long periods can raise challenges for financial stability further down the road. In this
context, activating macroprudential instruments where needed is essential to ensure resilience,
contain procyclical behaviours and prevent the emergence of financial imbalances.
7
Macroprudential  measures  are  the  appropriate  response  in  situations  where  signs  of  financial
imbalances are not pervasive. They can be targeted to specific member countries or sectors to
address the build-up of local imbalances, which cannot be addressed in an efficient way by the
single monetary policy. Macroprudential measures have already been proposed or implemented
in some euro area countries. Authorities have taken decisions to calibrate the systemic risk and
countercyclical  capital  buffers,  as  well  as  sectoral  capital  requirements  for  real  estate  and
housing, and to introduce caps on loan-to-value ratios to counteract emerging risks.
Conclusion
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  proven  effective  in  sustaining  a  resilient  recovery  and
addressing  the  risks  to  price  stability.  This  in  turn  provides  a  strong  contribution  to  financial
sector resilience. Looking ahead, significant monetary policy stimulus is still needed to support
the gradual build-up of price pressures for inflation to return to levels below, but close to, 2% in a
durable fashion.
At  this  stage  of  the  cycle,  careful  monitoring  of  the  risk-taking  channel  of  monetary  policy  is
important. While there is no evidence of excessive misalignment across asset classes in the
euro area right now, there are signs that valuations are stretched in specific market segments.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Macroprudential instruments are best placed to counteract the emergence of specific financial
imbalances in an efficient and targeted manner. Macroprudential policy and monetary policy thus
complement one another in pursuit of their respective objectives.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
For a comprehensive overview, see Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2013), “Banking crises: An
equal opportunity menace”, Journal of Banking and Finance Vol. 37.
For  a  detailed  discussion,  see  Frank  Smets  (2014),  “Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  Closely
Linked”, International Journal of Central Banking Vol. 10 No. 2.
See  Markus  Brunnermeier  and  Yuliy  Sannikov  (2014),  “A  Macroeconomic  Model  with  a  Financial  Sector”,
American Economic Review Vol. 104, No. 2, February.
For a quantitative evaluation of the relevance of the Tinbergen’s principle in this setting, see Julio A. Carrillo,
Enrique G.Mendoza, Victoria Nuguer, Jessica Roldán-Peña, (2018), “Tight money – tight credit: coordination
failure in the conductof monetary and financial policies”, ECB Working Paper No 2129. They show that a regime
with separate financial and monetaryinstruments yields significant welfare gains.
See Jeremy Stein, “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement and Policy Responses”, speech at the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Missouri, 7 February 2013. He actually concluded that while policy rates have
the ability to reach into all corners of the economy, it would be better to use targeted supervisory and regulatory
measures to address localised imbalances as they have less potential to damage the economy.
L. Christiano, C. Ilut, R. Motto and M. Rostagno, “Monetary Policy and Stock Market Booms”, paper prepared for
Macroeconomic Challenges: the Decade Ahead, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming August 26 28, 2010.
See Financial Stability Review, European Central Bank, May 2018.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
