               RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
   KEYNOTE ADDRESS BY THE RESERVE BANK OF FIJI GOVERNOR, MR ARIFF ALI  
SOUTH PACIFIC CENTRAL BANKING RESEARCH CONFERENCE,  
12 DECEMBER 2018, HOLIDAY INN, SUVA 
  Your Excellency, Ms Amy Crago, Australian Deputy High Commissioner to Fiji; 
Mr Loi Bakani, Governor, Bank of Papua New Guinea; 
Mr Denton Rarawa, Governor, Central Bank of Solomon Islands; 
Deputy Governors and fellow central bankers; 
Members of the Griffith University Faculty; 
Distinguished Guests and Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
 Bula Vinaka! 
It is indeed an honor for me to give the keynote address in this Inaugural South Pacific Central Banking Research 
Conference,  co-hosted  by  Griffith  University  and  the  central  banks  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  Solomon  Islands, 
Vanuatu and Fiji.   
In fact, I am delighted that we central bankers in the Pacific have taken this bold step to strengthen our research 
capacity, which is evident by the high-level attendance today, of representative central banks from the region.  
Our  being  here  also  demonstrates  our  sincere  appreciation  of  the  commitment  of  Griffith  University  and  the 
Australian Government to assist in the research capacity of our Pacific central banks. 
1 
                RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
I wish to congratulate Dr Pramendra Sharma and the team from Griffith University for convening this conference, 
 an ultimate outcome of some years of dedicated work to highlight the research initiatives of our Pacific central 
bankers and provide a platform for dialogue, information sharing and future research opportunities. 
Deputy Governor Masitabua has welcomed us all last night so I do not wish to repeat his welcome, but I only 
wish to mention that the Reserve Bank of Fiji is indeed privileged to co-host this inaugural Conference and we 
look forward to fruitful deliberations in the next two days. 
 Collaboration with Griffith University 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to share at the outset a brief background of our journey with Griffith University.  
The Griffith-South Pacific Central Banks (SPCBs) partnership with the support of the Australian Government has 
come  a  long  way,  from  one  joint-working  paper  with  the  RBF  in  2014  to  almost  25  published  and  partially 
completed  working  papers  amongst  the  four  central  banks  represented  here  today.    We  have  indeed  proven 
ourselves as worthy partners with Griffith University, and we can only expect bigger and better outcomes from 
this great partnership. 
I understand that one joint-paper under this collaboration has been published in the “Review of Pacific Basin 
Financial Markets and Policies”, a prestigious academic journal in Singapore, and another has been accepted 
for publication in the “Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy”.  Our Griffith counterparts have assured us that 
some of our regional joint papers are good potentials for top-ranked journals in the coming years.   
There is certainly much to be excited about, for a unique regional partnership of this kind, yet, it would be remiss 
of me if I did not acknowledge a certain individual whose confidence in our work, and tireless efforts behind the 
scenes got us in the door with Griffith University. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we would not have come this far if it was not for the key role played by Dr. Parmendra 
Sharma, a former colleague of us here at the Reserve Bank of Fiji.  Had it not been for his work in linking our 
researchers  to  the  Griffith  experts  and  securing  the  necessary  funding  through  the  Australian  Department  of 
Foreign Affairs & Trade (DFAT), I believe we would not be having this conference today. 
2 
                RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
I am  also pleased to mention that Dr Sharma has just been recognized for  his collaborative work with central 
 banks  in  the  Pacific  by  being  awarded  the  2018  Griffith  Business  School  Pro  Vice  Chancellor’s  Engagement 
Leadership Award.  Our heartiest congratulations to you Dr Sharma! 
 Let me now move on to the three key messages that I wish to share today: 
1.  Being Small Should not be an Excuse for not Conducting Good Research 
A favourite quote that I share a lot and make reference to in my regular discussions with my staff and external 
stakeholders of the Reserve Bank of Fiji is by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Former Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia, 
and she said:  
“The central bank is a high impact organization.  Its decisions or indecisions, its actions or inactions will have 
major and far reaching repercussions and consequences on the economic well-being of the public at large and 
the entire spectrum of businesses.  The responsibility and accountability are therefore immense........Central 
banking is therefore not for the faint of heart.” 
We  cannot,  therefore,  make  the  excuse  of  being  small  central  banks,  as  a  limiting  factor  to  our  research 
capabilities,  because  the  responsibility  and  accountability  we  play  in  our  small  economies  are  immense.    Our 
business  is  about  bringing  value  and  benefits  to  our  citizens  as  policy  making  institutions  and  while  research 
allows us as policymakers to do our job better, good research lends credibility and improves the quality of our 
policy. 
 So we ask the question, what is necessary to produce good research at the central bank?  There is no single 
formula for this but there are some necessary conditions for doing good research: 
(i) 
First, there must be support from the top, and in our case from the central bank governors.  Without this 
support, any attempt to build a good research department will most likely fail.  I would like to say that the presence 
of us Governors in this conference is a testament of our support for research in our central banks. 
3 
                RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
For  us  at  the  RBF,  two  significant  initiatives  were  implemented  as  part  of  our  collaboration  with  Griffith 
 University.  We  have  set  up  a  Research  Unit  in  our  Economics  Group  with  the  aim  to  produce  more  research 
papers.  Selected staff are rotated to the Unit as an opportunity to undertake research and produce working papers.  
In  addition,  the  RBF  now  provides  staff  with  a  cash  reward  of  $1000  if  their  research  is  published  as  either 
working papers or journal articles. 
(ii) 
Second, there must be highly trained research staff and a system of measuring quantity  and quality  of 
research output.  Investing in the continuous development of our central bank staff is important and I know that 
a significant part of our central bank budgets is allocated to training and development.  We must continue with 
this and have as a priority the need to build highly trained research officers.  However, a real challenge faced by 
our small central banks is attracting and retaining research capacity and capability as many of our staff are so 
inclined to leave us for Universities that pay more and conduct more research.  More collaboration with academic 
institutions and research institutes such as the one we now have with Griffith could help address this. 
Going forward, we have to establish a system of measuring the quantity and quality of our research outcomes.  
Credibility  and quality of research is  crucial  and  good  evidence through a policy proposal  supported by  good 
research is highly likely to be considered for decision making.  Research must also be forward looking in nature 
to be relevant when the issues it addresses are faced by policy makers. 
(iii) 
Third, there must be a productive and rich research environment for good research to be possible.  One 
way to ensure this is making our central banks open to external research from academia, the fruits of which we 
are  witnessing  today  through  our  collaboration  with  Griffith  University.    There  is  room  therefore  for  more 
collaboration, which brings me to the second key message that I wish to share today: 
2.  Extending our Research Collaboration beyond the Griffith University 
My second key message is that we should extend our research beyond the current collaborations with Griffith 
University.  
Our role as central  banks has never been more important  than it is  today.  We have the core  responsibility to 
promote macroeconomic and financial stability but  our mandate has also  expanded to  include financial sector 
4 
                RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
development, consumer protection and financial literacy.  This is a significant undertaking that calls for close 
 collaboration  with  public  sector  agencies,  private  sector  organisations,  academic  institutions  and  regional 
organisations.  
I would therefore strongly recommend that we consider extending the collaboration that we have now started with 
Griffith University to other institutions and agencies in our countries and in the region.  These include PFTAC, 
Regional  ADB,  World  Bank  and  IFC  Offices,  possibility  USP,  and  FNU.  In  acknowledgement  of  the  limited 
resources for our research functions and data availability being a real constraint in our small island economies, 
such collaboration should assist in addressing these challenges. 
Expanding our collaboration to  other institutions will also  help  better communicate our policies to the public, 
improve our credibility as policymakers and contribute to the general knowledge that benefits society as a whole. 
3.  Central Banks should rightfully be Centers of Research in our Developing Economies 
My third and final message to my central bank colleagues is that central banks should rightfully be the center of 
research in our developing economies.   
I had stated earlier the reference made to central banks as high impact organisations.  In an environment of greater 
transparency and enhanced communication, expectations are high on the delivery of our results.  As central banks, 
we have to be knowledge intensive institutions and derive our influence mainly from the quality of our arguments, 
which requires a strong research function. 
Central  bank  continuity  provides  institutional  memory.    A  central  bank  accumulates  knowledge  both  from 
research  and  experience.    Governments  change,  but  central  banks  stay.    We  are  one  of  the  most  important 
reservoirs of knowledge  that rightfully places us  as the  center of research in  our small  economies.   While we 
acknowledge that we do not have access to quality, timely and reliable data in most instances, it should not stop 
us from using simple-excel based analysis and developing policy solutions based on our own unique experiences 
and institutional knowledge. 
5 
                RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
The importance of evidence-based policy meetings and deliberations cannot be emphasised enough.  Our regional 
 central  banks  need  to  continue  partnering  with  relevant  stakeholder  institutions  as  we  aim  to  up-skill  our 
researchers, build capacity and narrow the knowledge gap. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, this conference is a great example of collaboration at the regional level on an issue that is 
core to our central banking role.  Being the first of its kind in the region, it is my hope that the two-day Conference 
will stimulate vigorous debate and  allow the sharing of diverse opinions  to  address  some of the financial and 
economic challenges facing our Pacific Islands.  
I congratulate all our researchers who will be presenting their work during the conference.  The research papers 
are the culmination of critical thinking and innovative proposals that should be encouraged to the next step of 
being published in reputable journals. 
In  closing,  I  wish  you  all  a  successful  workshop  and  I  trust  that  the  knowledge-sharing  will  be  useful  and 
rewarding to you personally and to your respective organizations and countries. 
I also hope that you will find time to enjoy Suva.  It may be challenging to listen to all the technical discussions 
planned, especially having such a conference in the festive month of  December, so please do enjoy our Fijian 
hospitality and may I also take this opportunity to wish you all a blessed Christmas and a prosperous 2019. 
 Thank you! 
6 
 