Mojmír Hampl: Is the euro zone still an attractive target for countries
outside the euro? A view from the Czech Republic
Speaking  points  by  Mr  Mojmír  Hampl,  Vice  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the
conference “Are we on the verge of a new Euro Crisis?”, Copenhagen, 4 September 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Good afternoon. First of all, let me thank Lars Christensen for his kind invitation to speak here
today in front of such a distinguished audience. It is really an honour for me and I am also glad to
be in Copenhagen again.
In this talk I will try to shed some light on what appears to be a puzzling attitude of some new EU
member countries towards the common currency.
I will use the example of my home country, the Czech Republic. It entered the EU in 2004 and
has no opt-out from euro adoption, so legally we are obliged to join and to make every effort to
enter the Eurozone as soon as possible.
Yet no major political force in our country pushes for euro adoption at the moment. Talks about
joining the Eurozone are simply not part of the political agenda, and we now have a fourth or so
government in a row declaring that this issue will be left “for the next government after the next
elections” – so it is being postponed to political infinity. The antechamber for euro adoption, the
ERM II, is not being considered either. And this approach has the full backing of the central bank.
Ten years ago, supporting euro adoption in our country was a sign of “good social morals among
the better classes”, whereas today only the brave confess to ardently supporting it. That’s how
much the mood of the elite and the electorate has changed over the last decade. Why is that so?
Here my seven personal comments come into play.
The euro and political union
A stateless monetary union is inherently unstable. A currency is usually a consequence, not a
cause,  of  the  establishment  of  a  state.  In  Europe,  however,  we  began  to  build  the  “currency
house” from the roof down, and then in 2008 everyone was very surprised at how the tiles flew
off when the first wind appeared. Is there a prospect of a political union – a single European state
– in the pipeline? Even if there is, do we want to be part of it? If the question is no, which would
seem to be the case, thoughts of introducing the euro in the Czech Republic should, for that
reason alone, be left on the back burner.
Autonomous monetary policy
Autonomous monetary policy is a kind of “absorber” of economic shocks. It is meant to reduce
their impact and smooth the economic cycle. It prevents an economic contraction being borne by
the unemployed and those on low incomes more than is necessary. Certainly, the more flexible
is your economy (in terms of public finances, the labour market, and so on), the easier it is to
cope with shocks and the less monetary policy is needed. However, the case of the Eurozone
shows  how  tricky  it  is  when  the  absorber  in  the  form  of  monetary  policy  is  switched  off  and
nothing replaces it. The shocks are bigger and hurt more. Listeners themselves can answer the
question of whether the labour market and labour law are likely be made more or less flexible
(and dismissals made easier) in the future. In doing so, they will answer the question of whether
there  will  be  a  need  in  the  future  for  more  or  less  domestic  monetary  policy  in  the  Czech
Republic, a country whose conservative population is so averse to upswings and downswings.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The “convergence trilemma”
The standard “monetary trilemma”, which you know very well (a country cannot simultaneously
have  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  an  open  capital  account  and  autonomous  monetary  policy),  is
accompanied  in  a  converging  economy  of  our  kind  with  something  I  call  the  “convergence
trilemma”. No country can simultaneously have high convergence growth, a fixed exchange rate,
and low macroeconomic imbalances, be they internal or external. In our case, catching up with
our  wealthier,  low-inflation  Western  peers  means  a  long-term  tendency  for  our  currency  to
appreciate. This is hardly consistent with a permanently fixed exchange rate.
The paradox of the Eurozone
The Eurozone paradox is that the best possible members of the club are the countries that are
so stable themselves in monetary and economic terms that they don’t need “to buy in stability
and credibility”. Such countries have fewer and fewer reasons to adopt the euro. Conversely, the
more a country begs to have the euro, the bigger the problem it will represent. This explains why
almost no one is conducting a euro debate in Sweden, even though it does not have a derogation
and many would like to see it in the Eurozone. Canonically, the same goes for us: either we can
continue  to  stabilise  ourselves,  in  which  case  we  don’t  need  the  euro,  or  we  will  destabilise
ourselves,  but  in  that  case  we  will  potentially  harm  others  in  the  euro  club  and  Eurozone
membership will be a hindrance in bad times.
There’s no story in our case
The Baltic states took the euro as a geopolitical and security safeguard and paid an economic
price  for  permanently  fixing  their  currencies  to  it.  Slovenia  wanted  to  cut  itself  off  from  the
Western  Balkans.  Slovakia  wanted  to  seal  the  reforms  of  former  Prime  Minister  Mikuláš
Dzurinda.  Germany  gained  unification  in  exchange  for  the  euro.  The  southern  countries  (Italy,
France, and Spain) gained the stability of the German mark because they were unable to create
such a currency at home. And those who were tied to the German mark long before the euro
was created (Austria and the Netherlands and Denmark for that matter) simply remained bound
to Frankfurt after the Eurozone was established, only the Bundesbank building was replaced all
of a sudden by the ECB building. There’s no basic euro story like this in the Czech Republic.
Why should we try to create one artificially? Our story is one of maintaining monetary stability
across  regimes  and  governments  and  of  keeping  the  koruna  as  the  name  of  our  currency
continuously since the time of Emperor Franz Joseph (his monetary reform established a new
currency  –  the  crown,  or  koruna  –  throughout  the  Austro-Hungarian  Monarchy  in  1892)
regardless  of  totalitarianism  and  the  horrors  of  the  20th  century.  Neither  the  Nazis,  nor  the
Communists  had  any  tendency  to  rename  the  currency  and  kept  this  old  monarchist  name
despite otherwise changing basically everything, and for the worse. Our country – unlike the rest
of Central Europe – has never experienced hyperinflation in its modern history, and this monetary
stability  has  always  served  the  entrenched  mentality  of  small  Czech  savers  well.  Domestic
scepticism about the euro: that’s our authentic Czech story.
The Prague-Copenhagen connection
I  have  to  add  with  some  bitterness  that  many  in  the  Czech  Republic  like  having  their  own
currency but not necessarily their own monetary policy or their autonomous central bank. This
magical contradiction can be seen in the pleiad of ostensibly conservative political opponents of
the euro in the revitalised euro debate. In one breath they say that we should not adopt the euro –
so that we can keep our own currency and hence retain the ability “to weaken the koruna in bad
times” – and then criticise the Czech National Bank for doing exactly that in the bad times of
2013. They then happily add that Greece would have benefited from having its own currency and
that Germany is profiting from the euro being weaker than the Deutschmark would have been.
The  same,  however,  doesn’t  go  for  the  Czech  Republic  after  2013.  These  endearing
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
inconsistencies are present throughout the population. Here again, however, the Eurozone and
its satellites offer parallels. You in Copenhagen have a fixed exchange rate against the euro (and
previously had a fixed rate against the mark) and thus in effect “buy in” monetary policy from
Frankfurt. You have your own notes and coins but not your own monetary policy. Note this fine
“Scandinavian paradox”: you have an opt-out from the euro following the 2000 referendum, yet
you do not make your own monetary policy, nor did you before the euro was created, whereas
the Swedes do not have an opt-out (although they have been trying not to fulfil the criteria and not
to  join  ever  since  rejecting  the  euro  in  their  2003  referendum),  yet  they  pursue  autonomous
monetary  policy.  I  sometimes  wonder  whether  the  Czech  sitting-on-the-fence  approach  is
heading towards the Danish model. It wouldn’t be my choice, but it’s good to be prepared.
The price of entering goes up, or the Bulgarian thorny road to the euro
Yes,  some  new  EU  members  are  still  keen  to  join  the  Eurozone.  Especially  in  Bulgaria,  the
desire is understandable: the country has held a fixed exchange rate visa-à-vis the euro since the
common currency’s inception. Just like Denmark, Bulgaria has outsourced its monetary policy to
Frankfurt, but unlike Denmark, it would also like to become an official member of the club to enjoy
all the benefits of using one of the most prestigious world currencies. On paper, at least, Bulgaria
appears  to  be  an  ideal  candidate:  unlike  many  of  the  current  members  of  the  Eurozone,  it
actually  fulfils  the  key  Maastricht  criteria.  But  the  idea  of  Bulgarian  membership  is  not  an
appetizing one to many technocrats at the ECB and to the representatives of some Eurozone
member states. So, for many years, Bulgarians have been tacitly discouraged from applying to
ERM II, the antechamber of the euro. This year, however, they tried their luck: perhaps they felt
that the conditions would never get any better than under Bulgarian presidency of the EU and
Jean-Claude  Juncker’s  vocal  emphasis  on  how  the  euro  should  become  the  currency  of  the
entire Union. Complicated negotiations followed, and their result is of key importance to all EU
member  countries  outside  the  Eurozone.  It’s  not  enough  that  Bulgaria  fulfils  the  important
Maastricht criteria: new criteria were thought up specifically to make the Bulgarian path to the
euro  as  difficult  and  humiliating  as  possible.  Prior  to  entering  ERM  II,  Bulgaria  has  to  join  the
Banking Union, pay its share in the ESM, and let the ECB conduct a deep audit of its financial
sector. In other words, it has to pay all the costs of Eurozone membership many years before it
becomes  a  member  –  and  without  any  assurance  that  it  will  be  accepted  to  the  club  at  all.
Crucially, in line with the principle of “equal treatment”, in the future all countries wishing to enter
ERM  II  are  expected  to  follow  these  humiliating  conditions.  Well,  in  my  eyes,  that  provision
practically closes the door to euro membership for countries such as the Czech Republic: it is
difficult to imagine how any government with a trace of honour left would choose for the country
to go through such an ordeal.
In sum, I would say that the pragmatic Anglo-Saxon approach of “if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” suits
the  Czech  Republic  and  other  Central  European  countries  well  on  the  point  of  independent
monetary policy. In the case of the euro, it holds true here more than anywhere else that we are
not rich enough to afford to repeat the potential mistakes of others. We make enough of our own.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
