Denis Beau: Where do crypto-assets fit into our payment system?
Speech by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the Bank of France
Conference, Rouen IAE, Rouen, 31 October 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Bitcoin was valued at USD 0.001 less than a year after its launch in October 2009. Today it is
worth  USD  6,500,  down  from  a  peak  of  USD  19,500  in  December  2017.  The  explosion  and
volatility in Bitcoin’s price have done much to fuel the media coverage surrounding the growth of
the new monetary and financial instruments known as crypto-assets,  of  which  Bitcoin  is
merely the best known. In fact, there are now over 2,000 of these types of assets worldwide.
Initially  designed  as  online  instruments  of  exchange,  these  assets  have  gradually  gained  a
foothold in the real economy with the development of services that allow them to be bought and
sold against currency issued by central banks or financial institutions, to be held, to be used as
instruments  of  exchange  against  other  assets  and,  with  the  recent  emergence  of  Initial  Coin
Offerings (ICOs), to be employed as investment and financing instruments.
Issued  and  stored  in  electronic  form,  these  assets  have  specific  features  that  US-based
comedian John Oliver jokingly summed up in his Last Week Tonight show on 11 March 2018, as
“everything you don’t understand about money combined with everything you don’t understand
about computers”. His comments reflect the fact that crypto-assets have unique financial,
monetary  and  technical  features  that  set  them  apart from  the  currencies  and  payment
instruments issued by financial institutions and central banks and which form the foundation of
our monetary system in Europe. They have no issuer for whom the assets act as a guarantee of
value. They do not have a guaranteed fixed exchange rate with the currency issued by the central
bank, which forms the basis of our payment system because it is the only one with legal tender
status, i.e. which must be accepted by everyone. And they rely for their circulation on blockchain,
a decentralised and distributed ledger system using cryptographic techniques.
These  unique  features  largely  explain  the  widely  varying  views  that  we  hear  today  about  the
outlook  for  crypto-assets,  keeping  in  mind  that,  for  now,  they  constitute  a  marginal  share  of
holdings of economic agents and within the global economy. At their peak in January 2018, total
outstanding  crypto-assets  represented  EUR  330  billion;  in  comparison,  the  euro  area’s  M1
monetary  aggregate  amounted  to  EUR  7.5  trillion.  Some  see  crypto-assets  as  disruptive
innovations poised to radically overhaul the way that our monetary and financing system works,
changing it for the better. Others believe that these are innovations that still need to find their
market. Or, to quote from a special issue on the subject published in September 2018 by The
Economist, a weekly economics magazine: “Cryptocurrencies look like a solution in search of a
problem.”
Given all this uncertainty, I would like to speak today from my perspective as a central banker,
supervisor, mindful of innovations that could affect the effectiveness and security of our payment
system, since this is a determining factor in the stability of our monetary and financial system.
Accordingly, I would like to share a few ideas and thoughts about where crypto-assets fit into
the  changes  taking  place  in  payment  methods,  and  about the  supervisory  challenges
posed by these new assets.
I.  To  begin  with,  let  me  set  the  development  of  crypto-assets  in  the  broader
context of the changes affecting payment instruments. Supporting this transformation
is a core activity for us at the Banque de France, in accordance with our statutory tasks of
ensuring the security of cashless payment instruments as well as the quality of banknotes
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
in circulation. Since banknotes are the only payment instruments with legal tender status,
we  have  to  make  sure  that  they  remain  a  secure  and  easily  accessible  payment
instrument for anyone who wants to use them, especially the most vulnerable people in our
society. Given this twofold mission, we base our activities on a principle of neutrality and
freedom of choice, which in turn means that we cannot favour one payment instrument
over another and do not seek to influence people’s behaviour or preferences.
1. In the payment instrument landscape, we are currently seeing a twin trend as
cash payments go down, while cashless payments undergo a transformation
driven by behavioural changes and technological innovation.
Shifts in consumption approaches, such as the growth of e-commerce, are fuelling a steady
decline  in  the  use  of  cash  in  transactions,  while  the  use  of  electronic  payment
instruments  is  increasing.  Statistically  speaking,  the  volume  of  banknotes  returned  by  the
public to cash processing firms fell by over 10% between 2012 and 2017. However, this decline
needs  to  be  put  into  context,  because  banknotes  still  dominate  face-to-face  transactions,
particularly small-value transactions, as shown by recent Eurosystem research, which found that
banknotes  continue  to  be  the  main  payment  instrument  in  Europe  and  France  by  number  of
transactions, accounting for 79% of transactions in the euro area and 68% in France. In value
terms, they make up 54% and 28% respectively.
 At  the  same  time,  we  are  seeing a  rise  in  electronic  payments,  which  are  not  merely
growing but also developing along four different pathways:
Spreading technology: advances in internet technologies and devices have paved the way
to  increase  the  number  of  channels  used  to  initiate  and  accept  payments.  The  ways  in
which these technologies are used are becoming more diversified and increasingly digital.
They are no longer confined to cards, as we are seeing with the rise of mobile payments.
A broader range of participants: I am thinking here about how the payments market has
expanded to include competition from big techs and major retailers, which are following a
wide range of strategies in this respect. The flipside of this trend is the increasingly global
nature of the market, which is raising sovereignty and independence issues, including the
question of control of data with respect to the American and Chinese tech giants.
Payment is becoming less prominent:  nowadays  the  actual  act  of  paying  is  becoming
less visible, as it is combined seamlessly within the overall transaction process to minimise
the impact on the payer. We are seeing this shift in online payments, for example, which are
designed to be increasingly fluid through solutions such as one-click buying.
Availability of payment services: payment services are becoming more available, ignoring
physical borders and time constraints to satisfy customer demand for instant, continuous
and uniform payment services, as economic agents become ever more mobile.
2.  The  development  of  crypto-assets  naturally  forms  part  of  these  underlying
trends affecting payment instruments, combining the search for anonymity, management
of  non-intermediated  peer-to-peer  payments  and 
the  use  of  entirely  web-based
technologies.
 But  crypto-assets  are  also  different  because  of  their  financial,  monetary  and
technological  features  that  I  mentioned  in  my  introduction.  These  clearly  create
opportunities to improve payment services in at least three ways, by:
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Harnessing the underlying blockchain technology to improve or supplement existing
processes: the Banque de France is already employing blockchain technology to improve
industry  processes.  For  example,  we  are  using  a  blockchain  project  called  MADRE  to
assign SEPA Creditor Identifiers, which are needed for creditors to issue direct debits.
Helping to remedy market inefficiencies: this could be done in the area of international
multi-currency payments, for example, with a view to improving the conditions under which
individuals transfer funds abroad.
Diversifying project financing methods:  a  prime  example  would  be  ICOs,  which  have
enabled swift and large-scale fundraising in the network technologies sector in the past two
years.
3. Yet for all that, can crypto-assets become true currencies that will revolutionise
our payment system, providing the decisive innovation that will lead us to the cashless
society that some people are predicting and even hoping for?
For the time being, this seems unlikely because existing crypto-assets are far from perfect.
As many central bankers have pointed out, today’s crypto-assets do not satisfactorily offer the
qualities expected of a currency and cannot be considered as such:
First, their value fluctuates enormously, preventing them from being used as units of
account. As a result, very few prices are denominated in crypto-assets and not many large
brick-and-mortar  or  online  retailers  accept  bitcoin  for  example,  although  there  are  some
exceptions [i.e. showroomprivé.com, France’s second largest flash sale web retailer, which
has accepted bitcoins since 2014].
Second, as intermediaries in exchanges, crypto-assets are far less effective than a
currency with legal tender status, insofar as (i) their price volatility makes it hard to use
them as a means of payment, (ii) they generate transaction fees that are far too high for
simple retail transactions, and (iii) they offer no guarantee of a refund in the event of fraud.
Third, the fact that they have no intrinsic value means that they cannot be used to
create trustworthy stores of value.
In addition, crypto-assets may be conduits for financial risk, security risk and especially
risks of cyber-attacks, money laundering and terrorist financing. These would represent
major  risks  for  users  and  hence  for  the  orderly  functioning  of  our  payment  system if
crypto-assets were ever to play a major role in that system.
II-  In  this  complicated  context,  with  crypto-assets  undergoing  technical  and
economic  trials  that  offer  opportunities  but  also  present  material  risks  for  our
payment  system,  should  we  consider  establishing  a  regulatory  framework  and
supervisory approach and, if so, how should we go about this?
 
1) Various courses of action are available to the public authorities. The first would be
to ignore crypto-assets. But even if the volumes in play remain small and do not represent
a  threat  to  financial  stability,  the  risks  that  I  mentioned  earlier  must  be  addressed.  The
second course of action would be to ban crypto-assets outright because of these same
risks. Several countries have already gone down this route, including China in 2013 and
Russia  in  2017. A  third  option,  and  the  one  that  has  so  far  been  the  preferred
response in Europe and France to innovations with the potential to change the
payment  services  market,  is  to  establish  appropriate  regulations  that  make  it
possible to reconcile two key imperatives:
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, address the risks that I mentioned, notably with a view to ensuring an adequate level of
protection for participants, whether they be investors or consumers.
Second, preserve the potential for technological innovation offered by crypto-assets.
 two 
imperatives  are  mutually  beneficial. Adopting  a  framework  that  protects
These 
participants in the real economy will help to increase their confidence in the mechanisms
associated with crypto-assets, thereby promoting growth in the new assets.
1. If we opt for creating a regulatory framework, what should go into it? That is
precisely  the  topic  of  a  number  of  debates  currently  being  conducted around
France’s new PACTE Bill. The proposed legislation includes an approach to crypto-assets
based on two pillars. The first specifically addresses the question of ICOs, proposing an
optional labelling system. Under this system, a company planning an ICO would be able to
ask  the  AMF  to  label  the  offering.  This  optional  label  would  give  the  offering  greater
credibility and reassure potential token buyers about the serious nature of the project and
the associated financing arrangements.
The second pillar concerns providers of crypto-asset services. These essentially include venues
used to exchange digital assets against legal currency, and providers of custody solutions for
digital assets. To satisfy anti-laundering obligations, these platforms must be registered. But to
address risks relating to security, market integrity and price manipulation, an optional label could
be granted at the service provider’s request by the AMF after a more in-depth investigation, in
order  to  provide  security  for  the  service  offered  to  users.  The  regulation  of  venues  used  to
exchange digital assets for legal currency, in France and elsewhere, is a key issue for obvious
reasons,  as  these  platforms  are  the  interface  between  the  virtual  and  real  worlds  and  hence
where risk can spread from the former to the latter.
As you are doubtless aware, the authorisation and labelling schemes mentioned in the PACTE
Bill are optional. But there is an exception when it comes to anti-money laundering and terrorist
financing  (AML/TF)  mechanisms.  European  regulators  have  been  firm  in  their  resolve  not  to
compromise in any way on this matter. Accordingly, the Fifth European Anti-Money Laundering
Directive makes all participants handling digital assets subject to applicable AML/TF provisions.
This is consistent with the system in place since 2014 in France, which states that an exchange
of crypto-assets in euro requires a payment services provider authorisation, and, accordingly,
compliance with AML/TF rules.
To take account of the experimental phase that crypto-assets are presently in and to
satisfy the key requirements of ensuring payment security while encouraging innovation
in the area, a possible alternative to the optional approach currently favoured by the
PACTE Bill would be to maintain a proportional approach. This has been the basis for the
European  regulation  of  payment  services  up  to  now  and  consists  in  setting  a  mandatory
framework whose requirements are adjusted according to the nature, development stage and
risk  of  the  associated  services.  This  approach  was  employed  under  the  Second  Payment
Services  Directive  (PSD2)  to  regulate  the  market  development  of  account  aggregators  and
payment initiators.
In conclusion, it is hard to anticipate the role that crypto-assets might play in the payment
system of the future, especially since the characteristics and features of these assets look set to
change considerably. Right now, there are major limitations to their everyday use in retail
payments,  and  crypto-assets  still  have  to  prove  their  attractiveness  in  this  regard,
particularly  since  an  extensive  range  of  payment  solutions  is  available,  and  these
solutions continue to modernise to address the need for instant exchanges, with, for example,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the introduction of mobile payment solutions and instant transfers. That said, the underlying
technologies  that  I  mentioned,  and  especially  blockchain,  open  up  interesting
development prospects for major payment and market infrastructures.
Uncertainty over the future of crypto-assets in the world of payments does not relieve us of the
need  to  regulate  their  development,  given  the  attendant  risks. Adopting  a  framework  that
protects participants in the real economy will help to increase their confidence in the
mechanisms associated with crypto-assets, thereby promoting growth in the new assets.
The  intrinsically  digital  and  global  nature  of  crypto-assets  means  however  that  a
coordinated  international  approach  must  be  taken  to  avoid  creating  an  opportunity
effect,  because  experience  tells  us  that  participants  can  easily  relocate  to  another  territory
offering  more  flexible  laws.  Several  international  organisations  have  set  up  working  groups  to
explore this question, under the leadership of the G20. While some of the discussions are still in
their infancy, the aim in the medium term is to come up with a framework and an international
code  of  conduct  to  preserve  security  for  everyone  and  promote  financial  stability,  which  is  a
common good that we all share.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
