   CENTRAL BANK OF KENYA 
 7TH KENYA BANKERS ASSOCIATION ANNUAL BANKING CONFERENCE  
 Thursday, September 27, 2018 
 Keynote Address by 
Dr. Patrick Njoroge, Governor, Central Bank of Kenya 
 As Prepared for Delivery 
Good morning! I want to begin by thanking the Kenya Bankers Association 
(KBA) for inviting me to speak at this auspicious Annual Banking Conference. I 
applaud KBA for organizing this conference for the last seven years, and 
contributing to thought leadership on topical banking sector issues. 
 The theme of the conference ‘‘Credit Market Dynamics in an Evolving 
Regulatory and Market Participants’ Environment’’ is quite apt given the 
conjuncture—where the global, regional and national financial markets are today. 
For instance, in Kenya, there has been considerable discourse recently on the cost 
and availability of credit. The discussion is now morphing to the potential role of 
disruptive non-traditional credit providers that leverage on technology, but 
discussions about consumer protection in these new environments has not gathered 
much steam. However, I am informed that these issues will be discussed during 
the conference and I look forward to the findings.  
 The year 2018 has been a year of anniversaries. On August 7, we marked twenty 
years since the bombing of the American Embassy in Nairobi, just a few steps 
away from the Central Bank building. And just a few days ago, on the 21st of 
September, we marked the fifth anniversary of the Westgate attack. Both of these 
were tragedies, marked with sombre reflections by our fellow citizens. 
  1 
We marked another recent anniversary that is less familiar to many ordinary 
Kenyans, but one that is felt acutely by practitioners in the financial sector. Ten 
years ago, on September 15, 2008, the storm that had been brewing for a year 
finally broke. Lehman Brothers, a company that had been in existence for one 
hundred and fifty eight years, shut its doors. Ordinarily, companies come and go. 
After all, creative destruction is the mantra of the day and only the fittest survive. 
New blood, new ideas and new companies are essential to the health of capitalism, 
and, conversely, old ideas and old companies must be discarded when the time 
comes. But, of course, Lehman was different. The canary in the coal mine was 
dead. The deluge was upon us. 
 The effects of the global financial crisis were deep, powerful and lasting. Some are 
being felt to this very day. The ordinary citizen—Wanjiku—may not give you the 
precise details of what happened ten years ago. She may not speak of 
“systemically important financial institutions” or tell you what a subprime 
mortgage is. She may not speak eloquently about collateral debt obligations, or 
calculate the point at which a bond goes from investment grade to junk. But 
Wanjiku, the ordinary citizen that all of us serve, understands some fundamental 
facts. She understands the fundamental principles of finance, commerce and social 
interaction. She understands some basic principles that are easily forgotten, 
ignored, or overlooked in the pursuit of sophistication or profits. The rest of my 
remarks will expand on this idea. 
 In the recent weeks, there has been extensive debates on the lessons from the 
global financial crisis and whether the global financial system is now safer. These 
discussions have also asked whether a sense of exuberance is creeping back into 
the global financial system, that could unwittingly lead us to the next crisis—
another “Minsky moment” where current booms sow the seeds of a future 
dramatic collapse. These are questions I will leave for participants of the 
conference and I would be keen to know your thoughts.  
  2 
In diagnosing the cause of the global financial crisis, a lot of ink has been spilled 
on the inadequacy of regulation and the trend towards deregulation in the lead up 
to the global financial crisis. Regulation, especially regulation that recognizes and 
acts on risks, is crucial. And we all appreciate the major drive globally towards 
strengthening the regulation and supervision of global financial markets. But let’s 
also appreciate the following crucial fact—at its core, the global financial crisis 
was about human beings. What human beings chose to do and what they chose not 
to do. At its heart, the global financial crisis was about ethics.  
 Ethics is not a financial term and conjures up difference images and responses by 
for different people and different responses. Some in the audience may be 
thinking: of course my institution is highly ethical—we have rules! Our legal team 
always ensures that we comply to all laws and regulations! We won a governance 
award the other day! Our values are printed and displayed in our headquarters! 
Our email signature tells the world that we are guided by good principles! Even 
more, we are renowned for training our staff rigorously on our code of conduct! 
While all these may be related to the core message of raising our ethical standards, 
I believe there is a need to think deeper, dig deeper, and be more earnest on this 
matter. 
 While the business of defining ethics can be left to philosophers, we can agree on 
the more pedestrian description given by the renowned American humanist Aldo 
Leopold: “Ethical behavior is doing the right thing when no one else is watching 
even when doing the wrong thing is legal.” Many of you may be wondering why 
laws cannot be put in place to prevent unethical behaviour once and for all. 
Wonder no more—life is more complex than rules. Misconduct happens first and 
laws are passed later—as we have seen elsewhere, innovation generally goes 
ahead of regulation. There is therefore need for something else besides a set of 
rules to control the behaviour of people and institutions: we need to understand 
and pursue ethical values. A lot has been said about this in the aftermath of the 
global financial crisis.1 Let me touch on three areas for your reflection. 
                                                           
1 https://blog.iese.edu/ethics/2014/06/25/ten-recommendations-for-the-necessary-ethical-rearmament-of-banking/ 
 3 
First, institutions need to develop a responsible corporate culture that entrenches 
proper market conduct. Culture that goes beyond neat slogans to actually being the 
guiding force that leads to ethical behaviour and ethical outcomes. You may say 
the right thing on your corporate culture statements and governance code of 
conduct declarations, but if your employees know and are told day after day that 
profit is the only motive, they will behave accordingly. If they notice that customer 
needs take second place to corporate profit, nothing stops them from treating 
customers in a similar fashion—badly—in pursuit of expanding the bottom line. If 
they see rules bent, and notice that the most ruthless are the ones who get the pat 
on the back, the promotion and, ultimately, the corner office, they will behave in 
ways that show the greatest rule breaking and ruthlessness.  
 The banking sector’s role in economic development calls for a balance between 
pursuit of economic profit and serving the community in an environment of shared 
prosperity. When financial institutions start to embrace excessive risk and 
questionable practices, they stop performing their ethical-social function, which is 
necessary for society’s prosperity. Codes of Conduct by players or industry 
associations should include relevant aspects of ethical behaviour of all 
stakeholders including employees, customers, suppliers and competitors, local 
communities, and owners. Each of these stakeholders play a role in success or 
failure of their institutions. 
 Second, transparency is at the centre of ethical behaviour. All relevant 
information must be explained even if it is more than what is required by law. 
Over the years, customers have complained over the lack of transparency in the 
pricing of products and services by banks. I acknowledge you are making positive 
steps in this area, but much more remains to be done. This is particularly in the 
area of credit risk pricing. Customers need to be clear on what their credit 
reference record means for them in the pricing of credit. Beyond product pricing, 
you need to be transparent on your governance, business models and risk and 
reward trade-offs particularly in respect to compensation policies. And this cannot 
  4 
be driven by enforcement by the regulator. You, the people in this room, must be 
the ones to go above and beyond the strict interpretation of transparency rules.  
 Third, compliance without integrity is futile. Compliance with codes of conduct 
and other means of self-regulation are good. But this is only useful when the focus 
is on a shared mentality of integrity that goes beyond mere compliance. The 
mentality of “we comply” for compliance sake cannot sustain a business for long. I 
remind you of another anniversary, but this one of a much more recent event. Two 
weeks ago yesterday, we informed the Kenyan people of the action we took 
against some of you because of non-compliance with integrity laws. Make no 
mistake – it was not easy. We considered all the possible negative outcomes that 
could be triggered by those actions. Ultimately, however, we did not hesitate, and 
would not hesitate to do it again, under similar circumstances. Banks must steer 
away from being used as conduits for ill-gotten funds. The Kenyan people – 
Wanjiku – demand that of us, and will treat us very unkindly, were we to look the 
other way. 
 The reason why there is such palpable disappointment – I dare say it extends to 
anger – from the ordinary citizen to you in this room is exactly that. Wanjiku feels 
that her banker prefers expediency to empathy. She feels that her banker would 
rather hunt for a loophole than show leadership. Would rather seek supernormal 
profit than search for solutions. The old adage about the banker asking for their 
umbrella back when it starts raining may have been funny once, but not when the 
rain is this heavy, and when Wanjiku already has a flu. 
 So I ask you to reflect on your work, and your conduct. As Kenyans, we would 
rather watch with pride, and gasp in admiration, when Eliud Kipchoge becomes 
the fastest marathoner in history, than wonder anxiously whether our banker will 
be with us in the long haul. We would rather spend our energy thinking of ways to 
increase and share our prosperity than despairing about whether we are all in this 
together. 
 5 
 We must do better. We must be the guiding light for the banking and financial 
sector and for this great country we all call home. This would be very easy if we 
all insist on ethical practices and putting Wanjiku before anything else. I want to 
finish with an idea that is attributed to the philosopher Immanuel Kant: “May you 
act so that the principle of action might safely be made a law for the whole 
world.” Had this advice been heeded in the run up to 2007, the Global Financial 
crisis would have been averted. The Queen of England would also not have asked 
the professors at the London School of Economics in November 2008: “If the 
[antecedent of the global financial crisis] was this bad, why did nobody notice 
it?” 
 It is now my distinct honour to declare the 7th KBA Annual Banking Conference 
officially opened.   
 Thank you for your attention. 
 6 
