Luis de Guindos: The European Central Bank and financial stability
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the joint National
Bank of Belgium / Toulouse School of Economics / Solvay Brussels School of Economics and
Management / European Central Bank colloquium, Brussels, 5 November 2018.
 It is a pleasure to be here today and to take part in this joint initiative of four institutions – the
European  Central  Bank,  the  Solvay  Brussels  School  of  Economics  and  Management,  the
Toulouse  School  of  Economics  and  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium  –  devoted  to  the  topic  of
managing financial crises. The extensive programme over the next two days will enable policy
makers  and  academics  to  engage  in  a  frank  exchange  of  views  about  policy  responses  to
financial crises and a thorough reflection on crisis management from different angles.
The global financial crisis erupted more than ten years ago and triggered a lengthy process of
transformation for central banks and supervisory authorities. The G20 summits in 2009 set in
motion  the  global  efforts  to  strengthen  our  institutional  framework  by  creating  more  effective
1
oversight of key financial players, products, and markets.
In Europe, we have seen the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board in 2010 with
the power to issue warnings and recommendations, the Single Supervisory Mechanism in 2014
and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  in  2015,  with  formal  supervisory  and  resolution
2
competences at the European level.
The sheer number of institutions involved in financial stability raises the question of governance.
As  a  central  banker,  I  would  like  to  address  the  question  of  what  role  central  banks  play  in
safeguarding financial stability.
This conference addresses the question from the specific perspective of crisis management. I
would like to take a step back and cover the broader institutional set-up and in particular the role
of central banks. I will focus on the interplay between monetary policy, banking supervision and
macroprudential  policy,  and  elaborate  on  how  central  banks  fit  into  this  trilogy  of  public  policy
responsibilities.
I will first discuss how the responsibility for financial stability is shared among many authorities
and the prominent role played by central banks. I will then address the very specific relevance of
financial stability for central banks and the toolkit to safeguard it. I will look at the set-up within the
Economic and Monetary Union and how recent changes in the European institutional set-up can
further enhance financial stability. Finally, I will say a few words about a very topical issue related
to financial system resilience: the results of the 2018 EU-wide stress test of the banking sector
just published by the European Banking Authority.
Financial stability – a responsibility shared among many institutions
Today’s  financial  system  builds  on  the  interactions  between  many  specialised  financial
institutions. While banks remain at the heart of financial intermediation, insurance companies,
pension funds and asset management companies, including investment and hedge funds, play
an increasingly important role. All these financial intermediaries face and manage risks, resulting
in a financial system which faces systemic risk from multiple sources.
To account for these multiple dimensions, the ECB relates financial stability to the stability of
core functions provided by the financial system and, ultimately, to economic growth.  Supporting
and ensuring the provision of these core functions is the role of public policy. The multi-faceted
nature  of  systemic  risk  requires  the  involvement  of  multiple  policy  areas  to  ensure  financial
stability across the entire system.
3
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The responsibility for safeguarding financial stability is held by three inter-related policy areas.
First, microprudential supervision is tasked with ensuring the stability of individual financial
institutions.
Second, macroprudential policy is responsible for ensuring the stability of the banking and
financial system as a whole, across individual institutions and over time.
Third, in times of crisis, monetary policy provides liquidity to the financial system as lender of
last resort. In normal times, price stability helps to promote financial stability.
The  reason  why  three  policy  areas  are  now  involved  in  financial  stability  is  clear.  The  great
financial crisis taught us that microprudential supervision alone cannot safeguard the stability of
the banking system as a whole. It focuses on the stability of individual institutions and does not
sufficiently  account  for  the  systemic  aspect  of  financial  stability  created  by  amplification  and
contagion mechanisms. For its part, monetary policy cannot sufficiently contain the costs of a
financial crisis once it erupts.  Indeed, crisis management instruments may have averted worse
outcomes, but the effective lower bound on interest rates stood in the way of efforts to promptly
restore macroeconomic stability through monetary policy.
4
To  pre-empt  such  situations,  academics  and  commentators  have  often  invoked  the  need  for
monetary policy to lean against financial imbalances, but this would imply a deviation from its
price  stability  mandate,  at  least  in  the  short-run.   Monetary  policy  is  able  to  “get  into  all  the
cracks” of the financial system. But it is too blunt a tool to address specific risks and imbalances
and would be likely to generate large macroeconomic costs if it tried, as many have argued.  In a
nutshell,  the  “leaning”  versus  “cleaning”  debate  has,  in  my  view,  focused  too  narrowly  on
monetary policy alone.
5
6
Instead,  additional  pre-emptive  policies  need  to  be  called  upon.   Macroprudential  policy  is
forward-looking and pre-emptive with a clear focus on financial stability. Its objective is to prevent
and  mitigate  systemic  risk  by  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  by
8
smoothing the financial cycle.
7
The question is then how can the institutional architecture be set up to ensure financial stability
by  building  on  the  respective  responsibilities  of  supervisory,  macroprudential  and  monetary
policy.
Financial stability and the role of central banks
Central banks have always had a keen interest in financial stability, irrespectively of any specific
statutory financial stability mandate. Historically, one reason for setting up a central bank was to
9
reduce bank panics through the lender of last resort function.
In today’s world, a central banker’s interest in financial stability goes far beyond the mere lender-
of-last-resort function. Indeed, financial stability is a pre-condition for monetary policy to achieve
its price stability objective. Monetary policy impulses cannot transmit to the real economy without
a stable and well-functioning banking system.
At  the  heart  of  the  complementarity  between  price  and  financial  stability  is  the  shared
responsibility of central banks and commercial banks for money creation.
 Central banks have
the monopoly for creating outside (high-powered) money, whereas commercial banks provide
inside money to facilitate transactions and to finance the broader economy.
10
The shared responsibility between central banks and commercial banks in this process implies
that the value of money relies not just on the provision of outside money by central banks but also
on the overall creditworthiness of commercial banks. A stable financial environment ensures that
money created by commercial banks remains fully fungible with central bank money across all
11
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
parts of the financial system.
11
A stable banking system is a precondition for any central bank to achieve its main mandate of
safeguarding the stability of its currency. It is thus only natural that a central bank holds financial
stability responsibilities in addition to those it has for monetary stability.
Traditionally, the two central bank instruments that interact with financial stability have been the
monetary policy rate and crisis management instruments. As I already mentioned, the monetary
policy rate is in most cases too blunt a tool to address the build-up of financial imbalances.
Emergency liquidity assistance, on the other hand, is a crucial tool for central banks in times of
crisis,  enabling 
remain
operational.
  Deploying  it  effectively  requires  detailed  information  on  market  conditions  and
market  infrastructures,  as  well  as  supervisory  information  on  individual  financial  institutions,
which should ideally be promptly available to the central bank in the event of a crisis.
that  payment  and  settlement  systems 
to  ensure 
them 
12
Beyond crisis management, ensuring stable conditions requires stronger regulation and sounder
supervisory practices. It also involves pre-emptive macroprudential policies that limit the build-up
of  imbalances  and  increase  resilience  ahead  of  future  stress  events.  These  pre-emptive
macroprudential instruments can steer market participants towards maintaining conditions that
do not endanger financial stability. 
13
The question that frequently arises is whether banking supervision and macroprudential policy
should  become  explicit  responsibilities  of  central  banks.
  The  various  frameworks  in  place
around  the  world  cover  a  wide  range  of  institutional  arrangements.  But  irrespectively  of  the
specific  institutional  set-up,  all  arrangements  assign  a  significant  role  to  central  banks  in
safeguarding financial stability.
14
15
The reasons for this are straightforward.
First,  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  can  be  seen  as  strategic  complements.  In
addressing risks from financial imbalances particularly resulting from asset price overvaluations,
more active macroprudential policy allows monetary policy stance to remain accommodative and
support a macroeconomic recovery in line with price stability. This strategic interaction requires
cooperation between both sets of policy-makers, which is more efficiently achieved within one
institution, while observing the appropriate Chinese walls.
One of the main reservations about allocating banking supervision and macroprudential decision-
making to central banks stems from the concern about the interaction and possible trade-offs
between  the  financial  stability  and  the  price  stability  objective.
  In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  the
scope for trade-offs is clearly contained, as the primary objective of the ECB continues to be
price stability.
 And I would argue that there is merit in assigning responsibility for decisions in
all three policy areas at the central bank, given that price and financial stability reinforce each
other. Most importantly, it ensures that decisions are consistent across policy areas; spillovers
from  one  policy  area  can  be  taken  into  account  in  an  effective  manner,  while  duly  observing
separation rules governing the policy domains.
16
17
Second, central banks have a deep knowledge about the functioning of financial markets. They
continuously monitor financial conditions to identify vulnerabilities and threats to financial stability,
and  their  assessment  is  backed  up  by  broad-based  market  intelligence  and  the  authority  to
request relevant data from financial market participants. Central banks are particularly sensitive
to macro-financial stabilisation goals in this context and maintain a forward-looking, system-wide
perspective which considers macro-financial linkages.
Adding banking supervision and, in particular, macroprudential policy to the central bank’s tasks,
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
shifts  the  emphasis  more  strongly  towards  preventive  policies.  Macroprudential  policy  can
address  financial  stability  risks  in  the  specific  areas  where  they  arise,  be  it  at  the  level  of  a
country, a sector or a financial institution. It can also effectively free monetary policy from the
temptation  to  counter  financial  imbalances  when  systemic  risks  increase.  This  reduces  the
apparent need for leaning. At the same time, macroprudential policy reduces the likelihood and
the severity of downturns should risks materialise.
With these conceptual considerations in mind, let me now examine the specific responsibilities
of the ECB, starting with its legal mandate.
The ECB’s role in financial stability
The ECB’s financial stability mandate is based on Article 127 of the Treaty and comes in addition
to its primary objective of price stability. It involves several duties.
First, the Treaty requires the ECB to “contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by
competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of
the financial system” (Article 127(5)). Second, it gives the ECB a consultative and advisory role in
the rule-making process (Article 127(4) and Article 25(1) of the Statute of the ESCB). Third, it
assigns  the  ECB  the  task  of  promoting  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  systems  (Article
127(2)).  In  addition,  since  November  2014,  the  SSM  Regulation  allocates  supervisory  powers
and a clear role for macroprudential policy to the ECB.
The  SSM  Regulation  reflects  the  decision  to  allocate  microprudential  supervision  and
macroprudential policy responsibilities to the ECB while building as much as possible on national
expertise and structures. This implies that, for countries in the euro area, the Governing Council
is  the  ultimate  decision-maker  on  matters  of  monetary  policy,  macroprudential  policy  and
microprudential banking supervision.
This  institutional  arrangement  overcomes  the  “double  separation”  of  policies  along  the
geographical and functional dimension. 
18
Monetary  policy  operated  at  the  level  of  the  euro  area  and  banking  supervision  at  the  level  of
Member States. This left a gap requiring close and smooth cooperation and coordination.
The  drafters  of  the  Treaty  had  clearly  identified  that  potential  problems  might  arise  from  this
separation. They therefore explicitly allowed for the powers of the ECB to be amended with a
simplified  procedure  should  the  interaction  between  area-wide  monetary  policy  and  national
supervisory  powers  need  to  be  strengthened  to  effectively  safeguard  financial  stability.  This
simplified procedure is established in Article 127(6) of the Treaty and states that the European
Council could confer “specific tasks upon the European Central Bank concerning policies relating
to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  other  financial  institutions”.  The  great
financial  crisis  evidenced  the  need  for  a  more  integrated  approach  while  assigning  different
instruments to the respective objectives of price and financial stability.
How is the ECB fulfilling its financial stability mandate?
With the launch of European banking supervision in 2014, the ECB became the microprudential
supervisor of the euro area and macroprudential policies became the shared responsibility of the
national competent authorities and the ECB. National authorities, with their detailed knowledge of
the  domestic  banking  system  and  financial  structures,  are  well  placed  to  assess  financial
stability risks. This goes hand in hand with the responsibility to address financial imbalances and
to counter systemic risks using the available instruments.
The  ECB,  with 
the  national  authorities’
responsibilities and can, if deemed necessary, “instead of the national authorities”, apply higher
its  cross-country  perspective  complements 
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital  buffer  requirements  and  more  stringent  measures  than  those  adopted  by  the  national
authorities to address systemic or macroprudential risks at the level of credit institutions.
19
Such  macroprudential  measures  have  been  applied  to  more  than  100  systemically  relevant
banks  in  the  form  of  systemic  institution  buffers,  systemic  risk  buffers  or  the  countercyclical
capital buffer for exposures to entire countries.
The aim of establishing the banking union with a single supervisor is to enable banks in the euro
area to operate under the same conditions regardless of their location. This would increase the
soundness  of  individual  banks  and  foster  financial  integration,  with  capital  and  liquidity  flowing
freely  across  borders.  While  huge  progress  has  been  achieved,  the  banking  union  is
unfortunately not yet complete. A European deposit insurance scheme is still missing. Such a
risk-sharing arrangement would lead to further risk reduction and support financial stability.
All in all, central banks have demonstrated that they can be effective crisis managers in times of
stress,  but  they  have  often  lacked  the  toolkit  to  pre-emptively  address  financial  stability  risks
while they are building up.
Pre-emptive macroprudential policy is essential in any economy to complement and unburden
monetary policy. Its instruments can tame the financial cycle when imbalances build up and can
ensure the appropriate level of resilience to absorb losses should risks materialise. This is all the
more important in a monetary union, where economic and financial conditions across member
countries can differ significantly.
I have argued that an effective institutional setup involves ensuring consistent decisions across
the  microprudential,  macroprudential  and  monetary  policy  areas.  Reflecting  the  economic
rationale, the ECB has legal responsibilities in all three areas in accordance with the Treaty and
the SSM Regulation.
EU-wide stress tests
Before closing, allow me to deviate from financial stability frameworks to look at the related topic
of the resilience of the financial system, and to focus on the resilience of the euro area banking
system today.
Last  Friday  the  European  Banking Authority  (EBA)  published  the  results  of  the  2018  EU-wide
stress test. For the 33 euro area significant institutions that took part in the EBA exercise the
average final Common Equity Tier 1 capital (core capital) after stress stood at 9.9%, up from
8.8% in the 2016 EBA exercise. In terms of capital depletion, the 2018 stress test resulted in an
adverse  scenario  reduction  of  average  core  capital  of  3.8  percentage  points,  up  from  3.3
percentage points in 2016.
I would like to highlight two main points underlying these results.
First, the improved strength of euro area banks is due to the strong build-up of capital buffers in
recent years: The average capital ratio going into the stress test stood at 13.7%, up from 12.2%
in 2016. At the same time, banks’ entered the exercise in better condition than before owing to
overall improved economic conditions and their continued efforts to reduce legacy assets.
Second, compared with 2016, the adverse scenario in the 2018 stress test was generally more
severe for European economies along several dimensions, such as GDP growth, property prices
and equity prices. The adverse scenario focused on the repricing of global risk premia, adverse
feedback  loops  between  low  growth  and  weak  bank  profitability,  and  private  and  public  debt
sustainability  concerns.  The  challenge  of  the  2018  scenario  was  that  the  cut-off  point  was
unusually  early,  and  so  the  scenario  does  not  account  for  more  recent  events,  in  particular
developments in emerging markets and sovereign spreads.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The overall high level of resilience achieved by the euro area banking system should not hide the
fact that areas of vulnerability remain. To briefly characterise the summary results, I would group
the banks into three broad categories depending on their final core capital ratio in the adverse
scenario. Clearly, I am using indicative benchmarks rather than formal thresholds. First, banks
with  stressed  core  capital  ratios  above  11%  reflect  strong  capital  positions  and  comfortable
capacity to withstand shocks. There are 9 banks in this group, representing 15% of total assets
of  the  euro  area  banking  sector.  In  the  second  category,  12  banks  had  core  capital  ratios
between  9%  and  11%,  representing  about  45%  of  total  assets.  These  banks  displayed  a
reasonable degree of resilience overall. However, some of these banks still have work to do to
enhance  capitalisation  and  reduce  their  vulnerability  to  stress.  Finally,  banks  with  core  capital
ratios  in  the  adverse  scenario  below  9%  display  a  weaker,  though  still  satisfactory,  capital
position.  These  12  entities,  representing  almost  40%  of  total  assets  of  the  sector,  should
increase robustness and enhance capital positions to face challenges ahead and will thus be
closely monitored.
In summary, the overall resilience of the banks supervised by the ECB has increased compared
with the stress test conducted two years ago. Banks start from a better capital position. Capital
depletion in the 2016 and the present exercise stand at similar levels. Risks and vulnerabilities
identified across some institutions, business models and constituencies, however, require close
monitoring.  Furthermore,  the  analysis  of  aggregate  results  and  their  interaction  with  the  real
economy, going beyond supervisory ratios, confirms that macroprudential pre-emptive policy has
an important role to play in safeguarding the stability of the whole system.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See Declaration on Strengthening the Financial System from G20 summit in London (2 April 2009) and “The
Leader’s Statement” from G20 summit in Pittsburgh (24–25 September 2009).
For an overview of the European system of financial supervision see the European Commission’s overview on
Financial supervision and risk management and the legal framework of the SSM.
The ECB defines Financial stability as a state whereby the level of systemic risk is contained. Systemic risk can
best be described as the risk that the provision of necessary financial products and services by the financial
system  will  be  impaired  to  a  point  where  economic  growth  and  welfare  may  be  materially  affected.  See:
www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/fsr/html/index.en.html
See for example for a theoretical explanation: Korinek, A. and A. Simsek (2016) “Liquidity Trap and Excessive
Leverage”, American Economic Review 2016, 106(3): 699–738, G. B. Eggertsson and P. Krugman (2012) “Debt,
Deleveraging,  and  the  Liquidity  Trap: A  Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,
Volume 127, Issue 3, 1 August 2012, Pages 1469–1513.
See for example Bean, C., M. Paustian, A. Penalver and T. Taylor (2010), “Monetary Policyafter the Fall,” in
Macroeconomic  Challenges:  The  Decade Ahead,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  ofKansas  City,  Issing,  O.  (2011),
“Lessons for Monetary Policy: What Should the Consensus be?”, IMF Working Paper WP/11/97, April, White,
W.R. (2006), “Is price stability enough?”, BIS Working Papers No. 205, April, and White, W.R. (2009), “Should
Monetary Policy ‘Lean or Clean?’”, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Working Paper No. 34.
See Constâncio, V. (2018) “Financial stability risks and macroprudential policy in the euro area”,Speech by Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at the ECB and Its Watchers XIX Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 14
March 2018 and references therein, and Svensson, L. (2017) “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning Against the
Wind,” Journal of Monetary Economics 90, 193–213.
See Cecchetti et al. (2000); Borio (2012), , Hanson, Kashyap & Stein (2011),
See Crockett, A. D. “Marrying the micro- and macro-prudential dimensions of financial stability”, Remarks before
the Eleventh International Conference of Banking Supervisors, held in Basel, 20–21 September 2000.Borio, C.
(2003), “Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and regulation?”, BIS Working Papers
No. 128. Knight, M. D. “Marrying the micro- and macroprudential dimensions of financial stability: six years
on”Address at the 14th International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Mérida, 4-5 October 2006.Fahr, S. and
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
J. Fell, (2017) “Macroprudential policy – closing the financial stability gap", Journal of Financial Regulation and
Compliance, Vol. 25 Issue: 4, pp.334–359.
For a historical review of the central bank’s role in financial stability see Goodhart (2008) “The Evolution of
Central Banks”, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA and London, 1988 andGoodhart, C. (2011) “The changing role of
central banks”. Financial History Review, 18(2), 135–154.
See Padoa-Schioppa, T. (2002)“Central banks and financial stability: exploring a land in between” in Gaspar, V.,
P. Hartman and O. Sleijpen (eds)“The transformation of the European financial system”, Second ECB Central
Banking Conference.
Beyond the benefits of financial stability for the use of money as medium of exchange, it also supports its
function as store of value and makes it more accepted as unit of account.
Liquidity  can  be  granted  through  open  market  operation  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  as  well  as  to
individual monetary and financial institutions through emergency lending assistance, building on Bagehot’s
original  principle.  See  Bagehot,  W.  (1878),  “Lombard  Street: A  Description  of  the  Money  Market”.  NewYork:
Sribner, Armstrong. E.
See  IMF-FSB-BIS  (2016)  “Elements  of  Effective  Macroprudential  Policies:  Lessons  from  International
Experience” www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/2016/083116.pdf
See Constâncio, V. (2017) “Macroprudential policy in a changing financial system”, Remarks at the second ECB
Macroprudential Policy and Research Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 11 May 2017.Schnabel, I. (2016) “What
role for central banks in safeguarding financial stability?” or more specifically on monetary policy and banking
supervision  see  Goodhart,  C.  and  D.  Schoenmaker  (1995),  “Should  the  Functions  of  Monetary  Policy  and
Banking Supervision Be Separated?”, Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 47, No. 4, pp. 539–560.
For a survey on financial stability arrangements pre-crisis see Oosterloo, S. and J. de Haan (2004): “Central
banks and financial stability: a survey, Journal of Financial Stability” Volume 1, Issue 2, Pages 257–273. The
responsibilities  of  macroprudential  responsibilities  across  EU  countries  see  ESRB  Follow-up  Report  with
overall  assessment  on  “ESRB  Recommendation  on  the  macro-prudential  mandate  of  national  authorities
(ESRB/2011/3): www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/recommendations/2014/ESRB_2014.en.pdf
See Smets, F. (2014). “Financial Stability and Monetary Policy: How Closely Interlinked?,” International Journal of
Central Banking, International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 10(2), pages 263–300, June.
See Draghi, M. (2017) “The interaction between monetary policy and financial stability in the euro area”Keynote
speech  at  the  First  Conference  on  Financial  Stability  organised  by  the  Banco  de  España  and  Centro  de
Estudios Monetarios y Financieros, Madrid, 24 May 2017.
See Padoa-Schioppa, T. (1999) “EMU and banking supervision” Lecture at the London School of Economics,
Financial Markets Group on 24 February 1999. www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/1999/html/sp990224.en.html
See Article 5(2), Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 (SSM Regulation).
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
