  Joint ICMIF/AMICE Regulatory Affairs conference 
Paris, Tuesday 4 December 2018 
  Keynote address 
 Denis Beau – First Deputy Governor 
 “Old and new challenges for the insurance sector, its regulators  
and supervisors” 
1 
  Good morning to all of you, dear Presidents and members of ICMIF and AMICE, 
 I am very happy to be here with you today to exchange views on the stimulating and no less 
challenging developments that the insurance sector, and especially mutual insurers, as well 
as their regulators and supervisors, will have to face in the upcoming months and years. 
 After a few words on the economic and financial context and its related challenges for 
insurers,  I  will  first  focus  on  those  brought  by  regulatory  developments  currently  in 
the  making,  and  will  finish  with  the  new  risks  that  insurers,  their  regulators  and 
supervisors will have to address, namely cyber-risks and climate change-related risks. 
 Overall,  the  macroeconomic  environment  has  been  favourable.  The  recovery  of  the 
global economy strengthened last year. Global GDP grew at 3.8% in 2017 and is expected to 
grow  at  a  similar  pace  for  the  next  two  years.  The  European  economy  performed  well  and 
the  inflation  rate  in  Europe  is  in  line  with  the  European  Central  Bank’s  target  (2%).  Even  if 
recent survey data have been somewhat weaker, the medium-term outlook for the euro area 
remains broadly positive.  
 However,  global  and  domestic  uncertainties  are  growing.  The 
tightening  
of  monetary  policy  in  response  to  improved  economic  conditions  may  impact  the  growth  of 
major  advanced  economies.  The  US  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  have 
progressively  raised  interest  rates;  meanwhile,  the  European  Central  Bank  has  started 
phasing  out 
its  bond-buying  programme  (QE).  The 
impact  of  monetary  policy 
normalisation  on  financial  markets  should  be  closely  monitored.  The  overall  market 
sentiment  is  optimistic,  but  signs  of  possible  repricing  in  financial  markets  are  emerging. 
Market  volatility  has  increased  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  and  price  corrections  were 
observed,  most  significantly  in  equity  markets.  Valuations  remain  stretched  in  equity,  bond 
and  certain  real  estate  markets  creating  a  high  risk  of  asset  repricing.  Recent  tensions  in 
emerging  markets,  especially  Turkey  and  Argentina,  initiated  some  flight  to  safety  mainly 
towards  US  investments.  In  the  near  future,  the  threat  to  global  trade  created  by 
protectionist  tensions,  and  growing  political  uncertainties,  also  in  Europe  following 
the  developments  in  Italy  and  a  significant  probability  of  a  hard  Brexit  may  weigh 
negatively on the global environment. 
 In  addition,  the  European  insurance  sector  has  been  facing  an  unprecedented  and 
challenging low interest rate environment for the past  four years. The downward trend 
in  bond  yields  had  a  direct  impact  on  the  return  on  investments,  especially  for  life  insurers 
 2 
who  hold  a  substantial  portion  of  their  investments  in  bond  securities.  The  dilution  of 
investment  yields  has  reinforced  risks  for  the  industry  such  as  a  serious  lapse  risk  if 
interest rates were to rise abruptly, financial losses for insurers who guarantee high technical 
rates compared to financial returns, or risks related to insufficient cost coverage.  
 Among  this  quick  review  of  the  most  salient  characteristics  of  the  environment  in  which 
insurers  have  been  operating  I  would  like  to  add  that  climate  change  risk  has  now 
become  a  reality  and  although  insurers  usually  know  how  to  deal  with  climate  risks, 
including in extreme events, it is more than likely that further adjustments will be needed.   
 Against this  backdrop,  French  insurance  companies  have  reacted  in  three  main  ways: 
lowering of paid interest rates in life insurance, development of alternative investment 
strategies  and  adaptation  of 
their 
traditional  business  model 
including  
an  increased  business  diversification.  As  a  result,  for  instance,  unit-linked  liabilities  
are  increasing,  and  the  profit-sharing  payments  for  euro-denominated  contracts  are 
decreasing.  However,  I  note  that  these  payments  remain  significantly  higher  for  mutual 
undertakings:  they  amounted  to  2.3%  last  year  while  the  French  average  is  lower,  and  the 
reserves  for  deferred  profit  sharing  have  been  strongly  reinforced  and  amount  to 
approximately  6%  of  mathematical  reserves  at  YE  2017,  which  is  50%  higher  than  the 
French average.  
 As a result, French insurance companies remain fairly solid, and the own funds held 
largely  cover  regulatory  solvency  capital  requirements  for  both  life  and  non-life 
insurance  companies, which is  an important asset  in  the  challenging  environment  in 
which  they  are  operating.  This  is  notably  the  case  for  the  mutual  insurance  sector.  Its 
solvency  coverage  ratio  significantly  exceeds  300%,  which  is  higher  than  the  average  in 
France, thanks in particular to their prudent and long-term approach, with less pressure from 
the financial markets.  
 However, adapting to a challenging environment does not come without new risks. For 
instance, it is necessary to closely monitor risks related to policyholder protection and 
advice, the excessive lengthening of bond maturities or the over aggressive search for 
yield. 
 Now, I would like to focus on regulatory developments, which are numerous and may 
have an impact on the insurance business model going forward. The French insurance 
landscape has experienced major regulatory changes over recent years: a modification 
 3 
of  the  taxation  system  of  life/savings  insurance  contracts  (Flat  Tax),  the  possibility  of 
changing  credit  insurance  contracts  annually  (Loi  Hamon/Amendement  Bourquin),  and  the 
creation of a specific prudential status for French pension funds. The new Pacte Bill should 
bring about further changes that seek to promote long-term investment in equity, including a 
reform of the French life long-term insurance product (also known as Eurocroissance).  
 In addition, at international and European level significant regulatory developments are also 
in  the  making.  At  the  international  level,  the  IAIS  work  on  systemic  insurers  and  the 
international  capital  standard  (or  ICS)  has  recently  made  significant  strides.  As  you 
know,  as  part  of  its  post-crisis  action  plan,  the  IAIS  developed  in  2013  an  identification 
method  for  systemic  risks,  reviewed  in  2016.  This  led  to  the  identification  of  nine  global 
systemically  important  insurers,  to  which  specific  measures  are  applied  (increased 
supervision,  specific  management  plans,  chiefly for  liquidity, recovery  and  resolution,  and a 
capital add-on measure, currently postponed to 2022). Given the recognised shortcomings of 
the methodology,  including  weak factual  basis,  the  FSB  asked  the  IAIS  to  review  it  with 
three key focuses: developing an activities-based approach supplementing the entity-
based  approach, which  itself will  be reviewed  in  order  to  correct  deficiencies.  A  new 
framework is hence being developed which will make it possible to reconcile an activities-
based  and  an  entities-based  approach,  to  better  capture  relevant  risks  and  systemic 
undertakings. In the meantime, the list of global systemic insurers will remain frozen for 2019 
and  could  be  suspended  beyond  and  until  2022,  so  that  enough  experience  is  gained  with 
the new approach. 
 Regarding the International Capital Standard, which aims to develop an international capital 
standard  in  order  to  be  able  to  establish  a  comparable  basis  in  terms  of  prudential 
requirements for all international groups, recent  progress was  made  in  Kuala  Lumpur  in 
November  2017  which  should  lead  to,  by  the  end  of  2019,  a  version  called  “ICS  2.0” 
that will be used as a reference in international supervision Colleges, for a transitory 
period  of  five  years. During this timeframe, each internationally active insurance group will 
have to ensure a compulsory and confidential five-year monitoring period based on the ICS, 
after which this standard is expected to become effective.  
 Now, I will turn to IFRS17: it would be unreasonable to apply the new IFRS17 accounting 
framework  right  now.  Given  the  obvious  issue  of  timing,  it  is  quite  welcome  that  the 
IASB reopened the discussion and that the application of this standard has now been 
postponed  by  one  year.  This  will  primarily  give  us  time  to  reach  an  agreement  on 
identifying groups of loss-making contracts. We also want to bring the discussion on the 
 4 
treatment of reinsurance contracts held to a satisfactory conclusion. At this point, there 
is  too  much  room  for  interpretation  in  the  standard,  which  could  interfere  with  the 
comparability and consistent application across countries. 
 In Europe, the current “hot topic” is the forthcoming Solvency 2 review. 
This  review  must  include  a  full  and  objective  assessment  of  the  framework  that  has  now 
been in place for three years.  
Of  course,  insurers  have  significantly  improved  their  risk  and  capital  management 
under Solvency 2, and the insurance market is now more resilient and better equipped 
to cope with financial crises. The average SCR ratio in the European Union stood at 241% 
in the first quarter of 2018. It tends to be even higher for mutual insurers  
But these positives must not be allowed to overshadow the questions that need to be 
asked after such a radical change, particularly about the impact on equity investment 
and the financing of the European economy, as well as issues relating to volatility and 
complexity.  
Therefore I invite Insurers to play an active role in the discussions that should come with the 
so-called “Long Term Guarantee Package” or 2020 review.  As  was the case with the 2018 
review,  the  ACPR  will  call  for  further  progress  towards  a  significant  simplification  of 
the  framework.  We  also  expect  the  review  to  better  take  into  account  the  impact  of 
Solvency 2 on the financing of the economy.  
This  said,  and  irrespective  of  the  outcome  of  the  forthcoming  reviews,  the  proportionality 
principle  and  its  harmonised  application  across  the  European  Union  will  remain  a  major 
concern for EIOPA and of course for ACPR. 
On  a  topical  note,  I  would  add  that  it  is  crucial  for  supervisors  to  apply  all  prudential 
requirements  with  equal  rigour.  The  string  of  failures  by  insurers  doing  business  on  the 
French market under the freedom to provide services, particularly in construction insurance, 
is a reminder of the importance of this. The Freedom of Provisions of Services is sometimes 
at  odds  with  the  specific  features  of  national  markets.  Complex  and  long-term  products 
require  improved  skills  on  the  part  of  both  the  insurers  providing  the  products  and  the 
supervisory authorities, with EIOPA’s support. The  requisite  convergence  of  supervisory 
practices  needs  to  become  a  reality  very  soon.  I  know  that  EIOPA  is  making  this  a 
priority. 
Incidentally,  the  three-year  review  of  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs),  is 
underway. Following a public consultation proposed by the European Commission, the draft 
legislation  looks  to  strengthen  the  authorities’  and  chiefly  EIOPA’s  role  and  powers  without 
 5 
calling  into  question  the  existing  architecture.  This  should  support  the  goal  of  increased 
convergence in supervisory practices, which should in turn promote improved effectiveness. 
Accordingly, the proposal represents a positive step forward for Europe.  However,  a  close 
eye  should  be  kept  on  the  place  given  to  national  supervisors,  especially  regarding 
the question of internal models and supervisory colleges. They should remain within 
the  national  supervisors’  realm  of  competence,  while  EIOPA’s  mediation  role  is 
essential  and  should  be  reinforced,  especially  with  regard  to  cross-border  issues. 
However,  this  is  incompatible  with  assuming  responsibility  for  validating  national 
internal models. As for the EIOPA role on cross-border cases and its guidance for national 
supervisors that some Member States would favour, such exchanges could take place within 
dedicated coordination platforms. 
 Beyond  regulatory  adaptation,  the  challenges  ahead  relate  to  technological  and 
environmental  changes,  which  are  new  and  yet  crucial  matters  for  attention  for 
insurers, regulators and supervisors. 
Insurance players, of all sizes and risk exposures, are facing the digital revolution,  which is 
inescapable  as  the  developments  in  other  business  sectors  such  as  travel,  tourism  or 
catering show. To remain competitive in terms of customer relationships, insurers will need to 
raise their customer experience to the highest levels. This will require them to fundamentally 
review  their  processes,  tools  and  information  systems.  It  also  calls  for  an  upgrade  of  their 
human  resources  policies.  The  risks  associated  with  the  digital  revolution  are 
numerous,  but  I  would  like  to  stress  the  bigger  risk  associated  with  procrastination. 
This  risk  seems  particularly  important  to  me  and  it  will  be  an  essential  focus  of 
attention for supervisors. 
The digital revolution has other ramifications that require the attention of supervisors. 
One  of them  is the  increasing inclusion  of insurance  products within  package  deals. 
This  is  particularly  the  case  for  affinity  insurance  products.  These  often  involve  the 
multiplication of intermediaries in the value chain. This phenomenon can blur responsibilities 
and  the  intrinsic  economic  value  of  these  products,  and  we  are  therefore  vigilant  as 
consumer  protection  is  especially  important  in  a  strengthened  European  regulatory 
framework for product governance (via the Insurance Distribution Directive in particular).  
Another  one  is  the  access  and  use  of  data.  To  remain  competitive  in  the  customer 
relationship and risk management, access to data and the ability to efficiently use them will 
be essential. These developments will involve further cooperation between the personal data 
protection authorities and the insurance supervisory authorities. This cooperation has already 
 6 
become a reality thanks to the CNIL's (National Commission for Information Technology and 
Civil Liberties) presence in the Artificial Intelligence Task Force led by the ACPR, which will 
publish a report in the coming months. I hope that this cooperation will deepen further in the 
coming years. 
As  a  result,  data  are more than  ever  a  strategic  asset.  In  these  circumstances, faced 
with the risks of cybercrime, it is imperative to ensure security. 
The  digital  revolution  has  been  accompanied  by  the  emergence  of  IT  attacks,  which  have 
been  increasingly  publicised.  The  insurance  industry,  where  information  systems  play  a 
major operational role, has not been immune to such cyber-attacks. Insurers  now  need  to 
manage and guard against this risk, which, in their case, is increased by the criticality 
of  data  (medical,  personal,  financial,  etc.)  handled  and  stored  in  their  information 
systems. 
Public  authorities  are  seeking  to  address  these  challenges  and  have  undertaken  major 
initiatives to raise awareness among insurers as to this new type of operational risk, as the IT 
systems of the insurance sector are still too vulnerable.  
 It is primarily up to the market to design efficient security schemes compatible with the 
opening-up  of information  systems  and innovation. This is a huge challenge, but it is in 
this spirit that the ACPR works. Cyber security remains one of our supervisory priorities for 
the  coming  years  and  it  is  important  to  actively  maintain  or  engage  our  dialogue  in  this 
regard,  facilitate  the  emergence  and  dissemination  of  best  practices,  and  strengthen  the 
resilience of the insurance sector.  
In this decisive transition phase, I would like to draw your attention to the ACPR's paper on IT 
risk, which discusses best practices regarding IT risks and more specifically cyber risk. 
While the digital revolution creates new risks for insurers as targets, it also offers new 
opportunities for growth in the industry to cover the cyber risk of their policyholders. 
The ACPR will therefore be particularly vigilant in the development of cyber insurance, which 
again requires insurers to adapt, manage a ”new” risk in terms of selection and underwriting, 
pricing, and portfolio oversight. 
 The  last  supervision  priority  I  would  like  to  mention  is  related  to  climate  change.  Although 
losses  from  natural  disasters  in  the  world  during  the  first  half  of  2018  were  half  of  those 
observed  during  the  same  period  in  20171,  this  is  not  good  news.  The  long-term  impact  of 
                                                 
1 Losses amounted in USD 33 billion in the first half of 2018 and USD 65 billion in the first half of 2017 
 7 
climate change remains a key area of vigilance for insurers, as climatologists foresee a long-
term  increase  in  natural  disasters.  Such  changes  impact  both  sides  of  the  insurers’ 
balance  sheet,  via  the increase in  physical  risks  and  transition  risks  to  a  low carbon 
economy, and more work is obviously needed to address them properly.  
 For  instance,  no  common  methodology  has  been  developed  yet  to  properly  assess  the 
impact  of  the  foreseen  increase  in  the  frequency  of  natural  catastrophes.  Regarding  the 
exposure to transition risks to a lower carbon economy, the exposures of the French insurers 
to such a risk have been assessed. At the  end of 2017,  EUR 250 billion,  or around 10% of 
the  total  portfolio  of  the  French  insurers,  was  invested  in  sectors  defined  as  sensitive  to 
transition  risk,  which  can  be  seen  as  a  significant  exposure.  This  figure  is  only  a  ballpark 
figure, though, as definitions of and methodologies to measure the carbon footprint of assets 
portfolios are still under construction.  
 These  examples  show  that  there  is  still  not  sufficient  recognition  of  the  need  to  act 
rapidly  in  order  to  reach  the  objectives  of  the  Paris  agreement  in  terms  of  climate 
change. Regulators’ actions have to give the right incentives for players to act more quickly. 
In  this  respect,  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  ACPR  have  set  up  and  are  actively 
coordinating the network of central banks and supervisors for Greening the Financial system 
(NGFS). 
 Let me conclude by saying that mutual insurers are of course exposed to all the challenges I 
have  mentioned. I  trust that they  are  willing  and well  equipped  to  live  up to them. Over the 
last  years  and  in  order  to  face  new  challenges,  the  mutual  sector,  which  historically 
comprised  a  large  number  of  entities,  has  adapted  and  has  successfully  achieved  the 
necessary  concentrations.  It  is  important  that  it  continues  to  adapt,  including  at  an 
international  level,  especially  since  the  values  of  mutual  insurance  are  essential  to  the 
stability of the insurance model based on risk-sharing.  
 Thank you all for your attention. 
 8 
