Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour:  Roundtable  Meeting  of  Centralised
Shariah Advisory Authorities in Islamic Finance
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Roundtable  Meeting  of  Centralised  Shariah Advisory
Authorities in Islamic Finance, Kuala Lumpur, 2 October 2018.
 It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  be  here  today  at  the  inaugural  Roundtable  Meeting  of  Centralised
Shariah Advisory Authorities in Islamic Finance. On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia, I would like
to welcome the esteemed Shariah scholars and delegates who are gathered here this morning
to share their experiences and exchange perspectives. We are at a time where our economies
and  financial  systems  are  more  connected.  We  are  seeing  greater  cross-border  trade  and
services, and mobility in capital.  Technological advancements are shaping the way businesses
operate and influencing dynamism in customer behaviours. This gathering today therefore is an
important first step – towards strengthening relations and connectivity among the scholars and
regulators who share common goals – that Shariah principles are embraced not only in form but
more importantly in substance, – and that Islamic finance consistently delivers positive impact to
the broader economy and society.
The global Islamic finance industry has seen remarkable progress over the last decade. Global
Islamic banking assets have doubled over the last 10 years and Islamic financial services are
now available in more than 48 countries. In fact, in a number of jurisdictions such as Bahrain,
Brunei Darussalam, Maldives, Nigeria and Malaysia, Islamic finance is increasingly becoming an
important component of the broader financial system. In essence, Islamic finance is impacting
the  lives  of  many  –  individuals  and  business  alike. All  these  progress  would  not  have  been
possible without the dedication of Shariah scholars such as yourselves in harnessing collective
wisdom to resolve many practical and contemporary issues facing the Islamic finance industry.
From  enabling  deposit  taking  to  facilitating  funding,  investments  and  protection  solutions  –
Shariah  has  been  the  underpinning  thrust  of  Islamic  financial  intermediation  in  meeting  the
evolving expectations of businesses and consumers.
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  three  imperatives  for  Shariah  scholars  to  be  the  beacon  for
financial, social and economic developments.
Engagement with wider stakeholders
First, the world we live in is not static. It is important to understand that issues confronting the
global economy and our modern society are intricately linked to the issues facing the financial
sector.  This  therefore  demands  for  Shariah  rulings  to  constantly  be  contextualised  towards
addressing  contemporary  issues  facing  the ummah.  From  ending  poverty  and  hunger  to
promoting  responsible  production  and  consumption;  providing  affordable  housing;  better
healthcare and education – Shariah deliberations on Islamic finance matters should reflect on the
evolving needs of the economy and society.
Shariah scholars are constantly challenged to have a thorough and sound understanding of other
fields of expertise such as economics, law, psychology and technology to formulate well-rounded
and pragmatic ijtihad. With Shariah scholars at the forefront of multi-disciplinary knowledge, the
Shariah  fraternity  can  play  a  more  prominent  role  in  the  global  call  for  action  for  the  financial
sector  to  better  respond  to  the  contemporary  challenges  facing  our  world  today.  Closer
engagement with wider stakeholders, be it the financial industry, regulatory authorities, central
banks and the public sector, has never been more pressing than before. It is the way forward.  It
is  the  way  to  ensure  that  the  Islamic  finance  industry  continues  to  be  able  to  deliver  on  the
intended objectives of Shariah.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Transparency of Shariah rule-making
My second point relates to the importance of transparency of Shariah reasoning and credibility of
Shariah  rulings.  This  will  encourage  a  deeper  understanding  of  Shariah  requirements  and
outcomes  beyond  a  compliance  mindset.  Pronouncing  a  clear  and  comprehensive hukum  is
certainly  not  easy;  Shariah  deliberations  would  need  to  be  anchored  to  a  comprehensive  and
robust  decision  making  approach  that  captures  holistic  considerations  including  legal,  risk,
accounting, operations and also stakeholder implications.
It  is  equally  important  that  Shariah  rulings  are  well-understood  by  everyone.  This  calls  for  an
effective  communication  strategy  to  advocate  the  intended  outcomes  of  each  rulings  and  the
underlying  reasons  for  each  decisions.  Platform  such  as  this  gathering  –  offers  all  of  us  the
opportunity  to  learn  and  exchange  views  from  each  other’s  experiences.  Best  practices  in
Shariah  methodology  and  governance  can  be  shared  and  deliberated  to  elevate  the  quality  of
rulings and stature of Shariah advisory authorities globally.
Connectivity among centralised Shariah advisory authorities
The  final  point  is  on  increasing  connectivity  among  centralised  Shariah  advisory  authorities  to
promote mutual respect and knowledge-sharing. Islam has flourished with a strong foundation of
knowledge, wisdom and tolerance among its scholars. Differences in ideas and open discourses
to assess the veracity of knowledge – have always been practiced in many Islamic societies.
While  achieving  consensus  is  ideal  –  full  appreciation  of  differences  in  circumstances  and
considerations is equally important and necessary.
I  have  observed  over  the  years  that  the  implementation  of  Islamic  finance  varies  from  one
jurisdiction to another. Rightly so, this reflects the different stages of development and diversity in
local  customs,  market  conventions  and  cultural  norms.  I  believe  through  frequent  and
constructive dialogue, Shariah boards and advisory authorities will become more appreciative of
the  many  differences  in  business  and  economic  environment  –  that  lead  to  different  Shariah
interpretations.  Concerted  efforts  to  cultivate  greater  understanding  of  the  variations  in fiqh
interpretations  and  approaches  to  Islamic  finance  development  are  positive  steps  towards
harmonisation that can deliver certainty of Shariah implementation in the global Islamic financial
system.
This roundtable meeting organised today is just a starting point of a long journey. It is my hope
that  this  meeting  offers  a  productive  networking  opportunity  for  all  of  us  to  identify  common
issues; explore mutually beneficial opportunities; and implement positive changes in our financial
systems. It is not too far-fetched – to envisage the generation of breakthrough thinking for future
research collaboration that is solution-driven; practical; and innovative in future meetings of this
forum.
Ibnu Taymiyyah once said: “Surely among the main thrusts in a religion is the union of hearts, the
unison  of  views  and  easing  of  disputes  conducted  in  good  way.”  I  implore  all  of  us  to  begin
today’s dialogue with an open mind and candid sharing of experiences that can benefit us all. It is
through collaboration and cooperation that the intended values and impact of Islamic finance can
be realised for the betterment of the ummah. On that note, I wish you a productive and engaging
discussion.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
