 BANK OF UGANDA 
   Remarks 
 By 
 Professor Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, 
 Governor, Bank of Uganda  
  at the  
 Uganda Bankers’ Association (UBA) Informal Dinner  
 Held at the Residence of the Managing Director, KCB Bank 
Uganda Limited, Kololo, Kampala 
  Friday November 09, 2018 
  Our host, The Managing Director, KCB Uganda Limited, 
Chairman of Uganda Bankers’ Association, 
Chief Executive Officers of Financial Institutions, 
Executive Director of Uganda Bankers Association, 
Senior Managers and Staff from Bank of Uganda, 
Invited Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Good evening, 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  this  evening  for  yet  another  informal 
Uganda Bankers’ Association Dinner.  
 Mark  Twain  once  remarked  that  “a  man’s  character  may  be  learned 
from the adjectives which he habitually uses in conversation”. You can 
tell  from  the  last  couple  of  informal  dinners  that  I  am  happy  with  the 
progress  we  have  made  as  the  Supervised  Financial  Institutions  (SFIs) 
sector over the last quarter.  
 But before I reveal the reasons for my happiness, I thank the Managing 
Director of KCB Bank Uganda Limited for hosting us this evening. I am 
grateful  to  the  organisers  of  this  informal  dinner  for  the  wonderful 
experience.  
 2 
Tonight,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  significant  events  that  the 
Supervised  Financial  Services  Sector  has  had  to  deal  with  since  July 
2018 when we last interacted. 
 I thank the Uganda Bankers’ Association for supplementing the Bank of 
Uganda  (BoU)  efforts  in  promoting  the  implementation  of  the 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS)  9.  I  have  been 
informed  that  the  UBA  successfully  organised  the  Chief  Financial 
Officers’ (CFO’s) symposium on IFRS 9 on September 13, 2018 in which 
BoU fully participated.   
 I am happy to note that the symposium was very fruitful as it provided 
valuable 
insights  and  sharing  of  practical  experiences 
in 
the 
implementation  of  the  IFRS  9  in  other  jurisdictions.  I  recognize  the 
efforts  and  distinction  of  UBA  in  identifying  a  resourceful  facilitator 
who  is  a  member  of  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board 
Implementation Task Force for IFRS 9. 
 Bank  of  Uganda  continued  its  efforts  to  enhance  the  supervisory  and 
regulatory  environment  through  the  publication  of  the  Financial 
Institutions  (Capital  Adequacy)  Regulations,  2018  in  the  Gazette.  The 
new Capital Adequacy Regulations will now require Commercial Banks 
and  Credit  Institutions  to  take  into  account  the  capital  charge  for 
market risk in addition to the existing credit risk capital charge.  
 3 
Accordingly, effective September 30, 2018  the minimum on-going core 
capital requirements was enhanced from 8 percent to 10 percent of the 
total  risk  adjusted  assets  plus  risk  adjusted  off  balance  sheet  items  for 
Commercial  Banks  and  Credit  Institutions.  The  achievement  of  this 
milestone  marks  the  point  of  full  implementation  of  Basel  I  Capital 
Accord by BoU. 
 In  furtherance  of  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  standards  in  the 
Supervisory  framework,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  will  now  focus  on 
enhancing the implementation of the Basel II Capital Accord.  The BoU 
has implemented some of the pre-conditions for Pillar II of the Basel II 
Capital  Accord,  which  is  enshrined  in  the  legal  and  supervisory 
framework.  
 The  BoU  embraced  the  Risk  Based  Methodology,  which  mandates  the 
Board  with  the  responsibility  to  ensure  that  a  sound  risk  management 
framework 
is  in  place.  While  these  form  good  foundation  for 
determination of the adequacy of the capital position based on the risk 
profile,  the  body  of  work  is  not  yet  complete.  For  example,  there  is 
considerable  work  to  be  done  in  the  implementation  of  Pillar  II 
requirements  for  Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment  Program 
(ICAAP)  as  well  as  capital  charge  for  operational  risk  based  on  the 
standardised approach. 
  4 
With  regard  to  market  discipline,  there  exists  a  rigorous  information 
disclosure requirement stipulated in the Financial Institutions Act (FIA) 
2004 as amended and implementing regulation on the requirements for 
disclosure 
in  final  annual  accounts,  risk  management  policies, 
publication  of  bank  charges,  financial  consumer  protection.  However, 
full implementation of market discipline requires adoption of Pillar I of 
Basel II Accord. 
 As part of the financial markets development plan, the Bank of Uganda 
recently  approved  the  proposal  to  make  Deposit  Auctions  marketable 
and gave a    no-objection to the introduction of  Covered Sale Buy  Back 
Bonds  (CSBBB).  The  BoU  approved  the  marketability  of  the  Deposit 
Auction  Facility  as  well  as  its  issuance  at  a  discount.  As  a  result,  the 
financial institutions can now ably trade the Deposit Auction facility in 
the secondary market. 
 Stakeholder  impact  is  critical  for  the  long-term  survival  of  Supervised 
Financial Institutions (SFIs). SFIs ought to proactively assess the power 
and  influence  of  each  of  their  stakeholders  as  well  as  the  legitimacy  of 
stakeholder  claims  on  financial  institutions  and  design  effective 
strategies to respond to each of the stakeholder claims. Specifically, the 
power  and  influence  exhibited  by  the  general  public  and  depositors 
places them as key players in the management of financial institution’s 
liquidity. 
 5 
Therefore,  unnecessary  “noise”  perceived  by  depositors  relating  to  the 
uncertainty of the long term survival of a financial institution can spark 
off liquidity crises and bank runs. Financial institutions must therefore 
invest  appropriately  in  developing  effective  corporate  communication 
strategies as a new liquidity management tool.  
 Last but not least, I would like to congratulate Mr. Matthias Katamba on 
his  appointment  as  the  new  Managing  Director  of  dfcu  Bank.  But  also 
thank Mr. Juma Kisaame for serving dfcu Bank diligently.  Mr. Michael 
Mugabi,    allow  me  to  congratulate  you  in  your  new  assignment  as 
Acting  Managing  Director  of  Housing  Finance  Bank.    And  I  hope  that 
the  Board  of  Directors  shall  find  it  fitting  to  confirm  you  in  that 
position. 
 Once  again,  I  thank  you  for  the  continued  support  to  the  economic 
development of Uganda through your financial intermediation role.  
 Thank you for listening.  
  Professor Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile  
GOVERNOR, BANK OF UGANDA 
 6 
