Haruhiko Kuroda: The Bank's Semiannual Report on Currency and
Monetary Control
Statement  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  before  the  Committee  on
Financial Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 6 December 2018.
Introduction
 The Bank of Japan submits to the Diet its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control
every  June  and  December.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  today  to  talk  about
developments  in  Japan’s  economy  and  present  an  overall  review  of  the  Bank’s  conduct  of
monetary policy.
I. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan
I will first explain economic and financial developments in Japan.
Japan’s  economy  is  expanding  moderately,  with  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending
operating.  Although  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the  July-September  quarter  was  slightly
negative,  this  is  likely  to  be  mainly  due  to  the  effects  of  temporary  factors  such  as  natural
disasters.  Looking  at  this  in  more  detail,  exports  have  been  on  an  increasing  trend  amid
overseas  economies  continuing  to  grow  firmly  on  the  whole.  Business  fixed  investment  has
continued  on  an  increasing  trend,  with  corporate  profits  following  their  improving  trend  and
business  sentiment  staying  at  a  favorable  level.  Private  consumption  has  been  increasing
moderately,  albeit  with  fluctuations,  against  the  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the
employment  and  income  situation.  Going  forward,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  its
moderate  expansion.  Risks  to  the  outlook  are  skewed  to  the  downside,  particularly  regarding
developments in overseas economies, including the consequences of protectionist moves and
their effects.
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) has been
positive  but  has  continued  to  show  relatively  weak  developments  compared  to  the  economic
expansion  and  the  labor  market  tightening.  This  is  largely  attributable  to  the  fact  that  firms’
cautious wage- and price-setting stance as well as households’ cautiousness toward price rises
have  been  deeply  entrenched,  due  mainly  to  the  experience  of  prolonged  low  growth  and
deflation.  In  addition,  such  factors  as  the  large  room  to  raise  productivity,  mainly  in  the
nonmanufacturing sector, and the technological progress in recent years have allowed firms to
maintain their cautious stance toward raising prices, even amid the economic expansion. With
regard to the outlook, however, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to increase
gradually toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of the output gap remaining positive and medium-
to  long-term  inflation  expectations  rising.  The  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability
target of 2 percent is maintained but is not yet sufficiently firm, and thus developments in prices
continue to warrant careful attention.
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy
Next, I will explain the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.
The Bank has been conducting powerful monetary easing under the framework of “Quantitative
and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control” introduced in September 2016.
In terms of yield curve control, with a view to facilitating the formation of the yield curve that is
considered most appropriate for achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, the Bank has
conducted  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  under  the  guideline  for  market
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
operations, in which it sets the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent and the target
level of 10-year JGB yields at around zero percent.
At  the  July  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM),  with  a  view  to  persistently  continuing  with  such
powerful monetary easing, the Bank decided to strengthen the current policy framework. First,
the  Bank  introduced  forward  guidance  for  policy  rates,  with  which  it  intended  to  maintain  the
current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time.
This  aims  to  clarify  the  policy  stance  of  continuing  with  powerful  monetary  easing  by  making
clear future policy rates in advance. Second, the Bank decided to conduct market operations and
asset purchases in a more flexible manner. As the degree of market functioning consequently
improves, such as through interest rate formation becoming more flexible, this likely will lead to
enhancing the sustainability of the policy.
The  Bank  deems  that  such  policy  responses  will  lead  to  achieving  2  percent  inflation  at  the
earliest possible time while securing stability in economic and financial conditions. It will continue
to examine the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy and conduct its
policy in an appropriate manner, taking account of developments in economic activity and prices
as well as financial conditions.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
