On the Importance of Independent Regulatory Institutions – 
The Case of the Central Bank 
By 
Dr. Viral V Acharya, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India1 
Delivered as the A. D. Shroff Memorial Lecture in Mumbai on Friday, October 26, 2018 
 
No analogy is perfect; yet, analogies help convey things better. At times, a straw man has to be 
set up to make succinctly a practical or even an academic point.  Occasionally, however, real life 
examples  come  along  beautifully  to  make  a  communicator’s  work  easier.    Let  me  start  today 
with an antecedent from 2010 as it is particularly apposite for the theme of my talk: 
“My time at the central bank is up and that is why I have decided to leave my post definitively, 
with the satisfaction of my duty fulfilled,” Mr Martin Redrado, Argentina’s central bank chief, 
told a news conference late on Friday, January 29, 2010. 
“We have arrived at this situation because of the national government’s permanent trampling of 
institutions,” he said.  “Basically, I am defending two main concepts: the independence of the 
central bank in our decision-making process and that the reserves should be used for monetary 
and financial stability.” 
The roots of this dramatic exit lay in an emergency decree passed by the Argentine government 
led by Cristina Fernandéz on December 14, 2010, that would set up a Bicentennial Stability and 
Reduced Indebtedness Fund to finance public debt maturing that year. This involved the transfer 
of $6.6 billion of the central bank reserves to the national treasury. The claim was that the central 
bank  had  $18  billion  in  “excess  reserves.”  [In  fact,  Mr.  Redrado  had  refused  to  transfer  the 
funds; so the government attempted to fire him, by another emergency decree on January 7, 2010 
for misconduct and dereliction of duty; this attempt, however, failed, as it was unconstitutional.] 
Besides  sparking  off  one  of  the  worst  constitutional  crises  in  Argentina  since  its  economic 
meltdown in 2001, the chain of events led to a grave reassessment of its sovereign risk.   
Within a month of Mr. Redrado’s resignation, Argentine sovereign bond yields and the annual 
premium  cost  for  buying  insurance  against  loss  from  default  on  Argentine  government  bonds 
(measured  as  the  sovereign  credit  default  swap  spread)  shot  up  by  about  2.5%  or  250  basis 
points, by more than a fourth of their prior levels. 
                                                            
1 I am grateful to Governor Dr. Urjit R Patel, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for his suggestion to explore this theme 
for a speech, for referring me to the work of the Late Deena Khatkhate (2005), and for his constant encouragement, 
feedback and guidance. I am also indebted to insightful exchanges with Professor Rakesh Mohan of Yale University 
and former Deputy Governor of the RBI; Dr. Nachiket Mor of Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, during his term 
as  a  Central  Board  Member  of  the  RBI;  my  fellow  Deputy  Governor,  N.  S.  Vishwanathan;  my  colleague,  Dr. 
Michael  D.  Patra,  Executive  Director  and  Monetary  Policy  Committee  member;  as  well  as  Jose  Kattoor,  Mridul 
Saggar and Vineet Srivastava of the RBI. All errors that remain are my own.  
 1 
Alberto Ramos, Argentina analyst at Goldman Sachs, noted on February 7, 2010: “Using central 
bank reserves to pay government obligations is not a positive development and the concept of 
excess reserves is certainly open to debate. It weakens the balance sheet of the central bank and 
provides the wrong incentive to the government, as it weakens the incentive to control the rapid 
expansion of spending and to promote some consolidation of fiscal accounts in 2010.” 
Even more damagingly, a risk that Governor Redrado had warned about came to the fore. By 
beginning of January, 2010, Thomas Griesa, a New York judge, had frozen the Argentine central 
bank’s account held at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, following claims of investors that 
the  central  bank  was  no  longer  an  autonomous  agency  but  under  the  thumb  of  the  country’s 
executive branch.  
(The above summary is based in part on Argentina’s central bank chief resigns, Jude Webber, 
Financial Times, January 30, 2010; and Argentina: Bank independence at stake as Redrado exits, 
Jason Mitchell, Euromoney, February 7, 2010)  
 This complex interplay of the sovereign’s exercise of its powers, the central banker’s exit, and 
the market’s revolt, will be at the center of my remarks today on why it is important for a well-
functioning economy to have an independent central bank, i.e., a central bank that is independent 
from  the  executive  branch  of  the  government.    I  will  also  try  to  lay  out  why  the  risks  of 
undermining the central bank’s independence are potentially catastrophic, a “self-goal” of sorts, 
as it can trigger a crisis of confidence in capital markets that are tapped by governments (and 
others in the economy) to run their finances. 
 
Why Nations Succeed (or Fail) 
Before I delve into this complex interplay, I wish to place the independence of the central bank 
in a more general context.  
Academic discourse by political economists recognises the key role played by the rule of law and 
accountability of governments in enabling countries to flourish.  Francis Fukuyama (The Origins 
of  Political  Order,  2011)  considers  these  two  elements,  along  with  adequate  state-  and 
institution-building,  as all  being critical  for “getting  to  Denmark,”  or  in  other  words,  creating 
stable, peaceful, prosperous, inclusive and honest societies.  
Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson (Why Nations Fail, 2012) summarize their body of work 
on the primacy of the quality of institutions in explaining the political and economic success or 
failure  of  states.    Taking  examples  of  “twin”  country  case  studies  (such  as  S.  Korea  and  N. 
Korea), the book elaborates the following important distinction:  
 Inclusive economic and political institutions involve plurality in decision-making which 
help guarantee the rule of law and  foster talent and creativity; in the presence of such 
institutions, economics and politics do not become hostage to a set of incumbents likely 
to be hurt by change.  
 2 
 In  contrast,  extractive  institutions  limit  access  to  a  country’s  economic  and  financial 
resources  to  the  ruling  elites,  hinder  change  and  innovation,  and  over  time,  lead  to 
stagnation and atrophy of the country’s potential. 
In  conversations  with  former  colleagues  at  New  York  University’s  Stern  School  of  Business 
(NYU Stern), it was routine to categorise economies as encouraging and supporting either value 
creation, whereby entrepreneurs believed their mantra of success lay in challenging orthodoxy, 
or rent extraction, wherein businesses found value primarily from joining hands with regressive 
state policies and crowding out others who had no such access. 
Regardless of the preferred theory and terminology for the importance of institutions, it is well 
accepted that they include, inter alia, property rights and their enforcement, the judiciary, and the 
election office in a democracy, instituted not just de jure but allowed to operate independently 
and function effectively de facto.  
Somewhat  less  celebrated  is  the  institution  of  an  independent  central  bank,  perhaps  not  just 
because the central bank is a relatively new kid on the block (in most cases less than a century 
old), but also because it interacts less directly with the public though its true influence is far-
reaching. 
Government and the Central Bank – A Tale of Two Horizons  
A  central  bank  performs  several  important  functions  for  the  economy:  it  controls  the  money 
supply; sets the rate of interest on borrowing and lending money; manages the external sector 
including the exchange rate; supervises and regulates the financial sector, notably banks; it often 
regulates credit and foreign exchange markets; and, seeks to ensure financial stability, domestic 
as well as on the external front. 
The world over, the central bank is set up as an institution separate from the government; put 
another way, it is not a department of the executive function of the government; its powers are 
enshrined as being separate through relevant legislation. Its tasks being somewhat complex and 
technical, central banks are ideally headed and manned by technocrats or field experts – typically 
economists,  academics,  commercial  bankers,  and  occasionally  private  sector  representatives, 
appointed  by  the  government  but  not  elected  to  the  office.  This  architecture  reflects  the 
acceptance  of  the  thesis  that  central  banks  should  be  allowed  to  exercise  their  powers 
independently. 
Why  is  the  central  bank  separate  from  the  government?  I  will  offer  what  I  find  to  be  a 
particularly intuitive explanation: 
(1) The first part of the explanation relates to the horizon of decision-making of a government 
vis-à-vis that of the central bank. 
 
A  government’s  horizon  of  decision-making  is  rendered  short,  like  the  duration  of  a  T20 
match (to use a cricketing analogy), by several considerations. There are always upcoming 
elections of some sort – national, state, mid-term, etc. As elections approach, delivering on 
proclaimed manifestos of the past acquires urgency; where manifestos cannot be delivered 
 3 
upon,  populist  alternatives  need  to  be  arranged  with  immediacy.  Less  important  in  the 
present scenario, but only recently so, wars had to be waged, financed and won at all costs. 
This myopia or short-termism of governments is best summarized in history by Louis XV 
when he proclaimed “Apres moi, le deluge!” (After me, the flood!).2 
 
In contrast, a central bank plays a Test match, trying to win each session but importantly also 
survive it so as to have a chance to win the next session, and so on. In particular, the central 
bank is not directly subject to political time pressures and the induced neglect of the future; 
by virtue of being nominated rather than elected, central bankers have horizons of decision-
making  that  tend  to  be  longer  than  that  of  governments,  spanning  election  cycles  or  war 
periods.  While  they  clearly  have  to  factor  in  the  immediate  consequences  of  their  policy 
decisions, central bankers can afford to take a pause, reflect, and ask the question as to what 
would be the long-term consequences of their, as well as government’s, policies. Indeed, by 
their  mandate  central  banks  are  committed  to  stabilise  the  economy  over  business  and 
financial  cycles,  and  hence,  have  to  peer  into  the  medium  to  long  term.    Unsurprisingly, 
central  banks  strive  to  build  credibility  through  a  series  of  difficult  choices  that  reflect 
sacrificing short-term gains for long-term outcomes such as price or financial stability. 
 
(2) The  second  part  of  the  explanation  as  to  why  the  central  bank  is  separate  from  the 
government  relates  to  the  observation  that  much  of  what  the  central  bank  manages  or 
influences  –  money  creation,  credit  creation,  external  sector  management,  and  financial 
stability – involves potential front-loaded benefits to the economy but with the possibility of 
attendant “tail risk” in the form of back-loaded costs from financial excess or instability. For 
example, 
 
(i) 
Greater  supply  of  money  can  facilitate  ease  of  financial  transactions,  including  the 
financing  of  government  deficits,  but  this  can  cause  economy  to  over-heat  in  due 
course  and  trigger  (hyper-)  inflationary  pressures  or  even  a  full-blown  crisis  that 
eventually require sharper monetary contractions;  
 
Excessive  lowering  of  interest  rates  and/or  relaxation  in  bank  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements can lead to greater credit creation, asset-price inflation, and semblance 
of strong economic growth in the short term, but excessive credit growth is usually 
accompanied by lending down the quality curve which triggers mal-investment, asset-
price crashes, and financial crises in the long term;  
 
(ii) 
(iii)  Allowing  foreign  capital  flows  to  flood  into  the  economy  can  temporarily  ease  the 
financing pressures for an expanding government balance-sheet and the crowded-out 
                                                            
2  See  Acharya and  Rajan  (2013)  for  a  complete  theoretical  analysis  modeling government  myopia  and populism 
(maximising  simply  the  cash-flow  and  spending  each  period)  in  the  presence  of  a  sovereign  debt  market; 
implications for policies governing the financial sector; and attendant risks in the form of economic repression and 
financial crises. 
 4 
(iv) 
private sector, but a “sudden stop” or exodus of these flows in future can trigger a 
collapse of the exchange rate with adverse economy-wide spillovers; and,  
 
Sweeping  bank  loan  losses  under  the  rug  by  compromising  supervisory  and 
regulatory  standards  can  create  a  façade  of  financial  stability  in  the  short  run,  but 
inevitably cause the fragile deck of cards to fall in a heap at some point in future, 
likely with a greater taxpayer bill and loss of potential output.   
While  not  always  the  case,  often  the  required  interventions  for  stable  growth  are  structural 
reforms by the government with upfront fiscal outlay; however, these may compromise populist 
expenditures  or  require  displeasing  incumbents.    As  a  result,  it  might  seem  as  an  expedient 
solution to the government to ask/task/mandate/direct the central bank to pursue strategies that 
generate  short-term  gains  but  effectively  create  tail  risks  for  the  economy.    To  protect  the 
economy from such short-termism, the central bank is designed to be at a safe distance from the 
executive branch of the government. 
 
Undermining the Independence of the Central Bank  
Now, although the central bank is formally organised to be separate from the government, its 
effective horizon of decision-making can be reduced for short-term gains by the government, if it 
so desires, through a variety of mechanisms, inter alia,  
Appointing government (or government-affiliated) officials rather than technocrats to 
key  central  bank  positions,  such  as  Governor,  and  more  generally,  senior 
management;  
 
Pursuing steady attrition and erosion of statutory powers of the central bank through 
piece-meal legislative amendments that directly or indirectly eat at separation of the 
central bank from the government;  
(iii)  Blocking  or  opposing  rule-based  central  banking  policies,  and  favoring  instead 
discretionary or joint decision-making with direct government interventions; and,  
Setting  up  parallel  regulatory  agencies  with  weaker  statutory  powers  and/or 
encouraging development of unregulated (or lightly regulated) entities that perform 
financial intermediation functions outside the purview of the central bank.3,4   
(i) 
(ii) 
  
(iv) 
                                                            
3 The most striking example is the presence of government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) to support mortgages and 
home ownership in the United States. The GSEs are outside of any regulatory purview of the Federal Reserve, but 
have been deployed by successive governments to pursue populist housing policies, contributing significantly to the 
imbalances that led to the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-08 and the ensuing Great Recession (see, Acharya, van 
Nieuwerburgh, Richardson and White, 2011, for details).  
4 See Acharya (2015) for discussion on the resulting need to ensure that the central bank has regulatory scope over 
parts of “shadow banking” that are likely to be systemically important. 
 5 
 If  such  efforts  are  successful,  they  induce  policy  myopia  in  the  economy  that  substitutes 
macroeconomic stability with punctuated arrival of financial crises. 
Therefore, there are several reasons why enshrining and maintaining central bank independence 
ends  up  being  an  inclusive  reform  for  the  economy;  and  conversely,  undermining  such 
independence a regressive, extractive one: 
(i)  When  the  government  is  seen  often  making  efforts  to  dilute  the  central  bank’s 
policies  and  effectively  coercing  the  central  bank  into  such  dilutions,  banks  and 
private sector spend more time lobbying for policies that suit them individually, at the 
cost of collective good, rather than investing in value creation and growth.  
 
(ii)  When governance of the central bank is undermined, it is unlikely to attract or be able 
to  retain  the  brightest  minds  that  thrive  on  the  ability  to  debate  freely,  think 
independently, and effect change; attrition of central bank powers results in attrition 
of its human capital and deterioration of its efficiency and expertise over time. 
(iii)  When important parts of financial intermediation are kept outside the purview of the 
central bank, systemic risks can build up in “shadow banking” with private gains in 
good times to a small set of players but at substantive costs to future generations in 
the form of unchecked financial fragility.  
As such, the divergence in horizon of decision-making between government and the central bank 
that  I  have  highlighted  need  not  lead  to  any  operational  incompatibility  as  long  as  it  is  well-
understood and well-accepted by both parties that it is precisely given this divergence that the 
central bank is formally separated from the executive office and meant to conduct its functions in 
an  independent  manner.  The  central  bank  can  of  course  make  mistakes,  and  is  generally  held 
publicly  accountable  through  parliamentary  scrutiny  and  transparency  norms.  This  way,  the 
institutional arrangement of independence, transparency and accountability to the public not only 
balance  but  also  strengthen  the  central  bank’s  autonomy.    However,  direct  intervention  and 
interference by the government in operational mandate of the central bank negate its functional 
autonomy. 
 
“Kiss of Death” – Incurring the Wrath of Markets 
Far-sighted  government  leaders  may  be  able  to  reap  benefits  of  convincing  voters  about  the 
importance  of  investing  in  macro-economic  stability;  for  instance,  by  claiming  credit  for  the 
long-term nature of financial sector outcomes attained by allowing the central bank autonomy in 
decision-making  and  delivery  of  its  core  functions.  When  such  a  measured  perspective  of  an 
independent  central  bank  as  a  key  element  of  durable  economic  prosperity  is  missing  and/or 
government  myopia  so  rife  as  to  lead  to  regular  inroads  into  central  banking  apparatus  and 
decisions, unfortunate accidents can arise. Macroeconomic management can become a tug of war 
between securing stability and inflicting misdirection; daily operational decisions lead to power 
struggles; and, as the central bank is forced to bend over backwards to retain credibility in the 
 6 
face  of  imminent  pressures  that  would  erode  its  independence,  counter  efforts  to  reduce  its 
independence escalate.  
As this dynamic plays out, markets watch keenly, and if uncertainty grows and confidence in 
central bank independence and credibility erode, then markets rap bond yields and exchange rate 
on the knuckles!   
Let me elaborate.  
Modern economies are, by and large, not autarkies; they rely on capital markets to finance their 
investments.  This  is  especially  true  of  governments  as  reflected  in  the  relatively  large  size  of 
sovereign  (and  quasi-sovereign)  debt  markets,  denominated  in  domestic  currency  as  well  as 
foreign currency. As long-term risks such as inflation or financial instability rise, markets reprice 
sovereign  debt  and  may  potentially  shun  its  financing  altogether.  This  could  have  immediate 
spillovers  to  other  markets  such  as  for  foreign  exchange  and  foreign  investments,  potentially 
putting at risk also the external sector stability of the economy. 
Therefore,  the  presence  of  this  third  player  –  the  market  –  in  the  back  and  forth  between  a 
government  and  the  central  bank  (more  generally,  regulatory  institutions)  is  an  important 
feedback  mechanism.    The  market  can  discipline  the  government  not  to  erode  central  bank 
independence, and it can also make the government pay for its transgressions. Interestingly, the 
market  also  forces  central  banks  to  remain  accountable  and  independent  when  it  is  under 
government pressure.5 
Besides the market revolt and strictures during the Argentine episode of 2010 that I recounted in 
my introductory remarks, it is to be noted that both of this year’s emerging market sovereign 
bond and currency meltdowns got catalysed through a perception of government influence on 
central bank’s monetary policy, including through sporadic communication by government with 
public on its desire to control the central bank’s decision-making. In one case, a rate cut in the 
wake of rising inflation and mounting fiscal deficit did the damage; and in the other, it was a 
public pronouncement by the premier of the state about the “evils” of interest rate hikes even 
when inflation was in double digit terrain.  
Indeed, the market censure need not be limited to emerging markets.  The public expression of 
government’s  bewilderment  and  disappointment  at  monetary  tightening  in  the  world’s  largest 
safe-haven economy, again at a time of rising inflation and fiscal deficit, has raised in minds of 
investors scenarios under which its reserve currency status cannot anymore be taken for granted 
(A debate about central-bank independence is overdue, The Economist, Oct 20, 2018).   
Barry Eichengreen, Professor of Economics and Political Science at the University of California, 
Berkeley, covers superbly, in his recent piece (2018), this critical feedback role of the market: 
                                                            
5 An interesting suggestion from Michael Patra is that perhaps economies should not only have rules that delineate 
clearly the roles of the government and the central bank, but also a dispute resolution mechanism a la the World 
Trade  Organisation  (WTO).  The  very  presence  of  a  referee  would  recognise  that  differences  in  objectives  and 
horizons of decision-making arise; central bank and government can (to borrow his exact words) “go in there, slug it 
out, come out battered, but in understanding, since there has to be a clear winner whose hand will be upheld by the 
jury.” 
 7 
“There  are  good  reasons  why  countries  …  delegate  monetary  policy  decisions  to  technocrats 
appointed for their expertise.  They can take the long view.  They can resist the temptation to 
manipulate monetary conditions for short-term gain.  Privileging long-term stability, as history 
has  shown,  is  positive  for  economic  performance.    And  it  is  on  this  performance  that  elected 
leaders, rightly or wrongly, are judged. 
Thoughtful politicians understand this. Hence their support for central bank independence and 
their respect for the convention that they should refrain from seeking to influence central bank 
decisions.  Unfortunately, not all politicians are thoughtful.  Not all have the patience to wait for 
long-term gains.  Not all are pleased when appointees refuse to bow to their wishes.  And not all 
are respectful of inherited institutions and conventions, be they central bank independence or, 
more broadly, the division of powers. 
The question is whether they pay attention to markets.” 
What Barry Eichengreen is perceptively observing is that if a government were to pay attention 
to markets, it would realize that central bank independence is in fact its strength and the central 
bank a sort of a true friend, someone who will tell the government unpleasant but brutally honest 
truths  and  correct  to  the  extent  it  can  any  adverse  long-term  consequences  of  government 
policies. 
 
Let me now turn to how all this relates to the Reserve Bank of India.  
The  Late  Deena  Khatkhate  provides  a  masterful  and  scholarly  assessment  in  Reserve  Bank  of 
India: A Study in the Separation and Attrition of Powers (2005). Some of the discussion below 
draws heavily from his assessment and is updated for developments since then. Other excellent 
discussions of the central bank’s autonomy and independence in the Indian context are contained 
in lectures by the Reserve Bank of India’s former Governors, Dr. C. Rangarajan (1993) and Dr. 
Y. V. Reddy (2001, 2007).  As we will see below, other Governors and Deputy Governors have 
also carried this abiding theme through their tenures.  For some of them, even when the Reserve 
Bank’s  independence  has  been  unclear  de  jure,  governments  have  in  the  end  have  had  the 
wisdom  to  support  it  de  facto;  for  others,  however,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  independence  has 
remained a work in progress, an enduring challenge that the nation has been grappling with on an 
ongoing basis. 
 
Progressive Evolution in Restoring Independence of the Reserve Bank of India 
While the Reserve Bank has always derived several important powers from the Reserve Bank 
Act,  1935  and  the  Banking  Regulation  Act,  1949,  what  matters  is  the  effective  independence 
with  which  these  powers  can  be  exercised  in  practice.    Over  time,  great  strides  have  been 
undertaken by successive governments at the behest of the central bank, several economists, and 
umpteen committee reports, to restore the operational independence of the Reserve Bank. I will 
touch upon three such areas of healthy progress. 
 8 
(1) Monetary Policy:  The Reserve Bank, like many central banks of the time, got quickly 
trapped into the socialist planning policies of post-independence government, setting not 
just the rate of interest on money but practically all rates of credit at different maturities, 
as well as doing sectoral credit allocation to the real economy.   
 
Post  the  deregulation  of  interest  rates  in  the  1990s,  monetary  policy  achieved  a  more 
modern dimension.  To start with, there was a “multiple indicators” approach to setting 
interest  rates.  Having  too  many  objectives  for  monetary  policy  violates  the  Tinbergen 
principle of “one objective, one instrument”; it also renders it difficult to understand or 
communicate what the interest-rate setting is attempting to achieve at any point of time. 
Importantly, this approach entertained much regulatory discretion, often at the level of an 
individual, viz. the Reserve Bank Governor.  This made independence of monetary policy 
individual-specific; in other words, it allowed for government pressure to creep in easily 
for keeping rates low at times of fiscal expansion under one guise or the other.  
 
This is exactly a setting where rules would be better than discretion, in particular to avoid 
the time-inconsistency problem, highlighted in the work of Nobel laureates Finn Kydland 
and Edward Prescott in 1970s and early 1980s.  Kydland and Prescott (1977) consider the 
implication that people, including investors, could look into the future and anticipate the 
behavior  of  self-interested  governments,  so  that  a  discretionary  monetary  policy  could 
end  up  being  compromised  by  government  pressures,  leaving  inflationary  expectations 
unanchored, whereas a monetary policy committed to a rule would be harder to bend and 
keep inflationary expectations at bay.6 
 
Following  several  episodic  bouts  of  double-digit  inflation,  a  war  on  inflation  and 
inflationary expectations, was finally launched in September 2013 by the then Governor 
Raghuram  G  Rajan;  the  Urjit  Patel  Committee  Report  to  Revise  and  Strengthen  the 
Monetary  Policy  Framework  was  released  in  2014;  and,  finally,  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India  Act  was  modified  in  August  2016  to  constitute  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC).  
 
The MPC consists of three RBI members, including the Governor who reserves a casting 
vote,  and  three  external  members  appointed  by  the  government.  The  MPC  has  been 
legislatively  awarded  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  mandate  of  achieving  4%  consumer 
price index (CPI) inflation in the medium term, while paying attention to growth, with 
operational independence to achieve it, and with accountability in terms of transparency 
around the MPC’s resolution, minutes summarising each individual committee member’s 
decision,  bi-annual  monetary  policy  reports,  and  a  written  report  to  the  government  in 
case a +/- 2% band around the target inflation level is violated for three quarters in a row.  
 
                                                            
6  See  also  Buiter  and  Sibert  (2000),  who  lay  out  the  theoretical  basis  for  the  required  legal  and  institutional 
arrangements, primarily operational independence of the central bank, for an effective monetary policy. 
 9 
The MPC, two years old since, has attempted steadfastly through its rate-setting decisions 
to  build  credibility  of  the  inflation  target,  a  process  that  is  generally  believed,  and 
empirically documented, to help lower the long-term bond yields as well as stabilise the 
exchange rate.   While the jury will remain out for some time on the economic impact of 
the flexible inflation-targeting framework, it is incontrovertible that the MPC has given 
monetary policy an independent institutional foundation. The government deserves much 
credit for its far-sightedness in legislating the required changes to strengthen this aspect 
of  central  bank’s  independence  and  distancing  itself  in  the  process  from  monetary 
decision-making (other than through the appointment of external members on the MPC). 
 
(2) Debt  Management:  For  several  decades  post-independence,  the  Reserve  Bank 
participated in  short-term  Treasury Bill  issuances  of  the  Government  of  India  (bearing 
extraordinarily  low  interest  rates)  to  fund  its  fiscal  deficits.    The  Reserve  Bank  also 
publicly acknowledged that its open market operations (OMOs) were primarily geared to 
manage  the government  bond  yields.    This  implied  that the  central  bank  balance-sheet 
was always available as a resource – just like tax receipts – ready to monetise excessive 
government spending.  Unsurprisingly, high inflation in India was engineered to please 
both  Milton  Friedman  and  Thomas  Sargent,  i.e.,  it  was  always  both  a  monetary  and  a 
fiscal phenomenon, as these two Nobel laureates in economics had respectively argued 
(Friedman, 1970 and Sargent, 1982). 
 
Eventually, recognizing the fiscal imprudence and inflationary risks engendered by such 
automatic monetization of government deficits, joint efforts between the Reserve Bank 
and the government during 1994-1997 limited deficit financing from the Reserve Bank to 
the capped Ways and Means Advances (WMA). The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management  (FRBM)  Act  of  2003  explicitly  prohibited  the  Reserve  Bank  from 
participating in primary issuances of the government securities. Open market operations 
came  to  be  designed  to  sterilise  the  impact  on  domestic  money  supply  of  foreign 
exchange interventions and/or to meet durable liquidity needs of the economy, rather than 
to fund deficits. While there have been relapses to old habits, overall these changes have 
left the task of government debt management with the Reserve Bank as primarily being 
one of auctioning government debt and helping it switch between securities or conduct 
buybacks, rather than of intricate involvement in fiscal planning, and more importantly, 
in its funding. 
 
Furthermore,  the  repressive  levels  of  Statutory  Liquid  Ratio  (SLR)  and  Cash  Reserve 
Ratio (CRR), which ensured substantial portions of bank deposits were channeled to the 
government  or  were  readily  available  to  debase  in  value  through  monetary  expansion, 
have  now  been  rationalised  to  be  more  or  less  in  line  with  international  prudential 
standards.  For instance, in case of SLR, the level has been steadily reduced and the plan 
is to harmonise it with the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR).  
 
 10 
(3) Exchange  Rate  Management:  In  the  Five  Year  Plans  post-independence,  prices 
including the exchange rate were assumed to be constant; however, since the true value 
of the Rupee fluctuated with market prices and macroeconomic conditions, the Sterling 
holdings had no choice but to take an undue hit.  The underlying true value of the Rupee 
was also affected heavily –– but not reflected in reality –– by monetary policy and debt 
management  operations  that  were  implicitly  supporting  the  ballooning  of  government 
deficits.  The result of the fixed exchange rate regime in the midst of “fiscal dominance” 
was  that  the  Reserve  Bank  was  essentially  a  silent  spectator  in  the  build-up  to  the 
inevitable  exchange  rate  disequilibrium  (though  arguably  this  was  true  of  much  of  the 
world at that time). 
 
Since  1976,  when  the  level  of  the  Rupee  moved  to  being  a  “managed  float”  against  a 
basket of currencies, and especially since 1993, the exchange rate has gradually evolved 
from  being  entirely  a  fixed  rate  to  being  market-determined  for  all  practical  purposes. 
The  Reserve  Bank  deploys  reserves  management  and  macro-prudential  controls  on 
foreign capital flows to manage excessively large movements. With a flexible inflation-
targeting  mandate  for  interest-rate  policy  and  funding  of  fiscal  deficit  no  longer  the 
objective of monetary operations, the desired exchange rate management rests with the 
Reserve Bank. 
 
Ongoing Challenges in Maintaining Independence of the Reserve Bank of India 
Few important pockets of persistent weakness, however, remain in maintaining independence of 
the  Reserve  Bank.    Some  of  these  areas  were  also  identified  in  the  2017  Financial  Sector 
Assessment  Programme  (FSAP)  of  India  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the 
World Bank (WB) as ways to strengthen the independence of the Reserve Bank, an area in which 
the FSAP rates India as “materially non-compliant”.  
 
(1) Regulation of Public Sector Banks: One important limitation is that the Reserve Bank 
is statutorily limited in undertaking the full scope of actions against public sector banks 
(PSBs)  –  such  as  asset  divestiture,  replacement  of  management  and  Board,  license 
revocation, and resolution actions such as mergers or sales –– all of which it can and does 
deploy effectively in case of private banks. The significant implications of this limitation 
were highlighted in detail in Governor Patel’s speech in March 2018, Banking Regulatory 
Powers should be Ownership Neutral. To reiterate from the FSAP (Para 39 in Summing 
up  Responsibilities,  Objectives,  Powers,  Independence,  and  Accountabilities,  the  Basel 
Core Principles Detailed Assessment Report):  
“Legislation  should  be  amended  to  enable  the  RBI  to  extend  all  the  powers  currently 
exercised  over  private  sector  banks  to  PSBs;  in  particular,  regarding  Board  member 
dismissals,  mergers  and  license  revocation.  …  It  should  also  remove  the  option  of  an 
appeal  to  the  government  when  the  RBI  revokes  a  license.    If  statutory  changes  are 
difficult, the RBI and the government should consider adopting a framework agreement 
11 
  whereby  the  government  would  acknowledge  the  RBI’s  full  operational  authority  and 
independence in supervision and regulation, as they did recently for monetary policy.” 
(2) The  Reserve  Bank’s  Balance-sheet  Strength:  Having  adequate  reserves  to  bear  any 
losses  that  arise  from  central  bank  operations  and  having  appropriate  rules  to  allocate 
profits  (including  rules  that  govern  the  accumulation  of  capital  and  reserves)  is 
considered an important part of central bank’s independence from the government (see, 
for example, Moser-Boehm, 2006). A thorny ongoing issue on this front has been that of 
the rules for surplus transfer from the Reserve Bank to the government (Cogencis, 2018, 
“Govt  pegs  RBI  excess  capital  at  3.6  trln  rupees,  seeks  it  as  surplus”),  an  issue  that 
relates closely to the leading Argentine example in my introductory remarks.  It has been 
covered  deftly  by  Rakesh  Mohan  (2018)  in  the  last  of  his  three-part  series  of  recent 
articles on the Reserve Bank, titled Protect the RBI’s balance-sheet; therein, he elucidates 
why  a  central  bank  needs  a  strong  balance-sheet  to  perform  its  full  range  of  critical 
functions for the economy.  I quote his main points below: 
“First,  …  The  longer-term  fiscal  consequences  would  be  the  same  if  the  government 
issued new securities today to fund the expenditure. [R]aiding the RBI’s capital creates 
no new government revenue on a net basis over time, and only provides an illusion of 
free money in the short term.” 
 
“Second, … The use of such a transfer would erode whatever confidence that exists in the 
government’s intention to practice fiscal prudence.” 
“Third, … In theory, a central bank can implement monetary policy appropriately with a 
wide range of capital levels, including levels below zero. In practice, the danger is that it 
may  lose  credibility  with  the  financial  markets  and  public  at  large,  and  may  then  be 
unable to attain its objective if it has substantial losses and is seen as having insufficient 
capital.  
 
Are fears with regard to possible central bank losses illusory? According to the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS), 43 out of 108 central banks reported losses for at least 
one year between 1984 and 2005. 
It  is  also  argued  by  some  that  the  government  can  always  recapitalise  a  central  bank 
when  necessary.  This  is  certainly  true  in  principle  but  is  practically  difficult  when  the 
government itself suffers from fiscal pressures and maintains a relatively high debt-GDP 
ratio,  as  is  the  case  in  India.  What  is  also  important  is  the  erosion  of  central  bank 
independence both in reality and perhaps, even more importantly, in optics. …  
 
Once  again,  better  sense  has  prevailed  and  the  government  has  not  raided  the  RBI’s 
balance sheet.” 
 
12 
     (3) Regulatory Scope: A final issue is one of regulatory scope, the most recent case in point 
being  the  recommendation  to  bypass  the  central  bank’s  powers  over  payment  and 
settlement systems by appointing a separate payments regulator (also covered by Rakesh 
Mohan in his series, ibid). The Reserve Bank has published its dissent note against this 
recommendation on October 19, 2018. 
 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  with  some  notes  of  gratitude  and  dedication  as  well  as  some  for  further 
reflection. 
Mr. Malegam has been a long-time adviser, friend and well-wisher of the Reserve Bank of India, 
as well as its former Board Member.  He is someone I personally admire for his intellect, clarity 
of thinking and sagacity.  I thank you, Mr. Malegam, for inviting me to deliver the A D Shroff 
Memorial Lecture for this year.   
The  Late  Ardashir  Darabshaw  Shroff  served  as  India’s  non-official  delegate  in  1944  at  the 
United Nations “Bretton Woods Conference” on post-war financial and monetary arrangements.  
One  of  his  primary  concerns  was  to  seek  a  permanent  seat  on  the  executive  board  of  the 
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, which unfortunately did not materialise. To 
me, his most important contribution was the co-founding in 1954 of the Free Forum Enterprise 
think tank which through open dialogue presented a counterpoint to the socialist tendencies that 
were  taking  root  in  the  country  in  the  post-independence  era  government.    Sucheta  Dalal’s 
biography, A. D. Shroff - Titan of Finance and Free Enterprise (2000), notes that George Woods, 
one of the most popular presidents of the World Bank, said of him: 
“Nobody could accuse A. D. Shroff of hiding his opinions and in the later years of his life, very 
rarely were those opinions fashionable in India. Yet few patriots did more than he [did] to make 
friends for the Indian nation and to build confidence in that nation among those throughout the 
world whose business it is to provide capital for sound investment opportunities.” 
In  all  humility,  to  emulate  A.  D.  Shroff’s  freedom  to  criticize  policy  “actuated  by  the  single 
motive of trying to promote the good of my country” (from his letter to Sir Osborne Smith, the 
first Governor of the Reserve Bank), I chose for today’s occasion the theme of the importance of 
independent regulatory institutions, and in particular, that of a central bank that is independent 
from  an  over-arching  reach  of  the  state.  This  theme  is  certainly  one  of  great  sensitivity  but  I 
contend it is of even greater importance to our economic prospects.  I earnestly hope that I have 
done some justice to his immortal legacy to independent economic discourse and policy-making.  
In the process, I have attempted to convince you that we have made good progress in earning the 
Reserve  Bank’s  independence,  most  notably  in  the  monetary  policy  framework  (changes 
wherein, along with the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and the Goods and Services Tax, were 
considered as crucial structural reforms by Moody’s in upgrading India’s sovereign rating eleven 
months back). To secure greater financial and macroeconomic stability, these efforts need to be 
extended  to  effective  independence  for  the  Reserve  Bank  in  its  regulatory  and  supervisory 
 13 
powers  over  public  sector  banks,  its  balance-sheet  strength,  and  its  regulatory  scope.    Such 
endeavor would be a true inclusive reform for the Indian economy’s future. Thankfully, it is only 
a  matter  of  making  the  right  choices,  which  I  believe  as  a  society  we  can  with  adequately 
thoughtful “what-if” analysis; I have sketched a scenario, which several parts of the world are 
presently witnessing, of great risk to nations from undermining the independence of their central 
banks. 
In his excellent biography, Volcker: The Triumph of Persistence (2012), my former NYU Stern 
colleague,  Bill  Silber,  describes  in  vivid  detail  how  in  the  1980s,  the  then  Federal  Reserve 
Governor  Paul  Volcker  adopted  a  curmudgeonly  approach  to  setting  interest  rates  to  target 
inflation. Besides resisting any and all pressure to keep rates low, which would have effectively 
allowed cheap funding – in the short term – of President Reagan’s expansionary deficit-based 
manifesto, Volcker engaged personally with the President to convey the perils of running high 
fiscal deficits right after double-digit inflation had just been tamed. In the end, Volcker won the 
day as wise counsel prevailed, deficits were reined in, and inflation tamed even further. I would 
argue that through Volcker’s tough stance on inflation and candour on risks from government’s 
fiscal  plans,  the  institution  of  the  Federal  Reserve  had  in  fact  been  President  Reagan’s  true 
friend. 
As  many  parts  of  the  world  today  await  greater  government  respect  for  central  bank 
independence,  independent  central  bankers  will  remain  undeterred.  Governments  that  do  not 
respect central bank independence will sooner or later incur the wrath of financial markets, ignite 
economic fire, and come to rue the day they undermined an important regulatory institution; their 
wiser counterparts who invest in central bank independence will enjoy lower costs of borrowing, 
the love of international investors, and longer life spans.  
 
References 
Acemoglu,  Daron  and  James  Robinson  (2012)  Why  Nations  Fail:  The  Origins  of  Power, 
Prosperity and Poverty, Crown Business. 
Acharya,  Viral  V.  (2015)  Financial  Stability  in  the  Broader  Mandate  for  Central  Banks:  A 
Political  Economy  Perspective,  Working  Paper  #11,  Hutchins  Center  on  Fiscal  &  Monetary 
Policy at Brookings. 
Acharya, Viral V., Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Matthew Richardson and Lawrence White (2011) 
Guaranteed to Fail: Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the Debacle of Mortgage Finance, Princeton 
University Press. 
Acharya, Viral V. and Raghuram G. Rajan (2013) Sovereign Debt, Government Myopia and the 
Financial Sector, Review of Financial Studies, 26(6), 1526-1560. 
Buiter, Willem and Anne C. Sibert (2000) Targets, Instruments and Institutional Arrangements 
for  an  Effective  Monetary  Policy,  Seventh  L.K.  Jha  Memorial  Lecture,  delivered  by  Willem 
Buiter at the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, October 16, 2000. 
 14 
Cogencis (2018) Govt pegs RBI excess capital at 3.6 trln rupees, seeks it as surplus, 3 August, 
2018. 
Dalal,  Sucheta.  (2000)  A.  D.  Shroff  -  Titan  of  Finance  and  Free  Enterprise,  Penguin  Books 
India. 
Eichengreen, Barry (2018) Investors have the power to tame Erdogan and Trump: Politicians 
should  think  carefully  before  seeking  to  influence  central  banks,  Financial  Times,  August  19, 
2018. 
Friedman, Milton (1970) The Counter-revolution in Monetary Theory, First Wincott Memorial 
Lecture, Transatlantic Arts. 
Fukuyama, Francis (2011) The Origins of Political Order: From Pre-human Times to the French 
Revolution, Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Khatkhate,  Deena  (2005)  Reserve  Bank  of  India:  A  Study  in  the  Separation  and  Attrition  of 
Powers, in Public Institutions in India: Performance and Design, edited by Devesh Kapur and 
Pratap Bhanu Mehta, Oxford University Press. 
Kydland,  Finn  E.  and  Edward  C.  Prescott  (1977)  Rules  Rather  than  Discretion:  The 
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans, Journal of Political Economy, 85(3), 473-492. 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2018)  Preserving  the  independence  of  the  RBI  (October  3,  2018); 
Responsibility  fulfilled  (October  4,  2018);  Protect  the  RBI’s  balance-sheet  (October  5,  2018), 
Business Standard. 
Moser-Boehm,  Paul.  (2006)  The  relationship  between  the  central  bank  and  the  government, 
Bank for International Settlements. 
Patel,  Urjit  R.  (2018)  Banking  Regulatory  Powers  Should  be  Ownership  Neutral,  Inaugural 
Lecture – Center for Law & Economics; Center for Banking & Financial Laws, Gujarat National 
Law University. 
 
Rangarajan,  C.  (1993)  Autonomy  of  Central  Banks,  Tenth  M.  G.  Kutty  Memorial  Lecture  at 
Calcutta, September 17, 1993. 
 
Reddy,  Y.  V.  (2001)  Autonomy  of  the  Central  Bank:  Changing  Contours  in  India,  speech 
delivered at Indian Institute of Management, Indore. 
 
Reddy, Y. V. (2007) Evolving Role of the Reserve Bank of India: Recent Developments, speech 
delivered on the Foundation Day of the Institute of Development Studies, Jaipur, June 30, 2007. 
 
Sargent,  Thomas  J.  (1982)  The  Ends  of  Four  Big  Inflations,  in  Robert  E.  Hall,  ed.,  Inflation: 
Causes and Effects, University of Chicago Press. 
Silber, William (2012) Volcker: The Triumph of Persistence, Bloomsbury. 
 15 
