“STEERING FINTECH FOR A PROSPEROUS SOCIETY” 
    Introduction 
 [Modem Connecting Sound] 
Ladies and Gentlemen, if you are 30 years old or younger, by a show of hands, 
how many of you have heard that sound before? 
You may not all be familiar with it but that, about 20 years ago, was the sound 
of a modem connecting to the internet. It was the latest technology at that time, 
and it was the envy of older generations who had never dreamed of seeing such 
luxuries during their lifetimes. This was the sound of the world of connectivity 
that was about to be unleashed. 
Let us consider how far we have come. Back then, the fastest home connection 
time was 56 kilobits per second. At that speed, a 10 megabyte image would take 
around  25  minutes  to  download.  Today,  it  would  take  seconds.  Such  a  slow 
connection now would be completely unacceptable to all of you, even on your 
phones, let alone your computers and tabletsi. 
The  world  today  is  very  different  from  what  it  was  just  two  decades  ago.  The 
technological revolution has enabled us to communicate, socialize, shop, keep 
up  with  the  news,  and  perform  any  number  of  other  tasks  simply  and 
conveniently from the palms of our hands. It is by now inconceivable to imagine 
an isolated world stripped of its smart phones, high-speed internet, social media, 
or even food delivery apps. 
  Keynote address delivered by H.E. Dr. Mohammad Y. Al-Hashel, Governor, Central Bank of Kuwait 
at  the  Global  Informatics  Forum,  November  27th,  2018,  Gulf  University  for  Science  and 
Technology, State of Kuwait. 
- 1 - 
Yet, it is a false notion to see technology as the sole driver of change when it can 
be argued that it is, in fact, propelled more by society’s insatiable thirst for ever-
faster access to information and entertainment and empowerment. 
 There is no sign of the revolution in digital technology slowing down. If anything, 
the technology is evolving and being adopted at an increasingly amazing pace. 
Economists have labeled this the Fourth Industrial Revolution. They believe the 
latest  digital  technology  is  transforming  the  economic  landscape  just  as 
dramatically as the steam engine, internal combustion engine and microchip did 
before, but this time at an exponential rate. It is plain to see that the world is not 
only changing, but is also being disrupted by technology infused with humanity. 
Seemingly  every  sector  of  the  economy  –  whether  healthcare,  transportation, 
hospitality, retail or manufacturing – is being utterly transformed. 
 So, what about financial services? What will the future look like for this industry? 
How will these changes affect our life? What role should the regulators play in 
the  technological  revolution?  And  the  role  of  other  stakeholders?  These 
questions  will  be  the  subject  of  my  keynote  address  today:  existing  trends  in 
financial  technology,  opportunities  and  risks,  and  the  Central  Bank’s  steering 
role as facilitator and enabler. 
 It must always be remembered that people are at the center of all we do. So in 
light of the many changes that financial technology is bringing and the possibility 
that  we  are  drifting  into  uncharted  territory,  all  stakeholders,  including  the 
Central Bank, must ensure that this transformation is aligned with our ultimate 
objective, which is to ensure inclusive  and sustainable prosperity. This means 
helping to build a brighter and safer future for all of society. And we believe that 
one  vital  step  towards  achieving  this  objective  is  embracing  technological 
innovation while steering clear of, or at least mitigating, risks to consumers, the 
economy and broader society. 
   - 2 - 
Fintech Developments 
The  changes  we  are  seeing  in  financial  technology  are  happening  at  an 
exponential  rate.  But  ultimately,  change  is  driven  by  consumers’  needs  and 
demands. If technology can enhance and improve our life, then society will adopt 
it. 
 This  is  certainly  true  of  financial  technology,  or,  as  we  abbreviate  it,  fintech. 
Fintech is a broad term covering a wide variety of innovative technologies, both 
emerging  and  advanced,  that  have  caused  a  paradigm  shift  in  the  world  of 
finance.  Fintech  encompasses  technologies  including  data  analytics,  artificial 
intelligence, blockchain, crypto-assets, payment solutions and online shopping. 
Some  technologies,  such  as  mobile  banking,  have  been  widely  adopted.  But 
others have not been so quickly embraced by banks and customers. 
 The gap this leaves means there are  huge opportunities in fintech, which has 
not gone unnoticed by investors. According to KPMG, Total investment in fintech 
has grown from $9 billion in 2012 to a predicted $120 billion by the end of 2018 
– an average annual growth rate of more than 50 percent. Not only this, but the 
average  investment  deal  in  fintech  is  $66  million  –  more  than  double  the 
average deal in any other type of technologyii. 
 Growth is even more impressive in the area of crypto-assets. Today, there are 
around 2,100 active crypto-assets in the world. In early November, the top five 
of these had a combined market value of over $160 billion, with Bitcoin alone 
sitting at more than $110 billion in value. To put  this in perspective, this was 
more than the value of all British banknotes in circulation at that timeiii. 
 Even more impressively, at the height of their  pricing in January this year, the 
total  value  of  all  crypto-assets  was  greater  than  $830  billion  –  around  eight 
times  the  value  of  British  banknotes  in  circulation.  Such  massive  and  rapid 
growth,  though  highlighting  what  a  risky  new  phenomenon  this  is,  made  all 
industry stakeholders take notice. 
 - 3 - 
As for consumer adoption, the right fintech proposition can enable institutions 
to attract more customers when compared to traditional channels. We have seen 
this  trend  in  Kuwait,  where  numerous  fintech  initiatives  have  attracted 
thousands  of  users.  These  initiatives  include  food  delivery  apps,  e-commerce 
platforms and online shopping. By our latest in-house estimates, we have over 
60 fintech firms operating in Kuwait, and this number is increasing each month. 
 In short, such rapid growth in innovation and adoption shows that fintech is more 
than  a  trend  –  it  is  a  transformative  force  to  be  reckoned  with.  Change  is 
happening  at  a  rapid  pace, and  it  is  being  driven  by  the  needs of  society.  We 
cannot slow this change, but that should not make us passive bystanders. We 
cannot  be  still.  We,  along  with  all  stakeholders,  must  steer  this  promising 
industry  towards  the  benefit  of  all  society  and  align  it  with  our  objective:  to 
promote ‘inclusive sustainable prosperity’. 
 Opportunities and Risks  
Let  us  explore  what  fintech  offers  and  how  it  can  support  a  more  prosperous 
society.  An  ocean  of  opportunity  has  opened  up  due  to  fintech's  tremendous 
appeal for consumers. What society needs is a frictionless financial experience. 
And  that  is  precisely  where  fintech’s  appeal  lies,  centering  around  four  key 
features – Access, Efficiency, Cost, and Customer Experience. 
 Today, around a quarter of the global population, or 1.7 billion people, have no 
access  to  basic  financial  services.  But  fintech  can  do  much  to  support 
governments in addressing financial inclusion by making it easier for people to 
benefit from these services. 
 One example among many is M-pesa, launched in Kenya in 2007. In a country 
where it is far easier to get a mobile phone than it is to open a bank account, M-
pesa  has  been  credited  with  providing  millions  of  unbanked  consumers  with 
access to financial services through its phone-based money transfer system. The 
service now has more than 25 million customers and operates in 10 countriesiv. 
 - 4 - 
Fintech represents a true paradigm shift when it comes to access to financial 
services.  Let  us  look  at  the  world’s  largest  bank  –  Industrial  and  Commercial 
Bank of China (ICBC). The bank has around 500 million customers. This seems 
impressive until you learn that it is eclipsed by the world’s largest fintech firm, 
Ant Financial, which has more than 870 million customers. This is an astonishing 
example  of  how  fintech  is  providing  access  to  financial  services  for  ordinary 
consumersv. 
 Ant Financial is valued at more than $150 billion. So, as we speak, this brings it 
in line with banks such as HSBC or Citibank, and is more than double the value 
of Goldman Sachs. This is remarkable, given that these institutions have been 
operating for more than 150 years, while Ant Financial has only been around for 
14 years. At this rate, what will the industry look like in another 14 years? 
 In  addition  to  access,  innovations  in  fintech  have  increased  efficiency  for  all 
types  of  financial  service.  A  good  example  of  this  is  the execution of  financial 
transactions, where transactions that once took several days to process can now 
be completed in seconds - as quickly as sending an email. 
 This efficiency also reduces costs for customers, who can now transfer funds or 
make financial investments at a fraction of the cost of traditional services. 
 The  increased  efficiency  and  reduced  costs  have  also  opened  up  new 
investment avenues for consumers. For example, customers can now invest in 
institutions such as Chinese money market fund Yuebao for as little as 16 cents. 
By  leveraging  technology  and  opening  investment  opportunities  for  a  much 
broader consumer base, Yuebao has created the largest money market fund in 
the world, currently managing over $270 billion in assets.  This is an excellent 
example of how fintech can make financial and investment services  available 
for allvi. 
  - 5 - 
Moreover,  fintech  has  the  capability  to  enhance  customer  experience,  in  line 
with  our  current  needs  and  expectations.  Today,  we  live  in  a  world  where 
consumers expect ‘on-demand services’, forcing institutions to operate around 
customers’  schedules  rather  than  their  own.  Branch  operating  hours,  hard 
copies  of  documents  and  physical  presence  are  becoming  increasingly 
disconnected from the expectations of the current generation. Fintech, through 
user-friendly  digital  services  and 
is  empowering 
consumers  to  access  their  financial  information  wherever,  however  and 
whenever they need it. 
‘on-demand’  banking, 
But  these  opportunities  tell  only  half  the  story.  Fintech  also  presents  many 
different challenges and risks that we will need to navigate around. 
 Some  of  the  biggest  challenges  facing  fintech  relate  to  identifying  and 
implementing these new technologies and integrating them with existing legacy 
systems. Moreover, fintech adoption requires a cultural shift in how businesses 
operate,  and  this  will  require  new  skills  and  extensive  training.  Investing  in 
training  and  up-skilling  of  human  resources  is  a  must  if  we  are  to  effectively 
address these challenges. 
 But even as we do this, fintech still poses many risks that we need to steer clear 
of,  or  at  least  mitigate.  First  and  foremost  is  the  risk  to  consumers.  While 
technology opens up many opportunities for consumers, it also exposes them to 
potential dangers. For example, their funds and data could be vulnerable to theft 
unless effective safeguards are put in place. 
 Fintech  firms  operating  with  different  stakeholders  and  third  parties  across 
jurisdictions  can  also  create  loopholes  that  can  be  exploited  by  individuals  or 
organizations  to  abuse  the  system  through  money  laundering  or  other  illegal 
activities. Monitoring and preventing such activity is crucial to safeguarding the 
overall wellbeing of society. 
 And  with  an  increasingly  interconnected  financial  system,  we  need  also  to 
ensure  that  our  IT  infrastructure  is  robust  and  secure.  Otherwise,  we  expose 
 - 6 - 
ourselves to operational risks, technical glitches, and other unforeseen technical 
issues. 
 Finally, Fintech firms that grow too big, too fast, could pose a systemic risk to the 
entire financial system. Imagine if a large fintech firm, with millions of customers, 
were to be hacked or go bankrupt. What would be the impact on the financial 
system and the broader economy? 
 These risks are rare, but when they do happen, the damage can be on a massive 
scale. Let me elaborate with examples. We have seen how the data breach at 
credit rating agency Equifax resulted in the personal and financial details of 140 
million people being stolen by hackers. Crypto-asset exchanges have also been 
hacked,  the  biggest  being  Coincheck,  which  lost  over  $500  million  in  crypto 
assetsvii. 
 Fintech can present huge opportunities, but we need always to be aware that its 
mighty forces, if unchecked, can be equally destructive. These risks have to be 
avoided, or at least managed, even as we push forward on innovation, inclusion, 
engagement, awareness, protection and empowerment. Responsible innovation 
and safer fintech adoption can only be steered when all stakeholders, including 
us,  work  together  towards  our  ultimate  objective:  to  promote  “inclusive 
sustainable prosperity”. 
 Central Bank Role 
Now,  let  me  touch  upon  our  role  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Kuwait.  It  is  the 
responsibility  of  regulators  to  strike  a  delicate  balance  between  enabling 
innovation and ensuring the stability of the financial system, for the benefit of 
the broader economy and society. 
 We  at  the  Central  Bank  are  responsible  for  ensuring  monetary  and  financial 
stability. What this means, in simple terms, is that we work to ensure that the 
people’s  deposits  are  protected,  that  the  value  of  our  currency  is  stable,  that 
prices of goods do not increase beyond what is acceptable inflation, and that the 
 - 7 - 
overall  financial  system  is  secure  and  facilitating  the  growth  of  the  broader 
economy. 
 We need to ensure that consumers are aware of the risks they undertake when 
they enter into fintech solutions. For customers to trust these new solutions, we 
need to also ensure that fintech firms have implemented reliable systems and 
sufficient controls to secure the funds and data of their customers. 
 In addition, funds from illicit criminal activities or terrorism should not sneak into 
the financial system through fintech platforms. And we, as the Central Bank of 
Kuwait,  need  to  ensure  that  no  fintech  firm  can  threaten  the  stability  of  the 
financial system and the broader economy, either technically or systemically. 
 Looking at these potential risks, it becomes clear why regulators play a critical 
role in the development of the fintech ecosystem. We realize that modern and 
efficient regulations form a key building block for a safe, state-of-the-art, fintech 
ecosystem. 
 I would like to detail how we take a proactive and dynamic approach at CBK. We 
start  with  a clear  vision and  strategy  on  embracing  technology  and  steering  it 
towards  the  benefit  of  society.  We  adopt  the  latest  relevant  and  useful 
innovations,  and  share  experiences  with  other  regulators  to  develop  our 
framework, which fits the needs of our society. And prior to the release of any 
new regulations, we hold discussions with financial institutions and fintech firms 
to receive their input and incorporate it into developing regulations that benefit 
all parties and ensure sustainable growth. 
 For example, our recent regulations for electronic payments are a step CBK has 
taken to support local, innovative, fintech platforms. These regulations ensure 
that  a  safe  and  secure  ecosystem  is  maintained  that  covers  all  stakeholders 
including  consumers,  retailers,  payment  channels  and  financial  institutions. 
Clear roles are assigned to each stakeholder, and a monitoring system is in place 
to ensure that the provided services are secure. 
  - 8 - 
We are also embarking on a long list of initiatives that will completely revamp 
and  upgrade  the  IT infrastructure  of  financial  systems  in Kuwait,  according  to 
global best practices. A key component of this is that startups and entrepreneurs 
will be able to interact with and benefit from an improved payment system that 
is efficient, convenient and safe. 
 One major initiative is the Kuwait National Payment System (KNPS), a strategic 
mega  project  being  developed  with  local  banks  and  payment  gateways  to  be 
rolled  out  in  two  phases  in  2019  and  2020.  The  system  will  cover  various 
initiatives  including  the  Government  Electronic  Banking  System,  Wages 
Protection  System,  Digital  Currency,  and  Automated  Clearing  House.  Each 
initiative  is  designed  to  enhance  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  financial 
system, and build the necessary infrastructure to address future needs. 
 For example, the Government Electronic Banking System dramatically improves 
efficiency by executing all government transactions online. It replaces a paper-
based  process  with  an  online  automated  cycle  that  is  both  immediate  and 
accurate.  This  system  is  live  today  and  is  being  rolled  out  to  all  government 
bodies. 
 Another interesting example is the plan to prepare the infrastructure for Digital 
Currency. In case the Central Bank of Kuwait decides to issue Digital Currency in 
the future, we will have the tools ready to go live. In addition to e-wallets, this 
includes a Digital Kuwaiti Dinar, which will facilitate exchange against tokenized 
assets. 
 To  encourage  startups and  entrepreneurs further,  the  Central  Bank  of Kuwait 
has  recently  announced  the  Regulatory  Sandbox  Framework.  A  regulatory 
sandbox is a safe space that allows for experimentation in innovative products 
and  services,  but  with  a  lighter  regulatory  touch  that  ensures  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  the  financial  and  banking  sector  without  stifling  innovation. 
Fintech  firms  will  also  benefit  from  fast-track  approvals  and  lower  capital 
requirements. Furthermore, the Central Bank of Kuwait will offer fintechs free 
advice on their information security effectiveness, operating model design, and 
regulatory compliance. The sandbox initiative is a framework that enables you to 
 - 9 - 
partner with the Central Bank of Kuwait. We encourage you to engage with us, 
and to submit ideas that will be secure, useful and beneficial to society. 
 We  have  also  ensured  that  our  regulations  follow  a  proportionate,  or  scaling, 
approach,  where  firms  are  treated  differently  depending  on  their  size  and 
sophistication. We differentiate between large sophisticated institutions such as 
banks  and  entrepreneurial  fintech  startups.  This  ensures  that  regulation  and 
supervision are tailored to the specific risks inherent in their different business 
models,  and  provide  an  accelerated  registration  process  for  smaller,  less 
complex or less risky firms. 
 Since people are the center of everything we do, we are continually working to 
upskill human resources at the Central Bank. Not only are we acquiring talent 
and training existing staff, we are actively leveraging on the expertise of external 
advisors, and engaging with banks and other partners. This ensures our ability 
to effectively support and regulate the industry as it grows and evolves in coming 
years. 
 Our  role  in  contributing  to  Kuwait’s  economic  and  social  development  also 
extends to preparing recruits for future jobs in banking and leveraging the skills 
of  existing  professionals  in  financial  technological  innovation.  We  are  running 
several successful training programs, with the full support of local banks, and 
under the management of the Institute of Banking Studies. These programs are 
wide  ranging  in  scope  from  providing  new  graduates  with  the  practical 
knowledge they need for working in the banking sector and in maintaining cyber 
and  data  security,  to  offering  Masters  degree  scholarships  at  leading 
international  universities  in  all  fields  related  to  the  banking  industry.  We  also 
provide  awards  for  best  economic  researcher  and  best  student  economic 
researcher, in order to encourage and advance scientific research in the fields 
of economics and banking. 
 In short, we believe that when regulators work hand in hand with all stakeholders 
to serve society, financial innovation can be responsibly steered towards our aim 
of promoting inclusive sustainable prosperity. 
 - 10 - 
Conclusion 
From that gushing sound we heard at the beginning of this address to the vastly 
different world we inhabit today, this incredible pace of change has been driven 
by  just  one  thing:  society’s  needs  and  demands.  With  the  advent  of  fintech, 
technology is revolutionizing the ways in which we spend, save, invest and lend. 
We realize that we cannot slow technological advance, nor would we want to. We 
welcome change, and we choose to steer technological innovation in the right 
direction towards our objective of providing inclusive sustainable prosperity. 
 But we cannot do this alone. All stakeholders need to come together to play their 
part in ensuring that fintech is steered in the right direction. We as regulators, 
and other regulatory bodies, must ensure that we play a proactive and dynamic 
role  in  creating  regulations  that  facilitate  innovation  and  growth,  while  at  the 
same time avoiding or at least mitigating risks. We must be agile and vigilant. 
 Educators  must  include  digital  technology  courses  in  all  curriculums  and 
programs to prepare the next generation. We also encourage them to partner 
with  international  institutions  and  establish  innovation  labs  to  research  and 
develop  fintech  solutions,  aligned  with  the  needs  of  society.  We  are  thinking 
seriously about establishing such a lab ourselves, in partnership with Thomson 
Reuters  and  international  universities  with  relevant  expertise.  We  invite 
universities and all interested parties to participate. 
 Innovators must provide out-of-the-box solutions to serve the needs of society in 
a responsible and sustainable manner. 
 And banks must be agile enough to develop fintech solutions, and to utilize big 
data  to  innovate  and  better  serve  their  customers  while  maintaining  their 
absolute trust. 
 Before  I go,  I have a  message  for  the  students in  this audience. Let  us  travel 
back 20 years and see how life used to be. Information that used to take us an 
age  to access,  like the  image we  mentioned at  the beginning  of  this address, 
 - 11 - 
would still be downloading now. There is no doubt that having information at our 
fingertips has been beneficial for society in many ways. 
But  while  it  is  right  to  demand  speed  of  service,  it  must be  remembered  that 
some  things  need  time.  You  yourselves  are  going  through  this  today.  You  are 
working hard over four years to earn your degree and equip yourselves with the 
skills needed to succeed in your working life. I am sure you appreciate the value 
of this investment in your future, and I hope you will equally appreciate that many 
other things in life also take time. Shortcuts are not the answer. Only through 
hard  work  and  commitment  can  you  achieve  your  aspirations  and,  in  turn, 
benefit society. 
 Once again, we call on you all to engage with us. And if your future brings you 
towards fintech, then you should know that you will always find a partner at the 
Central  Bank  of  Kuwait  that  will  work  with  you.  We  will  support  your  financial 
innovations, and ensure they operate in a responsible manner, where all risks 
are considered, and the solutions going out to the market are beneficial and safe 
for the broader society. 
 Unfortunately,  we  don’t  have  time  for  the  picture  to  download.  I  think  we  will 
need to disconnect at this point, and be grateful that we have moved on from 
the 56 kilobit modem connections of the past. 
[Modem Disconnecting Sound] 
Thank you very much. 
  
                                                           
i www.download-time.com 
ii KPMG International - Pulse of Fintech 2018 
iii www.coinmarketcap.com 
iv www.vodafone.com/content/index/what/m-pesa 
v Ant Financial Press Release – 2018/06/08 – ‘Ant Financial Raises Approximately US$14 billion in Series C Equity 
Financing to Accelerate Globalization and Technology Innovation’ 
vi Reuters News – ‘Jack Ma's Ant Financial adds two new money market funds to its platform’ 
vii Reuters News – ‘Equifax reveals hack that likely exposed data of 143 million customers’ – ‘Tokyo-based 
cryptocurrency exchange hacked, losing $530 million’ 
 - 12 - 
