Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Finance
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before the House
of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 30 October 2018.
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I
are pleased to be with you today to discuss the Bank’s Monetary Policy Report.
At the time of our last appearance in April, our message was about the considerable economic
progress  that  we  had  seen.  We  explained  that  after  a  lacklustre  start  to  2018,  growth  would
rebound in the second quarter, coming in at around a 2 per cent pace for the rest of the year. We
also  said  inflation  would  stay  somewhat  above  our  2  per  cent  target  this  year,  boosted  by
temporary factors whose impact would unwind over time, returning inflation to target in 2019.
Six months later, we have seen some very positive developments. The Canadian economy has
solid  momentum  and  continues  to  operate  near  its  capacity.  Growth  is  relatively  broad-based
across sectors and regions and it is more balanced, as the composition of demand shifts toward
business investment and exports and away from consumption and housing. The economy will
grow at a rate slightly above its potential over the projection horizon, supported by both foreign
and domestic demand and favourable financial conditions. Meanwhile, inflation is close to target
after running a little higher than we expected in July and August due in large part to changes in
the way Statistics Canada measures airfares. While there could be further volatility in inflation in
coming months, our core measures remain firmly around 2 per cent.
Of course, the outlook remains subject to important risks and uncertainties. Let me highlight two
issues: trade and household indebtedness.
In April we said the most significant risk to our inflation outlook was the prospect of a large shift
toward  protectionist  trade  policies  around  the  globe.  We  also  reminded  members  that  our
forecast included the negative effect of increased uncertainty on the export and investment plans
of companies. Naturally, we spent a considerable amount of time ahead of last week’s interest
rate  decision  discussing  the  implications  of  the  recent  US–Mexico–Canada  trade  agreement
(USMCA). The USMCA is good news because it will reduce a considerable source of uncertainty
that  has  been  holding  back  business  investment.  We  know  from  our  latest  business  survey,
completed before the agreement was reached, that investment plans were already quite positive,
as firms looked to take advantage of a strong US economy. Given the agreement, we reversed
some of the markdown of our investment outlook. To be prudent, we did not remove all of it, for
two reasons. First, we want to see how firms actually adjust their investment plans. Second, we
know that competitiveness challenges are also weighing on investment.
Protectionist trade actions, particularly those involving the United States and China, were also top
of  mind  for  us,  as  they  are  already  affecting  the  global  outlook.  We  have  incorporated  in  our
forecast the expected effects of the tariffs imposed to date, as well as the dampening effects on
confidence from threats of additional measures. All told, we estimate that this will amount to a
drag on the global economy of 0.3 per cent by the end of 2020. That is a big cost—it adds up to
more than US$200 billion.
The US–China trade issue represents a two-sided risk for Canadian monetary policy. The United
States and China could find a path to ease or resolve this trade conflict, which would be positive
for global trade and investment, and for Canada. Or, the conflict could worsen, jeopardizing key
global  value  chains.  This  would  surely  reduce  long-term  growth  and  prosperity  globally,  albeit
with uncertain implications for inflation. For more information on the potential impact of US–China
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
trade tensions, I refer you to Box 1 in the MPR. 
As for household indebtedness, we have also been assessing how people are adapting to both
higher interest rates and the changes to the B-20 mortgage underwriting guidelines implemented
earlier this year. Box 4 in the MPR goes into some detail on the impact of these policy changes
on mortgage lending.
Overall,  the  data  tell  us  that  households  are  adjusting  their  budgets  largely  as  expected.  We
understand that this can be difficult, particularly for those who are highly indebted. At the same
time,  employment  and  incomes  continue  to  grow,  which  can  help  cushion  the  adjustment
process. Further, the quality of new debt is improving and housing activity is moderating to a
more  sustainable  level. All  of  this  is  making  the  economy  more  resilient  and  is  reducing  the
chances  of  painful  outcomes  for  many  people  further  down  the  road.  The  rule  changes  also
appear  to  have  taken  the  wind  out  of  the  sails  of  speculators  in  some  markets,  reducing  the
pressure on housing affordability. While financial system vulnerabilities are still elevated, the fact
that they have stabilized and edged down in a number of respects is positive.
Let me conclude by pointing out that, even with last week’s increase in the policy rate to 1.75 per
cent, monetary policy remains stimulative. In fact, the policy rate today is still negative in real
terms, that is, once you adjust for inflation. Our estimate of neutral is in a range—currently 2 ½ to
3 ½ per cent. The policy rate will need to rise to neutral to achieve our inflation target. That said,
the appropriate pace of increases will depend on our assessment at each fixed announcement
date of how the outlook for inflation and related risks are evolving. In particular, we will continue to
take into account how the economy is adjusting to higher interest rates, given the elevated level
of  household  debt,  and  whether  strong  consumer  confidence  builds  on  solid  job  and  income
growth  and  leads  to  greater-than-expected  consumption.  We  will  also  pay  close  attention  to
global trade policy developments and their implications for the inflation outlook. Again, this risk is
two-sided.
With  that,  Mr.  Chairman,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  would  be  happy  to  answer
questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
