François Villeroy de Galhau: Pushing back the limits of insurability
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and
Chairman of the Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de resolution (ACPR), at the 10th international
conference on insurance, Paris, 26 October 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I  am  delighted  to  be  with  you  today  to  give  the  closing  remarks  at  this  tenth  international
conference on insurance, organised under the aegis of President Bernard Spitz. We don’t say it
often enough: the financial sector is one of the French economy’s key strengths. Another point
that bears repeating is that, within this financial sector, insurers play a critical role in financing our
economy. This will be the first point that I touch on. I will go on to look at regulatory developments,
hailing the progress made in the last year and picking out some European challenges that we
must face together. I will close by speaking about “the limits of insurability”: your theme today is
as  old  as  your  profession,  which  dates  back  to  the  bottomry  arrangements  used  to  protect
shipping ventures in ancient times and the first recorded insurance policy written in Genoa in
1347. But the question has taken on a renewed urgency today with the emergence of new risks,
particularly those relating to climate change. 
I. Insurers play a critical role in financing the economy.
 The  ACPR  recently  published  its  annual  statistical  report,  which  showed  that  the  French
insurance sector is in good shape. I recommend giving it a read: the report itself is a treasure
trove of data, and the results do you credit. The average solvency capital requirement (SCR)
coverage ratio on the French market climbed from 222% in 2016 to 238% in 2017. What’s more,
in  the  first  quarter  of  2018,  the  French  insurance  market  overtook  Germany  and  the  United
Kingdom to become Europe’s number-one market, with over EUR 35 billion in direct premiums
written in non-life insurance and over EUR 2.100 trillion in technical provisions. It also leads in
investment capacity: commanding total assets of EUR 2.7 trillion in September 2018, France’s
insurance sector is far and away the largest institutional investor in Europe, accounting for over
one-third of the total assets of euro area insurers. In comparison, France makes up 21% of euro
area GDP.
Insurers, then, are a crucial asset for France, and their critical role in financing the economy can
and  indeed  must  grow  further.  Corporate  equity  is  vital  to  innovation  and  hence  to  a  vibrant
economy, but in mid-2018 equity was equivalent to just 77% of GDP in the euro area and 76% in
France, compared with 124% in the United States.
II. Tapping into regulatory opportunities.
I would like to start this section off by noting that France’s introduction of a flat tax on capital
income on 1 January has not had the slightest detrimental effect on life insurance, despite fears
on  this  score  within  your  industry.  I  am  also  delighted  that  the  new Pacte  Bill,  which  was
recently  adopted  at  the  first  reading  by  the  National  Assembly,  seeks  to  promote  equity
investment as well as long-term investment. Our discussions in the lead-up helped to shape this
legislation,  with 
“eurogrowth”
(Eurocroissance) life insurance products at long last, setting an ambitious target – with which
you are all familiar – of EUR 20 billion in outstandings, compared with EUR 2 billion at present.
Accordingly, France’s lawmakers have expanded the tools put in place to achieve this goal. Now
it is time to deliver. We are entitled to expect a fresh start, with a reset for eurogrowth products
and innovative and energetic sales and marketing efforts by your industry, once the framework
includes  measures 
the  bill 
reform 
result 
that 
the 
to 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
has been simplified. Retirement savings, meanwhile, have been the subject of a lively annuity
versus lump sum debate. Like you, I am glad that the ability to receive annuity payments – and
above  all  the  principle  of  an  annuity  product  –  has  been  maintained  across  the  board,  not  to
defend  one  industry  against  another,  but  because  a  lifetime  income  is  closer  to  a  retirement
product and because this timeframe should support more equity investment. Here again, though,
it  is  up  to  you  to  take  the  steps  to  enable  retirement  savings  to  finally  take  off  in  France  and
ensure  that  your  approach  to  asset/liability  management  better  takes  into  account  the  longer
durations  of  these  products.  The  needs  are  huge,  and  the  goal  of  increasing  assets  held  in
retirement savings products from EUR 200 billion to EUR 300 billion is well within our reach. I
would also stress the need to ensure that policyholders are adequately informed about retirement
savings products, especially – as with all unit-linked products – if they do not include a capital
guarantee.
Within Europe, the forthcoming Solvency 2 review must include a full and frank assessment of
the framework that has now been in place for three years. Of course, insurers have significantly
improved their risk and capital management under Solvency 2, and the insurance market is now
more resilient and better equipped to cope with financial crises. But these positives must not be
allowed  to  overshadow  the  questions  that  need  to  be  asked  after  such  a  radical  change,
particularly about the impact on equity investment and the financing of the European economy,
along with issues relating to volatility and complexity. The very fact that we’re calling it a “review”
for  2020  means  that,  by  definition,  maintaining  the  status  quo  cannot  be  an  option.  As  the
preparatory work gets underway, I would like to see every topic, even the most awkward, raised
and dealt with. I urge insurers to play an active role in the consultations and I can assure you that
the ACPR will make its presence felt in the coming discussions. In this regard, we are naturally
supporting efforts by the French Treasury and insurers to improve the prudential treatment of
long-term equity investments already during the 2018 review.
On a topical note, I would add that it is crucial for supervisors to apply all prudential requirements
with equal rigour. The string of failures by insurers doing business on the French market under
the  FPS,  particularly  in  construction  insurance,  is  a  reminder  of  the  importance  of  this.  The
ACPR is obviously working hard to deal with this crisis, which is affecting tens of thousands of
French  policyholders.  But  the  requisite  convergence  of  supervisory  practices  also  needs  to
become a reality very soon. I know that Gabriel Bernardino and EIOPA are making this a priority.
Finally, let me be clear: it is unreasonable to apply the new IFRS17 accounting framework right
now,  given  the  current  state  of  the  discussions.  Aside  from  the  complexities  of  creating  a
European governance framework for these standards, there is also an obvious issue of timing,
and fortunately, the IASB appears to be reopening discussions on this. Implementing IFRS17,
which will be costly and complex, will follow on from implementation of Solvency 2, a process
that has kept insurers very busy. Beyond the question of timetabling, there are major substantive
issues. We want an agreement on identifying groups of loss-making contracts. As it stands, the
draft  is  unworkable.  We  also  want  to  see  completion  of  the  discussions  on  the  treatment  of
reinsurance  contracts  held.  At  this  point,  there  is  too  much  room  for  interpretation  in  the
standard, which could interfere with comparability and consistent application across countries.
III. Addressing the emergence of new risks
I turn now to the new risks that are emerging as challenges for the insurance sector. I would like
to single out three for comment, each with a longer time horizon than the next: Brexit, cyber-
security and climate risk.
In  the  short  term, Brexit  is,  alas,  the  issue  that  will  keep  us  busiest.  The ACPR  is  working
actively to ensure a smooth transition, but the time has come for insurers to set their contingency
plans in motion. That means talking with supervisors in the UK and Europe. It will also mean
getting new authorisations, transferring portfolios, relocating European companies and setting up
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
third country branches. Even if we hope to avoid it, we must be ready for a no-deal scenario. In
this respect, it would be preferable to have European legislation in place to ensure that every
relevant issue is dealt with in a harmonised manner; however, if need be, and as a backstop, the
enabling legislation presented to the Council of Ministers on 3 October will allow us to take legal
steps in France to manage – for those individuals insured in France – situations where UK firms
have not already transferred their contract portfolios. I would like to mention that joint work by the
European Central Bank and the Bank of England to assess financial risks looked specifically at
insurance contracts, and we believe the risks in this area to be manageable, provided we can
properly guarantee the protection of policyholders.
In the medium term, against the backdrop of the digital revolution, cyber security is a growing
concern for all businesses. Insurers are of course among the main ones affected because they
hold sensitive data. Your industry would certainly be well advised to draw on your experience with
cyber-risk to build up your own cyber-insurance offering.
I  come  last  to climate  risk,  which  occupies  the  longest  time  horizon  of  all,  but  which
nevertheless requires tangible action to be taken right now. As today’s discussions have shown,
the natural disaster insurance regime needs an overhaul and I know that reforms are coming in
2019. But this is also a very important area of investigation for supervisors because, over the
long  run,  climate  stability  is  a  determining  factor  in  financial  stability.  In  June  of  this  year,  the
ACPR  published  a  study  revealing  that  an  estimated  10–20%  of  all  securities  held  by  French
insurers are exposed to risk in relation to the transition to a low-carbon economy. The Banque de
France and the ACPR have set up and are actively coordinating the Network of Central Banks
and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). Launched in Paris last December,
the  NGFS  started  out  with  eight  trailblazing  supervisors  but  has  since  grown  to  include  19
members and five observers, including the Sustainable Insurance Forum (SIF). We are working
hard on two subjects where insurers are in the vanguard: disclosure of current climate risks and
the projection of dynamic stress tests based on future risks. A report detailing the network’s first
year of work and making recommendations will be presented at a conference in Paris on 17 April
next year.
 I have called green finance “the new frontier for the 21  Century”. Today, you are talking about
“pushing back the limits of insurability”. These images testify to your pioneering role and evoke
your  spirit  of  entrepreneurship  and  innovation.  The  risks  facing  the  world  in  2018  are
unquestionably growing, and we need these qualities more than ever before. Thank you for your
attention.
st
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
