Gent Sejko: Welcome address - Second Conference of the Museum
of the Bank of Albania
Welcome address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Second Conference
of the Museum of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 20 September 2018.
Distinguished professors,
Dear participants,
 It gives me a great pleasure to welcome you to the Second Conference of the Museum of the
Bank  of  Albania,  via  this  recorded  message.  I  wish  I  were  present  to  attend  in  person  the
proceedings of the Conference, but, regrettably, due to the rather tight agenda I will not be able
to. Nevertheless, I will have the possibility to read all the presentations, discussions, and input in
the Conference book that will be compiled subsequent to the Conference.
As I have already emphasised, the Conference of the Museum of the Bank of Albania is one of
the most prominent events, providing us with the opportunity to enrich and further the studies on
the exposed collections, and serves as a platform for Albanian experts to discuss and share their
research findings.
We  are  pleased  to  see  that  the  Museum  of  the  Bank  of Albania  brings  for  the  second  time
together representatives from renowned research institutions, such as: the Albanian Institute of
Archaeology and History, European Universities and central banks to present their studies.
As the title suggests, this Conference will address the role of money in wartime. In periods of
wars and conflicts – history shows that, albeit relatively small, Albania has experienced many
wars and conflicts – people have turned to the currency and precious metals. Hence, about 100
years ago, at the beginning of the World War I, Europe dived into one of the worst financial crises
of the past century and many people and businesses rushed to convert their bank accounts and
assets into cash and gold coins.
Meanwhile, in Albania, these events triggered a chaotic monetary circulation. In the absence of a
national currency and due to the political-military and economic developments during the War,
diverse  foreign  currencies  circulated  across  the  country,  mainly  those  of  European  and
neighbouring countries, as well as American and Turkish ones.
You may see this conglomerate of denominations in the showcases of the Museum dedicated to
the  period  of  Independence  and  the  World  War  I.  Also,  the  showcases  on  the  monetary
circulation  in  Albania  during  World  War  II,  in  addition  to  the  ones  of  Antiquity  and  Medieval
periods,  exhibit  denominations  that  speak  of  the  important  and  complicated  relationships
between money and war. I am sure these important moments to the economic and monetary
history of Albania, and beyond, will be discussed at length during the Conference.
Dear participants,
The  Conference  is  not  the  only  activity  the  Museum  has  organised  about  numismatics,
economic, monetary and financial history. We have also organised for the general public a cycle
of lectures called “Museum nights”, with lectures delivered by experts in the field of numismatics,
history and economy. Also, in cooperation with the Institute of Archaeology, a one-week seminar
was organised on Ancient coins, attended by the students of history, archaeology and cultural
heritage.
This year commemorates the pan-national Year of Skanderbeg, our National Hero. The Museum
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
has  organised  temporary  exhibitions,  displayed  both  inside  and  outside  the  Museum,  on  the
figure of Skanderbeg, featured in the Albanian currency.
Financial education has been given an important focus in the work of the Museum. Throughout
the  year,  many  students  and  young  people  have  been  involved  in  educational  activities  and
projects, actively participating during the Money Week events, attending the lectures held at the
Museum, and using our educational publications and products.
The Museum will continue to work in these two aspects by supporting: i) the scientific, economic,
and monetary history of the country; and ii) the financial education of the new generations, with
the support and cooperation with the most distinguished actors in these fields.
As an institution that keeps and promotes an important part of the cultural heritage of the country,
such as the currency, we are privileged and obliged to collaborate in order for the Museum of the
Bank of Albania not to be just an exposition of the rare collections, but a place where the public
may  find  adequate  and  specialised  literature  and  expertise  to  learn  about  the  economic  and
monetary history, and become more financially educated.
Concluding,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  the  researchers,  the  speakers,  the  audience  and  our
collaborators, who responded positively to our call for participation. With these words, I wish you
all fruitful deliberations, I wish the conference all success and I wish all the guests an enjoyable
stay in Tirana.
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
