     LAUNCH OF  
MOBILE MONEY INTEROPERABILITY PHASE II 
  SPEECH DELIVERED  
BY  
DR ERNEST Y. ADDISON  
GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
    GHIPSS, ACCRA 
NOVEMBER 28, 2018 
 His Excellency the Vice President, Alhaji Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia,  
  The Minister for Communications,  
The Board and Management of GhIPSS,  
CEO of the Ghana Chamber of Telecommunications,  
CEOs of Telcos and Financial Institutions,  
Invited Guests, the Media, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 Good Morning 
  1. It's an honour to witness the launch of the second phase of the 
Mobile Money Interoperability (MMI) project.  This is undoubtedly 
another  major  milestone  in  our  quest  to  deepen  financial 
intermediation  and  inclusion;  while  digitizing  the  economy  and 
levelling the playing field for both the banked and unbanked.  
 2. As you will recall, the first phase of this project was launched in 
May,  2018  with  tremendous  success.  I  must  state  that  though 
1 
the  significance  of  the  project  was  not  lost  on  us  at  the  outset, 
 international  commendation  subsequent  to  the  launch,  has 
underscored  its  uniqueness  and  novelty  in  the  global  payments 
industry. 
 3. Before  proceeding, 
let  me  acknowledge  and 
thank  His 
Excellency,  the  Vice  President,  Alhaji  Dr.  Mahamudu  Bawumia 
for  the  vision,  unflinching  support  and  dedication  from  the 
conception  of  this  homegrown  project  initiated  by  the  Bank  of 
Ghana way back in 2007 to its full implementation today. Also, I 
would thank the banks, mobile money operators and fintechs for 
the strong collaboration with GhIPSS and the Bank of Ghana in 
the execution of the project. The zeal and commitment exhibited 
during  the  successful  execution  of  this  project  is  commendable 
and signals good prospects for developing an inclusive, safe and 
efficient payments ecosystem for the Ghanaian economy. 
  2 
4. It is gratifying to note that the performance of the interoperability 
 platform since implementing the first phase has been impressive 
based  on  the  key  pillars  of  CONVENIENCE,  ACCESSIBILITY, 
and  VALUE  FOR  MONEY.  Since  then,  total  transaction  value 
and  volume  has  increased  from  GH¢8.3  million  and  96,907 
respectively  in  May  2018  to  GH¢32.6  million  and  319,094 
respectively in September 2018, representing 292.8 percent and 
229.3  percent  growth  in  value  and  volume  respectively.  This 
growth  trend  is  expected  to  increase  further  when  the  second 
phase  becomes  fully  operational  and  other  innovative  products 
and services become available.  
 5. Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  at  the 
recent  Annual  Global  Policy  Forum  of  the  Alliance  for  Financial 
Inclusion (AFI) held in September 2018 at Sochi Russia, Ghana 
won  three  (3)  of  the  eight  (8)  awards,  including  the  technology 
award in recognition of the interoperability project. As a result of 
 3 
these  laudable  achievements,  we  have  hosted  a  number  of 
 visitors from central banks on the African continent to understudy 
the  project  design  and 
implementation,  with  more  visits 
scheduled for next year. 
 6. His  Excellency,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  with  the  completion  of 
the second phase of the interoperability project, Ghana has now 
achieved 
its  objective  of  establishing  an 
integrated  and 
interoperable payments ecosystem. All the three (3) key national 
payment  circuits,  namely;  mobile  money,  e-zwich  and  gh-Link 
are  now  interoperable,  enabling  seamless  movement  of  funds 
across these systems.  
 7. As  we  develop  a  digital  financial  ecosystem,  the  integrity  of  the 
service  delivery  channels  becomes  paramount.  Transmission 
channels  for  electronic  payments  should  guarantee  security  of 
transactions.  This  can  be  achieved  through  adherence  to 
 4 
international  best  practices  and  standards  in  the  acquisition, 
 deployment  and  management  of  channels.  Consequently,  the 
Bank  of  Ghana  has  drafted  Guidelines  on  Operations  of 
Electronic Payment Channels which will provide a framework for 
management  of  an  efficient  and  secure 
transmission  of 
electronic  transactions  across  various  payment  channels.  We 
also  must  bear  in  mind  issues  regarding  cyber  security  during 
electronic  transfers  and  ensure  that  the  proper  structures  and 
systems are in place to handle such threats.  
 8. With 
the 
implementation  of 
the  second  phase  of 
this 
infrastructure,  payment  service  providers  would  have 
the 
opportunity  to  scale  up  access  to  financial  services  through 
digital  channels.  However,  a  strict  financially  inclusive  society 
must  ensure  that  financial  products  are  accessible  to  meet  the 
needs of different categories of customers.  
  5 
9. Currently,  most  of  the  digital  financial  products  available  in  the 
 Ghanaian  ecosystem  are  in  the  category  of  savings,  payments, 
investments  and 
insurance.  Credit  products 
receive 
less 
attention  thereby  limiting  the  capacity  of  the  unbanked  and 
underserved  to  borrow  for  economic  activities.  A  deliberate  and 
concerted  effort  to  develop  an  electronic  credit  market  is 
therefore necessary to promote financial inclusiveness.  
 10. 
In  this  regard,  the  Bank  is  working  with  Financial  Sector 
Deepening (FSD) Africa to implement a credit market diagnostic 
project.  The  project  will  assist  in  identifying  constraints  to  credit 
delivery  and  propose  measures  to  overcome  them.  This  will 
complement  efforts  towards  expanding  the  scope  of  financial 
access to both the banked and unbanked in society.    
 
11. 
His  Excellency,  as  the  sole  regulator  of  the  Mobile  Money 
sector, the Central Bank will ensure that right things are done by 
the  various  players  in  the  sector.  We  will  continue  to  regulate 
 6 
and  monitor  activities  within  the  space  and  ensure  that  all 
 participants  play  by  the  rules.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  has  a  key 
responsibility to safeguard the integrity of the financial system to 
underscore  the  trust  that  is  central  to  financial  deepening  and 
development. It is therefore critical to ensure the confidentiality of 
transactions, privacy of data collected by operators in this space 
(including  personal  and 
financial  data), 
the  security  of 
transactions,  and  smooth  operations  of  all  stakeholders  and 
regulators providing complementary services in this space.   
 
12. 
The  interoperability 
that  exist  between  e-zwich,  bank 
accounts  and  mobile  money  wallets,  offer  participants    an 
endless  opportunity  to  develop  various  value  added  services  to 
the public.  Let me therefore challenge Fintechs to  work closely 
with  banks,  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  especially  rural 
and  community  banks  to  come  out  with  several  other  products 
and  services  that  will  further  bring  banking  and  financial 
transactions closer to the public.  I see endless opportunities with 
 7 
this financial inclusion triangle and I hope the players also realise 
 the enormity of opportunities it presents. 
 
13. 
To  conclude,  I  wish  to  thank  all  stakeholders  who  in  one 
way  or  the  other  have  helped  in  the  full  implementation  of  the 
interoperability  project  and  to  say  that  the  future  of  Ghana’s 
financial inclusiveness and cash-lite society is well within reach. 
 
14. 
Thank you for the attention. 
 8 
