LAUNCH OF THE ABSA AFRICA FINANCIAL MARKETS INDEX 
 Keynote Address  
 
by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 November 9, 2018 
 I  am  delighted  to  be  able  to  join  you  this  morning  to  mark  the 
official  launch  in  Botswana  of  the  ABSA  Africa  Financial 
Markets  Index.    It  is  even  more  of  a  pleasure  to  give  the 
keynote  address  in  the  wake  of  the  news  that,  in  the  2018 
update of the Index, the rank of Botswana has moved from third 
to second among the 20 countries covered in the Index. 
 Director of Ceremonies,  I would like to preface my  remarks by 
observing that, not so long ago, the “Africa rising” narrative was 
somewhat  eclipsed  by  what  one  respectable  magazine 
described as the “hopeless continent of Africa”, a label that was 
later retracted as inaccurate and inappropriate.  And rightly so!  
The  fact  is  that,  despite  a  number  of  development  challenges 
and  pockets  of  civil  strife  and  political  unrest  in  parts  of  the 
continent,  Africa  has  remained  largely  resilient.    This  is  in  the 
context  of  an  increasingly  competitive  and  interconnected 
global  economy  in  which  both  developed  and  developing 
countries  continue  to  be  challenged  by  relatively  low  rates  of 
economic  growth,  unsustainable  levels  of  public  debt,  as  well 
as  rising  trade  and  socio-political  tensions.    It  is  all  the  more 
impressive, therefore, that the broader trajectory in Africa is one 
of  progressive  entrenchment  of  the  democratic  dispensation, 
adherence to the rule of law, and sound economic reforms, with 
laudable  returns  in  some  cases,  in  terms  of  overall  economic 
performance. 
 According  to  the  2018  World  Investment  Report  by  United 
Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD), 
since  2010  FDI  in  Africa  has  averaged  approximately  USD  50 
billion  per  annum.  That  the  continent  is  increasingly  regarded 
as  an  attractive  investment  destination  is  itself  part  of  the  new 
reality.  But the on-going transformation of Africa is taking place 
in  a  broader  new  global  reality;  that  is,  one  of  increased 
economic interconnectedness in which there is a relative shift in 
the  centre  of  gravity  of  economic  power  towards  emerging 
markets.    This  shift  brings  with  it  increased  opportunities  for  a 
more  equitable  sharing  of  the  benefits  of  global  wealth  and 
income. 
 That  said,  investor  interest  in  Africa  remains  unduly  cautious 
and  heavily  focussed  on  specific  sectors,  typically  commodity-
related, in a few countries. The same UNCTAD report indicates 
that, in 2017, FDI flows into Africa fell by 21 percent compared 
to the previous year.  Thus, there is a need to re-double efforts 
 2 
to not only make investors aware of the myriad opportunities in 
the  continent  of  Africa  but  also  provide  tangible  reassurance 
that levels of idiosyncratic risk are no longer prohibitive.  
 To this end, as I speak, the inaugural African Investment Forum 
organised  by  the  African  Development  Bank  has  reached  its 
final  day  nearby  in  Johannesburg.    The  event  has  the  explicit 
aim  of  moving  beyond  talking  about  investment  in  Africa  to 
providing  a  setting 
for  moving  specific  projects 
towards 
bankable deals.  It is also from this perspective that I welcome 
the  ABSA  Africa  Financial  Markets  Index,  as  a  practical  tool 
that  supports  market  development  and,  by  extension,  further 
improvement  in  the  investment  environment.    But,  before 
sharing  some  thoughts  on  the  role  of  financial  market  indices, 
let me, very briefly, enunciate the key characteristics of a well-
functioning financial sector.  
 Distinguished Guests, well-functioning financial markets should 
foster  savings  mobilisation  and  investments  in  a  cost-effective 
manner,  channelling  surplus  funds  to  their  most  productive 
uses,  hence  contributing  to  economic  growth.  They  should 
inspire investor confidence; have breadth and depth in terms of 
product  offerings,  as  well  as  liquidity.  But  more  importantly, 
good governance and accountability structures, buttressed by a 
sound  regulatory  framework,  good  accounting  and  auditing 
 3 
standards,  as  well  as  efficient  and  independent  judiciary  are 
essential to embed public trust and investor confidence.  
 In  this  way,  developed  financial  markets  facilitate  the  financial 
interactions  of  households,  corporations,  financial  institutions, 
and governments.  Such markets provide a pool of savings that 
can be tapped into for funding investments by businesses and, 
also, offer a stable source of funding for governments that can 
be used to undertake infrastructure development. Furthermore, 
empirical evidence suggests that countries with well-developed 
financial  markets  gain  significantly  from  increased  FDI.    Of 
equal  importance,  studies  concur  that  a  developed  financial 
sector  can  also  create  opportunities  for  financial  inclusion, 
especially embracing SMMEs and the undeserved segments of 
the  population.  In  turn,  this  supports  economic  diversification, 
enables  economic  agents  to  pool  and  offset  risks,  and 
encourages  savings  and  wealth  creation,  thereby  contributing 
to inclusive growth and improved living standards. 
 Various  indicators  or  sets  of  indicators  have  been  used  to 
measure 
financial  development.  The  World  Bank  has 
developed  a  comprehensive  conceptual  framework  to  capture 
the  multifaceted  nature  of  the  modern  financial  system.    The 
framework  has  four  dimensions  that  reflect  the  essential 
characteristics  of  a  good  and  well-functioning  financial  system 
 4 
that  is:    depth,  access,  efficiency  and  stability.    Staff  of  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  have  built  on  the  World 
Bank framework by developing indices to measure the level of 
development  of  financial  institutions  and  markets  in  terms  of 
depth,  access  and  efficiency,  thus  expanding  the  range  of 
indicators  used 
to  assess 
financial  development.  These 
multidimensional indices capture the fact that financial services 
are  provided  by  multiple  financial  institutions  offering  a  wide 
array of products and services.  
 The Africa Financial Markets Index is a valuable addition to this 
earlier  work,  where  the  ABSA  Banking  Group  has  partnered 
with  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum 
(OMFIF),  an  independent  think  tank  for  central  banking, 
economic policy and public investment.  This is with the explicit 
objective  of  providing  a 
toolkit 
for  countries  seeking 
to 
strengthen their financial markets infrastructure.  
 The  Bank  of  Botswana  was  fortunate  to  be  represented  at  the 
original launch of the Index in Washington DC during the 2017 
Annual  meetings  of  the  IMF  and  World  Bank.    As  already 
mentioned,  the  official  launch  in  Botswana  comes  shortly  after 
the release of the first annual update of the index.  This is itself 
an  important  event,  as  it  is  through  such  regular  updates  that 
progress can be monitored.  It is also to be welcomed that the 
 5 
coverage  of  the  index  has  already  increased,  from  the  original 
17 countries, to 20 in the 2018 update. 
 As  already  explained,  the  Index  ranks  the  maturity,  openness 
and  accessibility  of  financial  markets  in  Africa  based  on  both 
qualitative  and  quantitative  criteria, 
focussing  on  six 
fundamental pillars for financial market performance.  The 2018 
update  also  pays  special  attention  to  policies  for  enhancing 
market  growth, 
including 
financial 
inclusion  and 
investor 
education. 
 Most of the surveyed countries are implementing, or preparing 
to  implement  national  policy  frameworks  for  financial  market 
development.  The Index will, therefore, help provide them with 
valuable insights and tools to improve the state of their financial 
infrastructure  and  markets.    As  Maria  Ramos,  Chief  Executive 
of the ABSA Group, has correctly observed, the index facilitates 
a  meaningful  debate  about  the  maturity  and  accessibility  of 
Africa’s financial markets, thus helping policymakers, investors, 
regulators  and  other  market  participants  to  identify  the  areas 
and 
initiatives  which  will  drive 
the  most  significant 
improvements. 
 In  as  much  as  I  fully  concur  with  the  above  observations,  I 
should  inject  a  note  of  caution  at  this  point.   In  conducting  the 
 6 
meaningful debate that Ms Ramos refers to, we should not just 
highlight  the  successes,  but  give  equal  weight  to  areas  where 
more  progress  needs  to  be  made.  In  this  respect,  the  report 
highlights  continuing  room  for  improvement  in  several  areas.  
These  include,  for  many  countries,  the  capacity  of  domestic 
investors,  which  hinders  the  development  of  new  financial 
products  and  markets;  and  the  need  for  further  improvements 
in market infrastructure and regulatory frameworks. 
 Similarly,  while  we  should  celebrate  the  improvement  in  the 
ranking  of  Botswana  from  third  to  second  in  the  2018  index, 
ranked  only  behind  South  Africa  and  ahead  of  continental 
heavyweights  such  as  Nigeria, 
there 
is  no 
room 
for 
complacency.  There is considerable work to be done if we are 
to develop a truly world class financial sector in Botswana.  To 
put  this  in  perspective,  while  the  ABSA  Index  ranks  Botswana 
second  in  Africa,  in  the  latest  update  of  the  World  Economic 
Forum  Global  Competitiveness  Index,  the  country’s  financial 
sector is ranked only 69th out of 140 countries.  
 Thus, while the overall score of 65 percent is encouraging, the 
Index rightly highlights areas where there is considerable scope 
for  further  improvement,  for  example,  low  levels  of  interbank 
foreign  exchange  trading,  very  low  bond  market  and  equity 
turnover  and  limited  product  diversity.    Similar  observations 
 7 
were  made  in  the  2017  Bank  of  Botswana  Annual  Report 
Theme Chapter, which focussed on the importance of financial 
sector  development  for  inclusive  and  sustainable  economic 
growth.  
 To  some  extent,  these  deficiencies  reflect  structural  factors 
including  the  relatively  small  market  size  and  limited  need  for 
government  borrowing.    But  there  is  also  scope  for  beneficial 
policy intervention with the relevant sectoral regulators working 
in partnership with market participants.  
 At  this  point,  let  me  once  again  assure  you  of  the  Bank  of 
Botswana’s  wholehearted  commitment  to  supporting  financial 
sector  development  in  the  country.    First  and  foremost,  this 
comes  from  a  relentless  and  consistent  focus  on  the  core 
mandate  of  the  central  bank,  namely,  maintenance  of  price 
stability,  thus  contributing  to  broader  macroeconomic  stability 
for  durable  and  sustainable  growth;  second,  establishing 
structures that promote financial stability; and, third, adoption of 
a  regulatory  framework  that  balances  prudential  requirements 
with  allowing  sufficient  scope  for  innovation.  And,  above  all, 
recognition  that  "once  inflation  enters  through  the  door,  public 
confidence  and  trust  in  the  national  currency  will  escape 
through the other"!  
  8 
At  the  recent  sixth  Botswana  Stock  Exchange  Opening  Bell 
Ceremony,  I  provided  some  details  on  the  specific  initiatives 
that  the  Bank  is  undertaking  to  spur  the  development  of  the 
government  bond  market  and  stimulate  the  interbank  market, 
as well as on-going efforts to  modernise both the central bank 
and banking laws.  
 It  suffices 
to  conclude 
these  remarks  by,  once  more, 
underscoring 
the 
importance  of 
trust,  governance  and 
transparency  as  the  bedrock  and  essential  preconditions  for  a 
sound  and  sustainable  financial  sector.    At  the  heart  of  any 
financial  system  is  public  trust;  regulation  can  help  confer 
legitimacy  on  regulated  service providers,  but  the  value  of  this 
support 
is  quickly  eroded 
if 
the  underlying 
integrity  of 
governance structures is not well-entrenched.  
 I  do  not  need  to  remind  you  of  the  details  of  recent  events  in 
Botswana  that  have  severely  tested  this  core  principle  while, 
more broadly, in countries such as South Africa and the United 
Kingdom,  the  competence  and  integrity  of  the  accounting 
profession is once more under intense public scrutiny.  To their 
credit,  in  each  case,  the  concerned  regulators  in  Botswana 
have acted without fear or favour in addressing the challenges.  
The  regulatory  structure  has  been  tested  and  not  found 
wanting,  and  this  is  gratifying.    But  poor  governance  has  a 
 9 
corrosive  effect  that,  left  unchecked,  could  undermine  public 
confidence  and  trust  in  financial  institutions  and  financial 
markets, 
however 
carefully 
designed. 
I 
trust 
that, 
notwithstanding 
these  governance 
related 
challenges, 
Botswana  will  continue  to  make  progress,  cementing  its  lofty 
position in the continental rankings. 
 I thank you for your kind attention, and look forward to the next 
update of the ABSA Africa Financial Markets Index.   
 10 
