Credit, competitiveness and competence: the foundations of development
50th Credit Day
Speech by the Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy  
and President of the Italian Insurance  
Supervisory Authority (IVASS)
Salvatore Rossi
Rome, 4 October 2018
As  President  Pellicanò  has  already  said,  this  is  an  important  day. We  are 
celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of Credit Day, an annual occasion for taking 
stock together of the world of credit and the role it plays in Italy.1
Italy has changed greatly over the last half century, at least in some respects. 
In 1968 Italy was emerging from the economic miracle that had turned it into 
a  modern  country  and  was  heading  for  stormy  years  of  social  and  political 
turbulence.2 Today, it is still one of the leading advanced economies, though it 
is threatened by decline. Fifty years ago the credit system was almost entirely 
public and now it is almost all private. Yet banks continue to do essentially what 
they have always done: they collect deposits from a vast array of savers and use 
these resources to make loans to a smaller group, consisting mainly of firms. 
Italy’s banks find themselves at a crossroads today, as loans may no longer be 
their fundamental prerogative.
That  said,  we  are  not  here  for  a  history  lesson.  Today’s  conference  has 
a theme and we must engage with that. In my introduction I will take a brief 
look  at  its  four  sub-themes,  but  in  reverse  order:  development,  competence, 
competitiveness and credit. 
Development
The economic development of a country or a territory is an old and ambiguous 
concept. Scholars down the ages have defined it in many ways and in various 
fields of study. The main thing for us as Italians nowadays is that development 
has to be focused on firms and their ability to innovate and grow. It is firms that 
1  My thanks go to Francesco Franceschi, Francesco Manaresi and Francesco Palazzo for helping me 
write this speech. Any remaining errors are my sole responsibility.
2  For a brief history of Italy’s economy starting from that year, see Rossi, S., La politica economica 
italiana 1968-2007, Laterza, Roma-Bari, 2007.
3
must  use  Italy’s  resources  and  talent  in  order  to  succeed,  and  in  doing  so,  to 
increase well-being for everyone.
We know that Italy’s economic development has been stuck for more than 
twenty years now. From 1997 to 2007, in the decade prior to the world crisis, Italy’s 
gross domestic product grew by less than one point a year on average, against three 
and a half points in the rest of the euro area. Then came the double-dip recession 
towards the end of the 2000s onwards, first originated at the global level and then 
in Europe; Italy was overwhelmed, far more so than the other advanced countries. 
In the second quarter of this year, and despite three years of recovery, GDP was 
still 5 per cent lower than the peak level reached in 2007; it has risen by 6 per cent 
in the rest of the euro area.
How is it that the other economies have grown so much more than Italy’s? By 
increasing the average efficiency of firms, especially in technology and business 
organization, the component of productivity that economists refer to as Total Factor 
Productivity (TFP). From 1997 to the present day, that component has remained flat 
in Italy, while it has boosted annual average economic growth by half a percentage 
point in Germany and France and by 0.2 of a point in Spain. 
Italy’s production system has shown itself to be too fragile and fragmented 
overall to be able to aim for technological and organizational efficiency, and has 
become less competitive at international level. Some firms, mainly medium-sized 
ones,  have  now  emerged  from  the  financial  crisis  with  a  renewed  capacity  to 
compete and are sustaining Italian exports, but the other firms are still weak. 
Skills
A very important reason for Italy’s firms being at a disadvantage lies in the 
mismatch between the demand and supply of qualified employees, and therefore 
in the relative inability of Italy’s education system to provide students with the 
necessary skills.
I’ll refer here to some well-known data from the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation  and  Development  (OECD),  which  has  long  used  many  research 
resources and statistics to make a comparative study of education in the advanced 
countries. There are a quarter fewer high-school graduates in Italy compared with 
4
the  European  average:  60  per  cent  of  the  population  in  the  25-64  age  bracket, 
against 80 per cent. The situation is even worse for university graduates in Italy, 
as their number is just over half that of the European average, at 17 per cent of 
working age adults, against 35 per cent.
If  high-school  and  university  graduates  are  relatively  rarer  in  Italy,  they 
should be more sought after, yet this is not the case: there are as many instances 
of over-qualification for jobs in Italy as in other countries,3 especially early in 
working life.4 
These results are not accidental, but rather the outcome of a strategic choice 
made a century ago and that has never been changed, whereby public resources 
were channelled more towards nursery and primary schools, less towards secondary 
schools and even less again for universities and postgraduate studies. This choice 
was made to solve the serious problem of mass illiteracy at that time in Italy.5 
Compared with the major European countries, Italy’s primary schools still receive 
more public funding than those in France or Spain, and are almost on a par with 
Germany’s schools. Yet Italy slips back into last place for secondary schooling, 
just below Spain, and is also in last place for university funding, well below Spain. 
In any case, the amount of public money set aside overall for education in Italy is 
lower than that in the other three countries, given similar, mainly public education 
systems.
In other words, the commitment of Italy’s public sector to education is not in 
proportion to modern-day needs, which combine a drive for scientific research, 
continuous innovation and cut-throat competition. Such inadequacy is explained 
both by the amount of resources used and by how much money is spent on the 
different  levels  of  education.  Yet  the  idea  of  greatly  increasing  the  resources 
provided by the public finances or of redistributing them in favour of universities, 
3  See Flisi, S., V. Goglio, E. Meroni, M. Rodrigues, and E. Vera-Toscano, ‘Occupational mismatch in 
Europe: understanding overeducation and overskilling for policy making’ , JRC Science and Policy 
Reports, 89712, 2014. 
4  See Colonna, F., ‘Chicken or the egg? Human capital demand and supply’, Politica Economica, 1, 97-
123, 2017.
5  See Giunta, A. and Rossi, S., Che cosa sa fare l’Italia. La nostra economia dopo la grande crisi. 
Laterza, Bari, 2017;. and Bertola, G., and Sestito, P., ‘A Comparative Perspective on Italy’s Human 
Capital Accumulation’, Banca d’Italia, Economic History Working Papers, 6, 2011.
5
especially postgraduate courses, to forge tomorrow’s scientists and innovators, is 
unrealistic, politically speaking. 
However, it is not just a problem of how many resources we have; the education 
provided also leaves a lot to be desired. The division of secondary schools into 
high  schools  and  vocational  schools  with  apprenticeships  is  skewed  in  favour 
of  the  former.  Let  us  not  forget  that  the  Constitution  assigns  the  responsibility 
for professional training to Italy’s regional authorities. Theoretical and academic 
teaching at university still prevails over technical and practical content and there 
are still very few graduates in technical and scientific subjects.6 These are all factors 
that distance Italy’s education system from the needs of industry.
One possible policy that would not weigh on the public finances could be to 
boost professional qualifications and encourage the new higher-education technical 
colleges that are offering technical specialization courses to high-school graduates, 
which  are  making  their  students  highly  employable  but  which  are  limited  in 
availability because they are linked to local conditions. 
Other  no-cost  policies  could  be  devised:  for  example,  simplifying  the 
bureaucratic,  administrative  and  informative  framework  both  of  apprenticeship 
contracts and, at the other end of the spectrum, of PhDs; speeding up the technology 
transfer from universities to firms by promoting ways to share intellectual property 
and  revenues  from  patents  among  researchers  and  universities;  and  finally, 
promoting international cooperation: education policies have remained national, 
yet various European countries are harmonizing their university systems.
Competitiveness 
The problems of the education system interact with those of the production 
system, creating a vicious circle: on the one hand there is a lack of qualified human 
capital that limits firms’ propensity to innovate, on the other, take-up of innovative 
6  See OECD, Education at a glance 2017, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2017.
6
technologies is low, thus reducing the return on skills and discouraging investment 
in human capital.7 
In the almost twenty years between 1999 and 2017, investment in intangible 
goods, more than half of which on R&D and patents, only grew by 30 per cent in 
Italy compared with 70 per cent in France and Germany and 140 per cent in Spain. 
In relation to GDP, investment in intangibles in Italy (3 per cent) is today below 
that of Germany (4 per cent) and France (6 per cent) and on a par with that of Spain 
that has almost doubled in the meantime. 
The spread of the new digital technologies, while growing, is still below the 
euro-area average. As recently as last year, fewer than 10 per cent of Italian firms 
had introduced a supply chain management system, more than a third less than in 
Germany and France.8
The fragmentation of the production system into many micro and small firms 
is the main cause of the low propensity to invest in R&D in the Italian economy. 
But even when they are of an equivalent size, Italy’s small firms are less productive 
than those in countries like France and Germany.9 
Italian firms start to atrophy at birth; compared with firms in the other developed 
economies, newborn firms are smaller, grow more slowly and quickly stabilize at 
a small size.10
Consequently, Italian exports have been in decline since the end of the 1990s 
and were badly hit by the crisis: the average rate of growth of our exports between 
1997 and 2010 (1.8 per cent) was well below that of France (3.5 per cent), Spain 
(3.8 per cent) and Germany (5.9 per cent). 
7  See Visco, I., Investire in conoscenza. Crescita economica e competenze per il XXI secolo, il Mulino, 
Bologna, 2014.
8  See OECD, Science, technology and industry scoreboard 2017, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2017.
9  See Bugamelli, M. and F. Lotti (eds.), ‘Productivity growth in Italy: a tale of a slow-motion change’, 
Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 422, 2018.
10  See Manaresi, F., ‘Net employment growth by firm size and age in Italy’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di 
Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 298, 2015.
7
These disappointing results can be attributed at least in part to the particular 
weaknesses in Italy’s production system. Our micro and small firms have been less 
able to absorb the rise in the euro exchange rate and increased competition from 
abroad.11 
Exports began to recover in 2010, growing at a rate just below that of Germany. 
One factor was the increased polarization of the Italian production system, with an 
innovative group of firms - mainly medium-sized - looking beyond Italy, which not 
only managed to withstand the rigours of the crisis but came through it stronger 
than before.12
The reorganization of industrial policy, begun in 2012, has produced some 
encouraging  results.  Measures  in  favour  of  innovative  start-ups  have  increased 
value added and productivity.13 Policies aimed at the other small and medium-sized 
firms were more limited. We still need to properly assess the real effectiveness of 
incentives to spend more on R&D and to make better use of the ‘patent box’. 
I think we need to continue in this direction, as these policies go to the heart of 
Italy’s structural problem. There can be no economic growth if we do not resolve 
this problem.
Credit
Let’s now turn to the financial aspects. Today is called Credit Day, but it is 
a good idea to speak more generally in terms of finance, of which credit is only 
one component. Of course, it is a component with historical importance in Italy, a 
country where banks have always been at the centre of the financial system. Yet for 
some years now we have begun to reflect on what kind of financial structure would 
be best to support the relaunch of Italy’s economic development and therefore the 
11  See Bugamelli, M., S. Fabiani, S. Federico, A., Felettigh, C., Giordano and A. Linarello, ‘Back on 
track? A macro-micro perspective of Italian exports’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza 
(Occasional Papers), 399, 2017.
12  See Accetturo, A., Bassanetti, A., Bugamelli, M., Faiella, I., Finaldi Russo P., Franco D., Giacomelli S., 
and Omiccioli M., ‘Il sistema industriale italiano tra globalizzazione e crisi’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni 
di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 193, 2013.
13  See De Stefano, T., Manaresi, F., Menon, C., Santoleri, P., and Soggia, G., ‘The evaluation of the Italian 
Start-up Act’, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, 54, 2018.
8
most  suitable  way  of  funding  innovation  in  our  firms,  especially  technological 
innovation, and what role the banks and bank lending should play.
Let’s  start  with  the  observation  that  the  Italian  financial  system  is  smaller 
overall  than  those  of  the  leading  European  economies:  it  stands  at  about  four 
times GDP - a lower amount than not only the UK, but also Germany and France. 
Within the financial system in Italy, the banks, as we know, have a much higher 
weight than in the UK and a higher weight than in Germany and France, albeit only 
slightly higher. 
Now,  investment  in  innovation  is  particularly  risky  and  it  is  difficult  for 
anyone  outside  the  investing  company  to  estimate  possible  returns.  Hence  any 
funding must be made internally for the most part. This is what we have been 
witnessing for a few years now: self-financing has covered 90 per cent of this kind 
of investment, 20 points more compared with 2012. The increase in own funds has 
been accompanied by a fall in bank debt, whose share of firms’ total liabilities fell 
from 24 per cent in 2012 to 19 per cent in 2017.
In newly-fledged firms, a venture capitalist can be of great help by contributing 
to the firm’s capital with money available to fund an innovative idea, but also with 
specialist know-how.14 In Italy, the venture capital industry is, however, quite small 
on an international scale and it is not easy, even for the most promising innovative 
firms, to find specialized financiers to participate in their capital. 
The most consolidated firms can issue and place new capital to fund investment 
in technology and innovation. In theory this offers some significant advantages: 
compared  with  bank  debt,  equity  requires  no  collateral,  reduces  moral  hazard 
issues, and allows the investor to share in the profits if the innovative project is a 
success. The empirical literature shows that in many countries - and in particular 
in the United States - these advantages are recognized and risk capital often plays 
a more important role than debt financing for innovation.15 Nevertheless, Italian 
firms are relatively capital-poor on average: in 2017 financial leverage was about 
40 per cent, which is higher than in France, Germany and Spain.
14  See Bronzini, R., Caramellino, G., and Magri, S., ‘Venture capitalists at work: what are the effects on 
the firms they finance?’, Banca d’Italia, Temi di discussione (Working Papers), 1131, 2017.
15  See Magri, S., ‘Does issuing equities help R&D activity? Evidence from unlisted Italian high-tech 
manufacturing firms’, Banca d’Italia, Temi di discussione (Working Papers), 978, 2014.
9
Another path for financing innovation involves issuing bonds.16 This is the 
path that large Italian firms have been pursuing more decisively in the last few 
years. Compared with other European countries, like Germany, whose financial 
system is dominated by bank credit, the share of corporate bonds in firms’ total 
financial debt is greater, at just over 13 per cent against 12 per cent in Germany and 
the euro area, while it is considerably smaller than in the UK (23 per cent) and the 
US (41 per cent), but also less than in France (21 per cent). These are the results 
of strong growth in the post-crisis years. Recent initiatives, such as savings plans 
(PIRs) and mini-bonds, are helping to strengthen this process. 
Nevertheless, compared with other countries there is a still a difference due 
to both the characteristics of Italian firms and to the limited role of institutional 
investors in Italy. 
Large firms, especially those already listed and with growth prospects, have 
a better reputation and are more transparent - fundamental qualities for attracting 
bond purchasers.17 For small and medium-sized firms, which are very common in 
Italy, the lack of information available to outsiders is a formidable obstacle to their 
accessing the bond market.
Italian institutional investors hold few private bonds and many public securities 
compared with the other leading European countries. The small share of pension 
funds worsens the situation in which there are relatively few Italian institutional 
investors participating in the corporate bond market. 
Lastly, let’s look at bank credit, which still plays in Italy a very important role 
in funding innovation, not only for the largest firms with good credit scores and 
collateral, but also for small firms, including start-ups.18 As we have already seen, 
credit is not the ideal financial channel for investing in innovation. However, the 
banks can play a role in encouraging a broader take-up of bond funding on the part 
16  See Accornero, M., Finaldi Russo, P., Guazzarotti, G., and Nigro, V., ‘Missing investors in the Italian 
corporate bond market’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 450, 
2018.
17  See Accornero, M., Finaldi Russo, P., Guazzarotti, G., and Nigro, V., ‘First-time corporate bond issuers 
in Italy’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 269, 2015.
18  See Bonaccorsi, E. and Nigro, V., ‘The financial structure of Italian start-ups, in good and bad times’, 
Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 449, 2018.
10
of the smallest firms, especially in the placement and initial purchase of bonds. 
They  would  be  acting  in  their  own  interest  by  earning  commission  fees  which 
have grown in the meantime19 and they would restore balance to a market that is 
currently dominated by foreign banks.
Conclusions
To  conclude,  relaunching  the  economic  development  of  our  country  after 
more than twenty years of stagnation or overly slow improvement is the absolute 
priority for Italy. If our nation does not increase its wealth it will eventually decline, 
despite its talent and the capabilities recognized the world over. Development must 
be harmonized and sustainable over time, but it is a sine qua non. We can only 
return to financial balance if there is greater development. 
Nevertheless,  relaunching  development  is  not  easy;  we  need  to  make  big 
changes to Italy’s underlying character and to the political choices of our national 
community that are deeply rooted in the distant past. 
On this day, we are examining some of these central aspects: the education 
system, competitiveness, and the financial system. We must not tire of debating 
these themes, and we should not hold back or be afraid of expressing our ideas. If 
the ideas are right and convincing, action will follow.
19  See  Albareto,  G.  and  Marinelli,  G.,  ‘Italian  banks  and  market-based  corporate  financing’,  Banca 
d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 432, 2018.
11
Designed and printed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
