Elisa Ferreira: Resolution and early supervisory intervention
Topics supporting address by Ms Elisa Ferreira, Vice-Governor of the Bank of Portugal, on the
panel discussion of "Resolution and early supervisory intervention" at the "BCBS-FSI High-level
Meeting for Europe on Banking Supervision", Lisbon, 18 September 2018.
 Accompanying slides of the speech.
The  firm,  cohesive  European  commitment  to  Banking  Union  helped  counter  financial
fragmentation but its incomplete setup seriously jeopardises its key benefits. As the SSM
was  put  in  place  and  the  SRM  started  working,  the  political  will  to  build  the  third  pillar  –  a
European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS)  –  and  complete  the  overall  architecture  waned.
New, bigger political hurdles continue to emerge with policymakers stuck in the risk-reduction vs.
risk-sharing debate, losing sight of the final objectives.
Today,  Banking  Union  means  that  supervisory  and  resolution  decisions  are  mostly
European, whilst the ultimate guarantor of financial stability remains national, with limited
tools to act. The Meseberg declaration and last June’s Euro Summit, by falling short again of
proposing further risk-sharing while adding additional layers of risk-reduction measures, lead us
to ponder whether the costs of attaining additional risk-sharing are worth the risks to financial
stability that such measures may trigger. 
An unstable balance has emerged from the lack of political will to complete the Banking
Union  preventing  us  from  fully  reaping  the  benefits  of  economic  integration.  Europe
needs to have concrete plans going forward, and must address pressing questions on what we
need to adjust to guarantee financial stability.
 
1. Treatment of cross-border banking groups 
Without  EDIS,  as  banks  are  to  a  large  extent,  still  “national  in  death”,  instead  of
discussing the adoption of waivers, a specific regime needs to be developed to address
Member States’ concerns over the risks of potential failures of cross-border banking
groups.  Member  States  need  tools  to  address  financial  stability  issues  arising  from  locally
systemic undertakings. This involves: 
the  rethinking  of  the  Single  Point  of  Entry  (SPE)/Multiple  Point  of  Entry  (MPE)  resolution
model;
the choice between subsidiaries or branches, together with the supervisory powers of host
national competent authorities (NCAs); and 
openly debating the contentious topic of ring-fencing measures. 
The  transformation  of  subsidiaries  into  branches  has  emerged  as  an  answer  to  this
debate – however that implies, at least, that:
national  resolution  authorities  are  involved  in  the  definition  of  resolution  plans  and  actions
when local undertakings are of systemic relevance to the concerned Member State; and 
domestic  supervisors  should  have  the  capacity  to  react  to  strategic  decisions  affecting
branches as they would, had it been a standalone entity, so that the SSM, SRM and national
authorities are accountable to the Member States.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
2. Resolution/winding-down of medium-sized banks
The  sustainability  of  business  models  of  medium-sized  institutions  predominantly
financed by capital and deposits is currently endangered, with insufficient instruments
available to safeguard financial stability in case of failure.  There  is  no  clear  room  for  a
‘middle  class’  of  institutions  whose  failure,  and  eventual  liquidation,  could  be  considered
systemic but whose business model may be incompatible with accession, at a reasonable cost,
to the international market, to satisfy their MREL requirements. 
Resolution  authorities  need  to  be  able  to  rely  on  alternative  sources  to  support
resolution actions, such as resolution funds, but are currently prevented from doing so.
The current minimum internal loss absorption requirements (8% of total liabilities and own funds)
and limitations on the amount of the use of resolution funds (5% of total liabilities and own funds)
prevent it, which may subject senior debt and even unsecured deposits to risks incompatible with
financial  stability.  In  this  context,  the  IMF’s  recent  proposal  of  a  ‘financial  stability  exemption’
should be further explored.
Recent experiences have put the harmonisation of EU banks’ liquidation regimes on the
agenda of policymakers. However, before we jump into harmonising liquidation regimes,
in view of the public policy dimension, we must understand what bank liquidation means
and assess if we have the right tools to ensure that bank liquidations are orderly in the
current context. As a considerable social and economic impact results from the failure of a
bank considered to be of no public interest at EU level but with systemic relevance at local level,
we  need  to  discuss  alternatives  for  medium-sized  and  small-sized  banks  exiting  the  market,
instead of moving towards a further straitjacketing of nations’ room for manoeuvre. These might
include  the  establishment  of  an  enabling  framework  for  the  winding-down  of  locally  systemic
relevant banks combining elements of the resolution and liquidation frameworks while preserving
value and protecting creditors and non-financial borrowers. For that, work is needed to:
create  special  insolvency  proceedings,  with  recourse  to  administrative  options  attributing
additional instruments, such as the ones available in resolution, to a liquidating authority ,as
an alternative to the ‘atomistic’ court-led liquidation regime. The liquidating authority and the
funding sources available would need to be identified. 
ensure effective financing of the deposit insurance system for deposit transfers abiding by
the least cost principle with the liquidating authority having the option to offer guarantees or
enter into profit and loss sharing regimes. For that we would need to revise the applicable
State aid rules.
Recent calls to form a sort of European FDIC, merging the Single Resolution Fund and
EDIS  into  one  single  entity,  merit  our  attention  in  this  regard,  provided  that  the  legal
framework is fixed and that financial stability – both at European level as well as at national level
– is enshrined as the first and fundamental objective of any intervention. 
 
3. The return of too-big-to-fail?
Regulation-driven consolidation has become an imminent risk, fostering concentration at
local level and the comeback of too-big-to-fail.  Existing  regulatory  requirements  were  not
thought of as a way to promote consolidation but are currently working in that direction. Driven by
profitability and efficiency concerns, recent calls for the creation of pan-European banks able to
compete with larger institutions outside Europe as a matter of national sovereignty have added
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
pressure on regulators and policymakers to review existing rules. This in turn has implicitly put
on the table the return of too-big-to-fail with the ensuing moral hazard – something we were trying
to avoid in the first place. Are we so afraid of what digital giants such as Google, Facebook, Apple
and Amazon might give rise to in the future that to compete with them we are turning a blind eye
to  the  risks  of  too-big-to-fail?  Is  a  ‘forward  escape  consolidation’  the  right  answer  when
challenges remain regarding the failure of cross-border banks even for medium-sized banks?
Shouldn’t we instead focus on ways to address the economic dislocation and social costs that
may arise from the gaps in the current architecture?
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
