  Higher capital better for banking 
system and NZ  
  Notes from an address delivered to Business NZ CEO Forum in Auckland 
 On 30 November 2018 
 By Adrian Orr, Governor 
       
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
             2 
 The Reserve Bank is tasked with ensuring the banking system is both sound and efficient. 
To achieve our task we have a range of tools (see Table 1). The most important tool in our 
kit is ensuring banks hold sufficient capital (equity) to be able to absorb unanticipated 
events. The level of capital reflects the bank owners’ commitment – or skin in the game - to 
ensure they can operate in all business conditions, bringing public confidence.  
Given its importance, we have been undertaking a review of the optimal level of capital for 
the New Zealand system.  We conclude that more capital is better. We are sharing our work 
with the banking sector and public, and expect to hear one side of the story loud and clear, 
that capital costs banks.  We need to hear a broader perspective than that, to best reflect 
New Zealand’s risk appetite.  
  What have we done in practice? 
The Reserve Bank needs to ensure there is sufficient capital in the banking “system” to 
match the public’s “risk tolerance”.  This is because it is the New Zealand public – both 
current and future citizens - who would bear the social brunt of a banking mess  
We know one thing for sure, the public’s risk tolerance will be less than bank owners’ risk 
tolerance.   How do we know this?  Surely the more capital a bank has the safer it is and the 
more it can lend. Why don’t banks hold as much capital as they can?  
First, there is cost associated with holding capital, being what the capital could earn if it was 
invested elsewhere.  Second, bank owners can earn a greater return on their investment by 
using less of their own money and borrowing more - leverage. And, the most a bank owner 
can lose is their capital.  The wider public loses a lot more (see Figure 2).    
Hence, we need to impose capital standards on banks that matches the public’s risk 
tolerance. We have been reassessing the capital level in the banking sector that minimises 
the cost to society of a bank failure, while ensuring the banking system remains profitable.   
Ref #7821869 v2.0 
   3 
 The stylised diagram in Figure 3 highlights where we have got to.  Our assessment is that 
we can improve the soundness of the New Zealand banking system with additional capital 
with no trade-off to efficiency.   
In making this assessment, our recent work makes the explicit assumption that New Zealand 
is not prepared to tolerate a system-wide banking crisis more than once every 200 years.  
We have calibrated our ‘sweet spot’ thinking about economic ‘output’ and financial stability 
benefits.   
 How did we arrive at this position? 
Current levels of capital are based on international standards, and are not optimal for any 
one country.  The standards are also a minimum. There is a clear expectation that individual 
countries tailor the standards to their financial system’s needs.   
Banks also hold more capital than their regulatory minimums, to achieve a credit rating to do 
business. The ratings agencies are fallible however, given they operate with as much ‘art’ as 
‘science’.  
Bank failures also happen more often and be more devastating than bank owners – and 
credit ratings agencies – tend to remember. The costs are spread across the public and 
through time.  
Many large banks are foreign owned – especially in New Zealand. Their ‘parents’ are subject 
to capital requirements in their home and host country.  This creates continuous tension as 
to who gets the lion’s share of capital and failure management support.  It would be naïve to 
expect a foreign taxpayer to bail out a domestic banking crisis.  
Hence, New Zealand needs to assess its own risk tolerance, and decide who pays to clean 
up any mess and the scale of that mess.  
A word of caution.  Output or GDP are glib proxies for economic wellbeing – the end goal of 
our economic policy purpose.  When confronted with widespread unemployment, falling 
wages, collapsing house prices, and many other manifestations of a banking crisis, 
wellbeing is threatened.  Much recent literature suggests a loss of confidence is one cause 
Ref #7821869 v2.0 
   4 
 of societal ills such as poor mental and physical health, and a loss of social cohesion. If we 
believe we can tolerate bank system failures more frequently than once-every-200 years, 
then this must be an explicit decision made with full understanding of the consequences.  
Table 1: The Reserve Bank’s tool kit 
 
  
Transparency  Disclosure 
Financial 
requirements 
RBNZ tools 
Institutional 
rules 
 
 
 
   Funding & 
liquidity 
 
   
Enforcement 
 
Monetary 
policy 
Crisis 
management 
 
Ref #7821869 v2.0 
Governance 
Risk management 
Attestations 
Licensing & NZ 
incorporation 
Outsourcing 
Minimum capital 
requirements/solvency 
standards 
Conservation & counter 
cyclical buffers 
Sectoral Capital 
Requirements 
Core Funding Ratio 
Loan to value 
restrictions 
Liquidity standards 
Collateral standards / 
RMOs 
LoLR 
Foreign exchange 
intervention 
Financial Stability 
Report 
Stress testing 
Supervision & 
engagement 
Thematic reviews 
Investigations 
Directions 
OCR 
OBR 
Statutory management 
Infrastructure  FMI rules and powers 
Monitoring 
Self  Market  Regulatory  Permanent 
                                                         Time 
varying 
 
             Event 
                 5 
 Figure 2: The cost of recent bank failures on society 
 
Fiscal cost as % of banking system assets 
Uruguay (2002)
Korea (1997)
Greece
Finland (1991)
Czech (1996)
Japan (1997)
Iceland
Ireland
Netherlands
Slovenia
Sweden (1991)
UK
Norway (1991)
USA
Belgium
Austria
Spain
Denmark
Germany
France
Luxembourg
Italy
Portugal
 Source: IMF (2013) Systemic Banking Crisis Database
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
% of banking system assets
Figure 3: The capital-output ‘sweet spot’ 
 Ref #7821869 v2.0 
    