  12.12.2018 
 Opening of the 14th banking industry meeting: should we reinvent banks 
or improve their management? 
IESE  
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Good morning. I should like to thank the IESE for its kind invitation to open the 14th edition 
of  the  banking  industry  meeting.  This  gives  me  an  excellent  opportunity  to  review  the 
progress made by the Spanish banking industry and the main challenges it currently faces. 
Let me start, however, with a brief explanation regarding the content of my speech. As a 
member of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank I am, as of today, subject 
to a “quiet period”, before a meeting at which monetary policy decisions are due to be taken. 
Accordingly,  my  reflections  in  this  speech  should  not  be  interpreted  as  indicating  the 
monetary or economic outlook (see Chart 1). 
Following the last crisis, Spanish banks have carried out a major balance sheet clean-up, 
recapitalisation  and  restructuring  which,  over  the  last  four  and  a  half  years,  has  notably 
improved the situation of the industry in terms of its basic parameters, such as asset quality, 
profitability and solvency.  
Starting with asset quality, between December 2013 and June 2018 the reduction in non-
performing loans and foreclosed real estate assets has been very notable. Also, the return 
on equity has turned positive again and is above the euro area average, following its collapse 
in 2012, to minus 25%. The total capital ratio, meanwhile, has increased by 1.7 percentage 
points over the last four years, and the leverage and liquidity ratios are above the European 
averages.  Indeed,  the  recent  stress  tests  carried out  by  the  European  Banking  Authority 
(EBA)  and  the  Banco  de  España  show  the  considerable  resilience  of  Spanish  banks’ 
solvency under adverse scenarios. 
However,  while  recognising  the  significant  progress  made  in  recent  years,  the  Spanish 
banking industry continues to face significant challenges, which are largely shared by other 
euro area banking systems. 
Notable among them are: i) the need for further progress in reducing unproductive assets 
which remain at high levels; ii) raising profitability; iii) strengthening the industry’s reputation 
by preventing misconduct; iv) adapting to the new regulatory framework and strengthening 
the highest-quality capital ratios; and v) competing in a new financial environment arising 
from technological progress and the emergence of new players (see Chart 2).  
Reducing unproductive assets 
As I have already said, the reduction in non-performing loans and foreclosed assets from 
the  peak  levels  they  reached  during  the  crisis  has  been  significant.  Private-sector  non-
performing loans, which have fallen by 60% from their peak in 2013, currently stand at the 
same level as in 2009. Foreclosed assets have followed a similar pattern, falling by 40% 
from their peak in 2012. The economic recovery has certainly contributed to this process, 
but it has also been driven by credit institutions’ management of troubled assets and  by 
supervisory pressure.  
Spain  has  made  relatively  more  progress  than  other  euro  area  countries  in  reducing  the 
volume of non-performing  loans built up during the crisis. Moreover, economic growth  – 
albeit at lower rates – can be expected to continue to help to gradually reduce them over 
the next few years. Despite these improvements, the level of unproductive assets of Spanish 
banks (especially those related to business in Spain) remains relatively high and above pre-
crisis levels.  
 3/11 
 Reducing unproductive assets continues to be a challenge for the industry, requiring banks 
to strengthen the application of active management policies to their impaired assets. In this 
respect, the agreements to sell troubled asset portfolios announced over the past year will 
accelerate the reduction of future NPL ratios more than initially estimated solely on the basis 
of the cyclical improvement in the economy and the experience of previous credit cycles.  
In  order  to  address  this  challenge,  which  most  other  European  banks  also  face,  the 
European  economic  and  supervisory  authorities  have  taken  initiatives  to  accelerate  the 
reduction  of  NPLs.  In  particular,  the  European  Commission  announced  a  package  of 
measures in March this year, which included a proposal to review the capital requirement 
regulations and an NPL provisioning schedule.  
Correcting the high level of impaired assets is key for two basic reasons. First, because the 
balance-sheet clean-up will improve banks’ profitability and solvency. That is to say, it will 
free up resources currently devoted to financing unproductive assets and allow them to be 
used to finance new lending. And second, because correcting the levels of bad debts in the 
euro area should smooth the path to creation of a pan-European, fully mutualised deposit 
guarantee scheme with sufficient fiscal backing, since it would enable risks to be shared 
without  problems  inherited  from  before  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  and 
Resolution Mechanisms. This is the third pillar of the Banking Union, a key element which 
seeks, moreover, to reduce the link between banking risk and sovereign risk (see Chart 3). 
Restoring profitability 
Restoring profitability is another of the main challenges facing the Spanish banking industry. 
Although it has returned to positive values (7% in June 2018), and stands above the EU 
average, profitability remains below pre-crisis levels and, in any case, below the levels in 
other developed-economy banking systems. 
The low average profit levels generated by Spanish banks are especially apparent in their 
business in Spain. In addition, the international activity of  Spanish banks, which entailed 
significant diversification of risk and a valuable source of profits during the crisis, has its 
own  challenges.  Some  of  the  emerging  market  economies  to  which  Spanish  banks  are 
exposed – such as Turkey and Argentina – are currently in considerable difficulty.  
That said, I should like to point out that geographical diversification of banks is a source of 
value added and of medium and long-term stability and is relevant to any assessment of 
profitability  and  risk  for  two  reasons.  First,  because  the  correlation  of  activity  between 
countries may be negative. This has historically been the case for many  of the emerging 
countries in which Spanish banks have international activity. Second, the characteristics of 
the banking markets in which they operate (much more concentrated, and with less banking 
penetration) are conducive to the existence of higher margins (see Chart 4). 
Returning to the profitability of the banking business in Spain, its comparatively low level is 
explained  by  a  variety  of  factors.  First,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  high  volume  of 
unproductive assets has a direct negative impact on banks’ income statements by reducing 
interest income and increasing impairment provisioning. 
Second, low profitability is also explained by the significant fall in income associated with 
banks’ deleveraging. In addition, the current levels of interest rates have squeezed banks’ 
4/11 
  net interest income. That said, the ECB’s monetary policy has also had a positive effect on 
economic activity (thus reducing the losses from loan defaults) and on banks’ capital gains. 
In short, the ultimate net impact of low interest rates on bank profitability seems to have 
been smaller than that of the other factors I have mentioned. 
As regards operating expenses, they remain on the downward trend seen in recent years. 
This containment of expenses is taking place against a background of adjustment  of the 
operating  capacity  of  Spanish  banks  and  has  basically  taken  the  form  of  a  significant 
reduction in the numbers of staff and branches in their business in Spain. The adjustment 
of the productive capacity of the Spanish banking system has already lasted ten years, the 
number of branches having been reduced by more than 40% from its peak in 2008, while 
staff numbers have fallen by more than 30%. 
In this scenario, in which extraordinary growth in total lending is not expected in the short 
or medium term, efforts to restore profitability should be based on adjusting expenses to 
the  new  size  of  balance  sheets,  seeking  alternative  sources  of  income  and  improving 
efficiency.  
That  said,  we  must  remember  that  the  search  for  profitable  business  cannot  be  at  the 
expense of the necessary vigilance of credit conditions. This basic premise is a necessary 
condition for the appropriate management of credit risk. I wish to point this out because we 
are  seeing  high  rates  of  growth  in  bank  lending  to  households  for  the  acquisition  of 
consumer durables (15% year-on-year in September 2008, after rates of more than 20% in 
previous  quarters)  and,  what  is  more  symptomatic,  the  default  rate  associated  with  this 
activity has already begun to accelerate significantly. 
This  situation  suggests  that  there  has  been  some  easing  of  the  risk  acceptance  and 
selection standards in this segment. It is vital that the lessons of the crisis not be forgotten 
here: past experience has shown that loosening credit standards eventually leads to notable 
increases in default rates.  
Although the weight of this business segment in the lending of Spanish banks as a whole is 
low,  the  growth  observed  should  be  a  warning  sign.  It  would  not  be  acceptable  for  the 
search for an alternative source of income in the short term to become once again a potential 
source of future losses.  
In this respect, price-setting policies at product or service level are fundamental to ensure 
an appropriate risk-adjusted profitability. These policies must be consistent, comprehensive 
and rigorous to ensure that the price charged for a product or service covers at least its total 
cost, including the risk premium inherent in each type of transaction.  
From  the  viewpoint  of  appropriate  risk  management,  controlling  the  risks  incurred, 
assessing  how  they  develop  over  time  and  applying  conservative  conditions  when 
negotiating  the  rollover  of  loans  are  basic  elements  of  credit  standards  that  banks  must 
observe and keep up to date in their policies. Moreover, from the viewpoint of customer 
protection,  the  appropriate  assessment  of  their  solvency  and  capacity  to  repay  is  also 
protection against future vulnerabilities (see Chart 5). 
  5/11 
 Reputation and conduct 
One of the largest challenges facing banks today is precisely that of managing one of their 
main assets: their reputation, which is fundamental to generate the appropriate framework 
of trust within which to develop customer relations. 
The  reputation  of  banks  was  eroded  during  the  last  crisis,  not  only  as  a  result  of 
management failures in part of the system, but also as a result of inappropriate marketing 
to customers, which undermined their trust. In fact, the number of complaints by customers 
to banks’ customer complaints services increased almost six-fold between 2014 and 2017. 
This has led to growing concern about conduct risk in the social, political and supervisory 
domains, and naturally in the industry itself. This concern is also shared internationally, as 
reflected in the recent work of the Financial Stability Board to strengthen the governance 
and remuneration frameworks in order to mitigate the risk of misconduct. 
The Banco de España strengthened its supervisory activity in relation to conduct four years 
ago.  This  greater  supervisory  presence,  along  with  regulatory  requirements,  the  need  to 
adapt to new and more demanding customers and judicial rulings in defence of consumers, 
is prompting banks to react, and they are making efforts to implement the measures needed 
to correct these practices. 
However, much remains to be done. Banks must be more proactive in developing a strong 
culture that is not only oriented towards complying with customer transparency regulations, 
but also fundamentally towards identifying and satisfying customer interests. This requires 
the  involvement  and  commitment  of  governing  bodies  and  the  spread  of  these  values 
throughout the institution; especially to the sales network, which must have an incentive 
mechanism that does not give rise to perverse or counter-productive incentives. 
In short, banks must incorporate the customer protection perspective into their risk appetite 
framework, making it a cornerstone of their governance and decision-making processes.  
For this process to be successful, the control of regulatory compliance in the marketing and 
management  of  banking  products  and  services  needs  to  be  strengthened.  And, 
simultaneously, the role of customer service departments needs to be bolstered, with the 
focus  not  only  on  improving  the  treatment of  complaints,  but  also on  ensuring  that  they 
serve as an alert mechanism for conduct risks, so that managers are promptly aware of the 
areas of customer relations giving rise to conflict or dissatisfaction. 
Thus, a comprehensive approach to customer relations is required. A satisfied customer is 
one of the main assets of any bank and the basis for sustained profitability (see Chart 6). 
Adapting to the new regulatory framework and strengthening solvency 
I  shall  now  turn  to  the  fourth  important  challenge  facing  the  Spanish  banking  industry: 
adapting to the new regulatory framework. I will start with one of the elements introduced 
in  the  context  of  Basel  III:  the  inclusion  of  macro-prudential  tools  to  supplement  micro-
prudential regulation and supervision.  
6/11 
  From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  providing  supervisors  with  macro-prudential  tools 
would  allow  them  to  better  adjust  financial  expansions,  on  the  one  hand  cushioning  the 
impact of contractions and, on the other, helping financial institutions to continue to perform 
their function of financing the real economy in times of tension. 
The  arsenal  of  macro-prudential  tools  has  indeed  been  expanded  significantly  since  the 
financial  crisis.  Apart  from  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  we  have  the  systemic  risk 
buffer, the buffers for global and local systemically important banks, the possibility to limit 
excessive  risk  concentrations,  to  increase  capital  requirements  and  to  review  the  risk 
weighted assets for real estate exposures. These tools will allow us supervisors to develop 
macro-prudential policies that interact with micro-prudential policies and monetary policy. 
However,  creating  macro-prudential  tools  is  not  sufficient.  To  ensure  their  effectiveness, 
they must be appropriately assigned from an institutional point of view to avoid so-called 
inaction  bias.  In  this  respect,  the  Spanish  Government  has  announced  that  a  macro-
prudential  authority  is  to  be  set  up,  composed  of  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  the 
Economy  and  Enterprise,  the  Banco  de  España  and  the  National  Securities  Market 
Commission. 
Spain  was  one  of  the  few  European  countries  still  without  a  national  macro-prudential 
authority. By setting up this new authority, Spain is complying with the recommendation of 
the  European  systemic  risk  board,  which  urged  EU  Member  States  to  establish  such  an 
authority. 
The aim of this authority will be to carry out the macro-prudential supervision of the Spanish 
financial system, in order to contribute to the prevention or mitigation of systemic risk. For 
this  purpose,  the  Banco  de  España  is  due  to  be  given  new  powers  in  this  area.  These 
include,  notably,  the  possibility  of  activating  tools,  such  as  the  sectoral  countercyclical 
capital buffer, limiting sectoral credit concentration and others relating to credit standards. 
Giving  the  Banco  de  España  these  new  macro-prudential  tools  clearly  strengthens  the 
Spanish supervisory system and brings it into line with best international practice. Macro-
prudential policy is especially important in a country like Spain, which belongs to a monetary 
union and a banking union, since – as we have seen in the past – the financial and business 
cycles of the various countries that make up the currency are not always harmonised with 
those of the euro area as a whole.  
Considering that the euro area has a common monetary policy and supervisory policy and 
that  there  is  limited  scope  for  fiscal  policy  measures,  macro-prudential  policy  has  a 
fundamental role to play in addressing the credit cycle.  
I will now move on to institutions’ adaptation to the other components of the international 
regulatory reform such as stricter requirements for own funds and liquid assets, and other 
requirements under the new resolution legislation. These regulatory changes were agreed 
at  international  level  in  response  to  the  shortcomings  that  became  apparent  when  the 
financial  crisis  broke  out  ten  years  ago  now.  Their  aim  is  to  boost  banking  systems’ 
resilience  to  adverse  shocks,  and  to  minimise  the  cost  to  taxpayers  in  the  event  of 
resolution. In other words, they seek to reduce the likelihood of future financial crises, and 
if they do happen, reduce their impact on society. 
 7/11 
 The  first  phase  of  the  reforms,  agreed  between  2010  and  2011,  focused,  among  other 
things,  on  strengthening  the  quantity  and  quality  of  banks’  capital  and  introducing  new 
liquidity requirements and limits on credit concentration. Almost all of these requirements 
will have come into force by the end of 2019. 
Subsequently, December 2017 saw the completion of the second phase of reforms in the 
Basel  III  framework.  Among  other  things  these  reforms  introduced  enhancements  to  the 
standardised methods for calculating credit and operational risk, restrictions on the use of 
internal models and changes in the leverage ratio.  These changes will be implemented in 
two phases, due to be completed in 2027.  
As  regards  bank  resolution,  the  common  European  resolution  framework  defines  the 
situations in which failing banks must be subject to liquidation or resolution. For this purpose 
a new category of non-preferred debt instruments has been created, ranked below senior 
debt in the order of priority of creditors to facilitate compliance with minimum requirements 
for the own funds and eligible liabilities available to absorb losses.  
The Single Resolution Board has started to establish the requirements for these liabilities 
for European significant institutions and they will gradually be extended to less significant 
institutions. Smaller Spanish institutions tend basically to be funded via capital and deposits 
rather  than  by  tapping  capital  markets.  While  this  feature  generally  gives  their  liabilities 
greater stability, it means they have lower levels of eligible liabilities and a more limited pool 
of investors, with possible difficulties accessing non-preferred debt markets.  
Lastly, issuance of this type of instrument is likely to have a much bigger impact on the cost 
of  funding  for  medium-sized  Spanish  institutions  than  for  larger  ones.  This is  due  to  the 
difficulties  accessing  markets  I  mentioned  earlier,  in  conjunction  with  the  higher  liquidity 
premia potential investors are likely to demand. 
As  can  be seen,  the  regulatory  reforms  are far-reaching  and  it is worth  anticipating  their 
impact  as,  although  Spanish  banks  have  largely  adapted  to  the  regulatory  changes, 
application of some reforms is still outstanding. 
Although the total capital ratio has risen by 1.7 percentage points over the last four years 
(reaching 15.1% in June 2018, exceeding the regulatory minimum), and the leverage and 
liquidity ratios are slightly above their European averages, when we focus on the regulatory 
capital  with  greatest  loss-absorbing  capacity,  i.e.  ordinary  capital  or  CET1,  the  ratio  has 
risen by just 0.3 percentage points.  
In this regard, the Banco de España’s in-house stress tests to assess prospectively the level 
of solvency of the Spanish banking system revealed that institutions have a high degree of 
resilience  to  possible  adverse  macroeconomic  scenarios.  Nevertheless,  in  view  of  the 
dispersion of results across banks and the possibility that the risks which materialise exceed 
those envisaged in the adverse scenario, banks would be advised to strengthen their capital 
insofar as the recovery in profits allows. 
Indeed,  according  to  June  2018  data  from  the  European  Banking  Authority,  Spanish 
institutions’ CET1 and Tier 1 solvency ratios are some of the lowest among the euro area’s 
banking systems. Apart from the need to adopt strategies to strengthen their top quality 
capital shown by comparison across Europe, Spanish banks also need to: (i) take advantage 
8/11 
 of  the  current  economic  growth  and  recovery  in  profits  to  raise  levels  of  solvency  and 
generate  operating  margin  with  which  to  meet  the  economy’s  future  credit  demand  in  a 
stable way; (ii) anticipate the impact of the reforms pending implementation in the framework 
of Basel III; and (iii) ensure compliance with the resolution requirements without excessive 
dependence on the market’s appetite to absorb new non-preferred debt instruments (see 
Chart 7). 
  The new competitive environment 
However, beyond the difficulties of adapting to post-crisis regulation and restoring banks’ 
balance-sheet  and  income  statement  quality,  the  biggest  challenge  being  faced  by  the 
Spanish  banking  sector  is  the  new  competitive  framework  in  which  it  operates,  and  in 
particular, 
financial 
disintermediation. 
technologies  and 
the  advance  of 
that  deriving 
from  new 
In this new competitive environment, both BigTechs and FinTechs are altering some of the 
traditional paradigms of retail banking, in particular, the traditional role of customer accounts 
in building loyalty and as the essential pillar on which to offer universal banking services. 
These  new  operators  can  leverage  the  opportunities  offered  by  technology  and  the  new 
payments  regulation  to  offer  their  value-added  services  using  the  “basic”  deposit-taking 
and account-management service platform provided by the banking system.  
This scenario represents both a short-term challenge, insofar as new competitors may enter 
specific areas, such as retail payment services, with the consequent drop in business and 
income for banks in this area, and, fundamentally, a major future challenge deriving from 
the  risk  that  banks  may  be  relegated  to  providing  undifferentiated  and  low  value-added 
basic services. 
Against  this  competitive background,  banks  have a  number of  initial  advantages but  are 
being forced to react in order to capitalise on the opportunities the new situation offers. The 
responses may range from specialisation to digital transformation, taking advantage of the 
possibilities offered by technology and the new regulations, with an emphasis on adequate 
data management. In any event, this transition will entail a short-term increase in costs in a 
context of low profitability. 
Issues  such  as  cybersecurity  also  take  on  particular  significance  in  the  process  of 
adaptation  of  institutions  to  new  technologies  as  they  can  also  lead  to  an  increase  in 
operational and reputational risk. 
I would also like to highlight the growing challenge BigTech firms are posing in the financial 
sector, not in their more prominent customer-facing facet, but as providers of a significant 
amount  of  financial-sector  infrastructure  in  areas  such  as  cloud-based  services.  These 
actors now constitute a critical component of the financial sector. 
In any event, new technologies offer banks fresh opportunities, both in terms of business 
and potential efficiency gains. The application of artificial intelligence and the use of large 
databases with real-time information (Big Data) may also provide for significant efficiency 
gains in terms of both business activity and regulatory compliance. 
 9/11 
 Similarly, the use of new technologies in the financial sector may offer advantages to society 
in that it reduces intermediation costs, improves households’ and SMEs’ access to finance 
and facilitates financial inclusion (see Chart 8). 
Financial disintermediation 
Another factor making the environment in which credit institutions operate more competitive 
is the advance of financial disintermediation. In Spain, as in countries such as Germany and 
Italy,  the  bulk  of  non-financial  corporations’  borrowing  has  traditionally  come  from  bank 
loans.  However,  in  other  countries,  such  as  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom, 
capital markets play a much bigger role in corporate finance. 
There is no consensus as to the optimal financing structure to best ensure financial stability 
and economic growth. On the one hand, it is true that the interaction between companies 
and  banks  involves  the  handling  of  non-public  information  about  companies  that  may 
facilitate their access to bank lending at lower cost. On the other hand, having liquid and 
efficient financial markets makes it possible to channel households’ savings into long-term 
projects with a larger share of finance in the form of capital.  
Also,  although  the  experience  of  the  recent  international  crisis  has  taught  us  that  an 
appropriate diversification of companies’ sources of financing reduces their vulnerability to 
shocks affecting bank lending channels, there is also evidence that capital markets are more 
procyclical. These issues take on special importance in the context of the potential increase 
in long-term saving associated with population ageing. 
In  any  event,  in  recent  years  companies  have  increasingly  turned  to  European  capital 
markets for finance. This trend towards financial disintermediation is explained by factors 
such as the ECB's corporate debt purchase programme, along with more permanent factors 
such as the introduction of new international banking regulation in response to the financial 
crisis. 
The  primary  aim  of  the  regulatory  reform  is  to  foster  financial  stability  by  strengthening 
banks’ resilience to future shocks, but it has the side-effect of creating incentives to move 
typical bank services outside the reach of the sector’s safety nets. 
Indeed,  various  analytical  studies  –including  the  annual  FSB  non-banking  financial 
intermediation  monitoring  reports–  suggest  that  fund  managers’  business  has  grown 
substantially over the past decade. Moreover, this growth has been observed particularly in 
the case of open-ended funds that offer their unit-holders daily reimbursements and which 
invest  in  assets  that  are  somewhat  illiquid  or  have  long  maturities.  In  other  words,  they 
perform activities that share the need to manage some of the risks characteristic of typical 
banking business, such as maturity transformation, leverage or liquidity risk. 
I therefore feel international financial regulation needs to follow the principle that activities 
with  similar  risks  should  be  subject  to  similar  supervision  and  regulation.  And  in  the 
supervision and regulation of all entities and activities, the risks they pose to the financial 
system, particularly those of systemic importance, must be taken into account. 
Looking  beyond  the  regulatory  viewpoint,  the  trend  towards  greater  development  of  the 
capital  markets  could  be  further  encouraged  if  headway  is  made  in  creating  a  Capital 
10/11 
  Markets Union which, together with the culmination of Banking Union, would allow a better 
allocation of risk within the Economic and Monetary Union. 
These changes in the structure of financial markets, in conjunction with the emergence of 
new technologies, clearly represent a challenge for banks, particularly in the current context 
of low profits among Europe’s banking systems. 
In any event, at this point in time the ultimate impact of new technologies on the structure 
of the financial system is highly uncertain, as it will depend on various factors, including the 
future regulatory treatment of new players. 
Conclusions 
To  conclude,  Spanish  credit  institutions  have  improved  significantly  in  terms  of  their 
solvency, profitability and asset quality in recent years.  
Despite  this  progress,  the  Spanish  banking  sector  still  faces  important  challenges, 
challenges  which  it  largely  shares  with  other  euro  area  banking  systems.  The  most 
significant of these challenges are: (i) stepping up the pace of sales of unproductive assets; 
(ii) strengthening capital and liabilities suitable for internal recapitalisation; (iii) building the 
sector's  reputation  by  avoiding  the  risk  of  inappropriate  conduct;  (iv)  confronting  the 
challenge of making profits without undue easing of lending standards; and (v) utilising new 
technologies,  which  are  both  a  major  challenge  for  the  sector  and  an  opportunity  for 
institutions that can harness them. 
Additionally,  challenges  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  area  persist,  such  as  the  full 
integration of macro-prudential tools in economic policy design, and ensuring a regulatory 
framework that guarantees that typical banking risks are treated similarly regardless of the 
legal nature of the entity originating and managing them. In short, both institutions and the 
supervisory community share the challenge for the future of ensuring a more stable financial 
system that offers better services to society. 
Thank you very much.  
   11/11 
