 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  INTRODUCTION  
Good  morning  ladies  and  gentlemen.   It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  at  the  Financial  Centre 
Summit and I thank Finance Dublin for inviting me to speak todayi.   
 We  have  entered  a  new  era  in  the  world  of  financial  services.  Technology  change,  as 
evidenced by the description of a fourth industrial revolutionii, is more than just an enabler 
for conducting business in a faster, smarter, or cheaper way, for better managing costs, or for 
gaining better analytical insights. It is a revolution that is completely transforming the playing 
field for financial services firms.   
 Opportunities and risks abound.  
 The competitive landscape is changing, with new entrants, new business models, a race by 
incumbents to invest in developing the necessary capabilities, and in many cases the potential 
for  a  fundamental  disruption  in  the  value  chain  of  traditional  financial  services  firms  and 
sectors. Moreover, it is becoming ever more evident that data, and the harnessing of it, is the 
new currency of this new digital ageiii.   
 All this brings more complexity into the system, and complexity brings risk. Financial services 
firms  and  whole  sectors  face  the  challenges  of:  needing  a  clear  vision  for  the  future  in  a 
radically  changing  world;  having  a  sufficiently  flexible  strategy  and  building  the  necessary 
capabilities for thriving in it; and be able to manage the significant transition risks along the 
way.  And throughout, financial services firms will need to ensure that they are sufficiently 
focused on their customers, and serving them in a sustainable way. 
 So today, I am going to talk about some of these opportunities and challenges.  I will cover:  
 Page | 1  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
   the  importance  of understanding  the  role technology  plays  in  value  chains  and  the 
  implications should something go wrong;  
the need to get the basics right when it comes to IT;  
the criticality of taking a data-centric view to understand key assets, and thus how to 
protect them; and  
 the responsibilities of the senior management and boards of financial services firms 
to own these critical risks and to build resilience in their firms to be able to withstand, 
absorb, and recover from technology-related risks.  
 In covering the above, I will also summarise how the Central Bank is continuing to evolve its 
approach to regulation and supervision in the context of technological change.   
 The Implications of the Digitalisation of Financial Services 
“Artificial intelligence and exponential increases in computing power are forcing firms to re-
examine how they do business. The financial services industry is no exception. Digitalisation 
has  already  left  bustling  stock  exchange  floors  in  demise.  High-frequency  trading  is 
increasingly shaping market dynamics. And in the future, thousands of financial analysts may 
be replaced with robo-advisors.”iv 
 Technology  developments  over  the 
last  decade  have,  among  many  other  things: 
exponentially  increased  the  proliferation  of  data  and  the  speed  with  which  it  can  now  be 
analysed and processed; customer expectations of functionality; and increased outsourcing 
of technology services, including cloud storage.  And if the current pace of change is anything 
to go by, the future is a vast unknown where only those able to adapt at pace will be able to 
survive. 
  Page | 2  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  All  of  this  new  innovation  is  exciting  and  creates  a  myriad  of  opportunities.    Indeed,  it  is 
arguable that there is no part of the traditional financial services value chain that cannot be 
done better, smarter and more effectively.  In my role, I welcome the opportunities for the 
financial services system to better serve the needs of the economy and its customers, but I 
am also mindful of the risks.  
 As we look forward, it is important to reflect on the past to see what if any lessons we can 
learn. The onset of the financial crisis in 2008 has been much discussed in the last few weeks. 
The  years  leading  up to the financial  crisis  were characterised  by,  inter  alia:  high  levels of 
financial innovation; an over and incorrect reliance on implicit and explicit assumptions; the 
approach to regulation and supervision failing to keep pace with the growing systemic risks; 
and boards and senior managers not truly understanding the risks and, in many cases, the 
underlying  activities  being  undertaken  in  their  businesses.  In  other  words,  as  Christine 
Lagarde  recently  stated,  at  the  core  of  the  last  crisis  “was  financial  innovation  that  vastly 
outpaced regulation and supervision. Financial institutions…went on a frenzy of reckless risk-
taking.”v   
 I will not labour the comparison that could be made with the potential risks arising from the 
latest  wave  of  innovation  and  risk-taking  in  the  financial  system,  driven  by  technological 
change.   But the pace  of  change,  together  with the  borderless nature  of  technology, does 
require an appropriate level of caution to be taken, through financial services firms taking 
risk-based approaches to strategic and business initiatives.  Financial services firms need to 
make informed choices about where and how they are going to adapt and make sure that the 
associated  risks  are  understood,  considered, and  measured  as  they  make  changes to  their 
processes and business models. 
 Page | 3  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  Getting the basics right 
Worryingly, in too many cases the foundations to support success and effectively manage the 
technology risks are not sufficiently robust.  We have repeatedly found that too many firms 
are lacking in the fundamentals of IT risk management and IT security while at the same time 
espousing a digital strategy for the future. We find that too many firms are not aware of all 
the  IT  assets  on  their  estate  and  have  not  undertaken  adequate  risk  assessments  to 
adequately understand the threats and vulnerabilities to them.   
 Too  many  firms  do  not  fully  understand  all  the  systems  and  processes  that  support  their 
business services and they are not aware of all the third-party relationships that support their 
value chain. And we have found that in many firms the board does not fully understand the 
IT risk profile of their firm and is not asking the questions that need to be asked in relation 
their risk appetite or how the IT strategy is aligned with the business strategy of the firm. 
 As  outlined  in  our  2016  Guidelines  on  Information  Technology  and  Cybersecurity  Risksvi, 
Boards  and  senior  management  across  the  financial  services  sector  need  to  more  actively 
engage in the oversight of technology risk.  This requires having both the necessary skillset 
and mindset at these senior levels to understand the evolving technology landscape and make 
informed  decisions  about  it.    The  technical  changes  that  are  sweeping  through  financial 
services need to be accompanied by governance and risk management changes.   
 Data as an Asset 
A firm’s data is, in many cases, its biggest asset. So it is vital that firms are taking a data-centric 
view of their business and systems to identify what data they have or need to support their 
core business services, and how it is classified, used and protected. 
  Page | 4  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  In  this  fourth  industrial  revolution,  firms  that  can  harness  data  effectively  can  expect 
competitive advantages. The use of artificial intelligence and machine learning can be very 
powerful  for  analysing  big  data  to  better  understand  how  to  meet  customers’  needs  in  a 
sustainable manner over the long term.    
 But this can only happen if the data is reliable and available. From our on-site inspection work 
over  the  last  number  of  years,  we  have  identified  many  weaknesses  in  firms’  abilities  to 
effectively understand, use and report on their data.  Issues arise from a patchwork of legacy 
and newer systems that do not talk to each other, resulting in fragmented data that requires 
manual interventions and adjustments before it can be used.  Firms need to have a single 
source of their key data if they are to rely on it for critical intelligence and decision-making.   
Those that manage this transition best are likely to be the firms that survive and thrive.  
 But along with the benefits to the business of using this data comes the responsibility to your 
customers and counterparties to protect it from loss or theft and to use it to get the best 
outcome for all stakeholders – i.e. to not to use the advantages of big data to the long term 
detriment of customers.  
 Many industry experts believe that the future of financial services will increasingly involve a 
battle for the customer relationshipvii and the user-friendliness and trustworthiness of firms’ 
digital offerings.viii  Unfortunately, as we have seen in Ireland, trust in the financial services 
system  is  an  endangered  commodity.  Boards  and  senior  management  need  to  take 
responsibility for safeguarding the trust in and reputation of their organisation by prioritising 
the security, resilience and use of their data and systems. 
 Page | 5  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
   In  the  increasingly  interconnected  world  of  financial  services,  there  are  a  multitude  of 
interdependencies that all form links in a chain. Technology has deepened this chain and all 
parties are reliant on other members in the complex web of financial market infrastructures 
that underpin day-to day business.ix  This gives rise to two key risks that are too frequently 
underestimated; reliance on third-parties for delivery of your business services and increased 
cyber risk. 
 Outsourcing and Third-Party Risk Management 
Let me talk first about reliance on third-parties.  How many of you are aware of all the systems 
or services that support your value chain that are outsourced to third-parties?  How many of 
you know where all of your data is residing at this very minute?  Do you know how many third 
parties connect to your systems or have access to your data and for what reason? 
 These are questions that boards need to be asking of their senior management.  While it is 
possible  to  outsource  a  service,  you  cannot  outsource  the  risk.    The  responsibility  and 
accountability for ensuring security and resilience of your data and services remains firmly 
with the board.  
 A recent cross-sector survey on outsourcing conducted by the Central Bank, identified issues 
across the life-cycle of outsourcing arrangements and suggests that outsourcing is not being 
considered  a  core  priority  of  many  financial  services  firms.    Some  of  the  most  critical 
observations from the survey, which tie in with findings from on-site inspection work, relate 
to  poor  governance  and  controls  around  the  risk  assessment  and  management  of 
outsourcing,  inadequate  monitoring  and  reporting,  failure  to  consider  third-parties  in 
business continuity plans and tests, and a lack of exit strategies or contingency plans should 
 Page | 6  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  the firm need to find a new service provider or bring the service back in house.  These issues 
are  more  concerning  given  that  a  large  proportion  of  outsourcing  arrangements  were 
reported to involve sensitive customer and business data, including to cloud service providers, 
and that 75% of firms outsource all or part of their information technology.x 
 With all  outsourcing  arrangements, boards  and senior management  must  understand that 
they are placing the resilience of their firm into the hands of a third-party and while they may 
be able to monitor the service during normal operation, when something goes wrong, they 
are reliant on someone else to fix it.  Some firms might seek to take comfort from the fact 
that they outsource to a parent or sister group company rather than a third party, but, as has 
been seen with a number of high-profile events, firms cannot always rely on the parent to 
provide uninterrupted  service.  Boards  and  senior  management  need to understand  where 
their firm’s systems and data sit on the group priority list should something go wrong.  
 Cyber Security Risk 
As I am sure you are aware, October is Cyber Security Awareness Month.xi But cyber security 
and cyber resilience is not something we should focus on for just one month of the year.  It 
requires vigilance and attention, day in, day out. 
 Former Cisco CEO John Chambers once said, “There are two types of companies: those that 
have been hacked,  and those  who  do  not  yet  know  they have been hacked.”xii    The  cyber 
threat  is  constantly  evolving  –  the  frequency,  sophistication  and  volume  of  attacks  is 
increasing.  The  failure  to  adequately  protect  against  cyber-attacks  can  have  far-reaching 
repercussions given the interconnected nature of the financial system.xiii  
  Page | 7  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  Efforts to increase security and combat attacks is also increasing and cooperation between 
international organisations is improving.xiv  For example, in May the ECB published the TIBER-
EU  framework  which  sets  out  a  programme  to  enable  national  authorities  to  work  with 
financial institutions to test and improve their resilience against sophisticated cyber-attacks.xv 
 Closer to home, in 2016 the Central Bank issued the Cross Industry Guidance in respect of IT 
and  Cybersecurity  Risksxvi,  which  set  out  our  minimum  expectations  of  firms  in  relation to 
these risks. As with the other areas I have covered already, much more needs to be done to 
meet  these  expectations.  Cyber-security  needs  to  become  part  of  the  culture  of  an 
organisation and an integral part of the organisation’s risk management, crisis management, 
and business continuity planning. 
 Senior management and boards of financial services firms need to own these critical risks and 
build  resilience  in  their  firms  to  be  able  to  endure  and  survive  operational  or  technology-
related shocks, be they systems failures, change processes gone wrong, or a data breach.    
 We have seen a lot of progress in the area of IT risk management and resilience, but there is 
huge  amount  of  work  still  to  be  done.  Almost  three  quarters  of  our  findings  from  on-site 
inspections relate to four key areas: IT risk management, IT security, IT outsourcing, and IT 
continuity management.  Thus, firms can expect to see a continued focus by the Central Bank 
on these fundamentals and on firms’ resilience capabilities.  
 But  the  overall  responsibility  for  resilience  rests  with  the  board  and  senior  management 
which is why I am most concerned about the many findings in our work that relate to the 
failings of boards and senior management to understand and appreciate the significance of 
the IT and operational risks their firms face.  We have seen evidence of risks and messages 
 Page | 8  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  being diluted as they are filtered up through the organisation such that they are so high-level 
once they get to senior levels that they lose their meaning or impact. 
 I expect boards to: understand how disruptions of key business services could impact their 
customers and their value chain; ensure operational and cyber resilience strategies are fit for 
purpose;  and oversee  risk  tolerances  and  appetite metrics  to track,  measure  and trigger  a 
response to disruptive events.  They need to ensure that their firms have the resilience to 
withstand  future  shocks,  absorb  the  impacts  of  the  shock  and  communicate  effectively  to 
stakeholders throughout, and to ultimately recover from the incident and use the learnings 
to further improve their future resilience. 
 Firms need to be better prepared for the future challenges that technology will pose to their 
firms’  competitiveness  and  business  models  and  they  need  to  acknowledge  and  take 
ownership of the risks that go along with this changing environment.   
 The approach of the Central Bank 
I have touched on the work of the IT inspection team in the Central Bank.  Despite its relatively 
small  size,  the  team  has  significantly  enhanced  the  intensity  and  intrusiveness  of  our 
supervision of IT related risk across the financial services sector.  Identified issues are required 
to be resolved through risk mitigation programmes and we will continue to issue thematic 
findings from our work to highlight areas for improvement for all firms. Where necessary we 
have used our powers to sanction failures and require the use of third parties to help drive 
improvements. 
  Page | 9  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  The  inspection  team  is  ably  supported  by  and  contributes  to  policy  and  regulatory 
development within Ireland and as part of the wider European system.  We will continue to 
enhance and invest in our capability in this area.  
 Moreover, recognising the challenges and opportunities that arise from this revolution, we 
are continuing to enhance our data analytical capabilities, including through  investment in 
our  systems,  our  data  collection  and  a  restructuring  of  our  organisation  of  Prudential 
Regulation to best utilise our resources.   
 Conclusion 
This is a very broad topic, in which I have only really scratched the surface.  I have touched on 
the opportunities and risks, and recognised that for the financial services system to continue 
to serve the needs of the economy and its customers it must continue to evolve.   To evolve 
it  must  leverage  the  advances  of  the  fourth  industrial  revolution,  while  at  the  same  time 
acknowledging and addressing the inherent risks. 
 I expect boards and senior management of financial services firms to prioritise the issue of 
digital transformation and allocate the resources necessary to meet their customers’ needs. 
Firms need to demonstrate their understanding of the role technology plays in value chains. 
While looking at the opportunities for the future, many firms also need to continue to invest 
to get the basics right.  Significant improvements are required across the system to manage 
the incumbent and growing technology risks within it.  
A change in mindset is needed to see data as a valuable asset and to invest in protecting that 
asset.  Firms also need to be prepared for when things go wrong and to build resilience to be 
able to withstand, absorb, and recover from technology-related risks. 
  Page | 10  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
  As the popular wisdom tells us, you do not have to be faster than the bear, just faster than 
the other people running away from it.   One of my greatest fears in my role is the call from 
the firm that is not fast enough.  
 I thank you for your attention.  
 Page | 11  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
    i With thanks to Jane Woodcock, Thomas Farrell and Tim O’Hanrahan for their assistance in drafting these 
remarks.  
ii See among others Klaus Schwab, Founder and Executive Chairman, World Economic Forum 
(https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-
respond/) 
iii See for example Big Data, Big Impact: New Possibilities for International Development, World Economic 
Forum. 
iv See Coeure, B (2018), The future of financial market infrastructures: spearheading progress without 
renouncing safety. Singapore, 26 June. 
v See Lagarde , Christine: Ten Years After Lehman – Lessons Learned and Challenges Ahead. 
vi See Central Bank of Ireland,  Cross Industry Guidance in respect of Information Technology and Cybersecurity 
Risks, September 2016. 
vii Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Sound Practices, Implications of Fintech developments for banks 
and bank supervisors.  February 2018. 
viii See Hakkarainen, Pentti (2018): The Digitalisation of banking – supervisory implications, remarks at the 
Lisbon Research Centre on Regulation and Supervision of the Financial Sector Conference, Lisbon, 6 June 2018. 
ix See Lautenschlager, Sabine (2018): Cyber resilience – objectives and tools. Remarks at the first meeting of 
the Euro Cyber Resilience Board for pan-European Financial Infrastructures, Frankfurt am Main, 9 March 2018. 
x  Outsourcing, August 2018 - Unpublished internal Central Bank report on the results of the 2017 outsourcing 
survey. 
xi https://cybersecuritymonth.eu/  
xii https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/security/common-cyberattacks.html 
xiii See Coeure, Benoit (2018): The future of financial market infrastructures: spearheading progress without 
renouncing safety. Remarks at the Central Bank Payments Conference, Singapore, 26 June 2018. 
xiv Cambridge Centre for Risk Studies and Risk Management Solutions, Inc. Cyber Risk Outlook 2018, 
xv See ECB (2018), TIBER-EU FRAMEWORK – How to implement the European framework for Threat 
Intelligence-based Ethical Red Teaming, May 2018. 
 Page | 12  
 The need for resilience in the face of disruption: Regulatory expectations in the Digital World 
   xvi See Central Bank of Ireland,  Cross Industry Guidance in respect of Information Technology and 
Cybersecurity Risks, September 2016. 
 Page | 13  
