Anita  Angelovska  Bezhoska:  New  statistical  requirements  in  the
post-crises era
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
Macedonia,  at  the  event  on  the  occasion  of  the  European  Statistics  Day,  Skopje,  17  October
2018.
 Dear Prime Minister of the Republic of Macedonia, Zoran Zaev
Dear Eurostat Director General, Mariana Koceva
Dear Ambassador of the European Union, Samuel Zbogar,
Dear Finance Minister, Dragan Tevdovski
Dear President of MANU, Taki Fiti
Dear Rector, Nikola Jankulovski
Dear Dean of the Faculty of Economics in Skopje, Ljubomir Drakulevski
Dear Director of the SSO, Apostol Simovski
Distinguished guests,
This year we are marking the European Statistics Day, exactly ten years after the outbreak of the
global  crisis.  Its  intensity  and  duration  were  so  pronounced  that  in  the  last  ten  years  it  has
become usual to make almost all reviews and insights through the prism of the “pre-and post-
crisis period", and this is probably not surprising given that the great shocks inevitably lead to
reassessment  of  the  conventional  paradigms.  The  statistics  as  well  is  no  exception  in  this
respect. As the great depression highlighted the need for development of the national accounts
statistics,  while  the Asian  crisis  the  need  to  better  perceive  the  links  between  the  domestic
financial  system  and  capital  inflows,  leading  to  the  development  of  several  new  statistical
standards, the global crisis of 2008 once again brought the financial system into focus. 
The crisis has clearly shown how inadequate regulation and excessive risk taking in the financial
sector in developed economies can lead to unpredictable consequences in the real sector, both
nationally  and  globally,  stressing  the  need  for  a  better  understanding  of  the  links  between  the
financial and the real sector, such as and cross-border ties in the context of rising globalization.
The fact that the roots of the global crisis were precisely in the financial sector suggests that
most of the post-crisis needs for statistical changes touch exactly the central banks.
Although  the  outbreak  of  the  global  crisis  can  not  be  attributed  to  the  lack  of  statistical  data,
however, significant statistical gaps became evident and they are best reflected through the G-20
Data  Gaps  initiative  for  identifying  recommendations  to  fill  in  these  statistical  gaps.  The
recommendations are mainly located in the following key segments:
The first segment is better recognition of the increase in the financial sector risks. It was
found  that  timely  detection  is  extremely  important  for  protection  against  crises.  In  this
domain, emphasis is placed on developing a broader base of financial stability indicators,
which we prepare on a regular basis. In fact, in the post-crisis period, this recommendation
led to a dramatically increased number of central banks that prepare these indicators. Also,
in the context of financial systems and markets, a focus was placed on detailed data on
securities, in order to obtain a better analytical infrastructure to detect the risks of individual
exposures and cross-sectoral spillover. The  National  Bank  started  such  activities  in  2014
when it created foreign investment securities statistics, which was then supplemented with
data on domestic securities. In addition, the crisis has shown that the risks can increase
largely  not  only  in  the  banking  system,  but  also  in shadow banking. Therefore,  there  is  a
need for upgrading the statistics with data not only for depository institutions, but also for all
other financial institutions. Following these trends in 2012, we started with the preparation of
the  statistics  of  the  most  important  non-bank  financial  institutions,  which  enabled  us  to
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
constantly  monitor  their  activities  and  the  potential  risks.  We  recently  fully  complied  this
statistics with the latest IMF’s Guide on monetary and financial statistics.
The second segment is the improvement of databases on cross-border financial systems.
The  consequences  of  the  global  crisis  have  clearly  emphasized  the  risk  of  international
financial integration, in particular the global connection of systemically important institutions.
Such a context has had major consequences on the requirements for increasing the volume
and structure of statistical data that will give a better picture of these global connections with
a special emphasis on international investment position statistics, as well as more detailed
portfolio investment and direct investment statistics. The National Bank already prepares all
these surveys on a regular basis, although there is room for further improvement in the area
of international position.
The third segment is better detection of economy sensitivity to shocks, which is achieved by
establishing sector accounts, and in their frames financial accounts, which will disclose the
links between all sectors in an economy, and therefore, the possibilities for shock spillover
from one sector to another. In 2017, for the first time, the National Bank prepared financial
accounts  for  all  sectors  of  the  economy,  which  were  submitted  to  Eurostat  in  an
experimental format. 
The  fourth  segment  is  the  improvement  of  the  statistical  communication  process.  In  this
context, on a regular basis, we are making efforts to improve communication with the public,
also  by  conducting  surveys  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  reporters  and  users,  creating  the
possibility  for  direct  electronic  communication  on  all  issues  related  to  statistics  and
undertaking  financial  education  activities.  In  2016,  we  started  with  a  regular  publication  of
press releases on statistics, as well as a project, which is in the final phase, for establishing
a statistical internet portal for external data users.
In  doing  so,  in  the  basis  of  all  these  new  statistical  requirements,  lies  the  need  for  providing
granular,  rather  than  aggregate  data.  The  crisis  has  not  called  into  question  the  traditional
aggregate  economic  statistics,  but  has  shown  that  it  is  not  enough.  For  example,  in  order  to
understand why the huge liquidity that the ECB brought into the banking system did not lead to
stronger credit growth, granular data were needed, which will enable to better understand what
drives the aggregates, and thus enabling the monetary policy to be more effective.
All the statistical points indicated so far in one way or another are links within the G-20 statistical
initiative, which, although not a formal framework for us, is a guideline we adhere to. In addition,
this  initiative  is  in  synergy  with  other  important  international  statistical  standards,  as  well  as
European  statistical  requirements,  which  we,  as  a  central  bank,  strive  to  follow.  One  such
initiative  is  SDDS  plus,  as  the  third  and  highest  pillar  of  the  IMF’s  statistical  standards.  I  can
proudly say that we, as a state, have shown a willingness to join this initiative, which is currently
involving only 14 countries, actively working together with the SSO and the MoF to prepare all the
requested data, thus preparing for accession to this highest standard are in the final stage.
An additional aspect that brings new challenges to statisticians is the digitization process, which
is  also  gaining  momentum  in  the  financial  industry.  Digitization  and  innovation  of  financial
services imposes new challenges for their statistical monitoring and measurement. At the same
time, in the statistical world, the number of initiatives for active use of the so-called “Big data” is
rising, a new paradigm that changes profiles and statistics makers, statistical processes, as well
as the overall economic and financial analysis.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Finally, we, like other statistics makers in RM, in recent years have made great step forward in
improving the existing statistical surveys and introducing new one for the purpose of filling in the
identified staistical gaps in global terms. However, statistics is not an aim by itself. By providing
rich, high-quality, timely and internationally harmonized set of statistics, we contribute to higher
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
social goals, that is making decisions based on facts in order to increase social welfare. Bearing
in mind the dynamic world we live in and the changes it brings, a key challenge for statisticians
will be to keep pace with these changes and to develop credible statistics as a public good that
enables a better understanding of reality and taking appropriate policies from all factors of social
life. 
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
