Boris Vujčić: Macroeconomic developments and structural issues
in CEE countries
Speech  by  Mr  Boris  Vujčić,  Governor  of  the  Croatian  National  Bank,  at  the  Roundtable  on
Macroeconomic Developments of the 16+1 Economies, Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank
of Hungary), Budapest, 9 November 2018.
Accompanying slides of the presentation.
 Economic expansion in the CEE region can be expected to continue in the near term supported
by  still  favourable  cyclical  conditions.  However,  in  many  countries  pace  of  growth  might
moderate, partly due to supply side constraints and maturing business cycles. Potential growth
estimates  indicate  that  in  all  countries  output  gaps  are  positive  or  have  been  closed,  and
unemployment rates are close or below pre-crisis levels, pushing-up the wage growth.
While such a positive outlook for future growth is somewhat disturbed by rising risks to the global
economy,  such  as  escalation  of  trade  tensions  or  tightening  of  financial  conditions,  CEE
countries  seem  to  be  in  a  generally  good  shape  to  withstand  the  impact  of  negative  shocks.
Current  account  positions  have  improved  and  in  many  countries  turned  into  surplus,  while
international liquidity positions are ample. Also, economic recovery coupled with efforts to push
through  fiscal  adjustment  programs  led  to  improvement  of  general  government  balance  and
public debt was put on a declining path. Furthermore, financial systems in most countries remain
robust and resilient, as attested by withstanding the shocks emanating from the global financial
crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis.
Despite fair growth prospects and subdued vulnerabilities, medium-term growth potential in the
region seems insufficient to ensure pre-crisis pace of real convergence. The most recent data
shows that the convergence is still there, but it has markedly slowed down. At the current pace,
many countries in the region would need decades to reach German, Austrian or Swedish levels
of income, countries that we like to use as benchmarks. The last crisis also showed that there
can be events that will hold back growth and convergence for a protracted period of time and
even work in an opposite direction, leading to divergence. We know that when it comes to living
standards,  in  the  long-run  it  is  all  about  labour  productivity,  which  can  be  decomposed  into
growth of capital per worker and growth of total factor productivity (TFP). While we can expect an
investments to continue growing, it is not likely that the rates that we have witnessed in 2000s,
with strong inflow of FDIs and related transfers of technology and know-how, will be seen again
in the near future. That is why the TFP will ultimately prove to be the major determinant of long-
term convergence. 
For  us  as  policy  makers,  understanding  the  determinants  of  technology  adoption,  the  TFP
growth, is the key, as this gives us the channel to act through. There is an increasing number of
theories and empirical papers linking development and the adoption of technologies to the role of
institutions defined in a very broad way. And data support such outcome, here on a sample of
emerging market countries. There is a strong positive relationship between quality of institutions
and human capital on one side and growth on the other. Furthermore, in the context of new EU
member  states,  countries  with  better  institutions  tend  to  withdraw  more  EU  funds,  which  is
another channel through which the government can help to increase the growth potential of a
country.
When it comes to quality of institutions, developments are not encouraging. If quality is proxied by
World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicator, there has hardly been any convergence towards
Germany,  which  can  arguably  be  used  as  a  benchmark.  Notable  exceptions  are  the  Baltic
countries where we have  seen  positive  developments  also  in  the  aftermath  of  global  financial
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
crisis. CEE countries also lag behind when it comes to the quality of human capital compared to
those  EU  countries  that  achieve  the  best  results  in  PISA  test  in  Math  and  Science  (Finland,
Sweden, Austria, and Germany). Developments over time are also not encouraging as in many
countries the PISA results have actually worsened during the last decade, which is a phenomena
not confined only to the CEE region, but to the wider Europe.
Such developments are on the one side worrisome, but on the other give us the opportunity to
streamline  and  speed  up  reforms  because  potential  gains  can  be  substantial.  European
Commission  has  estimated  that  structural  reforms  that  close  only  half  the  gap  with  best
performers  in  different  areas  (market  competition  and  regulation,  R&D  expenditure,  skill
structure, tax structure, labour market participation, unemployment benefit ‘generosity’ and active
labour  market  policies),  which  does  not  appear  to  be  overambitious,  could  have  significant
macroeconomic  effects.  The  level  of  GDP  in  10  years  after  the  reform  would  be  around  7%
higher  in  the  CEE  countries  and  around  12%  after  20  years  compared  to  the  “no  reform”
scenario  with  effects  on  employment  reaching  a  similar  magnitude.  The  IMF  also  points  to
significant  benefits  of  structural  reforms  in  terms  of  TFP  improvements.  Even  if  we  consider
these estimates as somewhat optimistic, welfare advances would be substantial.
But  how  to  get  structural  reforms  right?  There  are  in  general  two  dimensions  of  structural
reforms.  First,  and  in  principle  the  easier  one,  are  the  reforms  that  bring  us  closer  to  the
efficiency frontier. That said, it is quite likely that most of the low hanging fruits of productivity
gains  from  sectoral  reallocation  and  imports  of  foreign  technology  have  been  collected  and
further improvements may require a new generation of reforms. This second generation are the
reforms  that  expand  the  frontier.  They  encompass,  among  others,  product  market  reforms,
competition policy, labour market reforms, public finance and taxation (including social security
system), human capital development, innovation policy, etc. Can we and should we act on all or
most of these different fronts simultaneously? Probably. Do we as economists and policymakers
truly understand all the synergies, complementarities and marginal effects of different reforms?
Probably not to the extent that we would like. Are we on the same boat when it comes to their
positive gains and externalities? I would dare say yes.
We  also  have  to  keep  in  mind  the  political  economy  dimension  of  the  process.  We  need  to
ensure broad support for the reform agenda especially since there might be some short-term
costs of certain reforms. In that sense, lacklustre support for market economy and democracy
as  well  as  low  faith  in  justice  systems  in  CEE  countries  compared  to  long  establishes
democracies  might  complicate  matters  further.  This  is  where  policy  transparency  and
communication plays an important role. Clearly, not everything we do will always get full support
from  the  broad  public,  particularly  in  the  case  of  structural  reforms  with  long-term  gains  and
short-term costs, but sometimes boldness is rewarded beyond our expectations.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
