Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska:  Perspectives  for  young  people  from
the  full  membership  of  the  country  in  NATO  and  EU  -  impacts  on
monetary policy, business and the capital market
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
Macedonia,  at  the  debate  forum,  organized  by  the  Institute  for  Business  and  Management
&quot;Heidelberg&quot;, Skopje, 18 October 2018.
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Let me express my gratitude and appreciation for inviting me today, to be part of the eminent
speakers  at  this  debate  forum,  organized  by  the  Institute  for  Business  and  Management
HEIDELBERG Skopje. The matter that this event addresses is an important dimension of the
prospects of our society, economy and the overall wellbeing. “Every cloud has its silver lining”,
and joining a large, diverse and prosperous community, such as the European Union, should be
our “silver lining” when facing difficulties in paving the way for stronger and faster economic and
social convergence.
The European Union has been an important institutional, economic and political anchor for the
region ever since the beginning of the transition. The accession process provides important tools
that  enhance  the  overall  reform  processes  in  the  country,  making  it  well  prepared  and  better
founded when the moment for full–fledged membership comes. My role today is to shed some
light  on  what  the  EU  entrance  might  imply  for  the  monetary  policy  in  general  and  for  us  as
monetary  policy  makers,  in  particular.  One  angle  of  this  issue  is  how  the  membership  might
impact the overall economy, and hence what challenges as policy makers we could face. The
second angle is more specific, as the economic integration is the stepping – stone towards the
monetary integration, and the adoption of the Euro as a single currency. 
Observing the first angle, one should probably try to draw conclusions from the experience of
other  peer  economies  that  already  went,  through  this  process.  Entering  the  EU,  for  these
countries provided confidence anchor and significant reduction of their risk premiums. It enabled
strong influx of capital, which underpinned their real and financial convergence. In some of these
countries, the finance flows went to productive and tradable segments, making the economies
more resilient to shocks and less vulnerable. But, in some of them the allocation of capital was
less conducive to sustainable growth, it created excessive imbalances, high leverage and less
room  for  policy  makers.  The  occurrence  of  the  global  crisis  was  a  “natural  halt”  and  painful
correction of this unsustainable economic matrices. At this juncture, with the global crisis behind
us and all the lessons learned, I think as policy makers we are more knowledgeable to reap the
benefits of the EU entrance more wisely, and to better deal with the challenges ahead. At this
point I must say, that Macedonian economy is already well integrated both in terms of trade and
finance with the EU. More than 70% of the total trade is with EU countries, the foreign owned
banks are mostly of EU origin, and the bulk of financial flows comes from EU. Very importantly,
these  financial  flows  went  in  export–oriented  and  more  productive  segments,  that  fortified  the
fundaments  of  the  economy,  provided  impetus  to  growth  and  did  not  add  to  inflationary
pressures, or pressures on foreign reserves. And, this model should actually be the proper way
to proceed after the EU entrance, as well. Less reliance on short-term volatile financial flows, and
import  of  longer  term  capital  is  the  only  way  to  enhance  the  productivity  of  the  economy  and
improve its competitiveness. Very often, the entrance on the large EU common market of goods,
services, capital and labor, not only is connected to faster growth and real convergence, but also
to  convergence  in  price  levels.  As  wages  start  to  increase,  and  gradual  shift  towards
consumption  of  more  expensive  services  occurs,  the  price  level  might  elevate  as  well,  thus
posing challenges for monetary policy. These price pressures can be avoided by boosting the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
productivity, thus creating more favorable environment for the monetary policy, without pressures
on the interest rates.
The second angle that should be pinpointed is the implication that EU entrance does have on the
further monetary integration, the adoption of the Euro as a single currency and the role that the
national  central  bank  would  have  in  this  context.  Entering  the  EU,  for  the  NBRM  would
automatically  mean  participation  in  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB).  In  this
manner, we are getting much closer to Europe in the field of central banking. The staff of the
central  bank  becomes  part  of  many  committees,  subcommittees  and  working  groups  of  the
ESCB, which is crucial ingredient for strengthening the institutional capacity for policy making.
And this is vital for the future steps, as the EU membership, for small and open economy, with
high level of euroization and fixed exchange rates would inevitable imply need for very serious
preparations for the Euro adoption. It requires passing the so-called test period, staying in the
ERM 2 mechanism for at least two years and delivering stable currency, inflation and long term
interest rates comparable with those in the EU, and disciplined and prudent public finance. All of
these are Euro convergence criteria that at the end boil down to having safe and sound economy
and disciplined monetary and fiscal policy, as a precondition for smooth monetary integration.
Hence, entering the EU not only will facilitate trade and finance, and make movement of people
much easier, but it will also open the doors to gradually move towards a single currency. The
benefits  of  adopting  the  Euro  are  well  known,  in  particular  for  a  country  that  already  has  the
exchange rate as a target, which means smoother transition. The single currency eliminates the
currency risk and transaction costs, and thus facilities trade of good and services. It can also
reduce  the  costs  of  financing,  enabling  easier  access  to  finance  and  better  opportunities  for
business decisions. The single currency and the participation in the monetary union provides the
country  with  a  backstop  in  case  of  financial  difficulties  and  disabled  access  to  international
markets  through  the  so-called  European  Stability  Mechanism.  Of  course,  adopting  the  single
currency would mean giving up on the monetary policy independence, which is already limited
given  the  exchange  rate  peg,  and  would  not  require  major  adjustments.  This  cost  is  lesser
compared  to  the  benefits  that  the  single  market  and  single  currency  would  bring,  under  the
assumptions  that  all  the  policies  would  be  in  place  and  prudent  enough  to  secure  sound
fundaments and stability of the economy.
To recap, the EU integration is a process, which will provide boost and will shape reforms in
many  areas,  underpinning  the  process  of  real,  social  and  institutional  convergence  of  the
country. It will also impact the monetary policy making, both before and after the final stage of
complete  monetary  integration.  The  challenges  for  the  central  bank  are  of  a  multidimensional
nature– macroeconomic, institutional, and operational. Steering the wheel properly would require
strong  institutional  capacity  and  awareness  of  all  the  policy  makers  that  smooth  integration
requires healthy economy, absence of imbalances and sound policies.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
