Jacqueline  Loh:  Broadening  and  deepening  Shanghai-Singapore
cooperation
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore, at the 4th Shanghai-Singapore Financial Forum, Singapore, 27 November 2018.
Shanghai Municipal Financial Regulatory Bureau, Director General Dr Zheng Yang
 Distinguished speakers and guests
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.
Introduction
1   First, let me thank the Shanghai Municipal Financial Regulatory Bureau (“SFRB”) for hosting
the 4th Shanghai-Singapore Financial Forum.  It is a great pleasure to see our good friends from
Shanghai and Singapore at the forum today.
Bilateral cooperation between Singapore and China
2   Over the last five years of China-Singapore financial cooperation, our central banks,
regulators, and financial institutions have achieved significant milestones.  In particular,
bilateral  ties  in  financial  services  between  Singapore  and  China  strengthened
significantly this year on the back of recent high-level visits between both countries.
a.   In September 2018, Chinese Vice Premier Han Zheng visited Singapore for the 14th
Joint  Council  for  Bilateral  Cooperation  (“JCBC”).    The  JCBC  meeting  saw  financial
agencies  from  both  sides  affirm  the  strong  foundations  laid  through  our  collaboration  in  RMB
internationalisation.  We also agreed to strengthen supervisory cooperation, enhance financial
markets connectivity and expand cooperation in the new area of FinTech.
b .   In October this year, the third China Securities Regulatory Commission (“CSRC”)-
MAS  Supervisory  Roundtable  was  held  here  in  Shanghai,  chaired  by  CSRC  Vice
Chairman  Fang  Xinghai  and  MAS  Deputy  Managing  Director  Ong  Chong  Tee.    Our
regulators  agreed  to  enhance  information  sharing  and  cross-border  supervision  of  futures
exchanges and intermediaries, as well as the substantive areas for cooperation in supervising
exchange-trade derivatives.  A MOU on staff exchange was also signed.
c .    Just  two  weeks  ago,  Chinese  Premier  Li  Keqiang  visited  Singapore  for  the  33rd
ASEAN  Summit  and  related  meetings.   A  key  outcome  of  the  visit  was  the  signing  of  the
Protocol to Upgrade the China-Singapore Free Trade Agreement (“CSFTA”).  As part of the visit,
MAS signed a FinTech Cooperation Agreement with the People’s Bank of China (“PBC”), and a
MOU for the Cooperation and Exchange of Information on Regulation of Derivative Activities with
CSRC.
3   To celebrate the success of China-Singapore financial cooperation over the last five
years and to tie-in with the commemoration of China’s 40 years of reform and opening up,
we will be releasing an infographic during my visit here in Shanghai.  This is a reflection of
the close bonds with our partners in China, which MAS greatly values.  In the next five years, we
look forward to broader and deeper financial cooperation with China, reaching more milestones
in  a  range  of  areas  including  Belt  and  Road  collaboration,  capital  markets  connectivity,
RMB internationalisation, and FinTech cooperation.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Singapore – Shanghai Economic Relations
4    Against  this  backdrop,  we  expect  Shanghai-Singapore  cooperation  to  grow  from
strength to strength, building on the strong economic and financial relations between
both cities.
1
a .    In  2017,  Shanghai-Singapore  trade  amounted  to  US$  17.5  billion ,  an  increase  of
33.8% from 2016.  On the investment front, Singapore has been China’s largest foreign investor
for five consecutive years.  Shanghai was Singapore’s second largest investment destination in
China  while  Singapore  was  also  Shanghai’s  second  largest  foreign  investor  in  2017.    With
growing  affluence  of  Shanghai’s  resident  population,  Shanghai  continues  to  be  an  attractive
investment destination for Singapore companies.
b.   Similarly, Shanghai companies view Singapore as an important Asian commercial and
financial  hub  as  they  expand  internationally.   As  of  end  2017,  there  were  close  to  110
2
Shanghai companies in Singapore, with more than US$ 6 billion in investments .
c.   Notably, Singapore Minister for Trade and Industry Chan Chun Sing visited Shanghai
from 4 to 6 November 2018 for the inaugural China International Import Expo (“CIIE”),
which  allowed  Singapore  companies  to  take  part  in  business  matching  sessions  and  explore
collaborations with Chinese partners to enter and expand into China.
d .   During Premier Li’s recent visit to Singapore, both sides welcomed the discussion
between  Singapore  and  Shanghai  to  establish  a  comprehensive  mechanism  for
cooperation.   The  new  platform  will  focus  on  Belt  and  Road  Initiative  (“BRI”),  modern  and
financial  services,  urbanisation  and  sustainable  development,  technology  and  innovation,  and
people-to-people  exchange.    This  new  strategic,  progressive  and  comprehensive  platform  will
expand and deepen China-Singapore engagements.
5   As economic and financial relations between Shanghai and Singapore expand, there
is  scope  to  foster  even  closer  collaboration  between  both  financial  centres,  and
reinforce  key  areas  of  cooperation  undertaken  at  the  Government  to  Government
(“G2G”)  level.  Let me outline five key areas, which I hope would lead to further discussion
during the forum today.  
Belt and Road Collaboration between Shanghai and Singapore
6   First, Shanghai – bridgehead of the BRI – and Singapore can foster the development of
a  comprehensive  financial  ecosystem  to  support  the  wide  range  of  financial  needs
related to the Belt and Road initiative.
a.   As an international financial centre in the heart of Asia and one of the largest offshore RMB
centres in the world, Singapore can play a key role in financing and advancing Belt and Road
projects, particularly in Southeast Asia.
Singapore signed the Guiding Principles on Financing the Development of the Belt
and  Road during  Premier  Li’s  recent  visit  to  Singapore.    These  principles  advocate  for
inclusive  participation,  mutual  benefits  and  risk-sharing  as  participating  countries  work
together  to  build  a  long-term,  stable,  sustainable  financing  system  that  is  well-placed  to
manage risks.
Singapore set up Infrastructure Asia this year to catalyse stronger partnerships for
infrastructure  development  across  the  region.   Infrastructure  Asia  harnesses  the
networks  and  collective  capabilities  of  public  sector  agencies  and  private  sector  firms
across  the  region  to  meet  Asia’s  infrastructure  needs  by  (i)  connecting  partners  in  the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ecosystem;  (ii)  building  capacity  in  demand  markets;  and  (iii)  providing  top-level  project
advisory to improve bankability.  Infrastructure Asia provides an open platform for Chinese
(including  Shanghai-based)  infrastructure  developers  and  financial  institutions  to  partner
players in Singapore in regional infrastructure projects.
b.      Furthermore,  as  infrastructure  demand  and  foreign  investments  along  the  Belt  and  Road
region increase, we expect a boost in demand for commodities and growth in commodity trade. 
Singapore’s  strategic  location  in  the  crossroads  of  key  trade  flows  has  enabled  commodity
traders in Singapore to capture such opportunities.
Shanghai Pudong Development Bank (“SPDB”) opened its first overseas commodity
centre in Singapore in October this year, providing global commodity businesses with
commodity-related financial services and solutions.
c.   Singapore banks are also embarking on BRI collaborations with Shanghai banks.
UOB signed a MOU with SPDB in September this year to serve companies hoping to
tap  on  BRI  opportunities, providing  financial  solutions  covering  investment  advisory,
cross-border  RMB  transactions,  syndicated  loans,  project  and  trade  finance,  and  cash
settlement.
OCBC  Bank  signed  its  second  MOU  with  Bank  of  Shanghai  in  April  this  year,
leveraging each other’s strengths, networks and platforms to support customers in
their BRI expansion plans,  including  access  to  OCBC’s  funding  and  risk  management
solutions for Bank of Shanghai’s corporate clients.  This builds on existing cooperation areas
under  the  first  OCBC-Bank  of  Shanghai  MOU  such  as  cross-border  trade  finance,
investment banking and treasury solutions. 
3
Capital Market Connectivity and RMB Internationalisation
7   Second, expanding the suite of offshore RMB financial products and facilitating more
investments into China’s capital markets through collaboration between Shanghai and
Singapore  financial  institutions.   This  would  be  aligned  with  China’s  goals  to  open  up  its
capital markets and promote RMB internationalisation.
a .    China  Foreign  Exchange  Trade  System  (“CFETS”),  Bank  of  China  (“BOC”),  and
Singapore Exchange (“SGX”) signed a strategic cooperation agreement in November
this year to jointly promote the CFETS-BOC Traded Bond Index and its sub-indices to
international investors .  SGX will be the first exchange to distribute the CFETS-BOC Traded
Bond Indices outside of China.  The launch of the Bond Indices will catalyse the development of
tradable  China  bond  products  and  facilitate  greater  investments  into  China’s  bond  market  by
international investors.  This will enhance the development of China’s bond market, as well as
strengthen Singapore’s role as a Global-Asia gateway for asset managers and investors.
Mutual Establishment of Financial Institutions from Shanghai and Singapore
8    Third, we welcome more progress in mutual establishment of financial institutions
from both cities.  Shanghai and Singapore financial institutions are ramping up their presence in
Singapore and Shanghai respectively, reflecting strong confidence from the financial industry and
the growing business opportunities available in both cities.
a .    Shanghai  Futures  Exchange  (“SHFE”),  one  of  China’s  largest  commodity  futures
exchanges, established a representative office in Singapore in June this year.  Shanghai
International Energy Exchange (“INE”), an international futures exchange set up in the Shanghai
Free Trade Zone, has been authorised by MAS as a Recognised Market Operator in November
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
this year.   SHFE and INE chose Singapore to be their first overseas outpost, given Singapore’s
position as a key global commodities trading and financial hub, and an important link in the BRI.
b.   Fullerton Fund Management and APS Asset Management received their private fund
management  approvals  in  June  2017  and  July  2018  respectively,  allowing  these  asset
managers to offer onshore investment products to institutional and high net worth investors in
China.
c.   UOB has reinforced its commitment to China by opening a new headquarters building
in Shanghai in November this year.  UOB Plaza is the first Grade-A office building owned by a
foreign bank in the Lujiazui Financial District.
FinTech Collaboration between Shanghai and Singapore
9     Fourth,  nurturing  a  conducive  ecosystem  for  FinTech  companies  and  start-ups. 
Together,  Shanghai  and  Singapore  can  increase  the  potential  for  technology  and
innovative  solutions  that  increase  efficiency,  improve  risk  management,  create  new
opportunities, and improve people’s lives.  We are pleased that FinTech companies and payment
service  providers  from  Shanghai  and  Singapore  are  entering  into  commercial  arrangements,
bolstering FinTech linkages between both cities.
a.   Union Pay International (“UPI”), headquartered here in Shanghai, signed a MOU with
NETS, a leading payment services group in Singapore, in November this year to support
cross-border  connection  of  their  mobile  wallets.   As  UPI’s  first  cross-border  tie-up  with
another nation’s mobile wallet – NETS’ NETSPay platform – this will allow Chinese customers to
pay  at  NETS  merchants  in  Singapore  while  Singapore’s  NETSPay  users  can  make  mobile
payments  at  over  8  million  merchants  in  China.    The  MOU  will  also  support  collaboration  on
technology  know-how  between  UnionPay  and  NETS,  and  facilitate  the  joint  setting  up  of  a
research and development centre in Singapore, initially focusing on mobile services technology.
2nd MAS – SFRB Training and Exchange Programme
1 0     Lastly,  deepening  information  and  knowledge  exchange  between  Shanghai  and
Singapore industry participants and officials.
a .    The  2nd  MAS-Shanghai  Municipal  Financial  Regulatory  Bureau  Training  and
Exchange  Programme  will  be  held  from  28  to  30  November  2018.   Such  training
programmes  will  encourage  mutual  exchange  and  deepen  ties  between  financial  regulators,
promote  better  understanding  of  each  other’s  markets  and  enhance  their  knowledge  in
specialised topics.
Conclusion
11   Asia remains strongly committed to maintain an open global trading system and to
preserve multilateralism.  There is therefore great potential for Asian countries to ride
on each other’s growth, and for cities like Shanghai and Singapore to strengthen our
bonds.
12   As key financial centres globally, each with their  respective  strengths,  there  are
tremendous  opportunities  for  Shanghai  and  Singapore  to  complement  each  other,
including in the BRI, capital market connectivity, RMB internationalisation, and FinTech
innovation.   This  would  pave  the  way  for  broader  and  deeper  collaboration,  progressing
Shanghai-Singapore  financial  cooperation  to  greater  heights.    Expressing  this  aspiration  in
mandarin: 让上海与新加坡的金融合作蓬勃发展,再创新高峰!
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
13   These are some ideas for everyone to consider.  I am sure our strong panel of speakers will
provide even greater insights during the discussions later.  I wish you a fruitful day ahead at the
forum.  Thank you.
1
2
3
Source: Shanghai Municipal Commission of Commerce (SMCC)
Source: Shanghai Municipal Commission of Commerce (SMCC)
The Bond Indices, designed by CFETS and BOC, track the movements of the Chinese bond market and can be
used by investors to benchmark their Chinese bond portfolio performance.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
