Ed Sibley: Culture, diversity and the way forward
Speech by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland,
at the Central Bank/Trinity College Dublin School of Law conference "Culture, diversity and the
way forward for corporate governance in Ireland", Dublin, 25 October 2018.
 With thanks to Peter McGlynn, Jenny Minogue, Antoinette McDermott and Tim O’Hanrahan for
their assistance in drafting these remarks
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen and welcome to the final session of today’s conference.
This morning we heard about the process of conducting a behaviour and culture review, how that
works in practice and the learnings we can gain from such a process. In the second session, our
colleagues from academia shared important insights into their research and the application of
these lessons for cultural change. This session will focus primarily on ‘the way forward’.
In my remarks, I will cover:
1
Why cultural change is important, building on Derville’s earlier remarks ;
Diversity matters;
Practical steps for effecting cultural change; and
In brief, the regulatory and supervisory work of the Central Bank.
Why is Cultural Change Important?
Mark  Twain  is  credited  with  saying  that  “History  does  not  repeat  itself  but  it  rhymes” .    The
effects  of  the  history  of  ineffective  risk  cultures,  poor  incentives,  unacceptable  behaviour  and
short-termism are clear.  Change is required to ensure that the future does not rhyme too closely
with the recent past.
2
Trust in financial services and banking in particular has been severely damaged by the history of
the financial crisis and the succession of conduct scandals that have subsequently emerged.  As
I have spoken about previously, this loss of trust elevates prudential risks and contributes to poor
3
consumer outcomes .
The underlying causes of the financial crisis have been much covered  in recent months, so I will
not  spend  time  on  them  today.  There  are  a  myriad  of  examples  of  misconduct.  The  tracker
mortgage  scandal  in  Ireland  is  the  largest  and  most  recent  local  example.  Further  afield,  we
have,  for  example,  seen  manipulation  of  benchmark  interest  rates ,  fraudulently  signing
customers up to products en masse , the interim findings of the Royal Commission in Australia
on  Misconduct  in  the  Banking ,  Superannuation  and  Financial  Services  Industry,  and  the
emergence  of  evidence  of  large  and  small  banks  facilitating  money  laundering  on  a  systemic
scale .  
5
6
7
8
4
To be clear, many of these conduct issues have resulted from rules and laws being broken.  So,
it  is  important  to  emphasise  that  a  starting  point  for  operating  in  a  regulated  environment  is
compliance with the rules and regulations that govern the industry.  But it is also clear, that rules
and regulations are not sufficient to always drive the appropriate outcomes from both a prudential
and  a  conduct  perspective.  The  fact  that  something  is  considered  legal  does  not  necessarily
9
mean it is right, nor does it mean that it is fair or equitable . 
“So, the law is just the last line of defence. Ethical behaviour is more than just complying with the
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
letter  of  the  law.  When  bankers  take  decisions,  they  must  be  aware  that  there  is  more  to
10
consider than just the legal and financial aspects .”
I would note that these types of issues are not unique to the financial services industry.  There
are  many  examples  of  large-scale  conduct  issues  in  many  industries.  For  example,  the
behaviours of some pharmaceutical firms in relation to the opioid crisis ; the vehicle emissions
scandal  in  the  motor  industry;  or  the  recent  super  complaint  covering  multiple  industries
launched by Citizens Advice in the UK on how loyal customers pay more for essential energy,
12
mobile, broadband and financial services . 
11
It is a legitimate question to ask why such behaviour repeats itself across different geographies,
times and industries.  However, my responsibility only extends to the financial services industry,
and what can be done to build on the extensive rules that are in place to drive better prudential
and conduct outcomes.  And this is why, as we have moved from a period of intensive crisis
management to one of crisis prevention and enhancing resilience we have increasingly focused
on culture and diversity in financial services firms.
As  you  have  already  heard  today,  culture  is  integral  in  driving  peoples’  behaviour  in  how  they
make decisions, treat consumers, assess risk and ultimately how the organisation is governed.
A culture that is operating ineffectively can encourage and reinforce practices that are unsound,
unsafe and threaten the stability of a firm and how its customers are treated.
Diversity Matters
In this context, diversity matters – diversity of thought, background, experience and intrinsic and
extrinsic characteristics.  Indeed, a lack of diversity at senior management and board level is a
leading indicator of heightened behaviour and culture risks.
Similar people looking at similar information and facing similar circumstances are, unsurprisingly,
likely  to  rely  on  similar  assumptions  and  make  similar  decisions.    This  type  of  groupthink
contributed  to  the  depth  of  the  financial  crisis  internationally  and  in  Ireland  and  contributed  to
many of the conduct scandals that have subsequently emerged.
Low levels of diversity in key decision-making roles in banks and other financial services firms
creates excessive risks and will inhibit necessary cultural change. While some firms are starting
to make progress, much more needs to be done to increase the diversity of experience, thought,
background  and  attributes  at  senior  levels,  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  groupthink,  reduce
overconfidence, improve decision-making, increase the level of internal challenge, improve risk
management, and reduce excessive resistance to external challenge.
While gender diversity is only one aspect of diversity, it is a very important one, and one that is
relatively easy to measure. It is striking that women remain seriously under-represented at senior
levels across financial services.
Our  previous  research  on  diversity  in  financial  services   and  the  assessment  of  diversity
undertaken within the Behaviour and Culture review starkly evidences this lack of gender diversity
across the entire financial system. For example, in the five years to the end of 2017, men had
been appointed for more than nine out of 10 of the most senior and influential roles in the retail
banks (Chairpersons, Chief Executives, Chief Finance Officers, Heads of Business Lines and so
on). Many of these appointees have similar backgrounds, educations and experience.
13
In other words, while there is evidence of the situation beginning to change, there is an acute lack
of diversity in those senior roles that are central to how banks make their decisions, set strategy,
calibrate risk appetites and treat their customers.  The issues identified in the banks are also
evident across the rest of the financial services sector.
 2 / 6
14
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is not a unique circumstance in Ireland.  International Monetary Fund (IMF) research  has
highlighted  both  the  lack  of  gender  diversity  at  senior  levels  in  financial  services  and  the
associated macroeconomic costs. Globally, less than 2% of banks’ CEOs are women, and less
than 20% of banks’ executive board positions are held by women.
14
This is not to suggest that diversity is all about gender. Diversity is a much broader concept.
Different  personalities  (e.g.  optimist  versus  pessimist),  educational  background,  ethnicity,  and
diversity of thought can all contribute to facilitating a variety of perspectives and more effective
challenge.
15
When  the  UK  Financial  Services Authority  conducted  a  review  into  the  collapse  of  the  Royal
Bank  of  Scotland ,  it  identified  significant  overconfidence  by  board  members  prior  to  the
financial crisis, and in particular in relation to the acquisition of ABN AMRO. The Dutch Central
Bank  has also identified a tendency towards consensus (prompting people to agree with the
majority  opinion)  and  optimism  (an  unwarranted  sense  of  comfort)  type  behaviours  in
organisations.
17
We have clearly set out our expectations of the five retail banks as part of the Behaviour and
Culture  review.  We  have  told  each  bank  to  submit  an  outcome  focused  diversity  strategy
supported by an implementation plan by 30 November. We expect each plan, at a minimum, to
include  clear  expectations,  implementation  targets  and  consider  a  range  of  measures  of
diversity.
We  will  also  be  undertaking  further  work  in  2019,  including  across  the  wider  banking  and
insurance sectors, to drive improvements in diversity and inclusion across the financial services
sector.  This is important from a crisis prevention perspective and improving the understanding,
consideration and treatment of their customers.
Effecting Cultural Change
It  is  clear  that  many  firms  do  recognise  the  need  for  cultural  change.    Furthermore,  there  is
evidence of progress across the financial services sector. In this context, I welcome the creation
of an Irish Banking Standards Board, which aims to promote a continuous improvement culture
across the Irish banking industry.  However, it is clear that a lot more needs to be done.
‘‘If you want something new, you have to stop doing something old’’
cultural change requires an understanding of the prevailing culture.
16
. In other words, successful
As  Derville  mentioned  earlier,  we  have  seen  time  and  time  again  that  what  happens  within
organisations  can  be  at  odds  with  their  stated  visions.  These  vision  statements  regularly
espouse  commitments  to  customers’  needs,  at  a  time  when  the  organisation  is  failing  to
sufficiently consider them.  A gap between the stated vision and the real action is a sign of an
inauthentic  message,  of  a  mindset  that  is  incongruous  to  declared  beliefs  and  a  sign  that
‘something new’ is needed and ‘something old’ needs to stop. 
In developing the ‘something new’, leaders need to adopt a mature and self-aware position in
order to understand how they can strike the balance in delivering for all their stakeholders and
how they message this across the organisation so it will embed in the day-to-day operations of
their  firm.  The  leaders  of  regulated  institutions  need  to  reflect  when  their  behaviours  are  not
consistent with their intentions and then consider how to put things right.
Unless there is work done to reshape the culture, the old culture can act as an anchor, slowing
down  and  in  some  cases  even  stopping  real  change.  Therefore,  to  fully  implement  a  new
strategy or to rebuild an organisation to be effective in a changing environment, it is critical to
reshape culture as well.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The primary responsibility for reshaping culture rests with the executive team, under the direction
of the board. It is not a human resources or organisational design exercise. It is a leadership
responsibility.  It  requires  leaders  to  take  a  long  hard  look  at  the  current  culture,  the  existing
business  processes,  the  work  attitudes  and  behaviours they  foster.  Without  first  establishing
what the current culture is, the issuance of lofty mission statements or long lists of core values
are merely paying ‘lip service’ to implementing effective cultural change.
Since  employees  tend  to  take  their  cues  on  what  is  important  and  how  to  behave  from  their
leaders, negative activities and behaviour at the top foster negative behaviours further down the
organisation.
“A good organisational culture is about more than avoiding good people doing bad things; it is
about equipping and enabling good people to do ever better things .” A firm in seeking to effect
cultural  change  can  take  some  practical  steps  to  achieve  this  aim.    I  will  suggest  five  as  a
starting point:
1.  Communicate and "walk the talk" - the cultural values and expectations of the firm need to
be  consistently  communicated  and  modelled  by  the  top,  middle  and  lower  management
levels.
17
2.  Enhance diversity at senior levels – meaningfully addressing the acute lack of diversity at
senior  levels  requires:  more  ambition,  including  in  targets  and  measures;  more  than  lip
service being paid to diversity programmes; better building of pipelines of talent; considering
the  overall  construct  and  functioning  of  the  executive  management  layer  when  making
appointments; and identifying and reducing barriers to change.
3.  Practice, process, performance  – principles  and  values  need  to  be  reinforced  through
practices  and  processes,  including  training  and  particularly  performance  management.
There must be clear alignment between individual roles and objectives and wider purpose,
strategy and outcomes, with people held accountable for their actions.
4.  Ongoing assessment and checking – boards and executives need to have mechanisms
and measures to understand whether the culture they espouse is consistent with the culture
of the organisation, and consider how they would identify where it is not. Considering how
decision-making, risk identification, product development, the use of behavioural economics,
the treatment of whistleblowers and everything in between works in an organisation is key to
understanding the culture of the organisation.Boards and executives need to consider the
information they receive and seek (including through second and third lines of defence) to
inform their view on the culture of their firm.
5.  Incentivisation  –in  its  broadest  sense,  i.e.  not  just  financial,  is  fundamentally  linked  to
behaviours;  for  example,  ensuring  promotion,  recognition,  and  the  variable  compensation
element of remuneration is consistent with the behaviours expected of employees will help
to ensure that the culture of the firm is reinforced.  This should include actively celebrating
those  who  come  forward  to  identify  issues  and  behaviours  that  are  not  in  line  with  the
espoused values and desired culture of the firm.
20
If  done  well,  variable  pay  can  support  and  incentivise  behaviours  that  are  consistent  with  the
values and culture espoused by boards and executives. Of course, the reverse is also obviously
true.  The requirement
 for firms to have long claw back periods should, all things being equal,
help  to  enhance  aligning  reward  with  a  longer-term  perspective.    For  example,  if  a  significant
proportion of an executive’s remuneration can be demanded back over a period of several years,
then that executive is likely to pay more heed to the longer-term sustainability of the business
they are writing and the risks they are taking.
Regulation and Supervision
It is undoubtedly the case that the standards of governance and risk management in financial
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
services firms have improved in the last decade.  This has been driven by the strengthening of
the regulatory framework and  the  intrusiveness  of  supervision.    However,  the  pace  of  cultural
change and lack of diversity at senior levels show that while you can put leopards in cages, they
are unlikely to change their spots. 
The Central Bank‘s work of recent years is towards the forefront of the growing international work
on  behaviour  and  culture,  together  with  our  connected  work  on  diversity.  The  Bank  of
International Settlements, the European Central Bank; the Group of 20; the New York Federal
Reserve and the Bank of England have all identified culture as an important issue.”
We will continue to develop our approach in this area, building on the work of the last few years,
as well as continuing to learn from international best practice.  This includes, as Derville has
outlined, our view that a Senior Executive Accountability Regime (SEAR) should be implemented
in Ireland through legislation.  In this context, I am delighted to have Richard Fox, from the UK
Financial Conduct Authority, with us today to share the UK experience of its Senior Managers
Regime (SMR).
In  short,  we  will  continue  to  focus  on  regulated  firms’  cultures  and  the  important  element  of
diversity  as  part  of  intensive  and  intrusive  approach  to  supervision.  This  will  continue  to  be
underpinned by the credible threat of enforcement.
Conclusion
The Irish financial system needs to be resilient and trustworthy so that it sustainably serves the
needs  of  the  economy  and  its  customers  over  the  long  term.    Resilience  has  undoubtedly
improved, but trust in the system has not.
Culture is not a substitute for compliance with rules, for regulation, for intrusive supervision. The
starting  point  for  operating  in  a  regulated  environment  is  compliance  with  the  rules  and
regulations  that  govern  the  industry.    Our  focus  on  culture  is  not  about  substitution  or
replacement, it is about achieving better prudential and conduct outcomes – for the system and
for individual consumers – than an entirely rules-based approach can deliver.
Referring back to Derville’s earlier remarks, whether you believe it is a case of rooting out the bad
apples or addressing the rottenness of a whole barrel, it is evident that we need greater diversity
of the leaders in the financial services industry and a cultural shift in the how the industry is run.
Meaningful cultural change should prevent financial services firms from flying too close to the sun
and instead, striving to be ahead of regulation and supervision in a positive way, before legislation
and regulation forces them to change. Truly serving the needs of the economy and consumers
over the long term not only requires learning from and addressing the sins of the past.  It also
requires the foresight to address the challenges of the future, creating a “system that can deepen
financial inclusion, better meet the needs of ageing populations and help fund the transition to a
low carbon economy.”
In other words, that we think more of Daedalus and his craftmanship, than of his son, Icarus
when we think of how financial services serves society’s needs.   
I  will  conclude  here.  I  look  forward  to  hearing  from  my  esteemed  panellists  and  audience
members about cultural change. I will hand you over to Sylvia Cronin, Director of Insurance, who
will moderate the final panel of the conference.
Thank you for your attention. 
1
2
Derville Rowland, Director General, Financial Conduct, Central Bank of Ireland, Bad Apples or Bad Barrels?
How effective Culture Mitigates Conduct Risk
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Attributed to Mark Twain (James George Eayrs attributes the quote to Mark Twain as early as 1971 in his book
“Diplomacy and its discontents”)
See,  for  example: Miguel  Ampudia,  Spyros  Palligkinis,  The  ECB  Working  Paper  Series,  Trust  and  the
household- bank relationship
For example, see Ed Sibley, The Banking Crisis – A Decade On
For example, see www.ft.com/libor-scandal
For  example,  see Federal  Reserve  Press  release,  Responding  to  widespread  consumer  abuses  and
compliance breakdowns by Wells Fargo. February 2018.
See Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry
For example, See press release from the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA)
For example, see Ed Sibley, Is it legal? A Question of Culture
Danièle Nouy, Chair of the Supervisory Board, Ethics in banking – from Gordon Gekko to George Bailey, October
2018
For example, see Financial times, Ending America’s opioid crisis requires more than a moral crusade
Citizens Advice,  Excessive  prices  for  disengaged  consumers:  A  super-complaint  to  the  Competition  and
Markets Authority
Central Bank of Ireland, report on Behaviour and Culture of the Irish retail Banks, July 2018 and Central Bank of
Ireland  report  on ‘Demographic  analysis  -Applications  for  Pre-Approval  Controlled  Function  (PCF)  roles  in
regulated firms – 2017’
House of Commons Treasury Committee, Financial Service Authority Report into the failure of RBS, October
2012
De NederlandscheBank, Supervision of Behaviour and Culture, Foundations, practice and future developments,
2015
‘‘If you want something new, you have to stop doing something old’’ was first articulated by Peter Drucker
Allison  Cottrell,  CEO  of  the  Banking  Standards  Board, Transforming  Culture  in  Financial  Services,    FCA
Discussion Paper
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
