Sir K Dwight Venner: Recent financial and economic developments in the 
Eastern Caribbean 
Presentation by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, on the ECCB 
2005/06 Annual Report, St Kitts, 28 June 2006. 
 Rationale 
I am using this medium to report to you on the performance of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
because as the sole issuer of the EC currency, the Central Bank's work touches the lives of all citizens 
in the eight member countries. 
The aim  of my  presentation  is,  therefore,  to enable  a wide cross-section  of persons  throughout  the 
region to have a better understanding of what the Bank does to ensure that you have a strong, stable 
currency. 
The Bank’s objectives 
The Bank's major objectives are monetary and financial stability, both of which are important elements 
in the process of economic development. 
Monetary  stability  allows  consumers  and  investors  to  conduct  their  business  with  confidence  in  the 
purchasing power of the EC dollar. In this regard, the Bank's monetary policy focus is to maintain the 
value of the EC dollar to the US dollar at the rate of 2.7 to 1. 
To sustain this, the Bank is required, by law, to hold foreign exchange reserves equivalent to 60 per 
cent of the currency in circulation and other demand liabilities. 
Financial stability, that is, financial markets, operating in a sound financial system allows all of us to 
deposit our savings and increase our investments, knowing that our assets are safe. 
The  system  is  only  as  safe  and  sound  as  the  banks  within  it,  therefore  the  ECCB  regulates  and 
supervises commercial banks to ensure that they operate within prescribed guidelines. 
At the same time, as part of the effort to increase investment opportunities, the Bank is encouraging 
the development of new money and capital markets. 
The Bank’s operating environment 
The ECCB is one of only four multi-state central banks in the world. As the Monetary Authority in a 
collective  arrangement,  the  Bank  is  required  to  work  very  closely  with  the  member  governments  to 
ensure  that  the  fiscal  infrastructure  required  for  safeguarding  the  value  of  the  currency  remains  in 
place. 
The economies of these same countries are intrinsically bound by virtue of the shared currency, and 
developments  in  any  one  economy  may  affect  the  entire  Eastern  Caribbean  Currency  Union.  This 
means  that  the  governments  of  these  countries  must  also  collaborate  very  closely  on  an  ongoing 
basis. 
The ECCB's governance structure facilitates this collaborative process, since the institution's highest 
decision  making  body,  the  Monetary  Council,  is  made  up  of  the  ministers  of  finance  from  the  eight 
countries. 
As Council members, they provide directives and guidelines to the Bank on monetary and credit policy 
issues.  As  elected  representatives,  accountable  to  the  people  and  with  cabinet  and  legislative 
responsibilities in their respective countries, the ministers spearhead implementation of the requisite 
legislative arrangements and fiscal policies to ensure that the financial system remains safe and the 
EC dollar remains stable. 
BIS Review 75/2006 
 1
It is within this framework that the operations of the Bank are conducted, with due consideration being 
given  to  various  factors  in  the  economies  of  the  member  states,  as  well  as  in  the  wider  external 
environment. 
The external environment 
Major considerations during the course of the year were: 
• 
First, the sharp upturn in the prices of fuel and petroleum products, with accompanying hikes 
in the costs of transportation, electricity, imported building materials as well as domestically 
produced goods and services. 
This resulted in an increase in the inflation rate in ECCU countries to 4 per cent in 2005, up from 2.6 
per cent in 2004. 
• 
Second, growth in the currency union of approximately 5 per cent, compared with 3.9 per 
cent in 2004, driven largely by increased construction activity, in preparation for the Cricket 
World Cup 2007. 
Third, a weakening in the tourism sector in 2005, and 
Fourth, the rising interest rate environment existing in the United States. 
• 
• 
Against this backdrop, let us now look at the performance of the Bank during the 2005/2006 financial 
year. 
The Bank’s performance 
I  am  happy  to  report  that  the  Bank  achieved  its  main  objectives  of  monetary  and  financial  sector 
stability. 
The  exchange  rate  peg  of  the  EC  dollar  was  maintained,  and  the  foreign  reserve  backing  of  the 
currency stood at 96 per cent at 31 March 2006, well above the statutory requirement of 60 per cent. 
In the area of financial sector stability among the initiatives undertaken were: 
• 
The  drafting  of  new  prudential  guidelines  and  regulations,  aimed  at  strengthening  its 
regulatory capacity and financial sector risk management in the Eastern Caribbean Currency 
Union; 
Refinement  of  the  risk assessment  model  used  as  the  basis  for an  early  warning  system. 
The model is used to stress-test institutions and the financial system, and 
Reducing the vulnerability of banks to credit risk by mandating the reduction in the tolerable 
limit for non-performing loans from 10 percent to the international benchmark of 5 per cent. 
  Recognising, however, the existence of gaps within the regulatory infrastructure, the Bank continues to 
collaborate with member governments to establish single regulatory units in each member territory to 
oversee financial institutions not regulated under the Banking Act. 
The Bank established a Payment System Council to research, consult, and advise on payment system 
policy,  in  an  effort  to  make  the  system  in  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Currency  Union  more  effective, 
efficient, reliable and secure. 
One of the benefits from this will be that, in any of the Bank's member countries, you can have ready 
access to your accounts through the use of debit and credit cards. 
There  were  also  positive  developments  with  respect  to  the  Bank's  money  and  capital  market 
development  programme  during  the  year.  Among  these  was  the  increase  to  five,  in  the  number  of 
governments  participating  in  the  Regional  Government  Securities  Market,  following  the  issue  of 
treasury  bills  by  the  Government  of  Antigua  and  Barbuda.  These  five  governments  have  benefited 
from a reduction in their cost of borrowing, while the public is now able to invest in a larger pool of 
investment instruments. 
With  respect  to  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Securities  Exchange,  the  listing  of  two  prominent  regional 
companies,  Grace  Kennedy  Limited  of  Jamaica  and  FirstCaribbean  International  Bank  Limited  of 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2006
Barbados,  is  evidence  that  the  efforts  of  the  Bank  to  promote  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Securities 
Exchange as the CARICOM Exchange, are beginning to bear fruit. 
As part of the effort to promote business development and to infuse an entrepreneurial spirit in the 
region's youth, the Bank collaborated with private and public sector partners to introduce the Junior 
Achievement  programme  in  St  Kitts  and  Nevis.  Successful  programmes  are  already  operating  in 
Grenada and Saint Lucia under the auspices of other interested parties in those countries. The Bank 
intends  to  work  with  partners  in  the  other  currency  union  countries  where  the  Junior  Achievement 
programme does not yet exist, to ensure that it is implemented. 
Recognising the  importance  of  public understanding  and  involvement  in  the  economic  development 
thrust, the Bank continued to expand its public education and awareness programme throughout the 
year. 
Among the initiatives targeting school children, the media and the public were: 
• 
A savings and investments course, which has now been implemented in Grenada, St Kitts 
and Nevis, Montserrat and Anguilla; 
Media round table discussions in all of the ECCB member countries. 
Press Briefings, following Monetary Council meetings, which have been aired on radio and 
television in member countries. 
Regional interactive discussions on the economic performance of currency union countries, 
and 
The  opening  of  the  OECS/ECCU  Exhibition  Centre  with  a  mission  to  promote  an 
understanding of the people, culture, history and economies of the OECS. 
   As  the  countries  of  the  region  move  into  the  Caribbean  Single  Market  and  Economy,  public 
understanding of the financial and economic issues which govern the arrangement will be imperative. 
During  the  year,  the  Bank  restructured  its  operations,  in  an  effort  to  improve  its  effectiveness  and 
efficiency.  A  significant  part  of  the  restructuring  effort  was  the  establishment  of  a  Statistics 
Department.  This signals  the  increased  importance being  placed  by  the  Bank  on  assisting  member 
countries to gather relevant statistics in order to improve decision-making for economic development 
and improvement in the standard of living. 
The  ECCB's  financial  objective  for  2005/  2006  was  expenditure  reduction,  in  an  attempt  to  keep 
expenditure in line with income earned on foreign reserve assets. 
I am pleased to say that this objective was achieved notwithstanding the unfavourable performance of 
the US bond market in an increasing interest rate environment, which had an adverse effect on the 
Bank's portfolio of foreign reserves. 
Operating  income  of  $64  million  exceeded  the  budgeted  amount  by  more  than  $11  million.  On  the 
expenditure side, total expenditure of $51 million was less than budgeted by just over $1 million. 
The  conservative  expectation  for  income,  coupled  with  strict  expenditure  management  controls, 
contributed to a higher than anticipated operating profit of just under $13 million. 
At 31 March 2006, the Bank's total assets stood at just over $1.8 billion, a decline of 2.3 per cent when 
compared to the position last year. This decline, reflected in a contraction in the foreign reserves, was 
due  primarily  to  foreign  payments  made  by  the  Bank  on  behalf  of  member  governments  and 
commercial banks in the ECCU. 
All in all, however, I am pleased to report that 2005/2006 was a successful and profitable year for the 
Bank. 
The current financial year 2006/2007 will bring new challenges for the Bank and its member countries. 
We must persist in our joint efforts in the years ahead as we work to strengthen our own economic 
union. 
This is necessary if the Bank is to continue to fulfil its mission to maintain the stability of the EC dollar 
and to ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system, for the benefit of the people of the 
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union. 
BIS Review 75/2006 
 3
