T T Mboweni: Overview of the South African economy 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  86th  Ordinary 
General Meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 23 August 2006. 
 We live in an ever-changing global environment, an environment that is characterised by opportunities 
and hope, but also fraught with risks. In this environment the South African Reserve Bank (Bank) must 
implement its mandate and manage the associated risks to ensure that South Africans benefit from 
opportunities emanating from a changing world. Today, I am pleased to report on another successful 
year in the eighty-five-year history of the Bank. 
The achievement and maintenance of price stability remains the primary objective of the Bank. Indeed, 
the most significant accomplishment of the Bank has been the containment of inflation within the target 
range since September 2003. This does not imply that the other functions of the Bank are neglected. 
On the contrary, these remain crucial in the operations of the Bank. 
Today we also release our Annual Economic Report which covers the broader aspects of the domestic 
and  international  economy  that  impact  on  many  of  the  activities  of  the  Bank.  This  address  will 
highlight,  where  relevant,  some  of  the  salient  economic  developments  which  have  affected  our 
operations. The focus of this address is on the main operational areas of the Bank including monetary 
policy,  monetary  operational  procedures,  gold  and  foreign  exchange  reserve  management,  the 
national payment system, banking regulation and supervision, international co-operation and internal 
administration. 
Monetary policy 
Monetary  policy  during  the  past  year  was  conducted  against  the  background  of  a  strongly  growing 
international  economy  and  buoyant  commodity  prices.  This  strong  growth,  combined  with  rising 
geopolitical tensions and other supply constraints, placed upward pressure on international oil prices, 
which reached highs of almost US$80 per barrel in recent weeks. Despite the high oil prices, world 
inflation  initially  remained  subdued,  but  inflationary  pressures  have  since  begun  to  emerge  in  a 
number of countries. This has prompted the tightening of monetary policy by several central banks in 
the past few months. 
Domestically, the economy grew by 4,9 per cent in 2005. In the first two quarters of 2006, economic 
growth remained robust but showed some moderation compared to 2005. An annualised growth rate 
of 4,2 per cent was recorded in the first quarter of 2006. 
Inflation  remained  under  control  in  the  period  under  review,  with  changes  in  CPIX  (that  is  the 
consumer  price  index  for  metropolitan  and  other  urban  areas  excluding  mortgage  interest  cost) 
remaining  within  the  target  range  of  3  to  6  per  cent.  In  the  twelve  months  from  1  April  2005  to  31 
March 2006, the year-on-year CPIX inflation rate averaged 4,1 per cent, but changes ranged between 
3,5 and 4,8 per cent over the period. From March to June 2006, CPIX inflation accelerated from 3,8 
per cent to 4,8 per cent. 
Services  price  inflation  continued  to  decline  and  had  fallen  below  goods  price  inflation  by  the 
beginning  of  2006.  This  was  partly  a  reflection  of  the  continued  containment  of  increases  in 
administered prices, other than petrol prices. The higher trend in goods prices was initially mainly due 
to petrol price increases, and more recently food price increases. During the first nine months of 2005, 
food price inflation averaged 1,8 per cent and therefore contributed to the downward trend in inflation. 
Following the strong increase in maize prices towards the end of 2005, food price inflation began to 
increase and had risen to 7,2 per cent by June 2006. By contrast, the prices of a number of categories 
of goods fell, particularly clothing and footwear, and furniture. 
Production price inflation increased over the past year and averaged around 5,5 per cent in the first 
four months of 2006, compared to 2,3 per cent in June 2005. However, a further acceleration occurred 
in  May  and  June  2006,  when  producer  inflation  reached  levels  of  5,9  per  cent  and  7,5  per  cent, 
respectively. Changes in energy and food prices provided much of the impetus to higher production 
prices. 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 1
For much of the reporting period the inflation outlook was fairly stable and favourable. This allowed for 
an unchanged repo rate of 7 per cent for a prolonged period following the reduction by 50 basis points 
in  April  2005.  In  the  past  year,  there  were  a  number  of  developments  that  supported  a  favourable 
inflation outcome. Lower inflation expectations appeared to have had an impact on wage settlements 
which have declined steadily. Unit labour cost increases were also moderate, with an average rate of 
increase of 3,4 per cent for 2005, significantly down from the rate of 6,5 per cent recorded in 2004. 
These  developments,  combined  with  the  increased  credibility  of  monetary  policy  as  indicated  by 
improved inflation expectations, were expected to support sustainable low inflation. 
The  inflation  outlook  was  also  supported  by  continued  fiscal  discipline,  output  growth  in  line  with 
growth potential and low world inflation. The initial impact of the significant increase in international oil 
prices on world inflation, world growth and domestic inflation was minimal, confounding earlier fears of 
a repetition of inflation spirals seen during previous oil price shocks. 
Some of the other determinants of inflation have remained favourable for much of the period, although 
their associated risk increased over the past year. The exchange rate remained within a fairly stable 
trading range over much of the period. However, following increased uncertainties in the international 
markets from May 2006, the rand came under pressure, along with the currencies of a number of other 
emerging-market economies. The rand exchange rate also reacted further to the publication in June of 
the first quarter current-account deficit of South Africa. Between the beginning of May 2006 and the 
beginning of August, the trade-weighted exchange rate of the rand depreciated by approximately 14 
per cent. 
Despite the positive developments in the inflation outcomes during the past year, there was a steady 
deterioration in the outlook of a number of the fundamental determinants of inflation, increasing the 
degree of upside risk to the inflation outlook. Of increased concern to the Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC)  was  the  continued  strength  of  domestic  demand.  For  the  past  two  years,  household 
consumption expenditure has grown at annual real rates of almost 7 per cent. Retail sales continued 
to  grow  strongly  and  consumer  confidence  reached  an  all-time  high  by  the  end  of  2005.  This  was 
fuelled by high rates of credit extension which averaged over 20 per cent during the past year, and 
resulted in household debt rising to 66 per cent of disposable income in the first quarter of this year. 
The strong growth in expenditure had little immediate impact on domestic inflation, although the MPC 
noted at its meeting in February 2006 that adverse price effects would be inevitable if these trends 
continued unabated. Increases in consumption expenditure, however, contributed to the progressive 
widening of the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments from 4,2 per cent of gross 
domestic product in 2005 to 6,4 per cent in the first quarter of 2006. This development was seen by 
the MPC to pose a potential threat to inflation through its possible impact on the exchange rate, should 
the  deficit  be  regarded  as  unsustainable.  Nevertheless,  these  deficits  were  adequately  financed  by 
capital inflows. 
The sustained strong domestic demand, combined with threats posed by international oil prices, food 
prices,  and  exchange  rate  developments,  increased  the  risk  to  the  inflation  outlook.  In  response  to 
these heightened risks and the deteriorating inflation outlook, the MPC felt that pre-emptive action was 
required. Accordingly, the repo rate was increased by 50 basis points to 7,5 per cent on 8 June 2006 
and  by  a  further  50  basis  points  on  3  August  2006.  However,  future  monetary  policy  decisions  will 
depend on changes in the outlook for inflation and economic developments. 
Monetary operations 
The Bank uses open-market operations to provide and drain liquidity from the money market in order 
to maintain the liquidity requirement of banks at a level sufficient for the implementation of monetary 
policy in line with the stance determined by the MPC. Deposits of banks at the Bank in terms of the 
minimum  statutory  cash  reserve  requirement  (2,5  per  cent  of  liabilities,  as  adjusted)  amounted  to 
R28,7  billion  for  the  June/July  maintenance  period.  As  at  the  end  of  June  2006,  total  outstanding 
debentures on issue by the Bank and longer-term reverse repurchase transactions amounted to R5,4 
billion and R2,0 billion, respectively. The deposits of the Corporation for Public Deposits with the Bank, 
which amounted to R11,1 billion at the same date, also contributed to the draining of excess liquidity. 
Notes and coin in circulation also had a contractionary impact on liquidity, increasing from R49,0 billion 
on 30 June 2005 to R53,9 billion a year later. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2006
Currency in circulation 
The  daily  average  value  of  banknotes  in  circulation  in  the  period  1  April  2005  to  31  March  2006 
amounted  to  R46,3  billion,  while  the  average  value  of  coin  in  circulation  during  the  same  period 
amounted to approximately R2,7 billion. While banknotes in circulation increased by 10,2 per cent over 
the previous corresponding period, coin in circulation increased by 9,1 per cent. A seasonal peak for 
banknotes and coin in circulation of R57,4 billion was reached on 23 December 2005. 
The demand for coin has shown a substantial increase in the past few months. This is particularly the 
case in respect of the demand for the 5c coin, which shows an increase of approximately 30 per cent, 
compared to the corresponding previous reporting period. 
The Bank has co-operated with commercial banks in the development of a more efficient and effective 
integrated national cash management system. The improved system has the potential to limit the cash 
holdings of banks, thereby contributing to a reduction in the cost of cash to the public. 
Gold and foreign exchange reserves 
The activities of the Bank in the domestic foreign exchange market are aimed at managing domestic 
money-market  liquidity  conditions  through  foreign  exchange  swaps,  servicing  the  foreign  exchange 
requirements  of  clients  and  increasing  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  a  prudent  manner  when 
conditions permit. The Bank does not aim to influence the exchange rate of the rand, but leaves its 
determination to the forces of demand and supply in the foreign exchange market. 
The Bank continued to take advantage of favourable market conditions to increase the level of official 
gold  and  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Gross  reserves  increased  from  US$15,9  billion  at  the  end  of 
March  2005  to  US$23,95  billion  at  the  end  of  June  2006.  Over  the  same  period  the  international 
liquidity position increased by US$7,79 billion to US$20,19 billion. The increase in the level of official 
reserves has been well received by market participants and rating agencies and has contributed to the 
improved perception of South Africa’s fundamentals by international investors. 
The Bank and the National Treasury co-operate very closely in the process of accumulating reserves. 
In making rand-denominated deposits with the Bank, the National Treasury assists with absorbing the 
excess  liquidity  created  by  the  purchases  of  foreign  exchange.  As  at  the  end  of  June  2006, 
government  deposits  at  the  Bank,  the  greater  part  of  which  related  to  this  sterilisation  initiative, 
amounted to R36,2 billion. 
The  higher  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  resulted  in  an  increased  focus  on  the  management 
thereof to ensure safety, liquidity and an adequate return within conservative risk parameters. At the 
end of June 2006, the internally managed portfolios comprised 81 per cent of gross reserves, with the 
balance  managed  externally. 
Internal  reserve  management  capacity  and  skills  have  been 
strengthened significantly through training and skills transfer agreements with external fund managers. 
A securities lending programme was implemented in July 2005. In terms of this programme, securities 
held on behalf of the Bank by a custodian can be used in lending transactions against cash or other 
high-quality collateral. The income and fees generated by this programme help to defray some of the 
costs incurred as a result of the external fund management programme. 
In  April  2005  the  National  Treasury  made  a  final  payment  in  the  form  of  zero-coupon  bonds  to  the 
Bank as compensation for losses accumulated over many years in the Gold and Foreign Exchange 
Contingency Reserve Account. 
Financial stability 
As  you  are  aware,  the  Bank  is  not  the  sole  custodian  of  financial  system  stability,  but  contributes 
towards  a  larger  effort  involving  the  government,  other  regulators  and  selfregulatory  agencies,  and 
financial market participants. 
The activities of the Bank relating to financial stability include the application of policies, instruments, 
norms and tools to prevent, detect and manage systemic instability of institutions, markets, and the 
payment  and  settlement  system.  The  robustness  of  the  financial  regulatory  system  was  continually 
assessed and reported on in the bi-annual Financial Stability Review of the Bank. Confidence in the 
domestic financial services sector remains high. 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 3
National payment system 
The Bank published its new strategic framework and strategy for the National Payment System (NPS), 
known as Vision 2010, in April 2006. Vision 2010 provides strategic direction for the payment system 
and its bank and non-bank participants up to 2010, identifying five major challenges for the payment 
system. These challenges include accessibility; transparency; security; support for payment, clearing 
and  settlement  initiatives  of  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC);  and  keeping 
abreast of international developments. 
The  monthly  value  of  settlement  in  the  South  African  Multiple  Option  Settlement  (SAMOS)  system 
amounted  to  R4,6  trillion  in  June  2006,  or  approximately  R200  billion  per  day.  This  includes  the 
settlement  of  transactions  stemming  from  the  equity  and  bond  markets,  as  well  as  the  rand  leg  of 
domestic foreign exchange transactions. Approximately 90 per cent of settlement through SAMOS is 
effected on a real-time basis during the day, while the remaining 10 per cent, which emanates from the 
retail batch environment, is settled in the evening. An upgrade of the SAMOS system, providing for the 
handling of dematerialised money-market instruments, was successfully implemented in June 2006. 
The Bank continued to facilitate a low-cost payment solution between the different role players in the 
low-income  collection  environment.  The  first  directive  for  conduct  in  the  payment  system  for  banks 
participating in the low-income collection environment was issued by the Bank during the period under 
review. 
Banking regulation and supervision 
The South African banking regulatory framework has to be amended to provide for the requirements of 
the new international Capital Accord (Basel II) for banks. During the period under review, two drafts of 
amendments  to  the  Banks  Act,  No  94  of  1990,  and  the  regulations  thereto,  were  circulated  for 
comment  to  the  Accord  Implementation  Forum  (AIF),  comprising  representatives  of  the  Bank,  the 
National Treasury, the banking sector and The SA Institute of Chartered Accountants. 
All registered banks, branches of foreign banks and mutual banks in South Africa were requested to 
perform  a  gap  analysis  and  self  assessment,  including  an  impact  study  of  prescriptions  for  their 
capital-adequacy  requirements,  to  determine  their  readiness  for  the  implementation  of  Basel  II.  In 
order to capture the risks faced by an entire banking group, Basel II will be applied on a consolidated 
basis to internationally active banks. 
The  Bank  participated  in  a  joint  project  with  the  National  Treasury  to  investigate  the  requirements 
necessary to implement a deposit-insurance scheme for South Africa. Once certain issues have been 
resolved, a final proposal will be submitted to the Minister of Finance for consideration. 
A corporate governance review of 14 South African banks (including two mutual banks, but excluding 
the five biggest banks) was undertaken during the period under review. Its purpose was to assess the 
compliance of the banks under review with sound corporate governance practices as laid down in the 
Banks  Act  or  the  Mutual  Banks  Act,  No  124  of  1993,  the  regulations  to  these  acts,  the 
recommendations  of  the  Myburgh  Report  on  the  Standard  of  Corporate  Governance  in  the  Five 
Largest Banks, and the second King Committee on Corporate Governance. 
International co-operation 
The  Bank  continued  to  play  an  active  role  in  the  international  arena.  The  Bank  and  the  National 
Treasury will jointly chair the G-20 in 2007 and the Bank has been very active in preparing for this. The 
Bank has established a G-20 Unit for this purpose, which works closely with the G-20 Secretariat in 
the  National Treasury.  Established  in 1999,  the  G-20  is  a  forum where  central  bank governors  and 
ministers  of  finance  of  developed  and  systemically  important  emerging  and  developing  economies 
deliberate on issues related to global economic and financial stability in support of global growth and 
development.  The  Bank  and  the  National  Treasury  will  undertake  the  preparations  necessary  for 
hosting meetings and seminars of the G-20 next year. In August 2005, a G-20 seminar on economic 
growth was held at the Bank, jointly hosted by the South African Reserve Bank, the Bank of Mexico 
and the People’s Bank of China. 
The  Bank  is  an  active  member  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  which  acts  as  the 
central bank for the central banks of member countries. In May 2005 the Bank bought further shares in 
the BIS which represented a pro rata allocation of the redistribution of a portion of US shares in the 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2006
organisation.  I  regularly  attend  the  meetings  of  the  BIS,  until  recently  representing  the  only  African 
country. I am pleased to say that after many years of persuasion by ourselves for the admission of 
another African country, Algeria is now a shareholder of the BIS. 
Our co-operation with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) continues. In May 2006, I was appointed 
by the Managing Director of the IMF, Mr Rodrigo de Rato, as a member of the Committee of Eminent 
Persons  to  study  the  long-term  sustainability  of  the  finances  of  the  IMF.  There  is  little  doubt  that 
international  organisations  such  as  the  IMF  should  become  more  accountable  to  their  membership 
regarding their operations. It is my strong view that the financing of any organisation has an important 
bearing on its accountability and transparency. It is envisaged that the Committee will meet four or five 
times over the next six months, and will table its report in early 2007. 
The Bank continues to improve its international co-operation efforts with global partners. During this 
year the Bank has signed Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with the central banks of Argentina 
and  Ukraine.  Discussions  on  co-operation  agreements  have  advanced  significantly  with  the  central 
banks of China and Peru, and completion and signing off of such agreements are expected in due 
course. 
With  regard  to  regional  integration  activities  on  the  continent,  the  Bank  continues  to  host  the 
Secretariat of the Committee of Central Bank Governors (CCBG) in SADC. Good relationships with 
central banks in the region have been boosted this year as three MoUs in the areas of information 
technology, exchange control and payment systems have been signed by central bank governors. 
The  Bank  participated  in  the  annual  regional  payment  conference  for  countries  in  SADC,  which 
focused on general payment system developments. In addition, three paymentsystem workshops were 
hosted  for  SADC  countries  during  the  period  under  review.  The  aim  of  these  workshops  was  to 
evaluate  the  payment  system  of  each  SADC  country  in  accordance  with  the  Financial  Sector 
Assessment Programme of the IMF and the World Bank. These evaluations and the report to the IMF 
and the World Bank will form the basis of the annual regional payment conference to be held later this 
year. 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  College  continued  to  play  a  key  role  in  training  staff  members  of 
central banks and financial institutions in Africa. It also co-organised the IMF Financial Programming 
and Policies course and a Financial Markets Analysis course presented by the Joint Africa Institute. 
Internal administration 
The  Annual  Report  of  the  Bank  was  distributed  to  shareholders  before  this  meeting.  The  balance 
sheet totals of the Bank show an increase from R129 billion at the end of March 2005 to R168 billion 
at the end of March 2006. The increase was mainly the result of the accumulation of official gold and 
foreign exchange reserves and was financed in the main by an increase in government deposits. The 
profit before taxation of the Bank increased from R866 million for the previous financial year to R1 038 
million for the financial year ending 31 March 2006. 
Budgeted expenditure of the Bank for the current financial year amounts to R1 615 million, compared 
to  actual  expenditure  of  R1  530  million  in  the  financial  year  to  31  March  2006.  This  represents  an 
increase of  5,56  per cent in  budgeted expenditure  compared  to actual  expenditure  for  the  previous 
financial year. 
The four subsidiary companies of the Bank achieved their objectives during the financial year. After a 
review of reports by their Boards of Directors, and internal and external auditors, the Bank is satisfied 
that these companies are managed in accordance with their objectives and best corporate governance 
practice. The results of the subsidiaries are reported on a consolidated basis with those of the Bank in 
the financial statements. 
During the financial year to 31 March 2006, 40 transactions in respect of 123 808 shares of the Bank 
were  concluded.  On  31  March  2006,  the  Bank  had  615  shareholders  and  by  the  end  of  June  this 
number had remained unchanged. 
Improved operational efficiency has been achieved since the introduction of a revised organisational 
structure  of  the  Bank  in  August  2005.  As  was  envisaged,  this  structure  allows  the  Governor  and 
deputy  governors  to  devote  more  time to  policy and  strategic  planning, while  the  executive  general 
managers  are  responsible  for  the  general  management,  supervision  and  control  of  the  Bank 
departments reporting to them. 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 5
The Bank has embarked on a number of capital projects. The existing infrastructure of the head office 
building is currently under improvement to ensure maintenance and optimal utilisation. The Bank has 
also  made  considerable  progress  with  the  practical  implementation  of  its  business  continuity 
management  and  disaster  recovery  strategies.  A  dedicated  disaster  recovery  site  for  head  office 
operations has been completed and will be fully functional towards the last quarter of 2006. Business 
continuity planning for the seven branch offices and the subsidiaries has also been completed. 
In the year under review the total staff complement of the Bank declined further to 1 956 as at the end 
of March 2006 and 1 937 at the end of June 2006. This can be compared to a staff complement of 2 
288 in March 2003. Staff turnover in the Bank has increased from 4,3 per cent in the 2002/03 financial 
year to 7,1 per cent in the financial year ending 31 March 2006. These trends could eventually impact 
on  the  employment  equity  targets  of  the  Bank,  as  many  of  the  resignations  occurred  from  the 
designated groups at middle management level. 
The Bank contracted an external party to conduct an organisational culture and climate survey during 
February  and  March  2006.  The  study  achieved  a  high  level  of  voluntary  participation  among  staff 
members. Although the study has identified a number of areas where the Bank should focus initiatives 
to improve staff morale, it has also indicated that staff members are satisfied with many other aspects 
relating to the Bank as an employer. 
The  Bank  has  also  engaged  an  external  service  provider  to conduct  voluntary  HIV/Aids  prevalence 
testing  among  its  staff,  after  launching  its  HIV/Aids  Response  Programme  in  February  2006. 
Preparation is currently taking place for the roll-out of the initiatives of this programme on a Bank-wide 
basis,  covering  matters  such  as  HIV/Aids  awareness  and  education  campaigns,  and  the  training  of 
management and employees in HIV/Aids counselling. 
The  Bank  is  viewed  as  an  industry  leader  in  complying  with  the  requirements  of  the  Employment 
Equity Act, No 55 of 1998 (EE Act), and the Skills Development Act, No 97 of 1998. The mandates of 
the  structures  created  for  consulting  in  terms  of  the  EE  Act  have  been  amended  during  the  period 
under review to encompass consultation on the workplace skills plan before its annual submission to 
the Bankseta. 
The Bank has made significant improvements in employment equity in recent years. The employment 
equity representation at the end of June 2006 was 56 per cent black and 46 per cent female in total. At 
management level the figures were 43 per cent black and 36 per cent female, respectively. However, 
we have not entirely achieved the target of 50 per cent black at all levels of seniority as was envisaged 
in the original Employment Equity Plan submitted six years ago. 
A  draft  second  employment  equity  plan  has  been  completed  and  is  currently  the  subject  of 
consultation with staff. The draft plan, to be submitted to the Department of Labour in October 2006, 
proposes an increase in the target for female employment from 33 per cent to 50 per cent of the staff 
complement  at  all  levels  of  employment.  A  target  of  2  per  cent  of  employment  for  people  with 
disabilities is also under consideration. 
A number of training and development interventions were conducted during the 2005/06 financial year. 
A  total  of  1  346  employees  benefited  from  these  interventions,  including  626  staff  members  who 
attended courses at the South African Reserve Bank College. In addition, 230 staff members received 
study aid during the year to 31 March 2006 to improve their formal qualifications. 
The  Bank  has  concluded  an  extensive  consultation  process  with  staff,  the  Employment  Equity 
Consultative Body and the finance union SASBO regarding the modernisation of staff-related policies. 
In this process the original policies proposed by the Bank have been amended to incorporate many of 
the views expressed by these stakeholders. A process has been embarked upon to familiarise staff 
with the new policies and it is anticipated that implementation will take place on 1 October 2006. 
Conclusion 
Reflecting on another successful year in the long history of the Bank, the preceding review provides 
ample  evidence  of  the  achievement  of  the  various  objectives  of  the  Bank.  Monetary  policy  has 
contributed to the containment of CPIX inflation to within the target range against the background of 
various risks to the inflation outlook. The MPC will remain vigilant and will not hesitate to adjust the 
monetary  policy  stance  when  necessary.  The  Bank  is  committed  to  the  pursuit  of  low  and  stable 
inflation as a major contributing factor to the growth and development of South Africa. 
6 
 BIS Review 76/2006
The Bank will carefully monitor the progress of South African banks towards ensuring their readiness 
for the implementation of Basel II on 1 January 2008. 
As always, the internal management of the Bank will receive the necessary attention. The Bank values 
its human resources very highly and this is borne out in the new and modernised staff-related policies 
that will be implemented later this year. The Bank is committed to the training and development of staff 
which will be done in pursuit of transformation as envisaged in the new employment equity plan. We 
will continually strive towards creating an organisational culture that makes the Bank an employer of 
choice. 
Acknowledgements 
I  want  to  thank  the  Presidency,  the  Government  and  Parliament  for  their  continued  support.  The 
Minister and Deputy Minister of Finance, and the Director General of the National Treasury and his 
staff also supported the Bank in the conduct of its business. 
I want to express a hearty word of thanks to the Board members for their commitment and service to 
the Bank. It is an honour and privilege to work with such a diverse and distinguished group of people. 
During  this  year,  Ms  A  M  Mokgabudi  stepped  down  from  the  Board  and  as  Chairperson  of  the 
Remuneration  Committee  because  of  professional  commitments.  Her  service  to  the  Bank  is  greatly 
appreciated. 
Although I have paid tribute to Mr I Plenderleith at the previous general meeting, he officially retired as 
Deputy Governor in January 2006. It is accordingly appropriate to thank him again on this occasion for 
his dedication and service to the Bank. Finally, the Bank cannot achieve its goals without the loyalty, 
service  and  dedication  of  its  management  and  staff.  I  wish  to  thank  the  deputy  governors, 
management and staff of the Bank for their contributions. 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 7
