Otmar Issing: Globalisation, EMU and the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Otmar  Issing,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
34th  Economic  Conference  2006  on  “Globalization:  Opportunities  and  Challenges  for  the  World, 
Europe and Austria”, Vienna, 22 May 2006. 
References to the speech can be found on the website of the European Central Bank. 
 Introduction 
Let me first extend a warm thank to the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB) for inviting me here 
today to share a few thoughts on globalisation and the role played by the euro and the European and 
Economic Monetary Union (EMU).  
In  the  last  decades,  Austria  hosted  a  number  of  distinguished  economists,  such  as  Carl  Menger, 
Friedrich von Wieser, Ludwig von Mises, Joseph Schumpeter, Friedrich von Hayek, who shaped the 
economic  thought  worldwide.  In  the  context  of  this  conference,  it  is  useful  to  mention  the  “creative 
destruction” term, coined by Joseph Schumpeter in 1942 at Harvard after his migration to the United 
States.  Schumpeter  argued  that  the  process  of  industrial  mutation,  which  is  intrinsic  to  capitalism, 
“revolutionizes  the  economic  structure  from  within,  incessantly  destroying  the  old  one,  incessantly 
creating a new one.”1  
No doubt globalisation has a big “destruction” potential. To benefit from the global changes, countries 
need to be flexible and quick enough at adopting and spreading new technologies, risking in moving 
into new areas with big market opportunities in the future, which then translates in new jobs and higher 
economic growth. 
The term “globalisation” has become one of the most fashionable buzzwords in contemporary political 
and economic debate. In an economic context, globalisation is associated with the growing economic 
linkages among countries through trade in goods and services, free cross-border capital flows, and 
more rapid and widespread diffusion of technology.2 From a historical point of view, this is hardly a 
new phenomenon,3 but over the past few decades this process has accelerated, as the time and costs 
necessary  to  connect  distinct  geographical  locations  have  been  drastically  reduced.  Indeed, 
geographical distance and national borders are much less important than previously, allowing firms to 
operate  easily  across  national  and  geographical  barriers.  Multinational  corporations,  for  example, 
typically manufacture their products in a wide variety of countries and sell to consumers around the 
world. And investment in financial markets can now be carried out directly on an international basis 
rather than through intermediaries, owing to economic deregulation and financial liberalisation, which 
have been underpinned by rapid advances in information and communication technology. 
We  can  therefore  safely  conclude  that  globalisation  has  radically  transformed  our  economic  and 
financial  landscapes.  What  I  would  like  to  do  today  is  to  discuss  the  inter-linkages  between 
globalisation, EMU and the euro. 
Before looking into this challenging issue, let me briefly talk about the creation of EMU in the context of 
globalisation. 
The creation of EMU in the context of globalisation 
EMU is the end-point of a long process towards monetary union, which started only a few years after 
the  end  of  the  Second  World  War.  Its  origin  is  rooted  in  the  1957  Treaty  of  Rome  establishing  the 
European Economic Community. At this point Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the 
                                                      
1   Schumpeter (1976, p. 83). 
2   See IMF (1997). 
3   For  a  historical  overview  of  globalisation  and  its  economic  implications,  see  Williamson  (1996),  and  Obstfeld  and  Taylor 
(2005). 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 1
Netherlands wished to remove economic barriers among Member States, but wanted to remain within 
the Bretton Woods system of stable exchange rates. 
In 1969, when the Bretton Woods system appeared on the verge of collapse, the European leaders of 
the time were already thinking about creating their own alternative system of stable exchange rates 
among the European currencies. Three key initiatives leading towards EMU can be highlighted: the 
Werner  Report  in  1970,  which  introduced  the  concept  of  the  “Snake  in  the  Tunnel”  that  was  later 
launched  before  the  end  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  1973;  the  European  Monetary  System  in 
1979, involving the introduction of the European Currency Unit; and the Delors Report in 1989, which 
is reflected in the Maastricht treaty in 1991. The years since 1969 depict a period of repeated attempts 
to establish a zone of exchange rate stability in (Western) Europe.4
These  initiatives  can  also  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  globalisation  process.  For  example,  the 
speculative  attacks  at  the  end  of  1992,  which  deepened  the  exchange  rate  crisis  in  Europe, 
highlighted  the  increasing  importance  of  exchange  rate  stability  in  an  economic  area  with  a  single 
market.  The  policymakers’  challenge  consisted  of  gradually  creating  a  large  economic  area  with 
monetary  stability  and  where  capital  controls  were  progressively  relaxed  with  the  ultimate  aim  of 
establishing a monetary union large enough to defend itself against speculative attacks. Indeed, we 
can safely conclude that based on the experience of the last 7 and half years, a viable monetary union 
is a more credible commitment device than a fixed or quasi-fixed exchange rate regime. This process 
is still ongoing, because the euro is not only the currency shared by the 12 euro area countries, but is 
also the anchor for most of the other EU countries’ currencies.  
In  addition  to  influencing  the  economic  and  political  debate  in  Europe  in  preparation  for  EMU, 
globalisation  will  also  continue  to  shape  the  future  of  the  global  monetary  system,  once  the  Asian 
currencies and in particular the Chinese renminbi take a definite stance on their respective exchange 
rate  regimes.  The  successful  experience  of  EMU  might  encourage  other  economic  areas  to  create 
new currencies and new joint central banks. Therefore, one might expect that globalisation will also 
affect the number of currencies currently circulating in the world. However, the creation of monetary 
unions requires a strong political commitment and forceful policy initiatives, as revealed by the EMU 
experience. 
The economic impact of globalisation and the role of EMU 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  main  area  of  my  paper  and  discuss,  first,  the  economic  impact  of 
globalisation on economic linkages – most notably trade and capital flows – and second, the impact of 
EMU on regional financial integration and global portfolio reallocation.  
Impact on trade, foreign direct investment and cross-border portfolio flows 
The effects of globalisation are channelled via trade in goods and services, all of which has a tangible 
impact  on  businesses  and  households.  Globalisation  means  that  transport  costs  have  decreased, 
technological innovations are more easily diffused, information is readily available at a low cost, and 
consumer  tastes  have  been  converging  with  an  increasing  number  of  global  brands.  Over  the  last 
three decades, tariffs have halved and a large number of trade agreements have entered into force 
between  various  countries.  These  developments  have  resulted  in  a  steady  opening  of  markets  in 
Europe and around the world. In the early 1970s, for example, global exports accounted for only one-
tenth of world GDP, compared with one-quarter today. The share of intermediate inputs in total trade 
flows  is  also at  a  historically  high  level,  reflecting  the  dramatic  deepening  of global  economic  inter-
linkages in recent years. Higher global demand and increase in the use of the euro in international 
trade have contributed to this new phenomenon. While intra-euro area trade has grown robustly since 
the introduction of the euro, extra-euro area trade has recorded even more rapid growth.  
The  effects  of  globalisation  are  also  channelled  via  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI).  The  role  of 
multinational enterprises in the world economy has similarly grown over the years, as reflected in the 
expansion of the world’s FDI stock, which is almost equal to the annual GDP of the euro area. In many 
countries,  the  operations  of  foreign  affiliates  are  now  extremely  important  for  domestic  growth,  with 
rising sales, value added, employment and exports. For the euro area, these international linkages are 
                                                      
4   For a comprehensive analysis on the implications of alternative exchange rate regimes, see Issing (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2006
highly significant, particularly because economies of scale and cross-country technological spillovers 
support euro area economic growth. Euro area corporate businesses are among the most dynamic in 
the world, providing more than one-third of the world’s FDI stock. At the same time, almost one-third of 
world  FDI  is  invested  in  euro  area  Member  States.  Intra-euro  area  FDI  stocks  have  also  grown 
robustly, increasing from almost 14% of euro area GDP in 1999 to around 24% by 2004.  
Consumers clearly benefit from greater trade and FDI linkages via greater variety of goods and lower 
prices. However, adjustment costs, which are often front-loaded and concentrated on specific regions 
and  sectors,  also  need  to  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  change  in  the  structure  of  the  global 
economy  requires  individual  countries  to  make  structural  adjustments  through  the  determined 
implementation  of  structural  reforms;  such  reforms  are  even  more  vital  for  countries  in  a  monetary 
union. We know that the ability of a country to benefit from globalisation very much depends on the 
quality of its institutional and structural environment. All economies – including advanced ones such as 
the euro area – have to adapt to the changing needs of the world economy. Structural reforms in the 
labour, goods and capital markets are a key element of any long-run strategy to improve investment, 
growth  and  employment  prospects,  and  are  essential  in  order  to  face  successfully  the  challenges 
ahead  of  population  ageing,  technological  change  and  globalisation.  The  euro  area  has  indeed 
undergone and will continue to undergo substantial structural changes, all of which are necessary and 
beneficial if the euro area is to secure a leading role in the global economy. Member States, therefore, 
need to stick to the implementation of their agreed reform agendas. 
The  impact  of  globalisation  is  also  apparent  in  the  sharp  increases  in  cross-border  portfolio  flows 
observed  since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  a  process  that  continues  to  be  encouraged  by  the 
substantial  number  of  bilateral  investment  treaties,  the  liberalisation  of  capital  accounts,  and 
technological advances in payment, settlement and trading systems as well as financial information 
systems, which tend to reduce information asymmetries. Since the beginning of the 1990s, countries 
have accumulated foreign portfolio assets equivalent to almost half of the annual world GDP, up from 
just  one-third  in  1997,  and  a  small  fraction  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Similarly,  in  2005  euro  area 
residents held foreign portfolio holdings with a total value of approximately 3.5 trillion euro, a figure 
that is almost half of euro area’s annual GDP.  
Cross-border financial linkages, new financial products and the possibility of more accurate and wider 
risk-sharing have however also raised the level of interrelations across national financial markets. This 
implies that financial systems are more exposed to common risks, as financial disturbances may be 
transmitted  more  easily  across  borders  in  periods  of  turbulence.  As  a  result,  sceptics  have  indeed 
expressed concerns about the sustainability of global financial integration, which is regarded by some 
as  having  the  potential  to  destabilise  the  global  economy.  But  there  is  also  an  opposing  view 
according to which global financial integration reduces the risks to the global economy, for which there 
are convincing arguments.  
In  this  respect,  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  the  strongest  determinants  of  the  global  portfolio 
reallocation  over  the  1997-2001  period  were  (1)  the  need  to  diversify  the  risks  of  holding  foreign 
portfolio assets across several countries, and (2) the willingness to close the gap between actual and 
optimal  shares  of  foreign  investment,  which  suggests  that  rational  portfolio  optimisation  was  the 
primary  motivation  behind  investors’  reallocation  of  their  international  portfolios.  This  has  two  main 
implications: first, that investors do not ignore the main principles of portfolio theory; and second, that 
portfolio  investments  might  be  less  prone  to  boom  and  bust  cycles,  being  driven  by  long-term 
economic fundamentals.5
The overall effects of global financial integration on the stability of the financial sector can be expected 
to  be  positive  in  the  long  run,  because  greater  liquidity  and  the  adoption  of  risk-sharing  and  risk-
mitigating  techniques  both  strengthen  the  overall  resilience  and  shock-absorption  capacity  of  the 
global financial system. Cross-border capital flows not only benefit the recipient economies, but also 
the countries of origin, as they facilitate international risk-sharing and participation in returns abroad. 
Trade in goods and services and cross-border capital flows have clearly increased the spillovers of 
macroeconomic  fluctuations  globally.6  However,  one  should  welcome  the  recent  developments  in 
                                                      
5   For a comprehensive analysis on the determinants of global portfolio reallocation, see De Santis and Gérard (2006). 
6   See  Kose  et  al.  (2003)  for  an  assessment  of  the  impact  of  globalisation  on  the  synchronisation  of  business 
cycles.http://www.iza.org/en/webcontent/publications/papers/viewAbstract?dp_id=702. 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 3
international  financial  integration,  because  they  reflect  trends  towards  an  efficient  allocation  of 
resources and, in this way, support growth and promote welfare in the global economy.  
How much further will financial globalisation deepen? In order to answer this question, we examine 
developments  in  countries’  home  bias,  i.e.  how  much  investors  prefer  to  invest  in  domestic  assets 
rather  than  fully  diversifying  their  portfolio  internationally.7  In  a  world  without  transaction  and 
information costs, all countries would hold the same portfolio and would diversify their investment in 
other countries  in  proportion  to  the size  of  their  financial  markets.8  In such  an  ideal  scenario,  each 
economy would be perfectly positioned to withstand economic shocks. This portfolio theory provides a 
benchmark for assessing the degree of financial integration in a given country. 
Over the last decade many countries have indeed been reducing their risk positions in equity markets 
through this mechanism, and in several developed countries the tendency to invest in domestic equity 
assets has decreased. However, the latter are still far from having a theoretically optimal portfolio, i.e. 
one with a zero home bias. In 2003, equity home bias amounted to 70% in the euro area and the US, 
and almost 90% in Japan (see Chart 1).9  
The degree of home bias in the fixed income market is also high, and has only decreased over time in 
the euro area (see Chart 2). 
Chart  1.  Home  bias  in  the  equity  market  for  the 
euro area, the US and Japan (annual data) 
Chart 2. Home bias in the debt instruments market 
for the euro area, the US and Japan (annual data) 
 
Sources:  IMF,  Thomson  Financial  DataStream, 
ECB calculations.  
Note:  The  home  bias  of  the  euro  area  is 
computed  excluding  intra-euro  area  asset  trade 
allocation.  
 Sources: BIS, IMF, ECB calculations.  
Note: The home bias of the euro area is computed 
excluding intra-euro area asset trade allocation.  
 
We  can,  therefore,  say  that  the  global  tendency  to  invest  in  the  home  market  has  been  declining, 
albeit  possibly  more  slowly  than  one  would  have  expected,  and  only  in  the  equity  market.  This  is 
because  the  tendency  to  invest  more  in  international  markets  –  as  reflected  in  the  surge  in  cross-
border  portfolio  flows  –  has  been  accompanied  by  the  tendency  of  households  to  shift  part  of  their 
savings towards riskier domestic assets, as the sharp rise in countries’ domestic market capitalisation 
reveals.  
What can we say about the future? We should expect that home bias will continue to decline, most 
likely at a slow pace, because investors need to perceive that diversifying their global portfolio more 
and  more  on  a  global  scale  will  reduce  risk;  for  that  they  need  to  become  more  familiar  with  the 
international environment.  
                                                      
7   See for example French and Poterba (1991), Coval and Moskowitz (1999) and Huberman (2001). 
8   See Solnik (1974). 
9   De Santis and Gérard (2006) provide the methodology here adopted to compute home bias measures. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2006
Impact of EMU on portfolio reallocation and financial integration 
Did EMU play a role in the reallocation of capital worldwide and on financial integration? To answer 
this question, we need to remind us what a monetary union implies. The elimination of the exchange 
rate risk is the first obvious implication, which is also a feature of other fixed exchange rate regimes. 
But the fundamental difference is that – when EMU was established – Member States committed to 
irrevocable conversion rates of their currencies. A second important factor is related to the effect of 
EMU  on  the  business  cycle  of  Member  States,  the  consequent  impact  on  asset  returns  and,  as  a 
result,  on  portfolio  diversification  by  international  investors.  A  third  crucial  factor,  which  could  have 
influenced the reallocation of portfolio holdings, is the catalyst effect of the single currency arising from 
the  reduction/elimination  of  cross-border  barriers,  which  enhanced  financial  integration  particularly 
among the Member States.  
In order to assess whether EMU did play a role in the reallocation of portfolio holdings worldwide and 
on  financial  integration,  we  can  look at  countries’  home  bias  measures  as  well  as  the cross-border 
investment in euro area portfolio assets. 
While  home  bias  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  –  treated  as  one  economic  entity  –  has  decreased 
somewhat,  particularly  in  the  fixed  income  markets,  in  some  cases  it  has  declined  enormously  for 
individual euro area Member States (see Charts 3-4).  
In Italy, for instance, the value of debt instruments held by residents is much lower than in 1997, when 
the majority of these instruments were issued domestically thanks also to the relatively higher level of 
interest rates that prevailed before EMU (see Chart 4). The decrease in home bias among individual 
Member  States  has  been  more  pronounced  for  debt  instrument  holdings  than  equity  holdings.  This 
implies  that  euro  area  investors  have  reallocated  their  portfolio  holdings  within  the  euro  area,  as  a 
consequence of the establishment of EMU. 
Chart  3.  Home  bias  in  the  equity  market  among 
euro area countries (annual data) 
Chart 4. Home bias in the debt instrument market 
among euro area countries (annual data) 
Sources:  IMF,  Thomson  Financial  DataStream, 
ECB calculations.  
Note: The home bias of the euro area is computed 
excluding intra-euro area asset trade allocation.  
Sources: BIS, IMF, ECB calculations.  
Note: The home bias of the euro area is computed 
excluding intra-euro area asset trade allocation.  
 
Indeed,  a  simple  inspection  of  the  data  reveals  that  European countries  increased  their  holdings  of 
euro area international assets (as a share of their total international portfolio) between 1997 and 2003 
(see Charts 5-6).10 Over this period, the share of intra-euro area allocation increased markedly by 10 
percentage points for equity portfolios and by almost 25 percentage points for fixed income portfolios.  
                                                      
10   12 EMU countries consists of the 12 euro area countries. “Other EU countries” refers to Denmark, Sweden and the United 
Kingdom. “Non-EU developed countries” comprises ten other developed countries: Australia, Bermuda, Canada, Iceland, 
Israel,  Japan,  New  Zealand,  Norway,  Singapore  and  the  US.  “Emerging  markets”  is  formed  by  7  countries:  four  Asian 
emerging markets (Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia and Thailand) and three Latin American emerging markets (Argentina, Chile 
and Venezuela). 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 5
Moreover, global financial integration was accompanied by a large shift in holdings towards the euro 
area  countries,  thereby  favouring  international  risk-sharing  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area,  particularly  with 
regard to other European countries and, to a lower extent, with respect to emerging markets in equity 
portfolios (see Charts 5 and 6).11
Chart 5. International allocation of euro area equity 
assets  relative  to  total  equity  holdings  by  region 
(percentage) 
Chart 6. International allocation of euro area debt 
instrument assets relative to total debt instrument 
holdings by region (percentage) 
Sources:  IMF,  Thomson  Financial  DataStream, 
ECB calculations.  
Note: Country groupings are listed in footnote 10.  
12 EMU countries = Share of intra euro area non-
domestic assets in total euro area holdings.  
Other  country  groupings  =  Share  of  euro  area 
assets  held  by  non-euro  area  residents  in  total 
non-euro area residents’ holdings  
Sources: BIS, IMF, ECB calculations.  
Note: Country groupings are listed in footnote 10.  
12 EMU countries = Share of intra euro area non-
domestic assets in total euro area holdings.  
Other  country  groupings  =  Share  of  euro  area 
assets  held  by  non-euro  area  residents  in  total 
non-euro area residents’ holdings  
 
One important conclusion can be drawn from this analysis. By reducing the barriers for cross-border 
portfolio allocation, EMU has had an impact on regional financial integration not only among euro area 
member states, but also vis-à-vis other European countries, which is particularly sizeable in the fixed 
income market. 
This brings me on to one of the key achievements since the creation of EMU: namely, the fostering of 
European  financial  integration,  which  goes  well  beyond  the  mere  elimination  of  the  exchange  rate 
risk.12 By providing a higher degree of financial integration, EMU has enhanced risk-sharing among 
participating Member  States  and contributed  to  a  smooth  and  effective  implementation  of  monetary 
policy in the euro area.13
To  sum  up,  from  a  global  perspective,  the  establishment  of  EMU  in  January  1999  represents  a 
fundamental  institutional  change  in  the  world  economy,  and  could  in  part  help  explain  the  large 
reallocation of capital that has taken place worldwide.  
                                                      
11   A more sophisticated analysis based on an international portfolio choice model reaches the same conclusion (see De Santis 
and Gérard, 2006). EMU has enhanced regional financial integration in the euro area in both the equity and bond markets. 
There is evidence of active trading among euro area Member States, with euro area investors assigning a higher weight to 
portfolio investment in euro area countries. Over the period 1997-2001, the average increase in weights - on top of the world 
average  portfolio  weight  increase  in  euro  area  assets  -  amounts  to  12.7  percentage  points  for  equity  holdings  and  22.4 
percentage points for bond and note holdings. 
12   See ECB (2005). 
13   On international risk sharing and EMU see for example Sorensen and Yosha (1998). 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2006
The euro area – a zone of stability 
Before  concluding,  let  me  emphasise  that  since  1999  we  have  experienced  a  number  of  important 
shocks to the global economy, such as the Y2K problem at the turn of the millennium, substantial oil 
price  increases,  the  fall  and  the  rise  of  the  euro  exchange  rate,  the  boom  and  burst  of  the  equity 
market bubble, global imbalances and the clouds of war and terrorism. Amidst all of this, the ECB has 
guided inflation expectations consistent with price stability and thus provided a reliable anchor for the 
euro area economy, while the euro has sheltered euro area financial markets against those shocks. 
Indeed, long-term forward break-even inflation rates – which measure inflation expectations and the 
corresponding  inflation  risk  premium  over  a  horizon  in  the  more  distant  future  –  have  remained 
remarkably stable in recent years in the euro area, at a level only moderately above 2% and thus only 
slightly above comparable survey expectations (see Chart 7). This indicates that the ECB has been 
very  successful  in  firmly  anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations  at  a  level  consistent  with  its 
definition of price stability that is below 2% over the medium term.  
Chart  7:  Implied  forward  break-even  inflation 
rates  and  comparable  Consensus  Economics 
inflation expectations  
(%  p.a.;  five-day  moving  averages  of  daily  data 
(BEIRs): Jan. 2005 to Apr. 2006)  
Chart  8:  Correlation  of weekly  changes  in  10-year 
nominal  and  index-linked  government  bond  yields 
and  break-even  inflation  rates  between  the  euro 
area and the US  
(12-week moving averages: Jul. 2002 to Apr. 2006) 
Sources:  Reuters,  Consensus  Economics,  ECB 
calculations.  
Sources: Reuters, ECB calculations.  
 
As  pointed  out  by  Malcom  Knight,  extracting  “clean”  information  about  domestic  economic 
developments  from  financial  market  indicators  in  a more  globalised  world  has  undoubtedly  become 
much more arduous.  
However,  the  break-even  inflation  rate  (i.e.  the  yield  differential  between  conventional  nominal  and 
inflation-linked  bonds)  predominantly  reflects  market  expectations  of  domestic  inflationary  trends. 
Correlation  analysis  suggests  that,  while  short-term  fluctuations  in  nominal  as  well  as  index-linked 
bond yields tend to be quite closely synchronised between the euro area and the US, the relationship 
between euro area and US break-even inflation rates tends to be very weak (see Chart 8). Only in 
times when inflation expectations react to common global inflationary shocks, for example to strong 
increases  in  oil  prices,  can  a  closer  synchronisation  of  movements  in  break-even  inflation  rates  be 
observed.  
How would the European economy have developed had the euro not been introduced? We can only 
speculate, but past experience can be quite instructive. We must not forget that, as a consequence of 
the collapse of the Bretton Woods system and the world’s first major oil crisis, the 1970s were a period 
of monetary disintegration in Europe. Nor should we forget the devaluation of the Italian lira by almost 
30% against the Deutsche Mark after the 1992 ERM crises. The exchange rate risk premium, which is 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 7
believed to have been a major determinant of interest rates before the introduction of the euro, would 
have increased the spreads on government bond yields across Member States with adverse effects on 
countries with large debt ratios.14 In all likelihood, therefore, a currency crisis in Europe may well have 
arisen, with speculative attacks on weaker currencies leading to large devaluations. Most likely, the 
existence of the European single market would also have been challenged in such a situation, given 
the sequence of abrupt shifts in competitiveness between EU Member States. 
Globalisation, by contrast, has promoted diversification and allowed risks to be spread across regions. 
Regional  and  global  financial  integration  as  well  as  internal  stability  have  shielded  the  euro  area 
against potential speculative attacks on the euro with all their negative consequences. 
But  the  euro  is  far  from  a  universal  panacea.  Countries  must  make  flexible  adjustments  to  their 
product and labour markets in order to increase the potential output of the euro area and to reduce the 
still  intolerably  high  unemployment  rate.  Establishing  competitive,  efficient  and  well-functioning 
markets  is  essential  in  order  to  enhance  medium  to  long-term  economic  growth,  to  facilitate  the 
adjustment process, and to increase the resilience of the euro area to economic shocks.  
In this respect, the globalisation process itself should induce policymakers to take unpopular decisions 
while ensuring fiscal discipline. For a monetary union to work, sound fiscal policies are a prerequisite. 
Therefore, Member States must adhere to the criteria set out in the Growth and Stability Pact.  
But is it possible, as some have argued, to promote growth and structural reform at the same time as 
encouraging further fiscal consolidation? My answer is a clear yes. There is no evidence for such a 
trade-off. On the contrary, countries that have in the past undertaken consolidation measures as part 
of a comprehensive reform agenda have fared best both in terms of boosting growth and sound public 
finances. These countries (e.g. Ireland in the late 1980s and Spain and some others in the mid-1990s) 
have benefited from strong supply-side effects on growth and – rather quickly – from the confidence 
effects of reform, which mitigated the adverse demand effects of fiscal consolidation.15
So,  given  this  evidence,  if  euro  area  countries  are  to  benefit  fully  from  the  globalisation  process, 
attaining sound public finances is a prerequisite.  
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  now  conclude,  in  what  is  going  to  be  my  last  public  speech  as  a  member  of  the Executive 
Board of the European Central Bank. By coincidence, – on 8 May 1998 –, just before the beginning of 
my mandate at the ECB , I gave a speech in Vienna at that year conference organised by the OeNB 
(title of the speech: Welche geldpolitische Strategie für die EZB?). I am again back in Vienna at the 
end of my mandate. 
Distinguished economists have often criticised the very concept of European Monetary Union, mainly 
because  the  Member  States  in  question  did  not  fulfil  optimum  currency  area  criteria,  having  for 
example  a  low  degree  of  labour  mobility,  inflexible  real  wages  as  well  as  sharp  differences  in 
commodity  prices  and  segmented  financial  markets.  At  this  point,  I  have  to  confess  that  I  too  was 
sceptical  for  similar  reasons,  also  because  I  have  always  argued  that  unsound  government  fiscal 
policies would ultimately discredit the efforts of monetary policymakers to fight inflation. However, at 
the  same  time,  I  also  believed  that,  if  all  countries  did  their  homework  and  the  Maastricht  Treaty 
criteria were met, I could envisage a successful monetary union – although, to be honest, in the first 
half of the 1990s I did not think it would be possible for 11 European countries to achieve price stability 
at the start of Monetary Union. 
In 1998, at my hearing in front of the European Parliament, I said:  
“The introduction of the euro will reshape the face of Europe. It is the most  significant event in the 
international monetary and financial world since the end of the Second World War. But the euro will 
                                                      
14   Budget balances for 2005, broadly ranging between a 2% of GDP surplus and a 5% deficit, and debt ratios varying from 7% 
to 108% of GDP, are accompanied by differences in the interest rates on government bonds of around 30 basis points at 
most. Ten years before, when spreads still included substantial exchange rate risk premia, they exceeded 600 basis points, 
with budget balances ranging from a 3% of GDP surplus to a 10% deficit, and debt ratios varying from 7% to 133% of GDP 
(ECB, 2006). 
15   For a survey of the literature on the impact on growth of contractionary fiscal policies, see Briotti (2005). 
8 
 BIS Review 43/2006
only be able to play its intended role if it becomes a stable currency. To achieve this, the Maastricht 
Treaty has given the European Central Bank (ECB) clear priority for the objective of price stability and 
has granted its decision-makers independence so as to be able to take the necessary decisions.”  
I believe that we have fulfilled our mandate. By pursuing price stability in the euro area, we have also 
made a positive contribution to stability worldwide. The euro is not only a very stable currency, but has 
also  become  the  world’s  second  international  currency,  after  the  US  dollar.  Moreover,  EMU  has 
affected global capital reallocation, attracting FDI as well as portfolio investment, and has enhanced 
regional financial integration among euro area Member States.  
Let  me  therefore  underline  my  firm  belief  that  the  euro  is  an  undoubted  financial  and  monetary 
success because the people who use it around the world believe in its stability. 
 BIS Review 43/2006 
 9
