X P Guma: Banknote design 
Remarks  by  Dr  X  P  Guma,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Bank 
Note Design Gala evening, held at the South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria, 30 August 2006. 
 1.  Dr  Heinz  Wirz,  President  of  the  South  African  Bank  Note  Society,  distinguished  guests, 
competitors, ladies and gentlemen; thank you very much for your kind invitation to me to say a 
few words on this auspicious occasion. I was delighted to be able to accept the invitation. 
2. The South African Reserve Bank is the proud sponsor of the evening and of the prizes which 
will be awarded tonight – and I address you, therefore, not only in my personal capacity but also 
as a responsible representative of the Bank. 
3. A man who was occasionally given to keen insight once spoke as follows: “… the nice thing 
about being a celebrity is that if you bore people, they think that it is their fault …”.1 Now, as my 
claim  to  celebrity  status  is  as  tenuous  as  any  claim  I  may  have  on  wisdom,  I  am  going  to  be 
extremely  brief  in  my  remarks:  I  don’t  want  to  bore  anybody,  as  I  won’t  be  able  to  deflect 
subsequent criticism elsewhere. 
4. As Governor Mboweni noted at the launch of the upgraded bank note series last year; 
“...Banknotes…  are  not  only  a  means  of  payment. 
They are pieces of craftsmanship that are a window 
on the country, its people, heritage and culture …”2  
This is certainly true of ours – but may be less than an exact description of some others. But that, 
in a sense, is what this evening’s proceedings are intended to celebrate: Banknotes as art, pieces 
of craftsmanship, even as they serve as a medium of exchange. 
5. Not that long ago, as some elderly people are wont to say, South African bank notes were still 
being printed overseas. When decimalised currency was introduced on 14 February 1961, those 
first rand notes were printed by Bradbury Wilkinson and Company in England. It was only with the 
introduction of the so-called Third Rand Series in 1966 that the bank notes, of a completely new 
design,  were  printed  locally  by  the  newly  established  South  African  Bank Note  Company.  This 
company, with its printing works in Pretoria, was jointly owned by the South African Reserve Bank 
and by Bradbury Wilkinson Limited. That was forty years ago. 
6. The South African Bank Note Company is now fully owned by the South African Reserve Bank 
and continues to print quality bank notes for South Africa and for the export market. In this case, 
ownership by a legal monopoly has not compromised quality or competitiveness. 
7.  The  symbols of  value you  have  been working on  are much sought  after. Once  a  bank  note 
makes it into production the numbers involved are staggering. I will not attempt to give exhaustive 
statistics regarding the production of bank notes in South Africa. It is enough to say that the value 
of  bank  notes  in  circulation  outside  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  exceeds  R50  billion  –  or 
about one thousand one hundred rand for every man, woman and child in South Africa. And that 
thousand rand plus is roughly made up of two R10 notes, three R20 notes, two R50 notes, seven 
R100 notes and one R200 note. Although in your design competition you worked on a R500 note, 
we are far from needing it. 
8. I am happy to confess that the issuing of bank notes is a monopoly. This sole right was legally 
granted to the South African Reserve Bank by the South African Parliament. As a quid pro quo, 
the  Bank  pays  over  a  substantial  portion  of  its  profits  to  the  government.  In  making  sure  that 
potential competitors end up in jail, the Bank co-operates closely with the South African Police 
Service.  It  is  reassuring  to  note  that  this  collaboration  is  successful,  and  that  the  incidence  of 
                                                      
1   Former US Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger as quoted in Business Day, 30 August 2006. 
2   Speech by Mr T.T. Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Launch of the Upgraded Banknote, 
Pretoria: 17 January 2006. 
BIS Review 79/2006 
 1
counterfeit notes is very limited thanks to the sterling efforts of the Police, the Reserve Bank and 
the banks in the private sector. 
9.  The  competition  emphasises not  only  the  more artistic,  political  and symbolic  dimensions  of 
bank  note  design,  but  also  the  matter  of  security  features.  Changes  and  improvements  in  the 
appearance  and  security  features  of  a  bank  note  series  are  crucial  in  making  the  lives  of 
counterfeiters  miserable,  and  in  maintaining  public  confidence  in  our  money.  Unfortunately, 
nobody has yet devised a system for legally making counterfeiters’ lives also short and brutish. 
10. The design competition correctly recognises the importance of the SADC region to our future, 
by requiring entrants to also propose designs for bank notes in other SADC countries. A greater 
degree of monetary integration in the region is being planned, to be implemented over the next 
decade: and this process may well involve changes in the range of currencies used. For the time 
being  South  African  rand  is  often  used  on  our  subcontinent,  being  legal  tender  in  Lesotho, 
Namibia  and  Swaziland.  The  Rand  circulates  more  widely  than  this  by  virtue  of  simply  being 
convenient and appropriate to use for certain types of payment in many other countries. 
11.  Maintaining  confidence  in  our  money  is,  of  course,  not  merely  a  matter  of  having  beautiful 
designs, good security features, and ensuring that counterfeiters end up in jail. Right at the core 
of our monetary system is the need to protect the purchasing power of our money. The South 
African Reserve Bank is totally committed to doing so, by maintaining inflation within the target 
range of 3 to 6 per cent per annum. This commitment has been illustrated by our policy actions 
since inflation targeting was formally introduced in February 2000. That is why I say that we are a 
long way from needing a R500 note: inflation is under control. 
12.  I  wish  to  thank  the  South  African  Bank  Note  Society,  the  staff  of  the  tertiary  institutions 
involved in this competition, the adjudicators who have had great difficulty in deciding between 
the excellent entries received, and above all the students who participated so diligently. To all of 
you, please view your time and effort as an investment to maintain and strengthen the pool of 
expertise  in  our  country,  so  as  to  ensure  that  our  designers  and  producers  of  banknotes  can 
compete successfully against the best in the world. 
13. Utlwa! Ke qetile. Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2006
