Svein Gjedrem: Trade-offs in monetary policy  
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Centre for 
Monetary Economics/Norwegian School of Management, Oslo, 6 June 2006.  
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  31  May,  Inflation 
Report 1/06 and on previous speeches. 
The  Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Low  prices  for  imported  consumer  goods,  combined  with  high  prices  for  our  commodities  exports, 
have contributed to a strong improvement in Norway’s terms of trade. The contribution from the rise in 
oil  and  gas  prices  is  particularly  high,  but  the  terms  of  trade  for  the  mainland  economy  have  also 
improved. The Norwegian economy has been exposed to a strong positive income shock.  
So far, the increase in income has not led to markedly higher price and wage inflation. Businesses are 
using resources with steadily greater efficiency and the supply of labour has been ample. Partly owing 
to  the  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade,  the  exchange  rate  has  remained  strong,  which  has 
contributed to keeping inflation low.  
In the face of such strong external influences, smoothing developments in the Norwegian economy is 
a demanding task. Our stabilisation policy rests on four pillars that were established in the 1990s and 
in 2001: the oil fund mechanism, the fiscal rule, a floating exchange rate and inflation targeting. This 
system was introduced against the backdrop of wide fluctuations in economic developments during the 
first twenty years of the oil age in Norway.  
Under the oil fund mechanism, increased government petroleum revenues are invested abroad, which 
curbs the impact of oil price swings on demand and output - and on inflation and the krone exchange 
rate.  A  floating  krone  exchange  rate  also  has  a  stabilising  effect,  and  the  exchange  rate  normally 
appreciates in favourable periods and depreciates during adverse periods. It is easiest to express the 
advantage of this during adverse periods. If the krone remains at a level that is too strong, real wage 
growth  must  be  lower  than  productivity  growth  in  order  to  strengthen  enterprises  and  employment. 
This only occurs when unemployment is high. With a flexible exchange rate, competitiveness may also 
strengthen as a result of a depreciation of the krone. A flexible exchange rate can reduce fluctuations 
in employment and output. The fiscal rule that provides for a steady phasing-in of petroleum revenues 
and the inflation target anchor expectations concerning developments in the krone exchange rate and 
inflation. Moreover, the fiscal rule contributes to restraining the pace at which international exposed 
industries are scaled back.  
When these policy guidelines are adhered to, they are in principle just as conducive for coping with 
favourable periods as with adverse periods. They will again be put to the test when the terms-of-trade 
change is reversed and the gains either fully or partly dissipate.  
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation.  Low  and  stable  inflation 
provides  enterprises  and  households  with  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations.  Given  that  there  is 
confidence in the nominal anchor, monetary policy shall also contribute to stable developments in the 
real economy. Norges Bank therefore operates a flexible inflation targeting regime. This means that 
weight is given both to variability in inflation and variability in output and employment in interest-rate 
setting.  
Monetary policy is facing particular challenges. Inflation has been considerably lower than the inflation 
target  during  the  past  three  years.  During  the  same  three-year  period,  economic  growth  has  been 
high,  and  higher  than  our  estimate  for  long-term  growth  potential.  The  output  gap  has  shifted  from 
negative to positive. Unemployment is low and falling, and the increase in house prices, equity prices 
and credit has been high.  
Monetary policy has been and continues to be expansionary. Real interest rates have been low, and 
considerably lower than what is regarded as a neutral level. The expansionary monetary stance must 
be seen in the light of the fact that inflation has been very low and that there was idle capacity for a 
longer period.  
BIS Review 49/2006 
 1
The economy is periodically exposed to unexpected supply- and demand-side disturbances that affect 
both  inflation  and  output.  Monetary  policy  must  then  be  oriented  towards  bringing  inflation  back  to 
target over time while avoiding wide variations in output and employment. It takes time for interest rate 
changes  to  feed  through  to  real  economic  variables,  and  it  takes  even  somewhat  longer  for  the 
changes to have a clear impact on inflation. How long it takes to reach the inflation target – and not 
least  –  the  time  deemed desirable  for reaching  the inflation  target  will  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
disturbances to which economy is exposed. It may be appropriate to differentiate between supply-side 
disturbances and demand-side disturbances.  
If the economy is marked by weak demand, with low growth and low inflation, monetary policy should 
quite  clearly  be  expansionary.  This  will  stimulate  both  the  level  of  activity  and  push  up  inflation. 
Inflation will then move towards the target and output will move towards potential output. By the same 
token,  if  there  are  pressures  in  the  economy  and  inflation  is  high,  a  tighter  monetary  stance  will 
restrain both activity and inflationary pressures. In such situations, it may be desirable to bring inflation 
back to target quickly. There is no conflict of objectives.  
Low inflation in Norway is not the result of declining demand, activity or employment, but is rather a 
result  of  favourable  developments  on  the  supply  side  both  in  the  Norwegian  and  international 
economy.  
The integration of new emerging economies such as China and India into world trade, in conjunction 
with lower tariffs and reduced trade barriers, has contributed to a decline in prices for imported finished 
goods.  This  development  has  probably  been  most  noticeable  for  clothing  and  footwear  and 
audiovisual  equipment.  New  producer  countries  with  very  low  cost  levels  and  increasingly  more 
efficient production have contributed to a low rise in prices for other goods as well. Global competition 
has intensified and productivity growth has been high both in Norway and abroad.  
Competition has also increased in Norway in a number of industries. The airline industry has perhaps 
been  in  particular  focus,  where  the  entry  of  the  airline  Norwegian  in  the  Norwegian  market  has 
resulted in substantially lower air fares. In the retail trade we have also witnessed the impact of more 
efficient  purchasing  schemes,  a  larger  number  of  chains  and  intensified  competition.  Margins  and 
prices are falling in the financial industry. The rise in prices, for example in the hotel and restaurant 
industry, is surprisingly low.  
In the labour market, we see traces of increased competition and a more flexible supply of labour as a 
result of the accession of new countries to the EU and greater mobility in the international labour force. 
These  developments  may  have  contributed  to  keeping  wage  growth  at  a  lower  level  than  would 
otherwise have been the case.  
Low import prices, increased efficiency and intensified competition in both product and labour markets 
are probably the main reasons why inflation is still very low, even three years into this upturn.  
When  economic  developments  are  marked  by  favourable  developments  on  the  supply  side  both 
internationally and in Norway, the challenges facing monetary policy are different from those arising 
when  developments  are  marked  by  demand-side  conditions.  A  favourable  supply-side  shock  may 
result in both lower inflation and higher output. A conflict may now arise between stabilising inflation at 
target and stabilising developments in output and employment.  
Not  all  supply-side  disturbances  will  be  of  the  same  nature.  Some  may  increase  potential  output 
permanently  and  enable  the  economy,  at  least  for  a  period,  to  grow  more  rapidly  than  normal. 
Monetary  policy  should  not  counteract  this.  Higher  productivity  growth  leads,  for  example,  to  lower 
inflation  as  well  as  to  an  increase  in  potential  output  in  the  economy.  A  sustained  increase  in 
competition in domestic markets will reduce prices and profit margins. At the same time, production 
will increase. In efficient markets, an increase in supply will normally generate higher demand without 
the  need  for  a  monetary  policy  response.  The  effects  of  globalisation  are  more  intricate.  Increased 
trade contributes to cheaper imported goods and increased potential consumption, but not necessarily 
to increased potential output.  
There  probably  have  been  some  disturbances  on  the  supply-side  that  may  be  associated  with  a 
permanent  increase  in  potential  output  in  Norway.  Our  estimates  of  the  potential  output  level  have 
increased  in  pace  with  the  emergence  of  new  information.  Our  best  guess  is  nevertheless  that  the 
output  gap  is  now  positive  and  widening.  Low  inflation  combined  with  high  growth  in  output  and 
employment is therefore a challenge to monetary policy.  
2 
 BIS Review 49/2006
Even  though  economic  growth  has  been  strong  over  the  past  15  years,  business  cycles  have 
fluctuated.  A  pronounced  upturn  in  the  years  from  1993  to  1998  was  followed  by  a  period  of  more 
moderate growth and a mild recession in 2002 and into 2003. Since summer 2003, there has again 
been a clear upturn in the Norwegian economy.  
Wage developments reflect and influence business cycles. Strong employment growth in the 1990s 
resulted in a rise in labour costs, which in turn had a dampening impact on growth. Moderate wage 
growth in recent years has been accompanied by a strong cyclical upturn.  
So far, the upturn has been marked by strong growth in output, with an ample supply of labour and 
unusually low inflation. For a longer period employment showed a smaller rise than in previous cyclical 
upturns,  partly  reflecting  the  decline  in  sickness  absence  since  summer  2004  and  solid  growth  in 
productivity. Employment showed a turnaround last autumn and the number of persons employed is 
now increasing sharply. Unemployment is falling rapidly.  
The threat of relocation of jobs to other countries, increased inward labour migration and increased 
imports of goods and services may contribute to somewhat more moderate wage growth during this 
upturn.  It  is  also  possible  that  the  experience  of  the  period  1998-2002,  with  high  wage  growth  and 
sharp fluctuations in the krone exchange rate and interest rates, is still marking wage settlements. At 
the same time, the situation with an ample labour supply may also be reversing. Sickness absence is 
now  on  the  increase,  and  the  number  of  persons  on  disability  benefit  is  still  rising  steadily.  Other 
countries  still  provide  us  with  a  source  of  labour,  but  the  supply  is  not  sufficient  to  offset  the 
considerable flows into benefit schemes when viewing the economy as a whole.  
As expected, it appears that wage growth will be somewhat higher in 2006 than in 2005. Historical 
experience shows that it is difficult for the social partners at the local and centralised levels to restrain 
wage growth when unemployment is low. A characteristic of the wage formation process in Norway 
has  been  that  fairly  long  periods  of  moderate  nominal  pay  increases  and  rising  employment  have 
culminated in a sharp rise in cost inflation – often as a result of working hour reforms – and a decline 
in employment. Developments in labour costs and the wage settlements in 1974 and 1975, 1986 and 
1987  and  in  the  period  between  1998  and  2002  triggered  a  subsequent  decline  in  output  and 
employment. When we set interest rates, we must always assess the risk of another sharp rise in cost 
inflation when the labour market tightens.  
High economic growth often leads to a sharp rise in asset prices and debt. Long periods marked by 
such developments may be a source of future instability in the real economy. When activity is high and 
household income expectations are high, asset prices and debt may increase rapidly. Expectations of 
high  corporate  profits  may  stimulate  investment  and  lead  to  higher  equity  prices.  Such  an  upswing 
may result in an increased willingness to take risk among both households and companies. They then 
become more vulnerable to a future downturn.  
Since the mid-1990s, debt and house prices have shown a marked increase in Norway. Initially and 
perhaps for a period, this may be viewed to some extent as a delayed adaptation to the deregulation 
of the housing and credit markets in the mid-1980s after households had burned their fingers in the 
first  years  following  the  deregulation.  Mortgage  loan  products  have  since  been  further  developed. 
Household income has risen considerably in recent years, and household optimism about the future is 
unusually  strong,  which  may  also  have  contributed  to  increased  demand  for  loans  and  the  rise  in 
house  prices.  In  addition,  expectations  of  persistently  low  real  interest  rates  over  time  may  have 
provided an additional boost to house prices.  
It will always be difficult to know when and to what extent monetary policy should respond to a sharp 
rise  in  asset  prices  and  a  strong  increase  in  credit  growth.  Our  knowledge  of  the  driving  forces  is 
incomplete.  Our  history  is  short  and  our  experience  with  deregulated  loan  and  housing  markets  is 
limited. It is difficult to determine to what extent the rise in house prices and growth in household debt 
can be accounted for by structural and long-lasting adaptation, by “normal” cyclical effects and by a 
short-term trend extension and speculative behaviour that may amplify the cyclical fluctuations when 
the bubbles burst.  
We have leaned towards the notion that debt and asset price developments may be a potential source 
of  subsequent  instability,  but  it  is  neither  our  ambition  nor  our  conviction  that  monetary  policy  can 
control developments in these variables. Combined with the favourable supply-side developments in 
the  economy,  this  has  prompted  us  to  extend  the  horizon  for  reaching  the  inflation  target.  In  our 
communications, we have  also clearly  articulated  that  the  interest  rate  has  been  unusually  low  and 
BIS Review 49/2006 
 3
must gradually be increased to a more normal level. Since last autumn, this has been expressed in 
Norges Bank’s interest rate projections for the period ahead.  
From  using  technical  assumptions  or  others’  assessments,  we  have  now  taken  ownership  of  the 
interest  rate  path  in  our  projections.  This  is  also  a  means  of  seeking  to  influence  household  and 
business  expectations.  Although  there  will  still  be  considerable  uncertainty,  it  will  be  easier  for 
economic agents to assess interest rate developments. This makes monetary policy more effective. 
The prospect of a gradual normalisation of interest rates may curb credit growth and the rise in house 
prices.  
There may be objections to our producing interest rate projections. Producing an explicit interest rate 
projection  may  be  stretching  our  knowledge  quite  far.  It  may  be  argued  that  market  participants’ 
overview  and  insight  are  just  as  good  as  ours  and  that  our  analyses  do  not  add  much  beyond  the 
information embedded in market rates. Another objection is the risk of the interest rate path becoming 
a target itself and that deviating from the interest rate projection would be perceived as a drawback, 
even if economic developments should so imply.  
It is important to stress that the interest rate path is conditional on economic developments and our 
understanding of the functioning of the economy. This is reflected in the fan chart bands surrounding 
future interest rate developments.  
The  central  bank  of  New  Zealand  has  experience  in  producing  interest  rate  projections,  and  actual 
interest  rate  developments  have  on  many  occasions  differed  from  the  projections1.  We  must  also 
expect deviations from our projections. The interest rate will deviate from the projections if economic 
developments  are  different  from  the  assumptions  applied  when  the  interest  rate  projection  was 
published or if we change our view of how the economy functions.  
Confidence  in  monetary  policy  depends  on  whether  we  succeed  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations 
and  thus  provide  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  A  credible  nominal  anchor  is  important  to 
ensure that economic agents are able to differentiate between changes in relative prices and changes 
in the nominal price level. Changes in relative prices for goods and services are an important bearer of 
information about the degree of resource shortages and provide signals to investors, producers and 
households.  Without  a  nominal  anchor,  it  is  more  difficult  for  households  and  enterprises  to  make 
consumption  and  investment  decisions.  There  is  greater  uncertainty  surrounding  real  returns  on 
nominal investments. This may increase risk premiums in financial markets. The absence of a nominal 
anchor  may  therefore  result  in  unsound  decisions  and  considerable  fluctuations  in  output  and 
employment and inflation. The interest rate will then have to be used more aggressively to stabilise 
output and inflation. Monetary policy may become less effective.  
Very low inflation over a longer period increases the risk of the economy moving into a negative spiral 
with real economic costs. Even if low inflation initially reflects favourable supply-side conditions, it may 
lead to a demand-driven downturn if economic agents choose to delay investment and consumption 
on the basis of expectations of continued low or falling prices. Orienting monetary policy with a view to 
achieving the inflation target within a reasonable time horizon and thereby providing a nominal anchor 
will  be  a  safeguard  against  such  a  development.  Our  experience  may  indicate  that  inflation 
expectations  remain  stable  even  if  inflation  varies  somewhat  as  long  as  the  interest  rate  is  used 
actively to dampen the effects and monetary policy is oriented towards achieving the inflation target 
over time.  
The interest rate was reduced to a very low level when inflation fell and approached zero. At the same 
time, we indicated that the interest rate would remain low until there were clear signs of a renewed 
pickup in inflation. If low inflation were solely associated with economic downturns, it would have been 
necessary to reduce the interest rate even further and keep the interest rate lower for a longer period. 
At this juncture, it our view that inflation could be brought back to target over a longer period because 
output has increased markedly.  
We are currently adjusting the interest rate, in small not too frequent steps, towards a more normal 
level. Since June 2005, the key rate has been increased by a total of 1 percentage point and we have 
signalled that further interest rate increases are in the offing. We expect inflation to rise through 2007 
                                                      
1   The chart is from Archer. D. (2005): “Central-bank communication and the publication of interest rate projections”, presented 
implementation,  communication  and  effectiveness”: 
targeting: 
at  Sveriges  Riksbank’s  conference: 
http://www.riksbank.com/templates/Page.aspx?id=15814. 
“Inflation 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2006
and be close to the target of 2.5 per cent at the end of 2008. This is supported by a number of factors. 
Capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  picking  up.  This  may  result  in  higher  margins.  A 
tighter  labour  market  may  lead  to  higher  wage  growth.  In  addition,  the  increase  in  energy  and 
commodity prices is pushing up producer costs at home and abroad.  
Although the Bank in principle neither found it desirable nor anticipated that inflation was as low as it 
actually has been, we have deliberately accepted an inflation rate that is below target for a period. In a 
period  of  increased  cross-border  labour  flows,  substantial  technological  advances,  changes  in 
competitive conditions and new trading patterns, we may, with our very open economy, have to accept 
a somewhat greater variability in inflation and deviations from the target, as we have witnessed over 
the past two to three years.  
This leads me to how monetary policy should be assessed.  
Section 1 of the Regulation on Monetary Policy states:  
  "Norges Bank’s operational conduct of monetary policy shall... be oriented towards low and 
stable inflation. The operational objective of monetary policy is annual consumer price inflation 
of approximately 2.5 per cent over time.  
In  general,  the  direct  effects  on  consumer  prices  resulting  from  changes  in  interest  rates, 
taxes,  excise  duties  and  extraordinary  temporary  disturbances  shall  not  be  taken  into 
account."  
A reasonable interpretation of the regulation is that when we look ahead, the interest rate should be 
set with a view to reaching the inflation target of 2.5 per cent within a reasonable, but flexible, time 
horizon. When evaluating whether the interest rate level is appropriate, one must consider the quality 
of the analyses of developments in the Norwegian and international economy, as well as the trade-offs 
that have been made.  
When we look back and assess interest-rate setting, we must also take into account the reasons for 
the  deviations  from  the  target.  For  the  average  annual  rise  in  consumer  prices  over  time  to  be  the 
same as the inflation target, the disturbances that affect the economy must be fairly symmetrical. Price 
inflation has been lower than the inflation target for a longer period and the interest rate is being set 
with a view to gradually closing the inflation gap. The aim is not for inflation to overshoot the target to 
the same extent a few years ahead. Therefore, when we in retrospect assess interest-rate setting, we 
cannot solely look at average CPI inflation.  
Monetary policy must also be seen in the light of historical inflation. In the 1970s and 1980s, inflation 
was  very  high  and  volatile.  The  economy  did  not  at  that  time  have  a  nominal  anchor.  Since  the 
beginning of the 1990s, inflation has been low and stable, both internationally and in Norway. While 
inflation in the 1970s and 1980s varied between 4 and 15 per cent, inflation has generally remained in 
the interval 1½ - 3½ per cent since 1990. The economy now has a nominal anchor.  
In  Norway  and  other  countries,  the  period  of  very  high  and  variable  inflation  and  high  inflation 
expectations was interrupted towards the end of the 1980s. We have seen the benefits of this in the 
1990s and thus far in this decade. The effects of persistently high oil prices and the generally strong 
rise  in  commodity  prices  internationally  cannot  be  compared  to  the  experience  of  the  1970s  and 
1980s.  Monetary  policy  is  now  delegated  to  central  banks  whose  objective  is  to  maintain  low  and 
stable inflation, and which are not of the view that there is a positive trade-off between inflation and 
economic growth in the long term. Inflation expectations are entrenched at a low, stable level.  
Even though inflation during the past 15 to 20 years has been under control, consumer price inflation 
has  nevertheless  in  periods  varied  somewhat  from  one  month  to  the  next.  A  large  portion  of  the 
variations may be explained by tax changes and variations in energy prices. These fluctuations have 
generally had transitory effects on the CPI. When assessing actual price inflation in the recent past, in 
the present and in the near term, we do not take account of the rise and fall in individual prices, but we 
look  at  whether  the  general  price  level  in  the  economy  exhibits  a  persistent  increase.  Indicators  of 
underlying inflation seek to reduce or exclude movements that are due to temporary disturbances and 
that should be disregarded when the interest rate is set.  
Underlying inflation, like the output gap and the neutral interest rate, is an unobservable variable. An 
ideal indicator of underlying inflation should show the same average rise as the rise in the CPI over 
time.  It  should  be  less  volatile  than  the  CPI  and  should  be  indicative  of  future  developments  in 
inflation.  
BIS Review 49/2006 
 5
The consumer price index adjusted for taxes and excluding energy products, the CPI-ATE, has been 
widely used as an indicator of underlying inflation. However, the CPI-ATE not only excludes temporary 
effects  of  tax  changes  and  fluctuations  in energy  prices,  but  also  trend changes  in  these  variables. 
This indicator is therefore not a perfect measure of underlying inflation. In the last 10 years, the CPI-
ATE has underestimated underlying inflation because energy prices have increased more than other 
consumer prices and the level of excise duties has increased somewhat. In the past ten years, the 
difference has been roughly 0.3-0.4 percentage point on average per year.  
Traditionally,  Norway  has  been  a  net  exporter  of  energy,  but  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  the  situation 
reversed.  The  price  of  energy  is  largely  determined  by  supply  and  demand  in  the  Nordic  energy 
market  and  to  some  degree  by  the  energy  balance  in  non-Nordic  countries.  Energy  trading  is 
important  for  Norway.  It  reduces  the  vulnerability  to  precipitation  levels  and  inflows.  However,  the 
majority of Norway’s energy trading partners use coal, oil, gas and nuclear energy. Production costs 
for thermal power are higher than for hydropower, which is produced in Norway. If demand continues 
to increase more than production, electricity prices may continue to rise more than other prices in the 
future.  
The integration of China and other low-cost countries into the world trade system has resulted in far 
lower prices for finished goods. These countries’ entry into the world market has also led to strong 
economic growth and high demand for oil and other commodities. This has pushed up both energy 
and commodity prices.  
Oil prices have risen from close to USD 30 per barrel in October 2003 to about USD 70 in May this 
year. The rise is largely due to increased demand for oil, and China accounts for a substantial portion 
of global growth in oil demand.  
The trend rise in energy prices and the trend fall in import prices are partly attributable to the same 
process.  Excluding  one  of  the  effects  and  not  the  other  could  distort  the  measure  of  underlying 
inflation2.  
We have regularly published three measures of underlying inflation which are published in the Inflation 
Report  –  the  CPI-ATE,  the  weighted  median  and  the  trimmed  average  (20%).  Recently,  we  have 
worked with several alternative measures of underlying inflation. One of these is a volatility-weighted 
indicator based on historical volatility of 96 sub-indices in the CPI (Coicop4 level). The CPI weights 
have  been  replaced  by  weights  that  give  the  sub-indices  with  the  widest  historical  fluctuations  less 
weight,  but  no  index  has been  fully  excluded.  This  means  that  energy  prices are  included  but  they 
have considerably less weight than in the CPI.  
Of the measures that we use for underlying inflation, the CPI-ATE has tended to be lowest. All four 
measures indicate that inflation has been moderate in recent years and have implied an expansionary 
monetary policy.  
The  rise  in  prices  we  have  recently  observed  could  affect  inflation  in  the  period  ahead  through 
compensation for earlier inflation, the pass through of costs to selling prices and through expectations 
of  future  price  inflation.  By  using  various  measures  of  underlying  inflation,  we  seek  to  capture  the 
portion  of  the  rise  in  prices  that  may  influence  future  inflation.  It  is  always  difficult  in  real  time  to 
determine which price movements will persist and which will only have a short-term effect on the CPI. 
An  assessment  of  underlying  inflationary  pressures  should  probably  be  based  on  several  different 
indicators and developments in these should be followed up by discussion and interpretation of the 
underlying causes.  
Allow me to conclude.  
Developments over the past 40 years have illustrated that the most important contribution monetary 
policy can make to sound economic developments in the long term is low and stable inflation. This 
provides the economy with a nominal anchor.  
In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that 
weight is given to both variability in inflation and variability in output and employment. Flexible inflation 
targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary policy, which is to keep inflation 
                                                      
2   This  is  discussed  in  “Measures  of  core  inflation”  in  Bank  of  England’s  Inflation  Report  of  February  2006.  See 
www.bankofengland.co.uk. 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2006
on  target  and  provide  an  anchor  for  inflation  expectations,  and  the  more  short-term  objective  of 
stability in the real economy.  
In some situations, it may be desirable to bring inflation rapidly back to target. In other situations, it 
may  be  desirable  to  apply  a  longer  horizon.  In  this  context,  it  may  be  appropriate  to  differentiate 
between supply-side and demand-side disturbances. The horizon must also been seen in the light of 
developments  in  house  prices  and debt.  However,  for  monetary policy  to  function  as  intended,  it  is 
important that there is confidence in the nominal anchor.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 49/2006 
 7
