Nicholas C Garganas: Regional financial stability around the Eurozone 
Presentation  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  conference  on 
Regional  Financial  Stability  Around  the  Eurozone,  organised  by  the  Euro  50  Group,  Istanbul, 
1 June 2006. 
 I am delighted to have been asked to participate in this conference on “Regional Financial Stability 
Around  the  Eurozone”.  This  topic  has  gained  importance  as  the  economies  -  and  particularly  the 
financial systems - of South-Eastern European (SEE) countries have increasingly developed linkages 
both  within  their  region  and  with  the  Eurozone.  In  recent  years,  SEE  countries  have  generally 
experienced  high  rates  of  economic  growth,  improvements  in  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  and  a 
significant  transformation  and  growth  of  their  financial  systems.  For  sustainable  future  growth  and 
development in the region, the maintenance of financial stability is an essential precondition. In turn, 
the existence of an effective legal and regulatory framework for the financial sector and the conduct of 
financial  supervision  in  accordance  with  international  best  practices  plays  an  important  role  in 
promoting financial stability. To this end, considerable efforts have already been made to strengthen 
the  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  of  the  financial  sector  in  SEE  countries  and  to  improve 
supervisory practice. In what follows, I will briefly discuss the various channels through which external 
assistance  towards  regulatory  and  supervisory  reform  in  South-Eastern  Europe  has  been  provided, 
identify  some  areas  where  further  reform  and  expertise  appears  necessary,  and  suggest  some  co-
operative arrangements that could contribute to this objective.  
Over the past fifteen years or so, technical assistance to improve the legal and regulatory framework 
of the financial sectors of SEE countries and the implementation and enforcement capabilities of the 
competent national authorities has been provided in various forms by international organisations such 
as the IMF, the World Bank,  and the BIS. Although a comprehensive discussion of all these projects 
is  not  realistic  in  my  short  presentation,  it  may  be  worthwhile  to  at  least  mention  a  few  of  them. 
Supervisory  personnel  from  SEE  countries  have  participated  in  training  seminars  offered  by  the 
Financial Stability Institute of the BIS and by the Joint Vienna Institute. Under the joint IMF-World Bank 
Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program,  international  teams  of  experts  have  assessed  the  financial 
sectors of SEE countries and the degree of compliance with Basel Core Principles and have identified 
weaknesses and proposed corrective measures, many of which have since been implemented by the 
countries  concerned.  In  coordination  with  international  institutions,  the  United  States  Agency  for 
International  Development  (USAID)  has  supported  projects  in  many  SEE  countries  to  improve  the 
regulatory framework for the financial sector and the conduct of supervision. 
As SEE countries aspire to eventual EU membership, the European Commission has been particularly 
active in the region both in providing technical assistance and in monitoring progress in financial sector 
reform. As regards technical assistance, the European Commission’s main instrument is the Twinning 
Programs  financed  by  the  PHARE  and  CARDS  facilities.  Twinning  Programs  are  particularly  useful 
since each beneficiary country determines its specific needs and is subsequently able to choose the 
one that best meets its requirements among the proposals submitted. Twinning Programs also help to 
establish close working relationships between the authorities of recipient countries and those of the 
EU countries which provide technical assistance. The ECB has also provided technical assistance to 
SEE  countries  through  various channels  such  as short-term  missions, conferences  and internships. 
ECB  assistance  was  given  in  the  fields  of  money  and  banking  statistics,  payment  and  settlement 
systems and financial stability as well as in other fields which fall outside the scope of my presentation. 
Moreover, the ECB, acting as co-ordinator of Eurosystem projects, is currently working on a number of 
projects in the region, including the finalisation of plans for a 6-month CARDS funded project to Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. Apart from these Commission and ECB initiatives, technical assistance has been 
provided  to  SEE  countries  on  a  bilateral  basis  by  the  financial  sector  authorities  of  individual  EU 
countries,  usually  through  less  formal  ad  hoc  arrangements  focusing  on  specific  areas  where 
particular  SEE  countries  require  expertise.  Finally,  the  Memoranda  of  Understanding  concluded 
between the banking supervisory authorities of EU countries and those of the SEE countries provide 
for  regular  meetings  to  discuss  supervisory  principles  and  practices  and,  in  some  cases,  include 
specific provisions for co-operation in staff training. 
In most SEE countries, the basic legal and regulatory framework for the financial sector is now in place 
and largely conforms with international standards. Nevertheless, there are differences between SEE 
countries  as  regards  the  state  of  development  of  financial  sector  regulation  and  supervision. 
Generally, there is a positive relationship between progress in these areas and how far each country 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 1
has  moved  along  the  path  leading  to  EU  membership.  As  Bulgaria  and  Romania  are  acceding 
countries  and  Turkey,  Croatia  and  FYROM  are  EU-candidate  countries,  they  have  generally  made 
greater  progress  in  adopting  the  acquis  Communautaire  in  the  financial  sector  compared  to  the 
remaining SEE countries, which are in various stages of the Stabilisation and Association Process. 
As  a  rule,  in  SEE  countries  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  and  the  implementation  and 
enforcement  capabilities  of  the  supervisory  authorities  are  more  developed  in  the  banking  sector 
compared to other segments of the financial system. This is due to the fact that the capital markets are 
still underdeveloped in SEE countries, with the banking sector dominating the financial system in these 
countries. Accordingly, both the national authorities and the foreign providers of technical assistance 
place  more  emphasis  on  regulatory  and  supervisory  reform  in  the  banking  sector.  [Bulgaria  and 
Romania  have  nevertheless  made  progress  toward  harmonization  with  EU  regulations  on  capital 
markets.]  Meanwhile,  in  all  SEE  countries  except  Turkey,  foreign  banks,  mainly  from  EU  countries, 
have acquired, through their subsidiaries and branch networks, a dominant position in local banking 
systems. This development has increased competition, facilitated the transfer of expertise especially in 
credit assessment and risk management and enhanced the ability of local banking systems to operate 
under more demanding supervisory standards. 
In contrast with the banking sector, the insurance sector in SEE countries is still underdeveloped and 
tends to be characterized by weak governance and regulation, despite improvements in recent years, 
mainly  in  Bulgaria  and  Romania  in  connection  with  these  countries’    preparation  for  EU  accession.  
Furthermore,  reflecting the persisting problems in governance and regulation, the insurance sector in 
SEE countries tends to be undercapitalized. 
In  the  banking  sectors  of  SEE  counties,  it  appears  that  the  degree  of  progress  towards  achieving 
international best standards has not been the same in all areas of regulatory and supervisory interest, 
particularly as regards the implementation and enforcement capabilities of the competent authorities. 
In  a  number  of  countries,  assessments  on  behalf  of  the  European  Commission  and  the  IMF  have 
revealed remaining weaknesses in such fields as anti-money laundering, consolidated supervision of 
financial  conglomerates,  implementation  of  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS), 
integrated  assessment  of  risk  management  systems  and  the  extent  of  co-operation  with  foreign 
supervisors. [As regards the IFRS, it is worth noting that Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia, and Serbia have 
already implemented these standards for companies and banks, while Turkey and Albania envisage 
their  implementation  by  2008.]  Moreover,  SEE  countries  face  important  medium-term  challenges 
relating to the effective application of the principles of good corporate governance across the financial 
sector,  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  capital  adequacy  framework  and  the  development  of  a 
comprehensive methodology for financial stability assessment, including the design of a macro stress-
testing  framework,  especially  for  credit  risk.  Although  central  banks  in  some  SEE  countries  have 
already  made  progress  in  financial  stability  assessment,  more  work  needs  to  be  done  and  such 
assessments need to increasingly take into account potential repercussions from regional and wider 
European developments. 
The  above  considerations  indicate  areas  where  further  assistance  may  be  required  by  particular 
countries.  Apart  from  programs  supported  by  international  organisations,  continuing  recourse  to 
bilateral co-operation arrangements between authorities of EU countries and those of SEE countries 
would be particularly useful. In this respect, the experience of the authorities of EU countries that have 
relatively  recently  completed  the  reform  of  their  financial  sector  in  accordance  with  international 
standards  would  be  a  valuable  input  to  the  authorities  of  SEE  countries  that  currently  face  similar 
challenges. Also, peer group reviews by financial sector supervisors from other countries could play a 
useful role in periodically assessing the effectiveness of financial sector regulation and supervision in 
each  SEE  country  and  in  offering  advice  on  needed  improvements.  Finally,  national  Banking 
Federations  of  SEE  countries  can  help  to  bring  the  operation  of  local  banks  up  to  EU  standards 
through multilateral co-operation in the areas of staff training and convergence in the implementation 
of  sound  operating  and  risk  management  systems.  To  this  end,  the  national  Banking  Federations 
participating in the Interbalkan Banking Forum have recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding. 
It is important to recognize that, as the financial systems of SEE countries are liberalized and their 
economies become more open, the task of maintaining financial stability becomes more challenging. 
In meeting this challenge, I believe that arrangements for supervisory co-operation and the provision 
of  technical  assistance  can  continue  to  play  a  useful  role  in  supporting  national  efforts  for  further 
regulatory and supervisory reform aimed at strengthening the resilience of the financial sector of SEE 
countries and achieving conformity with EU standards. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2006
Let me conclude by stressing the importance of the financial system for economic growth. Why is the 
financial  system  so  crucial?  The  answer  is  that  the  financial  system  can  be  thought  of  as  a 
coordinating  mechanism  that  allocates  capital  to  building  factories,  houses  and  roads.  If  capital  is 
misallocated, the economy will operate inefficiently and economic growth will be low (Mishkin, 2005)1. 
Effectively, just as a high level of human capital increases the productivity of labour, so an efficient 
financial system increases the productivity of all factor inputs. For this reason, a financial system can 
be thought of as the central nervous system of an economy. If it is stable and efficient, it coordinates 
the economy’s activities, helping to improve the living standards of its citizens  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                      
1   Mishkin, S. Frederick (2005), “Is Financial Globalization Beneficial?” NBER Working Paper No. 11891 (December). 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 3
