Toshihiko Fukui: Recent economic and financial developments and the 
conduct of monetary policy  
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, to the Japan National 
Press Club, Tokyo, 20 June 2006.  
 Introduction 
Japan's economy continues to grow, with domestic and external demand and also the corporate and 
household sectors well in balance. The economy is likely to achieve sustainable growth under price 
stability. 
Today,  I  will  explain  the  background  of  the  economic  outlook  and  assess  several  risk  factors 
influencing  the  outlook.  Moreover,  based  on  the  review,  I  will  talk  about  how  the  Bank  will  conduct 
monetary policy with a view to achieving sustainable growth under price stability. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
I. 
I will first summarize the outlook for economic activity and prices. The Bank presented the projection of 
economic  activity  and  prices  for  two  years  ahead  through  fiscal  2007  in  its  Outlook  for  Economic 
Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report)  released  on  April  28,  2006:  Japan's  economy  is 
likely to experience a sustained period of expansion, with domestic and external demand and also the 
corporate  and  household  sectors  well  in  balance,  and  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) is likely to rise gradually. 
The Outlook Report pointed to the following four factors as the mechanism behind the projection. First, 
exports  are  likely  to  continue  to  increase  reflecting  global  economic  expansion.  Second,  corporate 
performance is likely to continue to be strong. Third, the positive influence of corporate sector strength 
on  the  household  sector  is  likely  to  become  stronger.  And  fourth,  financial  conditions  are  likely  to 
remain extremely accommodative. 
Examining  data  available  after  the  publication  of  the  Outlook  Report,  developments  in  economic 
activity and prices so far seem to be in line with the projection in the Outlook Report. 
As for economic activity in fiscal 2005, which is the basis of the projection for fiscal 2006 and 2007, it 
was confirmed that the economy had continued to grow with balanced external demand and domestic 
demand  particularly  in  the  private  sector.  Real  GDP  registered  an  annualized  growth  rate  of  3.1 
percent for the January-March quarter of 2006 and 3.2 percent for fiscal 2005. Corporate performance 
continued  to  be  strong,  as  is  evident  from  increases  in  profits  both  in  the  manufacturing  and 
nonmanufacturing sectors at the book closing for fiscal 2005, following the large gains in the previous 
fiscal  year. 
the  manufacturing  and 
nonmanufacturing sectors showed robust growth during the January-March quarter of 2006, as shown 
in the quarterly Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry. 
As for future developments in economic activity, the corporate sector is likely to remain strong. Major 
firms are expected to enjoy continued profit growth in fiscal 2006, which in the manufacturing sector is 
likely  to  be  particularly  strong  in  the  processing  industries,  such  as  electrical  machinery,  general 
machinery,  and  automobiles,  and  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector  in  industries  related  to  private 
consumption,  such  as  retailing  and  services.  Various  surveys  indicate  that  firms'  business  fixed 
investment  plans  are  also relatively  strong.  We  expect  that  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector will 
continue, but the growth in business fixed investment will gradually slow. I will elaborate on this later. 
The  positive  influence  of  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector  on  the  household  sector  is  becoming 
more  evident.  As  for  employment  and  wages,  labor  market  conditions  have  been  improving  on  the 
whole. The unemployment rate has recently declined to around 4 percent from the 5-6 percent level in 
2003, and the ratio of job offers to applicants has been exceeding 1.00 for the first time since 1992. In 
addition to the increase in the number of part-time workers, the number of full-time workers has been 
increasing recently due to the shortage of labor felt among firms. As for wages, regular payments have 
started  to  rise  in  addition  to  the  increases  in  overtime  and  bonus  payments.  Although  the  pace  of 
increase in wages is moderate partly due to firms' efforts to restrain labor costs, the increase is likely 
this  situation,  business 
investment  both 
fixed 
In 
in 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 1
to continue. With the increase not only in temporary income but also in the more permanent part of 
income, private consumption is likely to remain strong. 
Turning  to  prices,  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  are  rising,  due  to  the  surge  in  the  prices  of 
international commodities such as crude oil and nonferrous metals. Recently released statistics show 
that  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  domestic  corporate  goods  prices  was  3.3  percent  in  May, 
faster than the 2.5 percent increase in April. It is likely to remain high for the time being. 
The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  was  0.5  percent  in  April  and  continued  to  be  on  an 
uptrend. Looking at individual prices for items in the CPI basket, the number of items showing price 
rises  is  gradually  increasing,  and  the  trend  toward  price  increases  is  becoming  more  robust.  For 
example, prices for services, such as those for package tours, golf fees, and educational costs, have 
been revised upward with the start of the new fiscal year. Services prices are important indicators to 
confirm  the  general  trend  in  prices,  because  their  movements  are  largely  influenced  by  changes  in 
wages. Prices of items other than services, such as personal effects and clothing, are also increasing 
gradually. 
Developments in overseas economies 
II.  
As I explained, Japan's economy is likely to achieve sustainable growth under price stability. Domestic 
private demand seems to be standing on a firm foundation given that structural adjustment pressures 
in  the  corporate  sector  and  the  financial  system  have  dissipated.  This  directs  our  attention  to 
developments  in  overseas  economies  as  one  major  risk  factor  determining  the  outlook  for  Japan's 
economy. 
In  the  U.S.  economy,  business  fixed  investment  and  production  have  been  increasing  steadily,  but 
signs of deceleration in housing construction have finally been observed and the pace of increase in 
household spending and employment has been slowing. This trend suggests that interest rate raises 
by the Federal Reserve to date have been gradually taking effect. The increase in the core CPI has 
been accelerating slightly, reflecting the rise in utilization of labor and production capacity in addition to 
high crude oil prices. In this situation, inflationary concerns seem to be mounting. As for developments 
in the near future, important issues are whether economic deceleration in the United States will result 
in a soft landing, and whether inflationary concerns will be contained. 
In Europe, the momentum for economic recovery has been increasing gradually, as is evident from 
increases  in  exports  and  production  and  the  recovery  in  household  spending.  Under  these 
circumstances,  the  European  Central  Bank  has  been  carefully  raising  its  policy  interest  rate  since 
2005  in  order  to  stave off  the  upward pressure  on general  prices  from high crude oil  prices  and  to 
sustain the economic expansion. 
The  Chinese  economy  has  continued  to  show  extremely  high  growth.  Monetary  policy  has  been 
tightened recently so as to deal with the expansion in the money stock and bank lending as well as 
high growth in business fixed investment. Whether overheating of economic activity can be contained 
through appropriate policy conduct is an important factor when monitoring developments not only in 
the  Chinese  economy  but  also  the  world  economy,  and  global  price  developments  including 
developments in international commodity prices. 
In 2005, the world economy grew by nearly 5 percent. This expansion has been supported by the fact 
that a stable financial environment has been maintained by containing upward pressure on prices. A 
key  factor  in  maintaining  a  stable  financial  environment  is  whether  global  inflationary  concerns 
continue to be contained in the future. 
Developments in financial markets 
III. 
I would next like to briefly touch on recent developments in global financial markets. Stock prices have 
been declining in emerging economies as well as in major industrial countries. Financial markets in 
many emerging economies have been weak, as is evident from the falls in bond prices and foreign 
exchange rates in addition to stock prices. Prices of some international commodities, including those 
of nonferrous metals, have declined recently, after exhibiting large increases. 
Market participants point to various factors behind these developments. One is the adjustment of stock 
and  commodity  prices,  which  had  risen  substantially  in  the  prolonged  accommodative  financial 
environment around the world, in response to changes in the degree of this financial accommodation. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2006
Another  factor  is  uncertainty  as  to  whether  inflationary  risks  will  be  contained,  and  whether  a 
considerable  deceleration  of  economic  activity  will  be  staved  off  even  when  inflationary  risks  are 
contained. 
The  fundamentals  of  economies  worldwide,  including  Japan's,  do  not  seem  to  have  changed 
significantly  so  far.  Under  the  current  economic  circumstances,  financial  markets  are  evolving  in 
pursuit of a new equilibrium by digesting new information while interacting with each other. Financial 
market  developments  continue  to  warrant  careful  monitoring,  since  they  influence  economic  activity 
through their impact on business and household sentiment. 
Developments in inventory investment 
IV. 
As I mentioned earlier, domestic private demand is standing on a firm foundation, but in the corporate 
sector,  it  is  necessary  to  pay  attention  to  the  possibility  of  a  stock  adjustment.  Such  adjustment 
involves  both  downside  and  upside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  in  the  short  term: 
inventory adjustment, for example in IT-related sectors, is a downside risk while a further acceleration 
of business fixed investment is an upside risk. Given that the output gap has already closed, a further 
acceleration of business fixed investment should be regarded not only as an upside risk in the short 
term but also a factor leading to larger economic swings in the longer term as a result of a subsequent 
downturn. 
Looking first at inventory investment, levels of inventories are still relatively low. The inventory cycle in 
the manufacturing sector as a whole suggests that the growth in shipments and inventories is more or 
less in balance. Focusing on individual industries, excess inventories, particularly of general-purpose 
products, had built up in the iron and steel, and chemical industries, but recently, adjustments in these 
industries  have  been  coming  to  an  end.  In  IT-related  sectors,  the  level  of  inventories  has  been 
somewhat high, but this is basically in line with the increase in shipments, and thus unintended and 
excessive inventories have not been built up at the moment. 
There are some factors, however, that may trigger inventory adjustments. For example, although the 
demand  for  IT-related  goods  is  expected  to  continue  increasing,  there  is  a  possibility  of  inventory 
adjustments  for  such  goods  occurring  depending  on developments  in  demand.  This  is  because  the 
supply of these goods is increasing at a rapid pace, including in the high-value-added products sector 
where Japanese firms have a competitive edge. 
Developments in business fixed investment 
V. 
As mentioned earlier, a further acceleration in business fixed investment, as another possible avenue 
of stock adjustments, entails not only an upside risk in the short term but also a factor leading to larger 
economic swings in the longer term as a result of a subsequent downturn.  
From a business-cycle point of view, the economic recovery appears to be reaching the mature stage 
and  growth  is  projected  to  gradually  decelerate  to  the  potential  growth  rate.  Although  corporate 
performance is likely to remain strong, the growth in business fixed investment is expected to slow as 
the level of capital stock becomes higher with the accumulation of past investment. As a result, the 
driving force of economic activity will shift gradually from the corporate sector to the household sector. 
The deceleration in business fixed investment is expected to stave off a build-up of capital stock and 
contribute to achieving a sustained period of growth. Especially given that the output gap has closed, 
excessive  investment  and  stronger  economic  growth  are  likely  to  increase  the  risk  of  an  eventual 
swingback. 
So  far,  no  signs  of  excessive  investment  have  been  observed.  In  the  face  of  intense  global 
competition, firms seem to be selective in allocating their business resources. 
It is true, however, that the financial environment is extremely accommodative and gives incentives to 
firms  to  accelerate  business  fixed  investment.  Real  short-term  interest  rates  in  Japan  are  currently 
negative  and  extremely  low  compared  with  real  GDP  growth  currently  exceeding  3  percent  and  an 
estimated growth rate of the potential output ranging from 1.5 to 2.0 percent. Moreover, the functioning 
of the financial system has been enhanced and private financial institutions have been maintaining a 
proactive lending posture. The year-on-year growth in lending by private banks turned positive in the 
summer of 2005 and has been on a gradual upward trend since. 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 3
Conduct of monetary policy in a low-inflation environment 
VI. 
Turning to a slightly theoretical issue, until recently, the main difficulty in conducting monetary policy in 
a low-inflation environment has been focused on how to deal with the risk of a deflationary spiral. 
In a low-inflation environment, nominal interest rates are typically low and are thus more probable to 
be constrained by the zero bound. Because nominal interest rates cannot be lowered below zero, real 
interest rates are likely to become higher than the optimal level for the economy when prices fall. That 
increases  the  risk  of  the  economy  falling  into  a  vicious  cycle  of  declining  prices  and  deteriorating 
economic  activity.  In  Japan,  such  a  risk  has  been  a  matter  of  strong  concern  since  the  end  of  the 
1990s.  At  present,  this  risk  has  become  low,  since  the  Japanese  financial  system  has  restored  its 
stability and firms have now resolved excesses in production capacity, employment, and debt. 
On the other hand, when economic activity is picking up as a result of an unprecedented monetary 
easing against severe economic conditions with low inflation, a central bank is required to carry out 
monetary policy adroitly to adjust monetary accommodation by assessing upside risks. 
For  example,  since  the  inflation  rate  tends  to  exhibit  strong  inertia,  even  if  the  supply-demand 
conditions in the economy become tighter, the observed rate of inflation and inflation expectations are 
likely  to  remain  anchored  at  a  low  level.  In  such  a  situation,  maintaining  an  excessively 
accommodative monetary condition entails a risk of causing temporary overheating of the economy 
and a subsequent downturn, thereby resulting in larger swings in economic activity. 
The sensitivity of the rate of inflation to changes in the output gap has tended to become weaker not 
only  in  Japan  but  also  abroad  in  recent  years,  reflecting  structural  changes  such  as  deregulation, 
advances  in  information  and  telecommunication  technology,  and  the  deepening  of  economic 
globalization. Since prices are becoming less sensitive in the short term, central banks are required to 
take appropriate measures by examining medium- to long-term risks to the economy. This suggests 
the need to take a forward-looking approach in the conduct of monetary policy. 
A stable economic and price environment 
VII. 
A  stable  economic  and  price  environment,  once  achieved  by  the  appropriate  conduct  of  monetary 
policy with a view to medium- to long-term risks, allows firms and households to make decisions more 
smoothly. As a result, the allocation of resources in the economy as a whole will be more efficient, and 
not only will short-term economic fluctuations be reduced but also the medium- to long-term growth 
path will be pushed up. 
Looking back at real GDP trends in Japan and the United States over the past 25 years or so, we see 
that economies often achieve higher growth when they move in a less volatile manner. As a result of 
smooth  economic  adjustments  in  the  early  1980s  after  the  Second  Oil  Crisis,  Japan's  economy 
followed a higher trend growth path than the U.S. economy while it moved in a less volatile manner 
thereafter.  This  situation,  however,  was  reversed  after  the  bursting  of  the  asset  price  bubble  in  the 
early 1990s, and Japan's economy experienced a decline in the trend growth path while moving in a 
volatile manner. 
Japan's  economy  is  now  emerging  from  the  prolonged  stagnation  that  was  an  aftermath  of  the 
bursting  of  the  asset  price  bubble,  and  is  heading  toward  a  sustainable  growth  path  under  price 
stability.  In  order  to  ensure  this  development,  it  is  important,  through  the  appropriate  conduct  of 
monetary  policy,  to  minimize  the  volatility  of  business  cycles  and  maintain  a  stable  economic 
environment. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
VIII. 
Before concluding my speech today, I will talk about the Bank's conduct of monetary policy based on 
the assessment of economic activity and prices mentioned so far. 
The Bank has been reducing the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank by paying due 
attention  to  the stability  of  the  money market  under  the guideline  for  money market  operations  that 
encourages the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at effectively zero percent. Through this 
process, the uncollateralized overnight call rate has been stable at around zero percent, despite small 
temporary increases. In the call market, interest rates have shown some fluctuations reflecting market 
conditions and the volume of transactions has been gradually increasing. Under these circumstances, 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2006
the Bank no longer finds it difficult to control the uncollateralized overnight call rate in its day-to-day 
operations. In this sense, the reduction of the outstanding balance of current accounts has virtually 
been completed. 
With regard to the future course of monetary policy, the Bank will conduct monetary policy in line with 
the thinking described in the Outlook Report as long as developments in economic activity and prices 
follow the Bank's projection presented also in the Outlook Report. In other words, it seems probable 
that the accommodative financial conditions ensuing from very low interest rates will be maintained for 
some  time  following  a  period  in  which  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  is  at  effectively  zero 
percent. Through and beyond this stage, the Bank will adjust the level of interest rates gradually in the 
light  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices.  The  timing  of  a  policy  change  depends  on 
developments in economic activity and prices from this time on, and there is no predetermined view 
regarding the future path of monetary policy at this point. 
The projection in the Outlook Report, which appears to be the desirable course of the economy, that 
is, sustainable growth under price stability, is based on the assumption that market participants and 
firms have been factoring in future policy changes to some extent when making their decisions. If the 
economy  develops  in  line  with  the  projection,  changing  the  policy  interest  rate  in  the  light  of 
developments in economic activity and prices will stave off an excess of economic activity, minimize 
the volatility of business cycles, and lead the economy onto a sustainable growth path. The projection 
suggests that economic activity is likely to slow and prices are expected to follow a moderate uptrend. 
Consequently, the Bank will not have to drastically adjust the policy interest rate, but, as mentioned 
earlier, will be able to adjust interest rates "gradually." 
Of  course,  there  is  the  time  lag  before  a  monetary  policy  action  influences  economic  activity  and 
prices,  and  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  not  only  take  the  current  economic  and  price  situation  into 
account  but  also  look  ahead  to  future  developments.  In  addition,  in  assessing  developments  in 
economic activity and prices, it is important to pay close attention to a variety of indicators and other 
relevant information in order to carefully judge overall conditions of economic activity and prices rather 
than  concentrate  on  just  one  particular  indicator,  such  as  the  CPI  during  the  period  of  quantitative 
easing. 
Conclusion 
In  sum,  Japan's  economy  continues  to  grow,  with  domestic  and  external  demand  and  also  the 
corporate  and  household  sectors  well  in  balance.  The  Bank  is  determined  to  contribute  to  leading 
Japan's  economy  to  sustainable  growth  under  price  stability,  through  the  appropriate  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
BIS Review 59/2006 
 5
