Eva Srejber: Are we ready to deal with a cross-border banking crisis in 
Europe? 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  seminar  on 
Financial  Institutions’  Value  Management  in  the  Integrated  Market  in  Light  of  the  Lisbon  Strategy, 
Gdansk, 12 May 2006. 
Introduction 
 Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  Gdansk  and  this  seminar  on  Financial  Institutions’  Value 
Management in the Integrated Market in Light of the Lisbon Strategy. 
The financial system plays a crucial role in the economy. It provides households and companies with a 
number  of  important  tools  as  well  as  the  infrastructure  for  channelling  savings  into  funding  of 
productive projects, managing and allocating various kinds of risk, and facilitating efficient transfer of 
payments.  The  more  efficiently  the  financial  system  works,  the  better  the  rest  of  the  economy  will 
work. One could say that the financial system is the oil that makes the machinery run more smoothly. 
The  European  financial  markets  have  long  been  very  fragmented.  As  Europe’s  economies  have 
become more integrated, however, the drawbacks of this financial market fragmentation have become 
increasingly  evident.  A  more  integrated  market  for  financial  services  could,  for  instance,  lead  to 
enhanced cross-border competition and better opportunities to make use of economies of scale and 
synergies.  Greater  competition  in  turn  should  result  in  a  wider  range  of  investment  and  financing 
services and more efficient pricing of these services. With that, expanding SMEs, for example, could 
gain easier access to risk capital and incur lower financing costs, in the same way that a more evolved 
and  integrated  market  for  corporate  bonds  has  led  to  a  lower  cost  of  capital  for  large  companies. 
Consumers, too, would benefit from lower borrowing costs and access to a broader range of financial 
services. Moreover, both companies and households would have better opportunities to diversify risk. 
Better  use  of  scale  economies  should  also  mean  less  expensive  and  more  secure  ways  to  pay  for 
goods and services. So, with all these potential efficiency gains, it is clear that further integration of the 
markets  for  financial  services  is  vitally  important,  if  we  are  to  succeed  with  the  Lisbon  agenda  and 
improve growth in Europe. And this is also the prime reason for the Financial Services Action Plan, 
which was launched a few years ago. 
However, at the same time as the financial system is important for growth in the real economy, it is 
also  inherently  unstable.  In  particular,  banks  could  be  prone  to  bank  runs  due  to  the  liquidity 
imbalance between their assets and their liabilities. This inherent instability is an important reason for 
the existence of financial regulation, supervision and macro-prudential oversight of financial firms in 
the first place. The costs to society from a bank failure could be enormous due to potential contagion 
to  other  financial companies,  thus  posing  a  threat  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole. When cross-
border  financial  institutions  are  involved,  the  systemic  risks  become  even  more  complicated  to 
manage. This, of course, entails some new challenges for authorities with tasks pertaining to financial 
stability, i.e. financial supervisors, central banks and ministries of finance. 
Some of the challenges that I will discuss here today are inspired by discussions that occurred at a 
workshop  that  was  hosted  by  the  Riksbank  in  Stockholm  in  February  on  the  topic  of  the  future 
regulatory framework for banks in the EU. At the Stockholm workshop some interesting papers were 
presented  by  Arnoud  Boot,  David  Mayes,  and  Charles  Goodhart  and  Dirk  Schoenmaker.  These 
papers  will  shortly  be  published  in  the  Riksbank’s  Economic  Review  and  I  can  warmly  recommend 
them as inspirational reading. 
A changing banking landscape 
All in all, there are roughly around 8 300 credit institutions in the EU today. Among these, of course, 
the  vast  majority  of  banks  are  small,  purely  national  institutions,  with  no  or  almost  no  cross-border 
activity. 
But cross-border banking activities are picking up. There is an increasing number of banks conducting 
at  least  some  cross-border  activities.  So  far,  cross-border  retail  activities  of  most  banks  have  been 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 1
fairly  limited  and  typically  conducted  in  subsidiaries.  Also  these  subsidiaries  have  often  been 
independent and not fully integrated into the operations of the parent bank. This is the type of bank the 
current system with a home-country control was mainly designed for and is best suited to handle. The 
current system has worked reasonably well so far for these banks, and is expected to do so in the 
future. At least as long as their cross-border activities are relatively limited in relation to their overall 
size. 
However, on top of this, there is also a category of banking group in Europe with significant cross-
border activities for which the current system may not be so well adapted. Some banking groups, for 
example, have extensive activities in several countries. The Italian Unicredit Group will, following the 
merger with the German HypoVereinsbank (HVB), be a significant banking group – not least – here in 
Poland, but also in, for example, Austria, the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, and Italy. Moreover, 
the British group Barclays has extensive operations in Spain, while the Spanish Grupo Santander has 
substantial activities in the United Kingdom. Fortis and Dexia are similarly important in the Benelux 
region. 
And  then  there  are  banking  groups  that  have  a  systemic  significance  in  their  host  countries.  For 
example in countries such as the Czech Republic, Finland, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland and Slovakia 
foreign banking groups have a dominant position in the domestic bank markets. Generally speaking, 
foreign penetration of the banking market is substantial in the New Member States (NMS). According 
to an ECB report, about 70% of the NMS banking sector is foreign-controlled, mostly by other EEA-
countries. Speaking from a Nordic-Baltic perspective, more than 90 percent of lending in Estonia is 
granted by Swedish and Finnish banking groups. 
To bring you another example that is close to my home, the Danish bank Danske bank has significant 
operations in many parts of Northern Europe. With its network of branches, it is now the fifth largest 
bank in Sweden and is on the verge of becoming systemically significant, at least by some standards. 
There are also some banking groups that have a significant share of their operations outside of their 
home  country.  Interestingly,  banks  from  some  small  countries  such  as  Belgium  and  Austria  are 
responsible for a large part of cross-border banking investments. 
It  is  banks  that  may  have  systemic  relevance  in  several  countries,  or  are  perhaps  systemic  in  one 
country  but  not  in  another,  or  which  are  simply  very  large,  and  complex,  with  geographically 
widespread operations, that pose the greatest challenges to authorities. Fortunately, there are not too 
many of these critical banking groups in Europe at this point in time. According to an ECB study, there 
are 43 banks with operations in three or more countries. Of these only nine are truly pan-European 
banks. Nevertheless, a crisis scenario in any of these may pose serious difficulties to resolve. 
In the current system, the organisational structure of a cross-border bank – specifically, whether the 
bank is organised according to a subsidiary structure or a branch structure – affects the distribution of 
responsibilities  between  the  home  country  authorities  and  host  country  authorities.  Moreover,  the 
relationship  between  home  and  host  authorities  may  be  affected  differently  depending  on  which 
function of authority, for example, supervision, emergency liquidity assistance or deposit guarantees, 
that  is  being  employed.  An  interesting  development  is,  however,  that  the  distinction  between 
subsidiaries  and  branches  is  becoming  more  and  more  blurred.  Banks  increasingly  concentrate 
different  functions,  such  as  funding,  liquidity  management,  risk  management  and  credit  decision-
making to specific centres of competence in order to reap the benefits of specialisation and economies 
of  scale.  With  the  financial  integration  in  the  EU,  this  specialisation  also  occurs  cross-border.  As  a 
consequence,  foreign  subsidiaries  (and  branches)  become  less  self-contained.  It  can  no  longer  be 
taken for granted that even a large subsidiary will be able to continue its business, if the parent bank 
defaults  –  at  least  not  in  the  short  run.  And  I  believe  that  the  idea  that  a  subsidiary  could  be 
successfully  ring-fenced  in  its  host  country  is  merely  history  today,  as  accounts  could  easily  be 
transferred from one country to another at the push of a button. Even if many of the examples I will 
use  today  formally  will  have  bearing  mostly  on  cross-border  banks  with  a  branch  structure, 
economically and practically, they can often just as well apply to cross-border banks with a subsidiary 
structure. 
Challenges ahead 
Although  increasing  cross-border  integration  of  the  financial  industry  is  essentially  a  positive  –  and 
even necessary – development to enhance the economic potential for the EU area, it also means new 
challenges for the authorities involved. The first dimension of these challenges concerns efficiency. So 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2006
far, much has been done in order to create a harmonised regulatory framework that provides a more 
level  playing field  and reducing  the  regulatory  burden  on  financial  institutions by  creating  European 
passports for financial services, improving supervisory cooperation and convergence, etc.  The second 
dimension, which I will concentrate on today, concerns financial stability. More specifically, I will focus 
on the challenges pertaining to our ability to manage financial crises in Europe. The increased risk of 
cross-border contagion means that it seems less likely that the next financial crisis in Europe will be 
contained within national borders, and much more likely that it will have far-reaching consequences in 
a  number  of  countries.  This  basically  means  a  greater  need  for  coordination  of  information  and 
decision-making between authorities in different countries. In a crisis situation it is important to know 
who  will  do  what  and  when.  Things  can  be  seriously  complicated  by  the  existence  of  a  number  of 
potential conflicts of interest between the different countries involved. Moreover, as the actions of one 
authority  could  have  effects  on  other  countries’  financial  systems,  there  are  some  obvious 
accountability  concerns.  The  national  authorities  are  only  accountable  to  their  respective  national 
governments and ultimately their constituencies. 
The fact that integration of the banking sector started relatively early in the Nordic and Baltic countries 
means that we have encountered some of these challenges perhaps a little earlier than many other 
European  countries.  And  because  we  share  similar  experiences  –  still  fresh  in  our  memories  –  of 
major  banking  crises  in  the  Nordic  countries,  we  have  perhaps  a  head  start  when  it  comes  to 
recognizing and trying to deal with these challenges on a Nordic level, even if much worksstill remains. 
Here,  I  might  add  that  integration  on  a  pan-Nordic  level  has  also  come  a  long  way  in  the  area  of 
securities exchanges and clearing and settlement facilities. Of course, the integration of the financial 
infrastructure  poses  similar  challenges  for  authorities  to  cross-border  banking  and  some  additional 
complications  as  well.  However,  today  I  will  focus  on  the  challenges  posed  by  cross-border  banks. 
And  I  must  stress  that  these  challenges  are  not  merely  a  regional  problem.  Due  to  the  dynamic 
changes in the banking landscape, they will indeed require solutions on a European level. 
My main message today is that increased coordination is imperative, and, in this, it is vitally important 
that  future  arrangements  for  supervision,  crisis  management  and  crisis  resolution  of  cross-border 
banks must be dealt with jointly as a package, and not in isolation from each other. It is apparent that 
the solutions in any one of these areas will depend on the solutions in the other areas. In particular, it 
will  be  necessary  to  address  the  issue  of  burden-sharing  arrangements  for  the  eventuality  that  a 
border-crossing bank becomes insolvent. If we don’t, there is a great danger that crisis management 
fails and valuable time will be lost. It will not be easy to achieve the necessary coordination and not 
least  to  deal  with  some  potentially  complicating  conflicts  of  interests,  and  much  more  analysis  is 
needed. However, I will at the end of my speech try to sketch some possible routes ahead. 
Coordination issues 
To make my points clear, I think a crisis scenario could be a useful starting point. Consider a large 
cross-border  bank  encountering  some  financial  troubles,  and  suppose  the  bank  is  systemically 
important in at least one of the countries in which it operates.  The number one concern for authorities 
would be to limit the social costs of a potential banking failure and to stop contagion to other parts of 
the  financial  system.  For  this,  efficient  crisis  management  is  key.  The  successfulness  of  the  crisis 
management, in turn, critically depends on a number of factors, such as coordination of information 
and decision-making, which in turn depend on how well conflicts of interests can be managed. 
Information 
First  of  all,  you  need  access  to  relevant  information  on  which  to  base  your  decisions.  Ongoing 
supervision  is  instrumental  in  detecting  weaknesses,  vulnerabilities  and  risks  that  may  trigger  or 
enhance systemic crises in the first place. But it is also a key source of information in a crisis situation. 
Given  the  very  complex  nature  of  some  cross-border  banks,  these  institutions  are  also  becoming 
increasingly opaque, and thus difficult to analyse. Despite EU regulations on consolidated supervision, 
there is always the risk that no supervisory authority will gain sufficient oversight of and insight into all 
parts of a banking group. The supervision is also complicated by the functional specialisation within 
the banks, which does not always follow the national and legal divisions. If, for instance, a banking 
group with operations in two countries has concentrated all of its credit risk management in its home 
country, it will probably be difficult for the host country’s supervisory authority to assess the total risk in 
the subsidiary. On top of problems of getting a fair overall picture, there is the problem of coordinating 
information. When several authorities in different countries are involved, the information flow may be 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 3
slowed down. The MoU on Cooperation between Banking Supervisors, Central Banks, and Finance 
Ministries in the European Union in Financial Crisis Situations that was recently agreed among the 25 
member states provides a useful framework for sharing information in a crisis. 
Decision making 
In a crisis you need the ability to make rapid decisions. For example, central banks might consider 
providing emergency liquidity assistance. In some cases, there might also be reasons to consider a 
swift take-over of the bank and temporarily placing it under public administration. For decisions like 
these,  you  would  ideally  need  a  clear  line  of  command.  It  is  difficult  enough  to  organise  efficient 
management of a national crisis. I think you can all imagine how complicated it could be to achieve 
anything like “a clear line of command” when there is a multitude of countries – and perhaps several 
authorities  in  each  of  these  countries  –  involved  in  the  decision-making.  Then  there  is  no  longer 
merely the financial supervisory authority, the finance ministry and the central bank in one country that 
have to be involved, but all of these authorities in several countries. If there are no prior agreements 
on  the  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  national  central  banks  and  the  other  relevant  crisis 
management authorities, and on how to coordinate decisions in the case of a crisis, there is great risk 
that any attempt to manage the crisis will fail miserably. 
Language differences and different legal structures can often reinforce the problems. On top of this, 
there is a clear cross-border mutual dependence, which means that no single country’s authorities are 
entirely sovereign in implementing a solution to the crisis without the risk of significant repercussions in 
other countries. 
Recently,  there  have  been  a  number  of  initiatives,  regionally  as  well  as  on  a  European  level,  to 
enhance  coordination.  For  example,  a  number  of  memoranda  of  understanding  (MoUs)  have  been 
worked out and agreed, either bilaterally or multilaterally, and more MoUs are underway. These MoUs 
detail  a  number  of  principles  and  practical  issues  regarding  the  cooperation,  the  exchange  of 
information  and  assessments  between  authorities  and  certain  issues  concerning  the  delineation  of 
responsibilities.  Some  MoUs 
involve  crisis 
management  as  well.  Notably,  they  are  not  legally  binding  and  give  the  national  authorities 
considerable scope for discretion. Although the emergence of these MoUs is very positive, they are no 
guarantee  for  efficient  crisis  management.  Probably,  these  MoUs  will  work  well  under  normal 
conditions.  And  they  will  also  be  most  helpful  in  facilitating  coordination  in  some  financial  crises. 
However, in a more wide-spread crisis involving a large cross-border bank, MoUs alone will probably 
be insufficient. Take, for example, the issue of assessments. We have in Europe in principle agreed to 
share each other’s views and assessments in the event of a distress scenario. However, to be able to 
act  decisively  in  a crisis  situation  involving  a  large  cross-border bank,  you would  preferably  need  a 
joint assessment between the countries involved. I don’t think it would be too speculative to think that 
each country in an acute situation would be prone to present an assessment that supports its national 
interests as part of a negotiation strategy. Arriving at a joint assessment may therefore prove difficult, 
and above all take valuable time away from crisis management.  To be able to act efficiently in a crisis 
situation, it is instrumental that conflicts of interests, as far as possible, are taken care of in advance. 
For that you need something more than the MoUs we have seen so far. 
Personally, I believe that crisis management simulation exercises involving supervisors, central banks 
and finance ministries in all EU countries would provide valuable ideas on how to develop and improve 
cooperation  and  coordination  of  financial  crises.  On  top  of  the  obvious  need  for  coordination  of 
information and decision-making, there is as I just mentioned – and I will elaborate more on this shortly 
– also the additional element of conflicting interests that may be an even more serious impediment to 
efficient crisis management. In order not to waste valuable time in an emergency, you need to have 
ways  to  settle  them  as  efficiently  as  possible  already  in  place.  In  my  opinion,  specifically  ex  ante 
arrangements for burden sharing between countries are needed. 
focus  primarily  on  supervision,  whereas  others 
Managing conflicts of interests 
Conflicts  of  interests  can  become  apparent  in  many  ways,  for  example,  if  a  cross-border  bank 
becomes insolvent and incurs social costs that somehow need to be shared between the countries 
involved. The problem of burden sharing becomes particularly precarious when, for example, the bank 
is significant to the banking system in some country but not in some other countries, or if there are 
great discrepancies between the ratio of the bank’s size to the GDP of the different countries involved. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2006
The social costs that may call for some burden sharing can take many forms. For example, there may 
arise situations in which the taxpayers in one country may be faced with the prospect of essentially 
bailing  out  the  depositors  of  a  branch  in  another  country  through  their  national  deposit  guarantee 
scheme.  Incidentally,  there  is  a  recent  example  from  my  own  country  (although,  technically,  it 
concerns  a  bail-out  under  the  investor  compensation  scheme  rather  than  the  deposit  guarantee 
scheme). After a long and complicated investigation the Swedish Deposit Guarantee Board decided 
around two weeks ago to commence payments to a group of mostly Italian investors that were the 
unfortunate clients of the hair-raisingly ill-managed securities company CTA, which went bankrupt in 
2004. Fortunately, CTA was not one of the bigger players – in fact I had never heard of it before it 
became an item for the Deposit Guarantee Board – and the fund will be able to cover the payments to 
the  approximately  1  200  clients,  amounting  to  around  €10  million  in  total.  However,  if  a  larger 
institution had gone bust, the fund alone would not necessarily have been able bail out the investors.  
All  deposit  guarantee  schemes  –  as  well  as  investor  compensation  schemes  –  are  typically  under-
funded and are not able to cope with failures in large cross-border financial institutions. In such events, 
additional government funding will be needed. 
Or, if emergency liquidity assistance was provided at some point during the course of the crisis (on the 
erroneous  assumption  that  the  bank  was  basically  solvent),  a  loan  loss  may  be  incurred  on  the 
national central bank that acted as a lender of last resort. And, of course, when giving liquidity support 
to  a  bank  with  cross-border  operations  in  many  countries,  you  can  never  be  entirely  sure  in  what 
jurisdiction your money ends up. In the case of a branch structure, it may end up in any country in 
which the bank operates, and ring-fencing a subsidiary may prove equally difficult in practice. 
Furthermore,  in  some  situations  it  may  be  socially  optimal  to  spend  public  money  in  order  to 
reconstruct  a  failed  bank.  If  the  reconstruction  is  successful,  the  money  spent  may  eventually  be 
recovered by the public. But it could take a considerable amount of time before this happens, and a 
precondition is that you are not betting on the wrong horse. The taxpayers in one country may not be 
so keen to take on such risks in another country. 
In  addition  to  fiscal  costs,  there  may  of  course  be  substantial  indirect  social  costs  in  the  form  of  a 
dipping  GDP  that  may  occur  when  the  financial  system  is  suffering  efficiency  losses  or  is  being 
temporarily disabled as a result of a financial crisis. These indirect costs are basically a function of the 
systemic relevance of the financial institution(s) in question. According to a study by Hoggarth et al, 
the average drop in GDP following a financial crisis is 15-20 percent. 
The social costs from a banking failure can thus be substantial and involve many countries in various 
degrees. This, in turn, will most certainly have the effect of giving rise to difficult negotiations on how 
burdens should  be  shared  between  the  countries  involved.  The  larger  the  banking  group,  the  more 
countries  that  are  involved  in  its  cross-border  activities,  and  the  more  important  the  bank  is  to  the 
functioning of the financial system in a country, the higher the stakes will be for individual countries 
and the trickier and tougher the negotiations will be. But why is this relevant in a crisis management 
perspective? Couldn’t we just go about and deal with the most urgent phase of a crisis first, and take 
care of burden sharing later, when we all know the facts? 
In my opinion, we cannot afford to wait that long. Uncertainty about the distribution of social costs in 
the  event  of  a  cross-border  banking  bankruptcy  can  seriously  hamper  the  ability  to  act  in  an 
emergency  situation.  In  particular,  there  is  a  risk  that  crisis  management  will  be  held  up  by  a 
negotiation game between nations unless there are some previously made arrangements for burden 
sharing. When the stakes are high, the incentives of the involved nations to keep their cards close to 
their chests until the last minute will also be strong, and the decisive actions that would be desperately 
needed in a crisis situation may be taken too late or not be taken all. In the worst case, this may result 
in a failure to prevent a crisis from developing further with the effect of greater overall social costs to 
share.  On  top  of  this  “prisoners’  dilemma”,  things  can  get  even  more  complicated  by  the  fact  that 
banks will shop around for the most favourable support among the countries involved. 
Let me be a little bit more specific. Take emergency liquidity assistance, for example.  A central bank 
could decide to act as a lender of last resort and provide emergency support to an illiquid but basically 
solvent institution. The problem is that, in the heat of a crisis, it may be almost impossible to be certain 
as  to  whether  the  bank  has  merely  liquidity  problems  or  has  serious  solvency  problems  as  well. 
Information  will  almost  certainly  be  incomplete.  Therefore,  providing  emergency  liquidity  assistance 
could in principle result in losses to the central bank, so the ultimate cost of the assistance is therefore 
uncertain at  the  outset.  (If  the  bank  could  pay  back  with  certainty,  there  would  typically  not  be  any 
need  for  emergency  liquidity  assistance  and  the  market  would  be  able  to  handle  the  liquidity 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 5
shortage.) Thus, a central bank providing emergency liquidity assistance must base its decision on the 
possibility of a loss. 
Given the uncertainty about the ultimate cost of emergency liquidity assistance and the central banks’ 
national mandates, conflicts of interest are likely to emerge in a decision to grant emergency liquidity 
assistance  to  a  bank  with  major  cross-border  activities.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  how  these  conflicts 
could complicate crisis management, in particular if the bank is systemically important in any of the 
host countries. In the present situation, the home country’s authorities are likely to have the principal 
responsibility, at least if it is organised according to a branch structure. If the bank is systemic in the 
home country, the decision to provide emergency liquidity assistance may not be so difficult; the risk of 
incurring a loss may be worth it to avoid a systemic crisis in the home country. But if the bank is not 
systemic  in  the  home  country,  but  systemic  in  the  host  country,  there  may  be  some  hesitation  on 
behalf  of  the  home  country’s  authorities  to  provide  liquidity  assistance.  If  the  bank  has  a  branch 
structure, the demise of the bank means that the foreign branch goes down with it, and, because it’s 
systemic in the host country, financial stability may be at risk and greater social costs are incurred at 
the host than in the home country. If it is a subsidiary that is systemic in the host country, one solution 
might  be  for  the  central  bank  of  the  host  country  to  grant  emergency  liquidity  assistance  to  the 
subsidiary. However, it may not be possible to successfully ring-fence it, and the money is lost and the 
rescue mission fails. 
Similarly,  the  decisions  in  an  emergency  situation  may  also  be  distorted  by  conflicts  of  interests 
regarding  deposit  guarantee  schemes  and  other  crisis  resolution  measures.  Through  deposit 
guarantee schemes, bank deposits are partly insured in the event of a bank default, thereby protecting 
depositors from losses (up to some maximum amount), which in turn reduces the risk of bank runs that 
may jeopardise financial stability. Deposit guarantee schemes are thus a vital part of the safety-net for 
banks, apart from the central banks’ ability to grant emergency liquidity assistance. 
All EU-countries are required to have deposit guarantee schemes that are supposed to be financed by 
the financial industry, for example through fees to a fund. Typically such funds would be designed so 
that any deficits in the fund are financed by the banks from future fees. However, it seems doubtful 
that such financing would be sufficient in all cases. In the case of default of a very large bank, it seems 
more likely that the government would then have to intervene somehow. Either the deposit guarantee 
fund would have to borrow from the government, or the government would step in directly and provide 
some  retribution  to  depositors  on  behalf  of  the  deposit  guarantee  fund.  In  both  cases,  government 
debt increases. The ultimate cost of a major banking crisis is therefore likely to hit the taxpayers in one 
way  or  the  other.  So,  any  deposit  guarantee  scheme  will  in  practice  contain  an  element  of  a 
government guarantee, which could be either implicit or explicit. In the case of a cross-border bank 
with  branches  in  other  countries,  the  important  question  is,  of  course,  how  far  the  taxpayers  in  the 
home country would be willing to go in order to bail out the depositors in the host countries. This could 
entail  substantial  cross-border  transfers,  which  is  something  that  most  politicians  tend  to  view  with 
considerable scepticism. 
There  are  also  challenges  in  the  potential  reconstruction  of  a  failing  cross-border  bank.  A 
reconstruction  of  a  cross-border  bank  will  increasingly  impact  the  financial  system  in  the  other 
countries where the bank has major activities. To achieve a successful reconstruction, coordination of 
the activities of the authorities in the different countries would therefore be essential. In addition, as 
banks merge cross-border, some banks tend to grow in size to the extent that it will be very difficult for 
a small country to save the entire group. Traditionally there has been a fear that banks are becoming 
“too big to fail” because of their critical importance for the stability of the financial system. For a small 
country, which is home to a large bank with an extensive network of foreign branches, there is a real 
risk that the bank will rather be “too big to save”. This suggests that burden sharing may be an issue in 
reconstruction as well. 
Scenarios  like  the  ones  I’ve  sketched suggest  that  negotiation  could  be extremely  complicated  and 
may hold up the entire crisis management process – I know how extremely complicated things can get 
even  when  a  crisis  is  contained  within  national  borders.  It  is  obvious  that  the  organisation  of 
supervision, crisis management and crisis resolution for cross-border banks are strongly linked to each 
other. The avenues we choose in any one of these functions will have an impact on the effectiveness 
of the other. Therefore, we cannot deal with supervision, crisis management and crisis resolution as 
separate issues. 
The  success  of  crisis  management  and  crisis  resolution  depends  on  coordinated  arrangements  for 
burden sharing with respect to deposit guarantee schemes, emergency liquidity assistance and public 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2006
money being spent in the aftermath of a banking crisis. If the uncertainty about this burden sharing 
cannot be reduced, there is a great danger of failure in the attempts to manage a bank in distress and 
that the overall burden of a crisis will be greater for all of us to bear. To me, it seems clear that some 
prior agreements outlining responsibilities for decisions and potential loss distributions are necessary. 
There is, of course, also the accountability issue. For the host country’s authorities, there is a risk that 
domestic opinion would not consider that the home country’s authorities were doing enough to save a 
cross-border bank or group, and vice versa. 
A  basic  challenge  for  the  authorities  dealing  with  cross-border  banks  is  how  to  find  an  acceptable 
formula  for  sharing  the  burden  and  the  costs  of  a  crisis.  Goodhart  and  Schoenmaker  have  in  their 
paper suggested a number of keys that could be explored to create such a formula, for example the 
relative size of GDP, the ECB capital ratio, and the relative amount of bank assets in the country. As 
pointed out by Goodhart and Schoenmaker, the first question to be asked is whether one would want 
a general solution where all countries contribute according to some fixed key, or more specific burden 
sharing  arrangements,  where  only  the  directly  involved  countries  participate  according  to  a  more 
flexible key, presumably taking into account the geographic spread of the bank’s business. To achieve 
the  latter,  it  would  be  necessary  to  find  some  commonly  agreed  criteria  for  assessing  a  bank’s 
systemic relevance to the financial system of a country. Merely using market shares as a criterion will 
probably  not  be  adequate  as  other  aspects,  such  as  the  bank’s  relevance  to  the  payment  system, 
clearing  and  settlement,  involvement  in  inter-bank  securities  markets  and  so  on  would  also  be 
important in this respect. At the same time, in a constantly changing banking landscape, it would be 
difficult to find criteria that are so clear-cut that assessments will not be “up for negotiation” in a sharp 
crisis scenario. In order to avoid having crisis management being held up by conflicts of interests more 
than necessary, I am personally inclined to believe that a general key that is fixed once and for all is 
the preferred choice. 
Possible ways forward 
The  title  of  this  speech  is  a  question:  “Are  we  ready  to  deal  with  a  cross-border  banking  crisis  in 
Europe?” Regrettably, the answer is no! Before we can say we are anywhere near “ready”, we must 
deal  with  some  serious  challenges.  In  particular,  we  need  to  solve  the  problem  of  how  to  organise 
supervision,  crisis  management  and  crisis  resolution  for  cross-border  banks.  Given  the  great 
complexity  of  the  issue,  achieving  a  practical  solution  will  not  be  an  easy  task,  and  there  is  no 
altogether ideal solution. The amount of work that has already been set up for us on the European 
regulatory agenda is already quite staggering, which suggests that everything may not be achieved in 
the next few years. But we must not use this as an excuse for not starting to deal with these important 
issues. We can at least start the analytical process, take stock of the problems and examine the pros 
and cons of different solutions. The longer we wait to get this process started, the greater the risk that 
we’ll end up in a very serious mess. I, for one, certainly hope that we manage to have some solution in 
place before the next major financial disaster in Europe occurs. I wouldn’t want to meet the eyes of the 
European citizens and tell them that we knew this could happen, but we were too busy to do anything 
about it. 
Some different avenues have been outlined in the ongoing international discussion. So far, the focus 
for discussions in the EU has primarily been on crisis prevention in the form of regulatory reform and 
different organisational structures of supervision. However, similar options do exist both in the context 
of crisis management and in the subsequent resolution of the crisis. 
One of the solutions suggested is to let the home country take a leading position more firmly. In this 
case, the home country supervisor is responsible for the supervision of the overall group and in a crisis 
the home country authorities has the responsibility for managing and solving the crisis for the bank as 
a  whole.  With  increasing  emphasis  on  consolidated  supervision,  this  seems  to  be  where  Europe  is 
heading  presently.  It  addresses  the  problem  primarily  from  the  cross-border  bank’s  perspective  of 
minimising the regulatory burden. This is, of course, valuable but does not solve all problems. With the 
new  Capital  Requirements  Directive,  the  consolidating  supervisor  of  a  banking  group  will  have,  for 
example, the principal responsibility for validating and approving the credit risk models in the entire 
bank, including its subsidiaries. But in most cases, the rules to be used are expected to be settled in 
negotiations  between  the  supervisors.  So,  for  example,  an  Austrian  subsidiary  to  a  German  bank 
could be subject to a mixture of some Austrian and some German rules. If the Austrian subsidiary has 
a branch in, say, Poland, the Austrian supervisors will have the main responsibility for the supervision 
of  the  Polish  branch,  while  the  Polish  authorities  remain  responsible  for  financial  stability.  So,  the 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 7
Polish branch could be subject to a mix of some German, Austrian and Polish rules and the German 
supervisor  will  be  the  consolidating  supervisor  of  the  group,  but  the  Austrian  supervisor  will  be  the 
home  supervisor  of  the  Polish  branch.  A  foreign  branch  will  be  part  of  the  home  country’s  deposit 
guarantee schemes but could also opt to top it up by connecting it to the deposit guarantee scheme in 
the host country, if that is considered favourable. At the same time, basically the national jurisdictions 
of the host countries will be applicable for other consumer protection aspects of the bank’s operations 
regardless of whether it is a branch or a subsidiary. And if, for example, the German bank is bought 
by, say, an Italian bank, jurisdictions and supervisory responsibilities will change all over again… Are 
you still with me? If it sounds confusing, that is because it is confusing, even in this relatively simple 
case, involving just supervision in sunny weather. 
Now consider what would happen if we add to this scenario a financial crisis involving several large 
banking  groups.  Now,  complications  could  add  up  really  rapidly.  For  example,  some  additional 
confusion may arise from the fact that more than one consolidating supervisor will be involved. On top 
of  this  there  would  be  several  consolidating  central  banks  and  several  consolidating  ministries  of 
finance. Therefore, I think that the lead authority model will not be sufficient for handling crises in large 
cross-border  banks.  In  particular,  it  does  not  solve  the  basic  dilemma  of  giving  one  country  the 
mandate  and  opportunity  to  act,  while  letting  the  host  country  retain  its  responsibility  for  financial 
stability. The accountability problem also remains. To my mind, the lead authority model is a model 
that  will  work  best  for  banks  with  limited  cross-border  activities  that  are  insignificant  in  the  host 
countries. But for large cross-border banks, I’m afraid that it will work only as long as the going is easy 
and the weather is fair. 
Another route that has been suggested is to give the home country authorities a formal mandate to act 
in the interest of all relevant countries, either through a European mandate or some kind of binding 
contract between relevant countries. A lead supervisor with a European mandate seems nice in theory 
and aims at solving the conflicts of interest by creating a central decision-making body. In practice, 
however,  it  could  easily  become  very  bureaucratic  and  inefficient.  If  we  are  establishing  a  central 
decision-making body anyway, why act through authorities from 25 different countries? Possibly, the 
number of authorities involved could be reduced somewhat if the mandate is based on an agreement 
between only  the  directly  involved countries.   At  this  point,  it  is  however  not  very  clear  how such a 
contract could be made legally binding.  Although solutions that are adapted to a specific situation are 
better than no solution at all, I am sceptical as to their practicability in a dynamic world. They have the 
same basic flaws as the model of home country lead supervision. In a constantly transforming banking 
landscape,  relevant  jurisdictions  will  change  when  principal  ownership  is  transferred  from  one 
nationality to another. That’s why I also don’t believe in so called regional solutions. 
A third way, and in my opinion the most logical step in the long run, would be to focus some authority 
on a European level to deal with the relatively limited number of most important cross-border banks. 
Supervision of these banks would in my opinion benefit from the establishment of a European financial 
supervisor.  Some  opponents  of  this  idea  have  claimed  that  proximity  might  then  be  lost,  and  a 
European  supervisor  wouldn’t  receive  enough  knowledge  about  the  markets  where  the  institution 
operates.  To  my  mind,  this  is  not  a  very  convincing  argument.  First,  this  problem  is  no  less  in  the 
home-host model. Second, it is an organisational problem that can be solved. An EU supervisor would 
certainly employ staff from all EU countries and have local offices in the national financial centres. For 
instance, for a regional cross-border banking group, I imagine the supervisory team to be based in the 
relevant region, perhaps in the same premises as the national supervisor, and to consist of staff from 
that region. 
As for crisis resolution, one could think of the EU building up a deposit insurance fund for the largest 
cross-border banks, possibly within the framework of the new European supervisory agency, akin to 
the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  in  the  USA.  This  would  considerably  reduce  the  risk  of 
destructive  negotiation  games.  Such  a  deposit  insurance  fund  would  certainly  be  better  diversified 
than the national funds are today, which would, all else being equal, enable it to charge lower fees or 
hold a larger risk-adjusted buffer. However, the fund itself would lack the ability to handle the largest 
banking failures. In order to cope in the event of a really large bank or several large banks failing, the 
fund should be able to borrow in the capital market. To be able do this in a cost-efficient manner, it 
would  need  backing  by  a  government  guarantee  from  the  25  member  states.  In  the  event  that  the 
European deposit insurance fund is not able to recover enough money from a troubled bank to repay 
its  creditors  in  the  capital markets,  a key  for  burden  sharing  would  need  to be  in  place.  One could 
establish  a  system  of  committed  payment  obligations,  where  the  fund  has  the  right  to  receive 
contributions according to the agreed key to pay back its capital market loans. The governments, in 
8 
 BIS Review 39/2006
turn,  rely  on  their  ability  to  raise  tax.  Such  a  system  would  of  course  demand  very  strict  and  well 
thought-out  rules  governing  what  actions  the  fund  should  be  allowed  to  take  in  the  case  of  a  bank 
failure. These rules could be inspired, for example, by the US FDIC’s very strict mandate to always 
choose  the  least  cost  solution.  Among  other  things,  this  would  in  some  cases  mean  allowing 
shareholders as well as uninsured depositors and debt holders to lose their money. 
One  would  of  course  also  have  to  think  hard  about  what  formula  to  use  for  burden  sharing.  In  my 
opinion,  I  think a  fixed key  would  probably  be  the most  practical  choice.  I  might  mention  that  there 
does, in fact, already exist one type of burden sharing arrangement in the EU today, and that is for 
topping up the national deposit guarantee schemes for foreign branches. Although the potential sums 
involved in these topping-up schemes are insignificant in comparison to the potential costs of a large 
cross-border  bank  failure,  one  could  perhaps  draw  some  inspiration  and  build  on  such  an  existing 
arrangement.  Another  source  of  inspiration,  where  an  ex  ante  determined  key  for  obligations  to 
provide  liquidity  is  used,  are  the  IMF  financing  system  and  its  second  line  defence  in  the  form  of 
General Agreements to Borrow and New Agreements to Borrow. These burden sharing arrangements 
have been successfully in use for half a century. 
On top of this, the agency that would be operating the fund – presumably the European supervisory 
agency  –  would  also  have  the  power  to  reconstruct  banks.  Efficient  supervision  and  crisis 
management  may  also  warrant  arrangements  for  prompt  corrective  action  and  structured  early 
interventions.  As far as I know, most EU countries lack the rules on how to handle large bank failures, 
which means it would also be very positive from a point of view of contingency planning and reducing 
moral hazard. With a strong legal framework, the EU would be able to let investors in even the largest 
banks take full financial responsibility. 
When  it  comes  to  crisis  management,  coordination  of  emergency  liquidity  assistance  is  also 
imperative. Today, there are some legal uncertainties remaining for national central banks considering 
providing  cross-border  liquidity  support.  One  example  of  the  effects  of  this  is  that  differences  in 
national lists of eligible collateral will probably lead to gaming situations. A more centralised lender-of-
last-resort function is probably necessary. Here it can be noted that the Treaty does allow for a more 
prominent  role  for  the  ECB  in  this  respect  than  it  presently  has.  However,  a  number  of  problems 
remain to be solved first. Even in the presence of burden sharing arrangements for crisis resolution, 
one  would  have  to  come  up  with  ways  to  avoid  gaming  of  collateral.  Merely  extending  the  list  of 
eligible collateral for emergency liquidity assistance will not do the trick. It will probably only create a 
host of new problems, while a number of ways of fencing in collateral still remain. For example, one 
would probably want to avoid that a bank in distress places all of its US treasuries in a country outside 
of the jurisdiction of the ECB, while only letting its bad loans and other lower-quality collateral be within 
reach of Frankfurt… Moreover, one must realize that, within a cross-border bank, liquidity shortages 
can occur in other currencies than the euro, and one will have to find ways to handle this, for example 
through prearranged swap agreements. 
I  realise,  of  course,  that  achieving  such  a  supranational  system  is  a  long-term  process  and  it  will 
inevitably going to be politically difficult, and I’m sometimes confronted with the view that it will take a 
major banking crisis before we’ll be able to muster the resolve to achieve it. However, as a European 
policymaker, I cannot accept this view. We have a definitive responsibility, and just because things are 
difficult we cannot let that stop us from trying. And, if a supranational solution is limited to the forty or 
so of the most important cross-border banks, it may not be so inconceivable, after all. 
Financial integration is inevitable and necessary if we are to achieve an efficient financial system and 
to foster growth in Europe. And when integration takes off it tends to follow the logic of business, and 
not  the  "logic"  of  country  borders  or  national  laws.  It  also  means  that  national  authorities  must  be 
willing to adjust and adapt to this new financial landscape. 
BIS Review 39/2006 
 9
