Burhanuddin Abdullah: Monetary and exchange rate policy in a global financial 
integration – Indonesian experience 
Paper by Mr Burhanuddin Abdullah, Governor of Bank Indonesia, presented at the South East Asia – 
Latin  America  and  Caribbean  Countries  (SEACEN-LAC)  Governors  Seminar,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
15 September 2006.  
 Introduction 
First of all, let me thank BNM for hosting the first SEACEN-LAC Governors Seminar with an excellent 
arrangement. I am both delighted and honored to be here before Fellow Governors from two regions 
of  separate  hemisphere,  to  discuss  important  issues  of  common  interest.  Indeed,  the  theme  of  this 
seminar “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy and International Financial System” is timely and very 
relevant for Asian and Latin American economies. We are all aware that over the past two decades, 
these two regions have undergone daunting challenges in managing monetary and exchange rate, in 
particular dealing with major external shocks. In spite of our improved resilience in addressing such 
kind of shocks, thanks to major reforms we have conducted in the aftermath of the late 1990s crises, 
the downside risks in the global economy could not be dismissed. 
In fact, under the globalized and integrated financial market, central bankers all over the world, most 
notably the emerging markets have been confronted with unprecedented potential challenges arising 
from surges in short term capital flows. Currently, the low interest rates in the international market and 
concerns over the sustainability of the US twin deficits have been driving factors in pushing capital to 
flow  to  emerging  markets.  At  the  same  time,  the  high  yields  on  domestic  currency-denominated 
instruments  in  emerging  markets  have  been  the  pull  factor.  As  we  are  all  aware,  there  are  distinct 
characteristics of capital flows during the pre- and post-crisis periods. Before the crisis, capital inflows 
were  mainly  associated  with  efforts  by  domestic  market  actors  to  avail  foreign  sources  of  finance 
through international bank loans and issuance of various global financial instruments. However, since 
2003, foreign capital flows have mainly been driven by the flush global liquidity in search of optimum 
rates of return. The differences between these types of capital inevitably entail different consequences 
for  emerging  markets,  and  as  a  corollary  in  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy,  which  I  will  briefly 
elaborate further.  
Policy on open capital account 
Dating back to 1970, Indonesia began to seek liberalizing its capital account. Initially, the liberalization 
started  with  the  removal  of  compulsory  surrender  of  export  proceeds.  By  1982,  all  types  of  capital 
controls were dismantled leaving the capital account virtually open. Until the Asian crisis hit in 1997, 
the  existing  restriction  on  capital  inflows  were  only  applied  to  foreign  borrowings  by  banks  and 
companies with government-linked projects and net open foreign exchange position (NOP) on banks 
as a prudential regulation.  
Prior to the crisis, this system had contributed to sustained high economic growth, thereby promoting 
our  long  term  development  program.  Foreign  capital  inflows  had  also  fostered  the  deepening  of 
domestic  financial  sector  by  expanding  market  liquidity.  However,  the  benefits  of  capital  inflows,  in 
particular  in  the  early  1990s,  were  undermined  by  financial  market  imperfection  stemming  from  lax 
regulation  and  supervision  and  moral  hazard  due  to  implicit  guarantees.  These  problems  were 
reflected in the inefficient allocation of capital, unhedged foreign liabilities, and inflated asset prices. As 
market confidence in the prospect of the economy of the emerging market in Asia faltered, reversal of 
capital outflows could not be arrested, thereby leading to capital account crisis.  
With the hindsight of the Asian crisis, the Central Bank has sought to strengthen the monitoring on the 
capital movement and minimize speculative transactions. To this end, in 2001 Bank Indonesia issued 
a  regulation  on  the  non-internationalization  of  the  rupiah.  Subsequently,  when  a  wave  of  capital 
reversal and speculation against the rupiah triggered by rising world oil prices heightened in 2005, we 
issued a series of micro policies addressing the imbalances in the demand and supply in the forex 
market.  Furthermore,  prudential  regulation  in  the  banking  sector  was  also  strengthened  through  a 
tighter ruling on the NOP and particular transactions in forex trading.  
BIS Review 88/2006 
 1
Indonesian floating exchange rate regime 
Needless to say to Fellow Governors that the choice of an exchange rate system depends to a great 
extent on the condition of a country at a given time. In the current context of Indonesia, under a free 
capital mobility and limited amount of international reserves, we believe that our floating exchange rate 
system adopted on August 14, 1997 is an optimal choice. The system, we believe, provides a built-in 
discipline in a market whereby all other infrastructures are not sufficiently strong. This float will in part 
create a break on imprudent overseas borrowing, because in doing so market participants will have to 
factor in the cost of possible movements of rupiah.  
We are fully aware that in the case of domestic financial markets with imperfections, such as the thin 
forex market and limited availability of hedging instruments, a floating rate system often leads to high 
volatility with adverse consequences on stability. Therefore, while in practice we adopt a floating rate 
system,  we  are  of  the  view  that  smoothing  of  exchange  rate  movements  is  necessary.  In  fact,  our 
measures to reduce volatility are not unique. As posited by Calvo and Reinhart, almost all countries 
adopting  de  jure  free  floating  rate  system  do  not  rule  out  interventions  to  curb  volatility  in  their 
exchange rates. Such interventions are conducted both through direct intervention on the forex market 
and through the use of interest rates. 
Monetary policy framework in a floating exchange rate regime 
A  logical  consequence  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate  system  is  that  the  exchange  rate  can  no  longer 
serve  as  a  monetary  policy  anchor.  During  our  stabilization  period  under  the  IMF  program,  Bank 
Indonesia adopted base money as an anchor. Over the long run, however, we noticed a number of 
shortcomings in the use of base money as the operating target, such as the difficulties in achieving its 
target and the poor signal it transmits to the market. Such a poor signal of monetary policy direction 
and targets obviously fails to meet the need to maintain market expectations on the future exchange 
rate  movement.  In  view  of  those  factors,  Bank  Indonesia  adopted  a  fully-fledged  inflation  targeting 
framework in July 2005.  
The  framework  at  least  consists  of  three  primary  characteristics.  First,  monetary  policy  is  directed 
towards achievement an inflation target explicitly announced to the public for a specified time horizon. 
In this regard, under the new Central Bank Law the inflation target is set by the Government. Second, 
monetary policy must be implemented on a forward-looking basis, responding to future developments 
in inflation. On the operational level, Bank Indonesia uses the BI Rate as policy rate to respond to the 
future trend in inflation. In formulating monetary policy, the Taylor-type rule is used as a benchmark. 
Thus in essence, interest rates used as monetary policy instruments are adjusted in such manner so 
as to respond to deviations in the inflation gap and output gap. 
Obviously, rules like these are not to be applied mechanically. A balance between rule and discretion, 
or constrained discretion, as I see it, is especially necessary when monetary policy must be pursued 
within  an  increasingly  globalized  and  complex  financial  environment.  We  must  always  be  alert  of 
market developments, whether the money market or markets for goods, and a number of other signals 
and indicators reflecting domestic and global economic developments. We should also keep in mind 
that while inflation is the sole objective of a central bank, the public also pursues its own objectives, 
such as job creation and improvement of incomes. For this reason, the inflation targeting framework 
retains the fundamental monetary policy paradigm of striking the optimum balance between inflation 
and output.  
Apparently, when a central bank faces a dilemma of choosing between inflation and growth, inflation 
remains the priority. An example of this can be seen in the problems we faced last year, when world oil 
prices almost doubled. This disturbing trend became highly problematic for monetary policy because 
not only did it boost inflationary pressure, but also inhibit economic growth. Many suggested that the 
central bank did not need to respond to this temporary surge in inflation. However, our view at the time 
was that despite the temporary nature of the disturbance, the inflationary impact emanating from the 
higher oil prices through increased price for other goods and services, such as transport and wages, 
would  drive  up  core  inflation.  In  this  situation,  the  tight  policy  was  necessary  to  prevent  sustained 
escalation in public inflation expectations. 
The third characteristic of the ITF is that monetary policy is implemented on a transparent basis with 
measured accountability. In my view, with elements like these, inflation targeting is more than a mere 
framework for monetary policy. Inflation targeting promotes the good governance of a central bank. By 
announcing  the  inflation  target  to  the  public,  the  central  bank  commits  itself  to  its  achievement. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2006
Uncertainty  over  future  inflation  will  ease  because  public  inflation  expectations  have  a  point  of 
reference, and thus economic costs arising from uncertainty will also be reduced. Communication to 
the  public  on  the  future  monetary  policy  direction  is  also  vital  so  that  the  public  can  anticipate  the 
central bank monetary policy and to avoid ‘surprises’ that could trigger volatility in the money market.  
To strengthen policy effectiveness in this present age of disclosure, the central bank must also carry 
out  a  process  of  educating  the  public  on  what  the  monetary  policy  objectives  are,  the  strategy  for 
achieving  these  objectives,  and  what  lies  behind  the  decisions  taken.  One  example  involves  the 
communication of the monetary policy response to soaring oil prices and risks from global imbalances 
at a time of weak conditions in the real sector and high unemployment. Communications between the 
central  bank  and  market  players  are  also  necessary,  especially  when  financial  markets  are 
experiencing  turbulence.  In  financial  markets  fraught  with  asymmetric  information,  the  wealth  of 
information  held  by  the  central  bank  is  frequently  of  great  benefit  in  mitigating  this  issue  and  thus 
preventing panic and herding by investors. In this regard, the credibility of the central bank is crucial. 
Concluding remarks 
Under the environment of financial integration, the task of a central bank in maintaining both monetary 
and  financial  system  stability  has  become  more  challenging.  To  navigate  under  this  changing 
environment, in my view a central bank should have at least three critical tools at its discretion. First is 
the  flexible  exchange  rate  system,  which  provides  for  autonomy  of  monetary  policy.  Second  is  a 
monetary policy framework which is consistent, credible, and transparent so as to provide a monetary 
policy anchor within the flexible exchange rate system. Third is a strong banking system capable of 
absorbing the various risks created by financial globalization. 
The  mounting  risks  and  uncertainties  emerging  within  the  financial  globalization  process  also 
underscore the importance of the central bank role in guiding public expectations. Within this context, 
the  credibility  of  the  central  bank  is  crucial.  To  this  end,  transparency,  accountability,  and  effective 
communication must be integral to the entire monetary management process. In short, communication 
may serve as an additional “instrument” that a central bank should use at its disposal to complement 
other monetary instruments for monetary policy to operate effectively.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 88/2006 
 3
