Martín Redrado: The hemispheric growth agenda - financial and economic 
outlook 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, President of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the 36th Washington 
Conference  on  the  Americas,  "Latin  America:  financial  and  economic  outlook  vis-à-vis  the  global 
challenges”, Washington DC, 3 May 2006.  
 International context 
1. 
Global  economic  and  financial  conditions  remain  favorable  for  the  region.  Commodity  prices  are 
soaring  and  look  sustainable  for  at  least  the  next  24  months,  economic  growth  is  still  high  and 
international interest rates are at historically low levels, despite recent hikes.  
During this year, global growth has become more geographically balanced with subdued inflation in 
the three largest regions of the world. Expansion projections have been revised upwards, rising from 
4.3% three months ago to 4.8%. Two-thirds of such increase is explained by growth in three countries: 
Russia, China and India. 
And this is not a negligible fact. The inclusion of China and India in the global economy has had a 
significant  impact  on  trade  patterns  and  on  terms  of  trade.  On  the  demand  side,  as  population 
migrates from rural to urban labor markets, demand for food has increased, driving commodity prices 
up in a sustainable way since 2002. China’s involvement in world economy has boosted interest for 
agricultural products and for industrial commodities such as base metals and, in particular, oil, amid a 
context of growth in investment and manufacturing activity in Asia. On the supply side, the production 
of  industrial  goods  at  low  cost  has  increased  competition,  helping  to  keep  inflation  restrained 
worldwide. 
I  contend  that  a  number  of  latin  american  countries  are  more  China  sensitive  than  interest  rate 
sensitive. 
Among industrial countries, the us remains the major driver for growth with limited pass-through from 
headline  to  core  inflation.  Japan  virtually  left  deflation  behind  and  China  keeps  growing  at  an 
outstanding  pace;  still  in  the  neighborhood  of  9-10%-rates.  There  are  some  signs  of  a  more  solid 
recovery in the euro area, although the expansion is still modest. Meanwhile, growth in most emerging 
countries remains solid.  
Global risks 
2. 
However, risk factors for emerging markets, and Latin America in particular, are slightly biased to the 
downside mainly due to a number of uncertainties. Let me point out four risks.  
First: increasing protectionism. There is little hope that multilateral trade negotiations would make real 
progress.  This  trend  may  also  be  fueled  by  the  continuity  of  the  current  status  quo  in  the  light  of 
escalating global imbalances. 
Second: oil prices, short-term risks relate more to the geopolitical arena than to the fundamentals of 
exploration  and  exploitation  of  resources.  On  the  demand  side,  the  renewed  interest  on  financial 
instruments such as the exchange-traded funds and their widespread development, open access for 
individual investors to spot and future markets, this new phenomenon generates new pressures that 
may be out of line with changes in the underlying fundamentals. 
Third: asset inflation - mainly in the real estate market - and, in particular, how this issue has impacted 
on  consumption  and  wealth  effects  in  industrial  countries.  Although  in  some  economies  such  as 
England and Australia housing prices began to decline, there is still noticeable uncertainty about the 
accelerated asset inflation and its consequences on the real economy.  
Fourth: the adjustment of “global imbalances”. In particular which region will absorb the greater costs 
is a critical factor to asses potential spillover effects. My view is that the correction will imply both a 
rebalancing of world demand together with price adjustments. Obviously, the key question is whether 
we will have a soft landing or a hard one. While in the past we have not seen many soft adjustments 
BIS Review 47/2006 
 1
for this kind of imbalances, the pace of technological progress and structural changes in productivity 
together with labor flexibility, make it harder to extrapolate the past into the future. 
In any case, the behavior of commodity prices, interest rates differentials and the demand for assets 
denominated  in  dollars  will  be  the  relevant  angles  to  level  the  field  during  the  next  years.  Any 
scenario  requires  our  economies  to  adopt  countercyclical  macroeconomic  policies.  Why? 
Because  we  are  more  vulnerable  to  external  factors.  The  agenda  includes  foreign  reserve 
accumulation, fiscal discipline and strong financial systems, capable of buffering the possible impacts 
of global financial turbulence on domestic variables. This is no time for complacency. This is time to 
build strong countercyclical policies. Save in the good times to spend it in the downturn. 
Latin America 
3. 
It is true that today our region is better prepared than in the past. The external and fiscal accounts of 
latin  american  economies  have  improved  significantly  over  the  last  years.  In  this  framework,  our 
countries have made progress towards more flexible exchange-rate regimes, continued to accumulate 
foreign reserves, made net payments to multilateral financial institutions, increased domestic savings 
and  developed  domestic  capital  markets.  Therefore,  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals  from  a  risk 
management  perspective  are  much  stronger  due  to:  1)  fiscal  solvency;  2)  monetary  prudence;  3) 
external  sustainability  with  exchange-rate  flexibility  and  countercyclical  policies;  and  4)  better 
regulated and deeper financial systems. 
The  current  account  surplus  and  a  primary  fiscal  surplus  has  reduced  indebtedness  in  virtually  all 
countries in the region. Latin America has been showing a current account surplus for three years in a 
row, which reached about 1.3% of GDP in 2005. Fiscal solvency has become a public good highly and 
undoubtedly valued by our society. Most importantly, fiscal discipline is not an asset for the left or right. 
It is just common sense. There is also increased price stability along with a greater social demand for 
restrained inflation. Central banks in the region have been able to meet these demands by pursuing 
prudent monetary policies.  
This scenario together with higher private capital inflows has helped to develop countercyclical policies 
by means of foreign reserves accumulation. While, the decision regarding the level of foreign reserves 
that  a country  should hold  is  generally  associated with  the  need  for  a certain  amount  of liquidity  to 
meet external liabilities, I would like to stress the role that foreign reserve accumulation plays as an 
insurance  and  deterrence  mechanism  for  emerging  countries.  I  believe  it  is  the  responsibility  of 
every country to develop its own set of countercyclical policies that would help weather limited 
access  to  financial  markets  without  causing  a  significant  impact  on  domestic  variables.  Building  a 
precautionary  cushion  of  foreign  reserves  is  particularly  important  for  emerging  markets  in 
these benign times.  
Also, there has recently been a shift in the focus of international financial rules. The old paradigm is in 
crisis,  but  no  replacement  has  yet  been  found.  The  problems  in  distinguishing  between  financial 
turbulences  that  arise  from  temporary  or  permanent  causes  may  lead  to  contagion  effects;  an 
uncertain transition from bail-out to bail-in; problems arising from moral hazard, are as present today 
as they have been in the past. Therefore, in the absence of an international lender of last resort and 
with an incomplete international financial architecture, the accumulation of international reserves for 
prudential reasons has to be contemplated. In fact, today I believe that, there is no good substitute 
for sound liquidity policies developed domestically to deal with exposure to the potential risks 
I described earlier. 
And this is not a policy exclusive to Argentina. Following the macroeconomic and financial instability of 
the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  the  main  emerging  countries,  especially  those  that  have  endured 
financial crises, have favored the accumulation of reserves as a mechanism to reduce the vulnerability 
of our economies and persistent exchange rate volatility. Foreign reserves held by central banks have 
grown by 220% over the past decade, at double the rate at which reserves were accumulated during 
the previous decade. 
In  the  particular  case  of  argentina,  the  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  has  been 
complemented  with  a  strong  sterilization  policy  with  a  number  of  absorption  instruments  to 
clear  pesos  in  excess  of  money  demand.  The  issuance  of  central  bank  securities  (LEBAC  and 
NOBAC)  has  been  the  monetary  authority’s  natural  absorption  factor.  These  securities  –  with 
maturities  that  range  from  one  month  to  two  years  –  generated  a  monetary  contraction  of  over  10 
billion pesos in 2005.  
2 
 BIS Review 47/2006
Another  remarkable  (and  rather  unique  for  Argentina)  absorption  instrument  has  been  the 
payback of rediscount lines by commercial banks, which has become one of the main contractive 
factors  in  2005  and  continues  to  be  in  2006  as  many  financial  institutions  are  anticipating 
payments  from  liquidity  assistance  provided  by  the  central  bank  during  the  crisis.  These 
payments reflect the upturn of the banking sector and also show the commitment of the central bank to 
keep  the  quality  of  its  balance  sheet.  This  factor  represented  an  additional  absorption  of  12  billion 
pesos.  
Additional sterilization instruments include activity in the repo market, which provides for a corridor of 
benchmark short-term interest rates and the stock of treasury bonds in hands of the central bank as a 
result of the recall of quasi-monies carried out by the national government after the crisis. This policy 
could not have been pursued without the strong balance sheet the central bank is able to show. In 
fact,  these  absorption  instruments  were  utilized  while  preserving  a  positive  balance  sheet,  which 
currently  shows  a  profit  of  over  2  billion  pesos.  For  2005  finally,  the  public  sector  acts  as  a  major 
source of monetary contraction as well, by purchasing part of the us dollars required to meet foreign 
obligations.  
Therefore,  as  an  autonomous  institution  that  has  emerged  from  a  major  crisis,  the  Central  Bank  of 
Argentina does not perform any monetary issuance to finance the national government nor it provides 
incentives to increase the exposure of the financial system to the public sector (but quite the opposite). 
The central bank has been accomplishing its monetary program - with a restriction in monetary 
agregates for 2005 and 2006 - for eleven consecutive quarters.  Consequently,  for  the  first  time 
since 2002, the monetary base reflected a shrinkage of 1.5% in real terms in 2005.  
Among several measures taken to boost credit and to develop an enhanced regulatory framework, we 
issued  regulations  that  limited  credit  to  the  public  sector  and  currency  mismatches,  which 
were two key sins of the past. As a consequence, a de-dollarized financial system currently relies on 
a lender of last resort in pesos and its exposure to the public sector diminished to 31% of the assets, 
after reaching levels of more than double during the crisis. In other words, strict limits on exposure to 
the  public  sector  have  been  set  up  in  order  to  leave  behind  the  “crowding  out”  of  previous 
decades, when loans were mainly heading for the government and welcome the “crowding in”, 
providing the right incentives to finance private projects. This development is entirely consistent with 
the goal of minimizing the “fiscal dominance” that has historically characterized the region. 
But,  central  banks  in  the  region  have  also  progressed  towards  ensuring  financial  stability  through 
deeper and better regulated and supervised financial systems. In Argentina, the central bank achieved 
sustained  progress  towards  the  definite  resolution  of  pending  issues  which  have  held  the  financial 
system  at  risk,  by  means  of  a  proactive  regulatory  and  supervision  policy.  These  developments 
include adequate regulatory incentives aimed at strengthening risk management, greater transparency 
and the safeguarding of consumers’ rights, as well as the recovery of solvency in a framework that 
encourages medium- and long-term lending.  
In this context, financial institutions managed to obtain positive earnings in 2005 for the first time since 
the 2001-2002 crisis. Both public and private financial institutions also received capital contributions 
for  more  than  1.2  billion  pesos  in  the second  half  of  2005  for  a  total  of  12.5  billion  pesos  over  the 
2002-2005  period.  In  a  process  that  is  expected  to  continue,  foreign  banks  accounted  for  more 
than two thirds of total capitalizations, which is a clear indicator of the renewed confidence of 
the international community on the domestic financial system. 
This  favorable  development,  along  with  the  ongoing  dynamics  of  banking  capitalization,  is 
consolidating the soundness of the financial system: Argentina today has a much smaller, better 
matched, deeper and less riskier financial system than in the past.  
Therefore, a combination of fiscal solvency, external sustainability, a sound financial system, and a 
prudent monetary policy ensures that recent price behavior by no means poses a threat of spiralizing 
inflation,  because  –  unlike  prior  episodes  –  there  is  no  uncontrolled  expansion  of  domestic 
credit, whether through the financing of public sector deficits or by unrestricted assistance to 
the  financial  system.  Inflation  processes  in  Argentina  have  in  general  been  preceded  by  a 
considerable stream of demand for dollars, which is quite the contrary to what is happening now. The 
current  situation  is  not  at  all  similar  to  what  occurred  in  the  past  two  decades.  During  the  1980s, 
Argentina was hardly competitive and the growing fiscal deficit was financed by printing money, which 
ended in hyperinflation. In the 1990s, low inflation lived with growing twin deficits (fiscal and current 
account) that were entirely inconsistent with the exchange rate regime at the time. Argentina currently 
exhibits the largest primary fiscal surplus of the past 50 years, a financial sector that is paying back its 
BIS Review 47/2006 
 3
debt to the central bank, and a significant current account surplus supported by the sustained growth 
of exports. 
There are reasons to believe that “temporary” factors are putting pressure prices today. Due to the 
limited pass-through to domestic prices that followed the devaluation of the peso, there should be a 
natural  adjustment  in  relative  prices  in a  context  of sound economic growth  and  a  narrowed  output 
gap,  as  well  as  some  imported  “inflation”  in  the  framework  of  a  more  open  economy  and  an 
international market with rising prices (crude oil and commodities in general). 
In  my  view,  a  strict  hold  on  the  growth  of  monetary  aggregates  in  a  way  that  encourages  savings 
without  affecting  investment  nor  leading  to  short-term  and  volatile  capital  inflows  combined  with  a 
responsible fiscal policy with countercyclical components and a prudent wage policy is the right way to 
go in order to keep inflation on track in Argentina. We should not ignore the fact that we are talking 
about an economy that is still in transition, where key economic variables have not reached their long 
term  equilibrium  levels  yet,  credit  markets  are  small  and  the  trnsmission  mechanisms  of  monetary 
policy  are  highly  undetermined.  It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  it  took  long  to  countries  that 
suffered  huge  economic  crises  to  fully  stabilize  their  economies  and  achieve  sustainable 
growth. 
In  fact,  the  approach  of  countries  such  as  chile,  to  fully  stabilize  their  economies  included  fiscal 
discipline,  external  debt  normalization,  reconstruction  of  the  financial  system  and  avoidance  of  an 
acceleration in inflation in a sequential manner. All of these countries put in place gradual policies after 
the collapse of their economies.  
Challenges 
4. 
Latin  American  countries  today  are  better  prepared  to  face  eventual  changes  in  the  international 
environment than in the past due to sound macroeconomic policies. The key challenge though is to 
make  theses  policies  long-lasting.  In  fact,  the  current  favorable  international  context  and  the 
expansion cycle of the global economy provides an opportunity to learn from the past and to 
generate persistent institutional changes.  
In the 1980s, monetary policy acted as a mere financing instrument for unsustainable fiscal policies. 
Even under the monetary arrangements of the 1990s that prevented the financing by the central bank 
of fiscal deficits, imbalances led to indebtedness crisis, which ended up affecting the whole economy, 
including  the  financial  system.  The  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals  the  region  stands  on 
today  contribute  to  generate  a  stable  economic  framework  and  work  towards  the  goal  of 
avoiding  the  “fiscal  dominance”  of  past  decades  based  upon  the  implementation  of 
countercyclical and flexible macroeconomic policies. 
Regarding the Argentine financial system, while the recovery from the crisis occurred at a remarkable 
pace,  there  are  still  some  outstanding  tasks  for  the  medium-term.  Although  there  has  been  a  clear 
upturn  in  private  credit  in  2005,  bank  lending  currently  stands  at  almost  11%  of  GDP,  well  below 
historic and international levels.  
Policy makers in the region now face the challenge of designing institutions that provide the means to 
make  these  sound  policies  persistent.  Depth  and  quality  of  institutional  reforms  are  at  least  as 
important as their stability in time, since otherwise, any effort shall be vain. For such purpose, they 
must be consistent and involve consensus among the different social groups. 
We know that economic institutions cannot be imposed in an authoritarian manner or imported 
from  other  countries,  rather,  they  are  endogenous  to  each  society.  They  are  the  result  of  a 
collective  decision-making  process  institutional  reforms  should  be  carried  out  on  “conviction”  rather 
than on “need” to enhances its probability of success and persistence over the long-term. 
The dual challenge of the region is not sequential but simultaneous: growing and creating institutions 
at the same time, since they define and reinforce each other, thus securing adequate consistency and 
consensus.  This  process  calls  for  a  gradual  nature,  for  flexibility  and  for  the  ability  to  adapt  to  the 
chalenges of the world economy. 
The Central Bank of Argentina will continue to pursue a prudent, predictable and transparent 
monetary policy, which includes countercyclical components to reduce external vulnerability 
and to provide the conditions for a solid expansion of the financial system within a context of 
financial stability. This is our contribution towards sustained growth.  
4 
 BIS Review 47/2006
