Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory statement by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the  hearing  before  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs  of  the  Storting 
(Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 22 May 2006.  
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  statement  is  based  on  Norges  Bank’s 
Annual Report for 2005, Inflation Report 1/2006 and the Executive Board’s assessments published after the monetary policy 
meeting on 26 April.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee and also thank for this opportunity to report and 
answer  questions  on  monetary  policy  in  connection  with  the  Storting’s  deliberations  on  the 
Government’s Credit Report. The account is based on the Bank’s Annual Report, but is also updated 
based on the Executive Board’s assessments for the period to the preceding monetary policy meeting.  
Economic policy in Norway faces particular challenges. Low prices for imported goods and services, 
combined with high prices for export goods, have led to substantial terms-of-trade gains for Norway.  
The  Norwegian  economy  has  experienced  a  strong  positive  income  shock.  Such  a  pronounced 
improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  has  in  fact  not  been  observed  since  the  First  World  War.  Real 
national disposable income will increase by 25-30 per cent in the period 2003-2006.  
So far, the increase in income has not led to a pronounced rise in price and wage inflation. Businesses 
are using resources with steadily greater efficiency and the supply of labour has been ample.  
Nevertheless, in the face of such strong external influences, it is demanding to smooth developments 
in the Norwegian economy. Our stabilisation policy rests on four pillars, which were established in the 
1990s and in 2001 against the backdrop of the wide fluctuations in economic developments during the 
first  twenty  years  of  the  oil  age  in  Norway.  Under  the  oil  fund  mechanism,  increased  government 
petroleum  revenues  are  invested  abroad.  This  curbs  the  impact  of  price  fluctuations  on  domestic 
demand and production - and on inflation and the krone exchange rate. A floating krone exchange rate 
also  has  a  stabilising  effect,  as  the  exchange  rate  normally  appreciates  in  favourable  periods  and 
depreciates  during  adverse  periods.  At  the  same  time,  the  fiscal  rule  that  provides  for  a  steady 
phasing-in  of  petroleum  revenues  and 
target  anchor  expectations  concerning 
developments  in  the  krone  exchange  rate  and  inflation.  As  a  result,  the  impact  of  a  terms-of-trade 
change,  stemming  from  variations  in  the  oil  price,  on  these  variables  becomes  less  pronounced. 
Moreover,  the  fiscal  rule contributes  to  restraining  the  pace  at  which exposed  industries  are  scaled 
back.  
In principle, these policy guidelines are just as conducive for coping with favourable periods as with 
adverse periods. We will face another test when the terms-of-trade change is reversed and the gains 
either fully or partly dissipate.  
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation.  This  is  the  most  important 
contribution monetary policy can make to sound economic developments in the long term. Low and 
stable inflation provides enterprises and households with an anchor for inflation expectations.  
In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that 
weight is given both to variability in inflation and variability in output and employment. Flexible inflation 
targeting builds a bridge between the long-term objective of monetary policy, which is to keep inflation 
on target and provide an anchor for inflation expectations, and the short-term objective of stabilising 
economic developments.  
Transparency  surrounding  Norges  Bank’s  assessments  of  monetary  policy  trade-offs  enhances 
economic agents’ understanding of how economic news influences the interest rate. In recent years, it 
has  become  easier  to  read  the  Bank’s  intentions.  As  a  result,  monetary  policy  has  become  more 
effective. The background material for the Executive Board’s monetary policy meetings is published 
and the assessments underlying the interest rate decisions are explained. As from last autumn, the 
Bank  publishes  its  own  interest  rate  forecast.  From  using  technical  assumptions  and  others’ 
assessments,  we  have  taken  ownership  of  the  interest  rate  path  in  our  projections.  Even  though 
inflation 
the 
BIS Review 44/2006 
 1
considerable uncertainty still remains, it becomes easier for economic agents to assess interest rate 
developments.  
Weak  growth  in  the  world  economy  early  this  decade  led  to  low  interest  rates  in  many  countries. 
Interest rates were kept at a low level for a long period, but are now on the rise. The world economy is 
again expanding at a brisk pace. Over the past three years, global production has increased by about 
14 per cent, which is the strongest upturn since the beginning of the 1970s.  
In the UK and US, interest rates have already moved up to a more normal level. In Sweden and the 
euro area, the central banks have started to raise interest rates. Over the next year, further interest 
rate increases are expected in the euro area, the UK, Sweden, Switzerland, the US, Canada, Japan 
and Australia.  
Norway has also experienced a fairly long period of falling and thereafter stable, low interest rates. 
Price  inflation  was  subdued,  and  there  was  idle  capacity  in  the  economy.  Real  interest  rates  have 
been very low and markedly lower than a neutral level. In line with the prospects I presented to the 
Committee last year, we have started raising interest rates. To date, Norges Bank’s key rate has been 
increased by 0.75 percentage point.  
Consumer price inflation has edged up, but is still very low even close to three years after the start of 
the cyclical upturn. Consumer prices adjusted  for tax changes and excluding energy products have 
risen by 1 per cent over the past twelve months1. Prices for imported consumer goods have fallen 
almost every year since the mid-1990s, reflecting freer trade and the shift towards imports from low-
cost countries.  
The rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services slowed somewhat towards the end of 
2005 and into 2006. The 12-month rise in prices for these products was 1.6 per cent in April1.  
Several factors now point towards higher inflation. Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy is 
increasing. This may result in higher margins. Furthermore, tighter labour market conditions may lead 
to higher wage growth. In addition, the rise in energy and commodity prices is pushing up producer 
input costs.  
Buoyant  growth  in  the  global  economy  has  contributed  to  very  high  prices  for  oil,  gas  and  other 
commodities. Since last autumn, copper prices have more than doubled and aluminium prices have 
risen by close to 50 per cent. Commodity futures prices have also increased markedly. Prices for other 
Norwegian export goods, such as fresh salmon, have also exhibited a marked rise.  
As mentioned by way of introduction, falling prices for imported consumer goods, in conjunction with 
rising  prices  for  Norway’s  export  goods,  have  contributed  to  substantial  terms-of-trade  gains  for 
Norway. Over the past few years, Norwegian export prices have increased twofold relative to import 
prices. The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices is particularly strong, but the terms of trade for the 
mainland  economy  have  also  improved.  The  situation  in  Norway  differs  from  that  of  its  Nordic 
neighbours. Sales of Swedish and Finnish high-tech products are growing strongly in volume terms, 
but prices are falling. Denmark has a diversified business sector, which is overall moving on a steady 
path.  
Partly reflecting the improvement in the terms of trade, the nominal krone exchange rate has remained 
strong.  Wage  costs  in  Norway  are  now  very  high  compared  with  other  countries,  measured  in  a 
common currency. The current situation is considerably different from that of the mid-1990s. At that 
time,  performance  in  the  manufacturing  sector  was  strong  partly  owing  to  solid  competitiveness. 
Today, the manufacturing sector is faring well in spite of a strong krone and a high cost level. The 
reason  is  the  unusually  buoyant  markets  for  Norwegian  goods.  At  the  same  time,  the  strong  krone 
exchange  rate  has  eased  the  impact  of  revenue  gains.  In  periods,  the  effects  on  the  krone  may 
nevertheless be somewhat excessive, partly owing to the low level of inflation in Norway.  
Low interest rates, increased petroleum investment, strong global growth and the improvement in the 
terms  of  trade  have contributed  to solid  growth  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Capacity  utilisation has 
probably  reached  a  higher-than-normal  level,  and  the  cyclical  upturn  is  continuing.  Enterprises  are 
steadily increasing their debt to finance investments. So far, the cyclical expansion has been marked 
by strong production growth, with ample labour supply and unusually low inflation.  
                                                      
1   Adjusted for lower maximum day-care rates. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2006
For  a  long  time,  employment  growth  measured  by  number  employed  was  lower  than  in  previous 
upturns,  partly  reflecting  the  fall  in  sickness  absence  as  of  summer  2004.  In  2005,  the  number  of 
person-hours  worked  increased  relatively  rapidly  and  productivity  growth  picked  up.  This  may  have 
limited the demand for new labour. This trend has now been reversed. Employment growth measured 
by number employed is strong. Our regional network reports that there are labour shortages in many 
sectors.  
The wage settlements concluded so far indicate that wage growth may, as expected, be somewhat 
stronger this year than in 2005. Historically, it has proven difficult in both local and central negotiations 
to keep down cost growth when unemployment is low. There is thus a risk of even higher wage growth 
further ahead. On the other hand, the threat of relocation of jobs, increased labour inflows and higher 
imports of services from low-cost countries will probably contribute to restraining wage growth. In the 
period  1998-2002,  businesses  and  employees  experienced  that  high  wage  growth  resulted  in  high 
interest rates and wide fluctuations in the krone exchange rate. This insight is perhaps still marking 
wage negotiations.  
The phase with ample labour supply may be in the process of tapering off. The decline in sickness 
absence has been reversed, and is now increasing. As was the case earlier, the number of persons on 
disability benefits is rising. The supply of labour from other countries is important for many industries, 
but on the whole is no longer offsetting increased flows into benefit schemes. There is competition for 
highly skilled labour in the new EU accession countries. Labour flows into the UK and Ireland have 
been  particularly  high  and  labour  barriers  may  be  more  restrictive  in  Norway  than  in  the  UK  and 
Ireland.  Activity  has  picked  up  in  Central  European  countries,  and  the  Swedish  labour  market  has 
become tighter. Therefore, it is uncertain how large the supply of labour from these countries will be in 
the period ahead.  
Household  debt  has  risen  sharply  since  the  mid-1990s.  At  the  same  time,  house  prices  have 
increased markedly. To some extent, developments in the 1990s can probably be viewed as a delayed 
adaptation to the deregulation of the housing and credit markets in the 1980s, after many households 
burned their fingers in the wake of deregulation. In recent years, household income growth has been 
solid  and  household  confidence  in  the  future  is  very  high.  Coupled  with  expectations  of  low  real 
interest rate over time, this may have provided an additional boost to house prices.  
Long  periods  of  sharply  rising  asset  prices  and  debt  may  be  a  potential  source  of  subsequent 
instability in output and employment.  
The sharp rise in house prices and debt in other countries are probably also ascribable to low real 
interest  rates  over  time.  Household  debt  is  high  in  Norway,  but  is  even higher  in Denmark and  the 
Netherlands.  This  probably  reflects  a  long  history  of  well  developed  mortgage  financing  in  these 
countries.  
Inflation stabilised early in the 1990s after falling from a high level in the previous decade. Through the 
1990s, inflation generally remained in the interval 1½ – 3½ per cent. Inflation has varied slightly more 
in  the  past  few  years.  In  a  period  of  increasing  cross-border  labour  flows,  major  technological 
advances, changes in competitive conditions and substantial changes in trade patterns, inflation will 
probably, with our very open economy, show somewhat wider variations, as witnessed over the past 
two to three years.  
The operational objective of monetary policy is low and stable consumer price inflation. Over time, the 
consumer  price  index  will  provide  a  guide  for  assessing  monetary  policy.  Monthly  variations  in 
consumer  prices  reflect  temporary  conditions  which  monetary  policy  cannot  control.  According  to 
Norges Bank’s remit, the Bank shall not normally take account of direct effects on consumer prices of 
changes in interest rate, excise duties and extraordinary, temporary disturbances. Energy prices have 
traditionally shown wide variations. Hence, a price index that is adjusted for variations in such prices 
as well as for indirect taxes can be a measure of underlying inflation in the economy.  
However, such a price index does not take account of that fact that the trend rise in energy prices has 
been higher than for other prices and is therefore not a perfect measure of underlying inflation. In the 
past 10-20 years, energy prices and taxes have pushed up consumer prices annually by an average 
0.35 percentage point. Even when taking into account trend increases in energy prices, inflation is still 
moderate.  
Experience  indicates  that  inflation  expectations  remain  stable  even  if  inflation  varies  somewhat,  as 
long as the interest rate is used actively to curb the effects.  
BIS Review 44/2006 
 3
Norges Bank seeks to set the interest rate with a view to achieving a reasonable balance between the 
objective of stabilising inflation at target and the objective of stabilising developments in output and 
employment.  
Interest  rates  are  projected  to  increase  gradually  in  the  years  ahead,  up  to  a  more  normal  level. 
Interest rates are also expected to increase in other countries. Capacity utilisation in the Norwegian 
economy is now fairly high and will contribute to bringing inflation up towards the target in the course 
of  the  next  2-3  years.  In  the  account  presented  after  the  monetary  policy  meeting  of  the  Executive 
Board on 26 April, it was stated that there are prospects of another interest rate increase in the second 
quarter – at the monetary policy meeting in May or June – and a further increase thereafter.  
In addition to projecting developments, we wish to highlight the uncertainty surrounding developments 
ahead.  The  projections  for  the  interest  rate  and  other  economic variables  are  based  on  incomplete 
information about the current economic situation and the functioning of the economy.  
Allow me to summarise:  
The fall in prices for imported goods and services and the increase in export prices have provided the 
Norwegian economy with an appreciable income boost. The mainland economy has expanded rapidly 
in recent years. At the same time, inflation has remained low. Increased efficiency and ample supply of 
labour has made a contribution in this context. This situation is now changing. There are now limited 
idle resources.  
Economic policy must increasingly reflect the capacity constraints facing many Norwegian businesses. 
There are prospects that the interest rate will be raised gradually – in small, not too frequent steps – 
towards a more normal level.  
Thank you for allowing me to make the introductory statement at this hearing.  
4 
 BIS Review 44/2006
