Svein Gjedrem: Wealth management in a public setting 
Introductory statement by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to 
panel  discussion  on  “Problems  of  Plenty?  Challenges  and  Opportunities  from  the  Accumulation  of 
Large  Exchange Reserves  and Windfall  Revenue”, arranged  as part  of  the  seminar  program  of  the 
2006 Annual Meetings of the IMF and the World Bank, Singapore, 18 September 2006. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 1. 
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss the challenges that arise when managing financial wealth in a 
public sector environment. Norges Bank now has eight to ten years of experience of this task, and I 
shall  try  to  describe  in  brief  the strategies adopted by  Norges  Bank, and  what  we  believe  we  have 
learned.  
2. 
We have a large amount of money under management. Our foreign reserves are probably larger than 
needed  for  financial  stability  and  monetary  policy  operations.  But  the  most  important  fund  is  the 
Government  Pension  Fund,  formerly  the  Petroleum  Fund.  We  have  been  responsible  for  managing 
that Fund since its inception in 1996, and it has been a major task for us since 1998.  
3. 
The value of the petroleum resources in the North Sea is currently estimated at about USD 700 billion. 
The  government  receives  the  bulk  of  the  revenues  generated  from  petroleum  extraction  as  sales 
revenues  and  taxes.  The  government  channels  these  revenues  into  the  Pension  Fund  as  financial 
assets.  
Annual spending from the Fund is subject to a spending rule, whereby the government commits to limit 
spending.  Over  time spending should not  exceed  the  estimated  expected real  return on  the  Fund’s 
investments, set at 4 per cent per year. This implies that the Fund is expected to become a permanent 
savings account.  
4. 
At  the  outset,  there  was  already  an  investment  management  operation  in  the  Bank,  for  the  foreign 
reserves. But when it became clear in 1997 that the Pension Fund would be growing fast, we decided 
to set up a separate management unit, now called Norges Bank Investment Management (NBIM). Our 
challenge was to build a business organisation within a traditional civil service culture.  
The  new  unit  recruited  investment  professionals  from  outside  the  Bank  as  well  as  people  from  the 
existing  reserve  management  operations.  NBIM  was  explicitly  defined  as  a  business  unit,  which 
should be different from the rest of the central bank in many respects.  
To avoid any suspicion that NBIM would benefit from proprietary central bank information, the new unit 
was  placed  completely  outside  the  decision-making  processes  in  the  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability area, with no access to confidential information.  
The  fact  that  the  Pension  Fund  does  not  invest  in  Norwegian  markets  is  also  important  to  avoid 
conflicts of interest: There is no direct link to our monetary policy operations.  
5. 
The  purposes  of  the  Pension  Fund  and  the  foreign  reserves  are  similar;  they  are  both  essentially 
national savings funds, except for that part of the reserves that we may need for policy purposes. The 
current asset allocation is thus effectively the same for both funds. At present they have 40 per cent in 
equities and 60 per cent in fixed income. The investments are widely diversified across international 
markets.  
The investment strategy has so far aimed at low return volatility, perhaps to a larger extent than is 
reasonable for a fund that is meant to be permanent. The strategy is currently under review by the 
Ministry of Finance, and there may be changes under way.  
6. 
The  Ministry  of  Finance  acts  as  owner  of  the  Pension  Fund,  on  behalf  of  the  government.  The 
management of the Pension Fund is delegated to Norges Bank. The key feature of the model is the 
BIS Review 86/2006 
 1
division of responsibilities between the two institutions. The Ministry takes the high-level decisions and 
defines a clear mandate for Norges Bank. In accordance with that mandate Norges Bank makes all 
investment decisions without interference from the Ministry.  
The benchmark portfolio for the Fund is defined by the Ministry. The benchmark determines most of 
the asset allocation in the actual portfolio, but the Ministry also leaves some leeway for the manager. 
NBIM shall deviate from the benchmark in order to obtain a higher return.  
Active management has become a very important part of our investment operations. We believe that 
the search for excess return has had a strong disciplinary effect on the organisation with a view to 
controlling  both  market  and  operational  risk,  and  to  ensure  that  all  inside  and  outside  suppliers  do 
exactly what they are paid to do.  
7. 
We have tried to build an organisation where the focus is on investment returns. In order to keep that 
focus we have tried to implement three basic principles:  
Accountability for decisions is clearly defined  
• 
• 
There is transparency, nothing can be hidden away  
• 
The professional standards required for employees are very high 
8. 
For investment decisions these principles mean that every decision is made by one individual and that 
the remuneration paid to him or her depends on the profitability of the decisions. We have defined a 
large  number  of  independent  profit  centers,  each  with  a  clearly  defined  mandate.  A  compliance 
function checks that no one operates outside the mandate.  
For  external  managers  we  apply  the  same  principle:  Hiring  an  external  manager  is  an  investment 
decision, and someone inside NBIM is held responsible for it.  
9. 
The  salary  system  is  different  from  the  rest  of  the  central  bank.  The  main  objectives  are  to  focus 
attention  on  performance,  and  to  give  distinct  signals  to  people  who  do  not  perform  according  to 
expectations.  
Salaries have two components, a basic salary and a performance-based component. The latter is a 
very important part of the total salary, and implies that differences between the salaries of poor and 
outstanding performers are large. The level of salaries is benchmarked to private sector competitors in 
the local market where we operate.  
The criteria used are designed to be transparent with little room for subjective judgement. Measured 
excess return contribution is a very important component.  
10. 
I  believe  that  our  experience  so  far  has  been  positive.  Since  the  Fund’s  first  full  year  in  1997,  the 
annual return in international currencies has been more than 6 per cent in nominal terms and 4.1 per 
cent in real terms.  
Since NBIM was set up in 1998, we have recorded the performance in 34 quarters. In 9 quarters the 
return  to  the  Fund  has  been  lower  than  the  benchmark,  but  in  25  out  of  the  34  there  has  been  a 
positive excess return. On average, NBIM has earned exactly half a percentage point higher return per 
year than the benchmark portfolio. In nominal terms, that adds up to somewhere between USD 4 and 
5 billion in extra earnings since 1998.  
11. 
In this introduction I have touched on what I believe are important factors behind the performance of 
NBIM.  It  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  purpose  of  investment  management  operations  is  to 
make money, so we need to have a business organisation. The responsibilities of each individual must 
be clearly defined, and his or her remuneration must depend on performance. The incentives must be 
set  up  in  a  way  that  leads  each  individual  to  chase  the  correct  targets,  and  in  a  way  that  rewards 
superior performance.  
This is not a description of a traditional central bank culture, so the investment management unit may 
need to be built outside the existing structures. At the same time the existing structures may benefit 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2006
from having a business unit within the central bank. There are lessons to be learned about efficiency in 
operations, and that has also proved useful for the civil service part of Norges Bank.  
    BIS Review 86/2006 
 3
 4 
   BIS Review 86/2006
   BIS Review 86/2006 
 5
   BIS Review 86/2006
 6 
    BIS Review 86/2006 
 7
