Erkki Liikanen: Competition and productivity  
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  European  Productivity 
Conference, Espoo, 30 August 2006. 
 As prime minister just said, competitiveness and productivity are closely linked.  
In the first half of the 1990s, it was still common "knowledge" that productivity was growing since the 
oil crisis of the early 1970s, much faster in Europe than in the United States.  
The situation changed in the middle of the 1990s; it was not noticed until later. In the United States 
economic  growth  surged,  mainly  because  of  an  acceleration  of  productivity  growth.  In  Europe 
economic growth was slowing down. One reason was a slowing of the flow of workers into the labour 
market. But even more important was a slowing of productivity growth.  
Turning points are seldom detected until later on. Time lags are in fact a great challenge for policy-
makers.  At  the  Lisbon  Summit  in  March  2000,  there  was  no  mention  of  the  problems  of  slow 
productivity growth. Nor was the Asian challenge discussed. Nowadays, neither of these topics can be 
brushed aside.  
Since 2000, the European Commission and also the ECB have been putting much effort into finding 
the reasons for the difference in productivity growth between Europe and the United States.  
Research  has  revealed  that  the  difference  is  related  to  the  development  of  information  and 
communication technology. This development is as important as the electrification that started about 
100 years ago.  
There are two reasons why ICT development explains the difference between productivity growth in 
Europe and in the United States.  
First, the ICT industry is more important in the US economy than in Europe.  
Therefore, favourable productivity developments in ICT are reflected much more clearly in the leading 
indicators for the US economy. In fact, one of the reasons why productivity figures in Finland are high 
compared with Europe as a whole is the weight of ICT in the Finnish economy.  
The second important factor is developments in services. Information costs plunged when it became 
possible  to  distribute  databases  cheaply  from  anywhere.  In  the  USA,  productivity  growth  has  been 
highest  in  retail  and  wholesale  trade,  but  financial  services  have  also  experienced  a  robust 
improvement. The same has not happened in Europe.  
What  can  be  done?  As  regards  private  services,  only  competition  can  encourage  companies  to 
innovate  and  spur  productivity  increases.  When  competitive  pressure  strengthens  in  the  market,  it 
forces companies to make full use of the opportunities created by ICT to raise productivity.  
Competition drives innovation and productivity growth. Competition also leads to lower prices, which in 
turn boosts real income. When real income increases, demand strengthens, which then stimulates job 
creation and investment. And these in turn improve growth and prosperity.  
 Economic growth is a fairly new phenomenon in history. It started with the industrial revolution. Finland 
lagged behind at first but managed to catch up with other economies, thanks to robust growth in the 
1900s.  
Finland quickly learned to utilise electricity, which helped to process its forests and ore. This resulted 
in  rapid  productivity  growth.  When  Finland  was  catching  up  other  industrial  states  after  the  war, 
productivity  growth  attained  rates  as  high  as  5%  per  annum.  The  standard  of  living  doubled  in  14 
years.  
By the 1970s, Finland had made use of the vast possibilities of electricity to stimulate productivity.  
A common feature of ICT and electricity is that they are multipurpose technologies. Industrialisation, 
which  was  based  on  the  utilisation  of  electricity,  provided  people  with  machines  and  equipment  for 
BIS Review 78/2006 
 1
processing raw materials into products more efficiently than with muscle power. The new IT revolution, 
for its part, provides the means to use information more effectively. It increases our brain power.  
In  advanced  economies,  productivity  growth  depends  not  only  on  technological  innovations 
themselves,  but  also  on  the  organisational  changes  that  are  made  possible  by  technological 
innovation.  
The wide utilisation of ICT and computers increasingly makes it possible to develop new and more 
efficient production and working methods in all economic sectors.  
But  to  adopt  successfully  new  technologies  and  production  methods,  further  efforts  are  required  in 
reorganisation of work and business practises. Investment in training is also needed.  
Research  on  the  effects  of  ICT  has  shown  that  the  contribution  of  ICT  to  output  growth  initially 
corresponds to investment costs. However, over longer periods (3–7 years), output can exceed costs 
by large multiples. The output growth can be 2–5 times greater in the long run.  
These figures help us to understand why companies operating in competitive markets have significant 
incentives  to  adopt  new  technologies  and  why  they  at  the  same  time  reorganise  their  work  and 
processes.  
Studies on the relationship between the introduction of ICT and organisational change have come to 
two conclusions: successful implementation of change requires innovative leaders and a staff that is 
well disposed towards the change.  
 We come to the significance of education and training.  
It is often seen that, besides organisational changes and restructuring of work processes, productivity 
gains from IT also require a rise in the education level of the workforce.  
It is well-known that as ICT development has gained momentum, the demand for unskilled workers 
has decreased and unemployment correspondingly increased. The higher the education level of the 
workforce, the lower the level of unemployment.  
A closer look reveals that the connection between education and IT utilisation is more complex. Higher 
education  is  very  important  when  we  are  talking  about  companies  that  have  made  substantial 
investments in research and development. This is especially true of the ICT industry and of innovation 
activities.  
But when we consider ICT utilisation and application, the matter is not so straightforward.  
Still  20  years  ago,  a  worker  was  a  physical  part  of  the  process  and  performed  mechanical  tasks. 
These  days  workers  monitor  and  oversee  processes  via  computer  terminals.  The  processes 
themselves have not changed very much, and therefore the worker must master them. The advantage 
of the new computer applications is that the software assists in controlling and monitoring the overall 
production process.  
They collect information on the whole process and present it for user viewing. This enables the user to 
get a broader overview at a glance. The main characteristic of the most advanced companies is that 
they have shifted the focus of work, education and training from mechanical tasks to problem-solving 
and communication skills.  
Previously when a problem arose, the worker told his superior. Today he is more likely to try to solve 
the problem himself, in order to avoid having a small problem become a large one.  
As I noted earlier, since the adoption of IT, productivity has increased most in the service sector. What 
is paramount for productivity growth is that all employees involved in a given process be able to use 
the required IT.  
The  best  solution  to  accelerate  the  implementation  of  changes  is  that  the  staff  is  involved  in  any 
project where new IT and related management systems are developed and applied.  
The employees know the products and services and their flows. As regards ICT based management 
systems, the overall process becomes more transparent and more easily visualised. The same work is 
performed – but with more efficiency, and possibly also with more pleasure.  
2 
 BIS Review 78/2006
When  a  company  is  operating  in  a  competitive  environment,  the  pressure  to  be  competitive  is  an 
important incentive to the company’s management. If the company is unable to raise its productivity, 
new competitors will pose the threat of driving it out of the market.  
But on the other hand, raising productivity requires investment, organisational change, restructuring of 
processes, training of personnel, and a broad-based commitment.  
How can this be made to work?  
It is vital that the entire staff know and understand the market situation and the in-herent challenges so 
that they will share the company’s visions and values. This is the foundation of commitment.  
The  challenge  lies  in  the  unexpected  speed  at  which  external  changes  can  take  place.  These  are 
always a challenge for management.  
However, if the staff does not believe that increased productivity will improve the company’s prospects 
and thus increase their job security, the commitment may not bee strong enough.  
This is why, in an environment of change, the securing of trust is critical.  
 That brings us to the public sector.  
The increasing competition forces companies to be innovative and to raise their productivity. But what 
about the public sector, which is often sheltered from actual competition?  
Ageing creates its own challenges for the public sector. Fewer people will be entering working life that 
will  be  entering  retirement.  Prosperity  and  its  continuing  development  will  depend  even  more  on 
productivity growth.  
For these very reasons – lack of competition and an ageing population – improvement of productivity 
in the public sector will pose a noteworthy challenge to our national economy.  
But  it  also  presents  an  opportunity,  because  many  public  services  are  highly  information-intensive. 
Their  digitalisation  will  enable  robust  productivity  growth  and  the  opportunity  to  provide  better 
personalised services.  
Finland has put much effort into measuring productivity in public services.  
This is not without its problems. How does one take into account the quality of services? How does 
one  measure  safety  and  security?  Productivity  figures  do  not  always  tell  the  whole  truth  about  the 
performance of public services.  
But the same productivity logic should also apply to the public sector. Taxpayers' money should be put 
to ever better use. We should be able to either produce more services, or services of better quality, or 
preferably both.  
Often in the public sector the organisational changes and restructuring of processes that are essential 
for  productivity  growth  are  cut  down  by  resistance  within  the  administration  or  become  victim  to 
internal turf battle.  
A  breakthrough  can  occur  only  if  leaders  have  a  strong  vision  and  persistence.  Productivity  is  not 
raised  by  IT  specialists,  although  their  input  is  necessary.  Productivity  starts  to  increase  only  when 
work and the related processes are reorganised. And this is something that leaders cannot delegate to 
anyone else.  
 In conclusion, future prosperity will be based on productivity growth. Information and communication 
technology makes this growth possible, but restructuring within working and organisational processes, 
combined with personnel training, are equally necessary.  
And behind all this is the requirement of innovative management and the employees’ commitment to 
their organisation. Everyone must bear his or her own responsibility. 
BIS Review 78/2006 
 3
