Niklaus Blattner: Financial market infrastructures facing technological, 
economic and regulatory challenges 
Summary of a speech by Mr Niklaus Blattner, Deputy Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the XI AWK Group Financial Services Lunch, Zurich, 20 September 2006. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Smoothly  and  efficiently  functioning  financial  market  infrastructures  form  the  backbone  of  the 
International Financial Centre of Switzerland. The future of these infrastructures will largely hinge on 
trends  in  Europe,  which  point  to  stronger  consolidation.  However,  healthy  competition  is  the 
prerequisite for investment and innovation incentives in a consolidated stock market and settlement 
environment. This would also contribute to reducing the existing inefficiencies, in particular with regard 
to  the  processing  of  cross-border  transactions.  Yet  a  competitive  environment  will  develop  only  if 
market  participants  can  choose  freely  among  the  different  providers  and  if  the  infrastructures  are 
interoperable,  i.e.  if  the  providers  grant  each  other  and  their  participants  mutual  non-discriminatory 
access.  
At  present,  competitive  obstacles  exist  at  the  technological,  economic  and  regulatory  levels.  For 
instance, costs for changing providers are high. Moreover, financial market infrastructures are often 
operated in “silo” mode – either explicitly or implicitly – with clearing and settlement being handled by 
only one provider. But silos impede competition. A  suitable regulatory framework must therefore be 
created to strengthen competition. The EU’s new Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID), 
for example, is expected to bring about important changes and intensify competition in the European 
financial market. This development will also influence the future of financial market infrastructures in 
Switzerland.  Against  this  background,  it  is  certainly  crucial  for  the  Swiss  financial  market 
infrastructures to persistently foster their competitiveness. They have pursued this strategy so far, and 
will need to continue doing so in the future. 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 1
