Jean-Claude Trichet: The development of euro area statistics from an ECB 
perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  delivered  at  the  third 
ECB Conference on Statistics, Frankfurt am Main, 4-5 May 2006. 
 Colleagues, fellow central bankers, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to address you on the occasion of the closure of the Third ECB Conference on 
Statistics.  With  this  conference,  we  have  continued  our  biennial  tradition  of  holding  a  dialogue 
between the compilers of statistics and policymakers, academics and other users on the development 
of statistical requirements. This tradition was started four years ago by Eugenio Domingo Solans, the 
first ECB Executive Board member responsible for statistics, who left the ECB in May 2004 and sadly 
passed away soon afterwards. 
The subject of this conference has been financial statistics for a global economy, and I would like 
to use this occasion to share with you some reflections upon the four themes discussed during this 
conference, namely: 
1.  Are financial statistics good enough to capture globalisation? 
2.  What are the challenges for national data collection in a global world? 
3.  Which are the statistical implications of financial stability and financial integration? and finally 
4.  What can we say on global statistical governance? 
I will obviously focus on the necessary development of euro area statistics and I would like to begin 
with a brief review of the recent developments in these statistics.  
Recent developments in euro area statistics 
An  evaluation  of  current  euro  area  statistics  should  start  with  three  observations.  First,  official 
statistics provide the foundation for both the economic and the monetary analysis of the ECB and 
therefore for its monetary policy. In addition, they are indispensable for the other functions of the 
ECB, for other economic policy-making in Europe and for a smooth functioning of the financial system. 
This also means that high demands are placed on these statistics.  
Second, it is still less than a decade ago that the statistical requirements for the European Economic 
and Monetary Union were agreed and that the first euro area statistics became available. It can now 
be  concluded  that  the  compilers  of  statistics  in  Europe  have  gone  a  long  way  towards 
harmonising their national statistics and meeting the requirements in a relatively short period of 
time, and I would like to compliment them on this achievement.  
Third, this progress has been possible thanks to excellent cooperation within Europe’s statistical 
community,  which  consists  of  national  central  banks  (NCBs),  national  statistical  institutes  (NSIs), 
Eurostat  and  the  ECB.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  pay  tribute  to  the  Statistics  Committee  of  the 
European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Committee for Monetary, Financial and 
Balance of Payments statistics (CMFB) for the very fruitful role they play. 
In  fact,  since  I  last  addressed  this  audience,  in  April  2004,  significant  progress  has  been  made, 
although also still much remains to be done. Concerning the euro area statistics compiled by the ECB, 
in close cooperation with the NCBs, I would like to recall some recent enhancements: 
•  Since  January  2005,  the  euro  area  balance  of  payments  has  contained  a  quarterly 
geographical breakdown of the counterparties involved in transactions with residents.  
•  Furthermore,  the  international  investment  position  (i.i.p.)  statistics,  which  show  the  balance 
sheet of the euro area, are now available at a quarterly frequency.  
In a different field, the ECB now regularly compiles a set of statistical indicators that shed 
light on the state of euro area financial integration in many different financial markets.  
 BIS Review 37/2006 
 1
•  Another improvement concerns the semi-annual release by the ECB of a residential property 
price indicator for the euro area.  
•  The ECB’s publication of the quarterly government revenue, expenditure and deficit for 
the  euro  area,  based  on  contributions  from  NSIs,  was  recently  complemented  by  fairly 
detailed data on government debt and the deficit-debt adjustment. 
•  The  ECB’s  financial  analysis  benefits  from  separate  statistics  that  are  now  available  for 
securities issued at fixed and floating rates, and zero-coupon bonds. 
•  Finally,  the  accessibility  of  ECB  statistics  and  the  national  breakdowns  has  been 
enhanced as the same set of tables is now available on the websites of the ECB and of most 
of the Eurosystem NCBs, in the national languages of the central banks concerned. 
In  addition  to  the  financial  and  monetary  statistics  compiled  by  the  Eurosystem,  the  ECB  makes 
intensive use of general economic statistics compiled by Eurostat and the NSIs. First and foremost, 
this  concerns  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  for  the  euro  area,  which  has 
continued to be both timely and reliable. In this context, the gap between inflation perceptions and 
actual inflation is now decreasing in many euro area countries. As you know, this gap originated when 
the euro was introduced and it became complex for consumers to process price information. The ECB 
also supports the further development work in this field, including the priority attached to compiling a 
reliable  indicator  for  the  price  development  of  owner-occupied  housing  services  and  a  further 
enhancement and harmonisation of adjustments for changes in the quality of goods and services. The 
latter work should also benefit the estimation of GDP volume growth, which is another key indicator for 
the ECB.  
GDP  and  the  national  accounts  statistics  on  which  it  is  based  have  recently  been  revised  in  many 
countries.  Whereas  methodological  improvements  are  welcome,  it  is  important that the timing  of 
such  revisions,  and  of  the  release  of  the  Principal  European  Economic  Indicators  more 
generally, be coordinated among countries. Otherwise, European users could be confronted with 
constantly changing euro area aggregates. In this context, recent ECB analysis found that, since the 
start  of  the  euro  area,  the  revisions  of  the  principal  quarterly  euro  area  indicators  have  been 
fairly modest and significantly smaller than the revisions of the same indicators for the largest 
euro area countries and for the United States. This is explained by the fact that revisions of national 
statistics  largely  cancel  out  at  the  euro  area  level.  At  the  same  time,  this  result  reinforces  the 
importance of aggregate euro area statistics for the analysis of the euro area economy.  
In  view  of  the  still  growing  importance  of  euro  area  statistics,  I  am  particularly  looking  forward  to  a 
forthcoming new milestone, i.e. the first release of integrated financial and non-financial euro area 
accounts  for  the  institutional  sectors  –  namely  households,  non-financial  corporations,  financial 
corporations and the government – and for the transactions with the rest of the world. These euro 
area  accounts  will  provide  a  wide-ranging  overview  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  enable  a  much 
more  comprehensive  analysis  to  be  made  of  the  interactions  among  sectors  and  between  non-
financial and financial developments. In turn, this will permit an even more comprehensive cross-
checking  of  the  economic  and  monetary  pillars  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  analysis. 
Furthermore, these accounts will provide users for the first time with regular key economic indicators 
for the euro area, such as household savings and corporate after-tax profits. They will be compiled in 
close cooperation between the ECB, the NCBs, Eurostat and the NSIs, and will be developed in two 
steps. The first annual accounts will be published soon and the inaugural release of the quarterly euro 
area accounts is expected in the spring of next year.  
These  and  other  recent  enhancements  in  euro  area  statistics  are  not  only  of  great  importance  for 
policy-making  in  Europe  but  also  contribute  to  a  better  analysis  of  the  global  economy.  However, 
continuing  globalisation  poses  some  particular  challenges  to  statistics,  as  has  been  clearly 
demonstrated by the excellent contributions to this conference. Drawing from these contributions, I will 
now turn to the themes you have discussed. 
Are financial statistics good enough to capture globalisation? 
Globalisation  stems  from  economic  interlinkages,  which  are  statistically  reflected  in  the  balance  of 
payments and international investment position statistics and in the “rest-of-the-world” accounts of the 
national accounts framework.  
2 
 BIS Review 37/2006
In a world of increasing financial integration, statistics on cross-border transactions and positions also 
gain  in  importance.  However,  at  present  the  analysis  of  international  economic  inter-linkages  is 
hampered by the fact that, for all pairs of countries, bilateral transactions statistics do not mirror each 
other;  this  is  the  asymmetry  problem.  Related  to  this,  the  sum  of  the  financial  transactions  in  the 
balance of payments typically does not match the sum of the non-financial transactions, the difference 
being called “errors and omissions”. To eliminate both types of discrepancy, it seems best to employ 
a multi-pronged strategy. At least, it would be expedient if the legal framework protecting statistical 
confidentiality were to allow the exchange of such confidential information among the compilers 
concerned, for the strict purpose of statistical quality improvement.  
Globalisation  can  only  be  analysed  in  a  meaningful  way  if  the  concepts,  definitions  and 
classifications underlying the statistics are standardised. Fortunately, this is largely the case, as 
these standards are laid down in, for example,  the 1993 System of National Accounts and the IMF 
Fifth Balance of Payments Manual. These global guidelines are being updated and the ECB attaches 
particular  importance  to  the  reinforcement  of  their  mutual  consistency  and  to  the  outcome  of  this 
process in general. For instance, it is of key importance that these statistical standards prescribe a 
faithful  representation  of  economic  reality  as  reflected  in  monetary  transactions  and  do  not 
impute an artificial price to non-monetary transactions or recognise assets and liabilities that are 
not viewed as such by the economic actors. It should then also be acknowledged that welfare cannot 
be adequately captured by any single statistic, including GDP. 
The revised statistical standards should also reflect the fact that modern economies are knowledge 
economies, in which the quality of the labour force is the key success factor. This requires the 
regular  compilation  of  disaggregated  labour  accounts  as  an  integral  part  of  the  national 
accounts. This, in turn, would substantially enhance the analysis of productivity growth and shed a 
better light on the evolving global distribution of labour, in which skill levels play a crucial role. 
In general, the statistics not only attempt to capture the ever increasing globalisation, but they are also 
affected by it. This is a subject to which I now turn.  
Challenges for national data collection in a global world 
Globalisation has certainly benefited from a progressive deregulation of cross-border transactions. At 
the same time, though, this deregulation has adversely affected the quality of national statistics. For 
instance, equal prices for cross-border and national payments in euro are difficult to match with widely 
divergent  reporting  obligations  related  to  these  two  types  of  payment.  Traditionally,  however,  many 
balance of payment reporting systems were based on cash settlements, and a transition to a more 
direct reporting system requires a substantial investment for the statistics compiler concerned, 
which is typically the NCB. 
More generally, globalisation has intensified competition among countries and this has also led to an 
increasing emphasis on the administrative burden put on business. Although the statistical response 
burden accounts for at most a few percent of the total administrative burden, it has also come 
under close scrutiny. Indeed, statistics compilers should constantly attempt to minimise the costs for 
respondents and to make use of already existing information to the maximum extent. This requires, 
however, that statisticians have unrestricted legal access to all relevant administrative records, 
while of course maintaining their very strict confidentiality standards. This applies, for instance, to all 
tax records, including the cross-border data that become available through the EU Savings Directive. 
This being said, I am convinced that it is not possible to obtain good quality, timely statistics on the 
basis  of  administrative  records  alone.  In  other  words,  the  high-quality  statistics  that  are 
indispensable  for  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  unavoidably  place  some  burden  on  business, 
including small and medium enterprises, even if this burden has to be minimised. It is therefore 
important that this data collection modality is adequately anchored in a legal framework, in order to 
guarantee representative survey results. At the same time, as regards the collection of data from the 
financial sector, supervisors and statisticians should intensify their cooperation in order to align, 
and wherever possible integrate, their data collection efforts to a maximum extent. 
Whereas  globalisation  complicates  the  compilation  of  national  statistics  and  also  makes  them 
somewhat less meaningful, particularly in those fields where the decisions are now made at the euro 
area level, the collection of euro area statistics should continue to make the best possible use of the 
enormous statistical expertise at the NCBs and the NSIs. However, this does not imply that for many 
years  to  come  each  and  every  statistic  should  be  compiled  by  the  relevant  authorities  in  each  and 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 3
every  country.  Instead,  it  is  perhaps  time  to  draw  conclusions  from  the  fact  that  the  collection  of 
statistics, particularly the increasingly automated retrieval of statistical data from the ledgers of larger 
corporations,  is  typically  characterised  by  significant  economies  of  scale.  Similarly,  significant 
efficiency gains would be reaped if sample sizes for statistics, particularly the very timely, high 
frequency statistics, are attuned to European needs. It goes without saying that countries that still 
want to spend additional resources to maintain nationally representative samples will be free to do so.  
Statistical implications of financial stability and financial integration 
Although  this  conference  has  devoted  a  single  session  to  the  statistical  requirements  for  financial 
stability and financial integration analysis, these requirements are not easily aligned at first sight. In 
fact, financial stability analysis puts new demands on data availability, if only because it requires 
consolidated data and strengthens the case for making available a whole range of micro-data. At 
the  same  time,  however,  macro-statistics  are  typically  much  more  reliable  than  micro-data, 
particularly those in the tail of the distribution, if only because significant misreporting by an “average” 
firm almost invariably means that it ends up in the tail. In any case, this analysis would be served by 
the  setting-up  of  reliable  and  flexible  pan-European  micro  databases.  In  fact,  the  ECB,  in  close 
cooperation  with  the  NCBs,  embarked  on  such  an  ambitious  project  several  years  ago,  when  it 
designed  the  Centralised  Securities  Database  (CSDB)  to  contain  an  accurate  representation  of 
individual securities issued, or potentially held, by euro area residents.  
Another  requirement  for  financial  stability  analysis  is  related  to  the  increasing  tendency  to  transfer 
risks  among  institutions  and  among  countries.  This  also  points  to  important  remaining  gaps  in  our 
current euro area statistics, particularly concerning insurance corporations and pension funds, the 
collateralisation  of  lending  business,  investment  funds  (which  include  hedge  funds),  and  special 
purpose entities (which include securitisation vehicles).  
Concerning  statistical  indicators  of  financial  integration,  I  have  already  alluded  to  the  ECB’s 
contribution and I look forward to the release of an enlarged set of indicators this autumn. In addition, 
the contribution of the ECB to the short-term paper (STEP) market in Europe could be mentioned, in 
particular through the regular publication of statistics on volumes and prices. 
Global statistical governance 
I have given some examples of trends that all point to a more global, and particularly more European, 
coordination of statistics. It is conceivable that over time the European statistical systems will develop 
in  the  direction  of  genuine  systems  with  regional  competence  centres,  coordinated  by  the 
European  institutions.  The  mutual  interdependence  of  statistics  compilers  would  then  increase, 
which  in  turn  calls  for  a  further  strengthening  of  international  statistical  governance.  In  this 
regard, it may be mentioned that the ECB has subscribed to a set of universal core principles for 
international statistics. Similarly, it may be worthwhile exploring an elaboration of the Eurosystem 
mission statement in the field of statistics. 
Good governance is particularly important for statistics that have a direct administrative and 
policy use in Europe, such as the indicators for assessing the convergence of EU Member States that 
do not yet belong to the euro area and the statistics underlying the excessive deficit procedure. While 
Eurostat is responsible for these statistics, it can benefit, when deciding upon conceptual issues, from 
the  considerable  statistical  expertise  available  at  the  ECB,  the  NCBs  and  the  NSIs,  as  brought 
together  in  the  CMFB.  In  any  case,  the  compilation  of  government  finance  statistics  –  and  all 
other statistics for that matter – should not be subject to political considerations. The compilers 
of  these  statistics  must  act  in  full  scientific  independence,  and  the  government  must  ensure  that 
sufficient  resources  are  made  available  for  their  task.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  regularly 
review the cost/benefit ratio of existing statistics that were agreed upon many years ago.  
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentleman, credible euro area statistics lie at the heart of the ECB’s monetary policy-
making. At the same time, these statistics are embedded in and affected by a globalising world. The 
key  to  meeting  the  challenges  this  poses  lies  with  further  enhanced  international  cooperation 
among statistics compilers. Another key success factor is continuous cross-fertilisation between 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2006
users and producers of statistics. An example of such cooperation in the near future will be the first 
release of integrated financial and non-financial euro area accounts for the institutional sectors, which 
will permit an even more comprehensive cross-checking of the economic and monetary pillars of the 
ECB’s  monetary  policy  analysis.  In  addition,  users  and  policy-makers  should  keep  in  mind  that 
indispensable high-quality statistics unavoidably place some burden on business, including small and 
medium enterprises, although this burden can be minimised if statisticians obtain appropriate access 
to administrative data collected for other purposes. 
This conference has indeed provided a significant contribution to the cross-fertilisation between users 
and producers of statistics and I would like to thank you all very much for your participation and for 
your attention. 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 5
