Mervyn King: Reform of the International Monetary Fund 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Indian Council for Research on 
International Economic Relations (ICRIER), New Delhi, 20 February 2006. 
 Sixty years ago delegates from around the world were gathering on Wilmington Island in Savannah, 
Georgia,  to celebrate  the baptism  of  the  Bretton Woods  twins,  the  International  Monetary Fund,  or, 
simply,  “the  Fund”  and  the  World  Bank,  “the  Bank”.  India  was  represented  by  Sir  Chintaman 
Deshmukh,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  and  Britain  by  John  Maynard  Keynes,  Lord 
Keynes as he had become. The two men got on well, as can be seen from their official reports on the 
Savannah Conference. As Sir Chintaman wrote later: 
“this  meeting  remains  memorable  mainly  as  the  occasion  when  the  Indian  delegation  worked  in 
effortless accord with the British delegation under Lord Keynes and there were many occasions when 
there happened to be agreement between us on the need to take some steps which would increase 
the utility, independence and creativity of the international bodies".1
In his speech at this first meeting of the Fund, Keynes drew an analogy with the christening-party in 
The Sleeping Beauty, which, as Chairman of Covent Garden, he had seen danced at the reopening of 
the Garden only two weeks earlier. He hoped that the Bretton Woods twins, Master Fund and Miss 
Bank, would receive three gifts from their fairy-godmothers: first, a many-coloured coat “as a perpetual 
reminder that they belong to the whole world”; second, a box of vitamins to encourage “energy and a 
fearless spirit, which does not shelve and avoid difficult issues, but welcomes them and is determined 
to  solve  them”;  third,  “a  spirit  of  wisdom  …  so  that  their  approach  to  every  problem  is  absolutely 
objective”.  Keynes  warned  the  delegates  that  this  was  asking  a  great  deal:  “there  is  scarcely  any 
enduringly  successful  experience  yet  of  an  international  body  which  has  fulfilled  the  hopes  of  its 
progenitors”. So he hoped that the malicious fairy would not bring its curse upon the twins: “you two 
brats shall grow up politicians; your every thought and act shall have an arrière-pensée; everything 
you determine shall not be for its own sake or on its own merits but because of something else". And if 
the IMF were to become politicised then, Keynes said, it would be best for the twins "to fall into an 
eternal slumber, never to waken or be heard of again in the courts and markets of Mankind".2
Sixty years on, the wisdom of Keynes's position at Savannah is clear. In recent years, the critics have 
charged that all three of the virtues of universalism, energy and wisdom have been lacking in the IMF. 
And if not in a deep slumber, then the Fund has appeared drowsy. It is an institution, it is said, which 
has  lost  its  way.  What  is  the  truth  of  these  allegations?  Certainly,  the  Fund’s  remit  is  unclear.  Its 
lending activities have waned, and its role in the international monetary system is obscure. The tasks 
given to it by the conferences at Bretton Woods in 1944 and Savannah in 1946 need to be adapted to 
the  financial  circumstances  of  the  21st  century.  That  was  attempted  in  1976  with  the  Second 
Amendment to the Fund Articles. But 30 years later it is evident that there is still more to do. 
We  have an opportunity  to  return  to  first  principles and  ask some  basic  questions.  Do we  need  an 
IMF?  Is  there  a  role  for  a  multilateral  institution  in  the  management  of  the  international  monetary 
system? If so, what is it? Not before time are those questions now being asked in the corridors, if not 
the main floor, of international meetings which rotate endlessly around the world from one windowless 
room to another. Belatedly, the G-7 has started to discuss the future role of the Fund, and the IMF has 
initiated its own strategic review. Last October, the ministers and governors of the G-20 countries said 
that “more work is needed to develop a ‘roadmap’ for the future strategic reform of the Bretton Woods 
institutions”. And speeches by several G-7 ministers and governors, and as recently as ten days ago 
from the Managing Director himself, show that the debate on the role of the IMF is live. Too often in 
the past, as on the fiftieth and sixtieth anniversaries of the Bretton Woods conference, the debate has 
simply  faded  away.  But  if  the  mission  of  the  Fund  is  not  examined  and  the  institution  revitalised,  it 
                                                      
1  
"Economic Developments in India-1946-1956", the Dadabhai Naoroji Memorial Prize Fund Lectures, delivered at Bombay, 
February 1957. 
2   The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, Volume XXVI, “Activities 1941-1946: Shaping thePost-War World”, p. 216. 
BIS Review 11/2006 
 1
could slip into obscurity. Just as in Savannah, the responsibility for the ideas and impetus for radical 
change lies firmly with all the shareholders around the world. 
It  is  encouraging  that  the  Fund  and  member  countries  are  putting  forward  concrete  proposals  for 
reform.  But  unless  we  consider  the  fundamental  question  of  what  the  Fund  is  for,  then  any  such 
suggestions  risk  being  piecemeal  and  ineffective.  That  is  the  issue  I  want  to  discuss  with  you  this 
afternoon, and I shall try to answer three questions. First, in what way is the world of today different 
from  that  of  Bretton  Woods?  Second,  what  role,  if  any,  do  we  want  an  international  monetary 
institution  to play  in  today’s  world?  Third,  what  changes  are  needed  to  enable  the  IMF  to  play  that 
role? 
What has changed since Bretton Woods? 
Following the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s, the IMF came increasingly to 
be seen not as the guardian of the international monetary system but as the international lender of last 
resort. It hit the headlines as the initiator of large support packages to emerging market economies – 
so much so, that until the recent repayment of their loans by Argentina and Brazil, 70% of the Fund’s 
outstanding lending was accounted for by loans to three countries. In turn, the growth of private capital 
flows and the build-up of massive foreign exchange reserves by many Asian economies have made 
redundant the idea that the primary function of the Fund is to be an international lender of last resort. 
The Asian economies, including Japan, have increased their foreign exchange reserves over the past 
fifteen years so rapidly that they are now nearly ten times as large as the combined reserves of the 
rest of the G-7. So the Fund urgently needs to ask what its main purpose is. 
In 1944, when the Bretton Woods system was created, it was understood that sharp changes in capital 
flows  were  costly.  Changes  in  capital  flows  can  induce  changes  in  trade  flows.  And  to  bring  about 
large changes in trade flows often requires not only a reallocation of resources, which itself can be 
costly, but also in some cases sharp falls in national output. The international monetary system was 
built  around  fixed  exchange  rates  and  controls  on  capital  movements.  Each  country  met  its 
international  responsibilities  by  running  a  balanced  current  account.  When  ‘imbalances’  arose  and 
countries were depleting or building their official reserves, a key feature of this system was supposed 
to be that both the creditor and debtor countries were obliged to adjust their imbalances. In practice, 
the obligations on creditor and debtor countries were asymmetric, and in part that explains why the 
system proved unsustainable. 
One drawback of the system was that it did not allow countries to smooth their expenditure in the face 
of fluctuations in their income. The role of the IMF was to facilitate some smoothing, by lending pooled 
reserves. Alternatively, changes in exchange rates would be sanctioned by the IMF for those countries 
judged to be in "fundamental disequilibrium". In doing this, the IMF fulfilled its purpose to help achieve 
orderly  world  growth.  The  history  of  the  United  Kingdom  illustrates  these  features  of  the  Bretton 
Woods  system.  Britain  faced  repeated  challenges  in  achieving  external  balance  during  the  Bretton 
Woods era. Sterling was devalued twice and four IMF lending programmes were necessary. Yet in 11 
of the 17 years between 1955 and 1971, the UK ran a current account surplus, and its current account 
deficit peaked at around a mere 1% of GDP in 1964. 
Over time countries realised that restricting their ability to save and invest overseas was a significant 
limitation on their wellbeing. Opening up capital accounts broke the link between current income and 
current expenditure, and enabled countries both to smooth consumption and to diversify risk. 
The openness of capital accounts means that the world today is very different from that of the Bretton 
Woods era. Capital flows - both public and private – are very large. And, for many countries, private 
capital flows now dwarf official flows. Because domestic demand is no longer constrained by current 
national  output,  a  current  account  deficit  does  not  necessarily 
indicate  any  "fundamental 
disequilibrium" nor require any official help to finance. For example, New Zealand received the largest 
annual disbursement of any industrialised country as a share of GDP during the Bretton Woods era: 
1.9% in 1967. That was associated with a current account deficit of 3.7% of GDP. Since 1990, New 
Zealand's  current  account  deficit  has  averaged  more  than  that,  but  it  has  had  no  need  of  an  IMF 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2006
programme to finance these deficits. Indeed, the need for official financing for industrialised countries 
has become redundant.3
Many of the "imbalances" that reflect private decisions to save and invest are desirable because they 
improve  the  efficiency  with  which  capital  is  allocated  throughout  the  world.  Since  it  is  difficult  to 
measure  “equilibrium”  flows  of  capital  from  one  country  to  another,  it  is  equally  difficult  to  define 
meaningfully “fundamental equilibrium” exchange rates. As Alan Greenspan has pointed out, current 
account deficits and surpluses are now the norm rather than the exception.4
Moreover,  even  if  a  country  is  not  today  running  a  current  account  deficit  or  surplus,  past  flows  of 
capital mean that domestic residents have assets and liabilities in a wide range of overseas countries. 
Countries now have asset positions quite distinct from their official reserves. The single most important 
difference  between  the  old  world  and  today's  world  is  that  in  the  former  the  financial  position  of  a 
country was captured by the size of its current account surplus or deficit; now the financial position is 
best  measured  by  the  size  and  composition  of  its  national  balance  sheet.  The  ratio  of  the  sum  of 
overseas assets and liabilities to GDP for major industrialised countries rose from around 70% in 1983 
to around 250% in 2003.5  
The  willingness  to  hold  those  assets  and  liabilities  depends  on  expectations  of  the  economic 
“fundamentals” such as productivity growth and demographic change. It also depends on expectations 
of future economic policy – both at home and abroad. If any of those expectations change, desired 
international investment positions will alter, possibly leading to sharp movements in asset prices and 
capital  flows.  News  about  economic  fundamentals  and  about  economic  policy  decisions  leads  to 
fluctuations  in  world  inflation,  output  and  employment.  To  understand  the  transmission  mechanism 
requires a study of national balance sheets. They tell us three things. 
First, they tell us about the claims of one country on another. That will help to reveal how international 
capital flows respond to news. For example, as expectations about productivity growth in the United 
States have changed, so have the composition of capital inflows. Equity inflows into the United States 
were twice as large as debt inflows in 2000. By 2004, debt flows were nearly four times as large as 
equity inflows. 
Second, balance sheets contain information about the potential speed of any likely adjustment. That 
speed is crucial in determining the intensity of the resulting changes in capital flows and hence, the 
costs associated with reallocating resources. For example, currency and maturity mismatches in the 
banking sector created the scope for a liquidity run on Korea in 1997. 
Third, balance sheets contain information about how changes in relative prices will affect the values of 
both assets and liabilities. For example, both Australia and the Philippines were affected by the crises 
in Thailand, Indonesia and Korea. Between 1996 and 1998, their exchange rates fell by 20% and 35% 
respectively. Both had high ratios of external liabilities to GDP. But whereas a significant proportion of 
Australia’s obligations were denominated in local rather than foreign currency, the obligations of the 
Philippines were largely in the form of foreign currency debt. Australia was able to cut official interest 
rates, run a larger current account deficit and grew faster in 1998 than 1997. The Philippines, on the 
other hand, could not and went into recession with its current account swinging by 7.5% of GDP, from 
deficit in 1997 to surplus in 1998. 
These balance sheet linkages have altered the risks we face but they are an inevitable consequence 
of the free movement of capital, which has brought with it new opportunities for us all. Any answer to 
the question of what role the IMF should nowplay must recognise these balance sheet linkages. The 
size and composition of balance sheets is crucial for determining how shocks are transmitted across 
national borders. And surprises about economic policy and news about economic fundamentals can, 
by  generating  changes  in  desired  balance  sheet  positions,  have  large  impacts  on  capital  and 
expenditure flows. 
                                                      
3   This principle is also illustrated by the United Kingdom. Between 1946 and 1971, the UK had four IMF programmes. The 
maximum current account deficit at the start of those programs was 1% of GDP. Since 1998, the UK current account deficit 
has not been less than 1.5% of GDP but has been financed fully through private markets. 
4   Greenspan, A (2005), “International Imbalances”, Remarks before the Advancing Enterprise Conference, London. 
5   Lane, P. and G. Milesi-Ferretti (2005), “Financial Globalisation and Exchange Rates”, IMF Working paper 05/3. 
BIS Review 11/2006 
 3
Is there a need for an international monetary institution? 
In the post-Bretton Woods world, do we need an international financial institution, and what would be 
its  role?  Or  has  the  international  capital  market  replaced  the  need  for  such  a  public  institution  by 
providing both finance to, and discipline on, countries? 
National economic policies are – or should be – trying to create stable monetary and fiscal frameworks 
to condition expectations of future economic policy. Policy surprises should not add noise to the news 
about economic fundamentals. It is in each of our national interests to avoid sudden or large changes 
in  capital  flows  induced  by  volatile  or  unpredictable  changes  in  economic  policy.  We  want  the 
monetary and fiscal decisions not only at home, but also in other countries, to be boring. 
Although domestic economic policies seem to have become increasingly boring over the past decade 
or  two,  their  interaction  has  not.  Consider  two,  related,  examples.  First,  the  rise  in  the  US  current 
account deficit to more than 6% of national income has raised fears of how the inevitable correction 
will eventually be achieved. Second, for much of the past twenty years, as evidenced by the Asian 
crisis  of  the  late  1990s,  we  have  worried  about  emerging  market  countries  accumulating  excessive 
dollar  liabilities.  Now  we  seem  to  be  worried  about  their  accumulating  excessive  dollar  assets. 
Capital  has  flowed  “uphill”  from  poor  to  rich  countries.  The  invisible  hand  of  international  capital 
markets has not successfully coordinated monetary and exchange rate policies. 
Many countries are no longer the atomistic entities of textbooks whose policy choices have no effect 
on global prices: whether an exchange rate, a real interest rate, or the prices of particularly sensitive 
commodities such as energy. Rather, the actions of all major countries have sufficient spill-over effects 
on other countries that they will then react in turn. The international economic system is better seen as 
a “game” in which there are many players of varying sizes, each adopting their own strategy. This has 
important implications. A world of atomistic countries requires no assumptions to be made about the 
objectives of others. The impersonal prices that we face contain all the information relevant to our own 
decisions.  But  in  the  international  economic  “game”  it  is  important  to  know  about  the  objectives, 
strategies – “policy reaction functions” – and policy decisions of other countries. In as much as these 
reaction  functions are  not well  understood,  the consequences of policy choices  may not  be  reliably 
priced by markets. Policy makers, therefore, are more likely to make incompatible choices if they make 
decisions independently relying solely on international prices as their guide for the consequences of 
their actions. 
An international financial institution might, therefore, help in two ways. First, even if countries are not 
willing  to cooperate  in  the  formal  sense  that  they  agree  jointly on  macroeconomic  policies,  a  forum 
which  improves  knowledge  and  understanding  of  other  countries’  objectives  and  policy  reaction 
functions may lead to more compatible policies. Second, such an institution might provide the public 
good of a dispassionate and independent analysis of the spill-over effects of one country’s policies on 
others.  Some  of  the  more  idealistic  aspirations  for  Bretton  Woods  –  such  as  the  creation  of  an 
international central bank and new currency – were never  likely  to  be  adopted  and  look  impossible 
absent  a  world  government.  But  an  arbiter  of  the  international  monetary  system  can  play  a  more 
limited role – not so much the referee brandishing the yellow and red cards of the football pitch, more 
the cricket umpire warning the players not to attack each other verbally and making it clear publicly 
when they believe the players are not abiding with the spirit of the game. Invoking the MCC’s “spirit of 
cricket”, when a country knows that a policy such as an exchange rate regime requires modification, 
the  player  should  walk.  Indeed,  the  players  might  in  time  come  to  realise  that  most  games  benefit 
when played according to a clear and agreed set of rules. 
So although it is not an international central bank, and the SDR is not a currency, the IMF still has a 
role to play. Given that most systemically important countries allow their exchange rates to float, the 
Fund cannot have an independent remit for global monetary stability. Hence, the Fund’s role should 
be to support national policy makers by providing expert analysis about external risks to their domestic 
monetary  policy  objectives.  National  policies  which  appear  sustainable  in  terms  of  countries’  own 
objectives may interact and, through the resulting balance sheet effects, create risks to those same 
countries further ahead. The Fund should be a forum in which countries can discuss these risks. It 
should also hold countries to account. In these ways, it can indirectly support global monetary stability. 
With countries naturally reluctant to cede any control over their own monetary and fiscal policies, it is 
likely that the IMF will have as instruments only the powers of analysis, persuasion, and, in Keynes’ 
own favourite words, “ruthless truth-telling”. That phrase does not conjure up many memories of any of 
the many international meetings I have attended. But unless the IMF has the self-confidence to play 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2006
that role, its deliberations and statements will carry little weight. The Fund requires an independent, 
respected and clear voice.  
The  Fund  should  focus  its  work  on  the  international  monetary  system  around  three  tasks.  First,  it 
should  provide  and  share  information  about  the  balance  sheets  of  all  major  countries,  their 
composition and size, and the links between them. The Fund has been in the forefront of the analysis 
of  balance  sheets  for  emerging  market  economies,  and  it  needs  to  extend  this  approach  to  its 
surveillance of the industrialised world. In conducting this analysis, the Fund must look at countries’ 
exchange rate choices. But no one price is a sufficient statistic for the effect of one country’s policies 
on the rest of the world - even one as important as the exchange rate. Balance sheet analysis should 
be at the heart of the surveillance process. That analysis should lead to an assessment of the risks to 
the world economy as a whole.  
The second task is to encourage countries to abide by their commitments to each other by promoting 
greater  transparency  about  national  policies.  In  agreeing  the  Second  Amendment  of  the  Fund’s 
Articles, all member countries made a general commitment to each other to pursue policies consistent 
with  the  objectives  of  stable  global  growth  and  low  inflation.  Only  in  relation  to  exchange  rate 
arrangements were members asked to specify what framework they would follow to be consistent with 
this  commitment.  As  Tim  Adams,  Under  Secretary  for  International  Affairs  at  the  US  Treasury,  has 
noted recently, the nature of those commitments was left unhelpfully vague and should be clarified. In 
doing this, we should not lose sight of the fact that the policies of all significant members have spill-
over  effects  and  all  should  be  required  to  be  more  precise  about  their  policy  making  frameworks. 
Clarity about the objectives of policy of member countries should make it easier for all countries to 
formulate  their  own  policy.  And  by  making  their  national  policy  frameworks  sufficiently  transparent, 
countries  will  be  making  it  possible  for  the  IMF  to  hold  them  to  account  and  to  fulfil  its  role  as  an 
umpire.  
The third task is the provision of a forum for national authorities to discuss risks to the world economy. 
To build a common analysis of balance sheet positions and a shared understanding of the implications 
of  that  analysis  for  the  world  economy,  a  trusted,  independent  and  expert  secretariat  is  needed  to 
facilitate those discussions. Only if countries are willing to share confidences with each other - discuss 
their "policy reaction functions" - will international meetings justify their cost. 
Those three tasks do not exhaust the responsibilities of an international financial institution. From time 
to time, there may well be financial crises when it would be appropriate for the international community 
to provide temporary financial assistance to mitigate the costs of sharp adjustment in trade flows and 
output. But such a role should not be the principal focus of international monetary co-operation, and, 
as I have pointed out, it has not been the role for the IMF vis-a-vis any developed economy for many 
years. Moreover, nor is it likely to be true of many important emerging market economies in the future. 
As I argued in my K.B. Lall Lecture in 2001, following the Asian crisis of the late 1990s it was likely that 
countries might choose to build up large foreign exchange reserves in order to be able to act as a “do 
it  yourself”  lender  of  last  resort  in  US  dollars.  It  is  now  clear  that  this  is  exactly  what  many  Asian 
countries have done. Nevertheless, it is sensible to provide the Fund with the capability to act when 
necessary.  
How should the IMF be reformed? 
The  treaty  creating  the  Fund  made  clear  that  its  founding  purpose  was  "to  promote  international 
monetary co-operation through a permanent institution which provides the machinery for consultation 
and collaboration on international monetary problems”. In reality, though, the Fund is not playing that 
role at present. Its surveillance lacks focus. Its lack of day-to-day independence hampers its ability to 
comment effectively on divergences between stated objectives and actual policies at the national level. 
And it lacks the legitimacy to be an effective secretariat. Despite strenuous efforts by its Chairman, 
Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown, to promote discussion, there is little genuine interaction 
between members of the IMFC (or the Interim Committee as it was) about the international monetary 
system.  
I  welcome  the  Managing  Director’s  recent  statement  that  he  intends  to  examine  Fund  surveillance. 
One symptom of the Fund’s decreasing effectiveness has been the proliferation of "G" groups – the 
G -5 that became the G-7, the G-22 that became the G-33 and then the G-20; the G-10; the G-24 and 
the G-77. All of these were attempts to create opportunities for serious discussions among countries in 
the international monetary system. But as the world economy, and hence the relevant issues, have 
BIS Review 11/2006 
 5
changed so it has been necessary to set up new “G” groups. Such groups are perceived as exclusive 
and  lack  legitimacy,  and  their  meetings  have  increasingly  become  communiqué-driven  events.  In 
February 2004, the G-7 met in Boca Raton in Florida. A key issue for discussion was the challenge 
posed by large current account imbalances and the role of exchange rate adjustment in any unwinding 
of the imbalances. As we looked around the table it was obvious that some of the key players, such as 
China and India, were not present. Since then a rather informal and ad hoc arrangement has ensured 
that the G-7 engages in discussion with a broader group. We need to take a multilateral approach to 
the key issues but that does not mean that every country needs a seat at the table to discuss every 
issue.  
If  the  Fund  is  to  make  this  possible,  reform  is  necessary.  Realistically,  only  meetings  with  a  small 
number of participants can encourage the level of frankness needed to resolve the challenges in the 
international  monetary  system.  All  member  countries  will  need  to  accept  that  the  big  players  in  the 
international monetary game must be able to meet at a relatively small table. But the membership of 
the  top  table  must  change  with  circumstances  -  the  group  of  big  players  is  no  longer  an  exclusive 
group of rich countries. Low and middle income countries can now affect the global economy. India 
and China have to be at the table.  
Reducing the size of the IMF Board itself to achieve this aim is likely to be problematic. An enlarged 
Board has been one way of providing a platform for smaller and poorer members. One solution could 
be  to  create  more  flexible  groupings  within  the  Fund  to  discuss  particular  topics.  For  example,  the 
Managing  Director’s  powers  to  initiate  bilateral  consultations  about  the  policy  choices  of  individual 
members could be expanded to cover multilateral issues discussed by the relevant group of members. 
If this does not prove practicable, other mechanisms will need to be found to introduce the requisite 
flexibility in how countries come together under the auspices of the Fund.  
The institution itself, though, also needs to change. The IMF has the great merit of being a universal 
institution. But it needs greater focus, independence and legitimacy. In terms of focus the members of 
the Fund, through the IMFC, could usefully restate the Fund’s mandate in terms of global economic 
and monetary stability. If it is to be able to meet its remit then surveillance should focus at least as 
much on balance sheets as on exchange rates. The mandate should make clear both what the IMF is 
responsible for and what it is not responsible for.  
But  producing  more  focussed  surveillance  cannot  be  achieved  in  isolation  from  more  fundamental 
reforms of the Fund. In terms of independence the responsibility for the delivery of a new mandate 
should  be  placed  more  firmly  in  the  hands  of  the  management  of  the  IMF.  At  present,  the  Board 
involves itself in every aspect of the Fund’s activities. In 2004, for example, the Board met for about 
500  hours,  an  average  of  over  three  hours  for  each  of  the  three  days  a  week  on  which  the  Board 
normally  meets.  Board  members  were  given  about  70,000  pages  of  material  by  IMF  staff  and 
produced another 10,000 or so of their own in written statements and other documents – equivalent to 
300  pages  of  reading  for  each  and  every  working  day.  The  direct  costs  of  supporting  the  Board 
account for around 10% of the Fund’s net administrative budget. And the indirect costs, in terms of 
staff  time  spent  writing  and  reviewing  papers,  attending  and  following  up  meetings  and  so  on,  are 
much higher. 
The Board should step back from much of this expensive micro-management, for example by ceasing 
its involvement in the day-to-day reviews of Article IV reports, and concentrating instead on holding 
management  accountable  for  the  delivery  of  the  mandate.  The  Independent  Evaluation  Office, 
reporting on the Fund’s lending to Argentina, pointed to the difficulty of knowing who was responsible 
for those decisions: management, the Board, or the national shareholders. The Fund is an institution 
with exceptionally high quality staff which is not best served by its current governance arrangements. 
At  Savannah,  the  main  issue  that  divided  the  Americans  and  the  British  was  the  role  of  Executive 
Directors.  Keynes  argued  that  the  Fund  should  be  under  the  control  of  the  Managing  Director  with 
oversight carried out by part-time Executive Directors. The latter should comprise people who help to 
formulate  the  policies  of  their  countries  in  national  capitals,  and  so  could  not  be  full-time  in 
Washington. The main function of the Executive Directors was not to manage the Fund, but to act as 
an essential link between the Managing Director and the national treasuries and central banks from 
which  they  were  drawn.  In  retrospect,  Keynes's  position  seems  sound.  Given  the  ease  of  modern 
travel – at least in comparison with 1946 - serious consideration should be given to a non-resident 
Board,  meeting  some  six  to  eight  times  a  year  with  directors  comprising  senior  finance  ministry  or 
central bank officials. 
6 
 BIS Review 11/2006
The process of shifting to a non-resident Board would bring the issue of the division of responsibilities 
to  the  fore.  Member  countries  might  conclude,  for  example,  that  they  wanted  to  retain  control  of 
decisions to lend under the exceptional access framework. But in other areas, such as surveillance, it 
would  make  sense  to  delegate  responsibility  to  the  Managing  Director  in  the  context  of  a  clearly 
defined  remit.  Moves  in  this  direction  would  need  to  be  accompanied  by  reforms  to  strengthen  the 
accountability of the Managing Director. A first step in this direction would be to instigate regular IEO 
assessments  on  the  effectiveness  with  which  the  Managing  Director  and  staff  had  discharged  their 
surveillance responsibilities.  
Finally, in terms of legitimacy, its members must feel that the ownership of the Fund is shared and 
that all have a voice. In practical terms, that means reaching a deal on quota shares and seats at the 
Board with all regions of the world appropriately represented. Such a deal will be extremely difficult to 
reach.  Nevertheless  shareholders  should  recognise  that  the  collective  benefits  of  reaching  a  deal 
would justify compromise on each of their parts. But even if an agreement is reached what would be 
the  purpose  if  the  Fund  remained  unreformed  and  the  larger  questions  I  have  posed  today  were 
unanswered?  
Conclusions 
The extraordinary changes in global patterns of trade and production, in which India is playing a major 
part, have the potential to raise living standards around the world by exploiting the division of labour 
which,  as  Adam  Smith  told  us  many  years  ago,  is  the  foundation  of  our  prosperity.  As  those  real 
economic  changes  unfold,  it  would  be  quite  extraordinary  if  the  institutions  required  to  sustain  and 
support that new open trading and financial system were not to adapt. After a decade of discussions 
on the “international financial architecture”, it might be sensible to pause and ask what we are trying to 
build. 
The world needs a strong and effective IMF to make us conscious of our responsibilities as members 
of  the  international  economic system, and  to  provide  a  clear  and  cogent  analysis of  the  challenges 
ahead. In the end, it is ideas that change the way people think and then act. 
Those  who  founded  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions  did  so  after  a  time  of  crisis,  war  and  economic 
disaster.  They  had  the  vision  to  put  in  place  international  institutions  that  might  help  prevent  the 
disintegration  of  the  open  trading  system  that  they  saw  as  necessary  to  a  revival  of  economic 
prosperity. We have not had to go through a time of economic disaster. We have had the opportunity 
to experience an extraordinary flowering of the international trading system, and the entry into that of 
the world’s two largest populations. The expansion of trade, the rise in the number of qualified people 
entering the world’s labour force, and the growing realisation that we can all benefit from trade has 
raised living standards and provided us with opportunities to reduce poverty around the world. That 
should  make  it  easier,  not  more  difficult,  to  design  international  institutions  to  sustain  those 
developments. We will have only ourselves to blame if we fail to live up to that challenge and simply 
allow  the  IMF  to  evolve  through  a  series  of  ever  more  bland  communiqués  and  meaningless 
statements. 
Today, I have tried to challenge the thinking behind the slow progress in reforming the IMF. But that 
should not be interpreted as any criticism of the extraordinarily talented and committed people who 
work  for  the  Fund.  On  the  contrary,  the  responsibility  for  reform  lies  fairly  and  squarely  with  the 
shareholders – the member countries. 
Nor  are  the  issues  an  arcane  exercise  in  international  finance.  As  Governor  Deshmukh  said  in  his 
speech in Savannah, agreements on the international monetary system and on trade go hand in hand. 
To eliminate poverty and improve living standards around the world will require progress both on the 
Doha trade round and on international monetary arrangements. 
In 1946 Sir Chintaman Deshmukh lent his hand to the wheel of creating a new international monetary 
order. In 2006 the world needs the new generation of Indian policy-makers to contribute to the debate 
with a loud, clear and thoughtful voice. To borrow Amartya Sen’s phrase, we need to hear from the 
“Argumentative Indian”.  
BIS Review 11/2006 
 7
