Joseph Yam: Establishment of the Treasury Markets Association 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
inaugural ceremony of the Treasury Market Association, Hong Kong, 23 January 2006. 
 Good afternoon, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. First of all, let me, as President of the Council of the Treasury Markets Association, welcome you all 
to this inauguration ceremony to celebrate the establishment of the Treasury Markets Association. The 
establishment of the TMA has the strong support of market participants. I am glad to learn that the 
Association  has  already  successfully  registered  about  2,000  market  practitioners  and  over  50 
institutions  as  members.  This  strong  membership  provides  a  solid  base  for  the  Association  to  take 
forward its strategy and plans. 
2. To maintain the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre, a requirement specified in 
Article 109 of the Basic Law, I believe that it is important for us to have, among other things, treasury 
markets that are active, professional and efficient, and that operate in accordance with international 
standards. The volume of financial business in Hong Kong is enormous. This is best illustrated by the 
following statistics: 
•  According to the Bank for International Settlement's triennial survey in 2004, our average daily 
foreign  exchange  turnover  was  close  to  HK$800  billion,  which  was  the  sixth  largest  in  the 
world;  
•  On average, transactions settled through the various RTGS systems in Hong Kong amounted 
to HK$540 billion each day in 2005;  
•  New  debt  securities  issued  in  2005  amounted  to  HK$400  billion;  and  The  total  amount  of 
funds raised through IPOs reached HK$166 billion in 2005.  
3. Our treasury markets have done well in servicing the financial businesses behind these impressive 
numbers.  Further  globalisation  of  financial  markets  and  financial  liberalisation  on  the  Mainland  will 
likely place new and increasing demands on our treasury markets. We need to move with the times, if 
we are to maintain our status as an international financial centre, and I think the establishment of the 
TMA provides a good mechanism for us to do so. In my view, there are four key areas which the TMA 
should focus on: professionalism, market development, codes and standards, and publicity. 
4.  The  professionalism  of  market  practitioners  contribute  significantly  to  the  competitiveness  of  a 
financial centre. An important area of work of the TMA is therefore to enhance the professionalism of 
the  practitioners  in  the  Hong  Kong  treasury  markets.  I  look  forward  to  the  development  of  a 
professional qualification regime for treasury market practitioners and to a time when membership of 
the TMA is seen as confirmation of professional expertise in the field. Credible training and continuous 
professional development programmes, comparable to those of other professional bodies, will bring 
the  recognition  that  the  treasury  market  business  deserves  as  a  distinct  branch  of  the  financial 
industry. 
5. The second area where the TMA will be active is market development. Treasury markets, like all 
financial markets, are never static: they are vibrant and dynamic. To maintain our competitiveness, we 
should  proactively  identify  and  respond  to  opportunities  arising  from  this  dynamism.  And,  looking 
around  us,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  the  Mainland  is  an  important  source  of  dynamism  and 
opportunities in the years to come. Hong Kong, with its location, mature and efficient markets, pool of 
professional talent, as well as its many links to the Mainland, has a clear advantage in tapping this 
huge potential market. One of the priorities of the TMA, therefore, is to establish a close relationship 
with its counterparts and regulatory authorities on the Mainland, and to contribute to the development 
of  the  treasury  markets  in  the  Mainland.  I  believe  that  this  will  provide  enormous  business 
opportunities for market participants in Hong Kong and further strengthen our role as an international 
financial centre. 
6.  The  third  important  area  of  work  for  the  TMA  will  be  to  develop  and  promulgate  codes  and 
standards  that  are  widely  accepted  by  market  participants,  and  in  line  with  best  international 
practices, to help the treasury markets function smoothly. The TMA will continue the work of the TMF 
in reviewing and developing codes and standards for the industry in the light of the development in the 
BIS Review 4/2006 
 1
local, Mainland and overseas markets. One example of work in this area is documentation in Chinese, 
which will be essential as Hong Kong explores new business opportunities on the Mainland. 
7. Lastly, for Hong Kong to aspire to be the preferred hub for treasury market businesses in the region, 
we  need  to  market  ourselves  well.  The  TMA  will  therefore  have  to  pay  attention  to  publicity  and 
communication, not just in Hong Kong but also in the region. It will be very important for the TMA in 
the years ahead to raise its profile, and strengthen and broaden the ties previously established by the 
TMF with counterparts in the major market centres around the world. 
8.  Establishment  of  the  TMA  allows  a  wide  range  of  institutions  and  practitioners  in  the  foreign 
exchange, money markets, debt, derivatives and other treasury markets to pool their efforts towards a 
common aim. While the TMA is newly established, I am glad to note that the financial institutions and 
money  brokers  have  already  joined  as  institutional  members.  The  majority  of  the  ACIHK  members 
have  also  joined  as  individual  members.  This  broad  membership  makes  the  TMA  the  authoritative 
industry association and focal point for treasury matters in Hong Kong. I am also glad that there are 
four committees established to focus on the four key areas that I have spoken about. We at the HKMA 
consider the TMA an important new element of our financial infrastructure. We are confident that the 
TMA will play a pivotal role in the maintenance of the status of Hong Kong as an international financial 
centre. May I congratulate you all on today's inauguration a nd wish you all the very best for the future. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2006
