David Dodge: Monetary policy report update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report Update, Ottawa, Ontario, 13 July 2006. 
 Today, we released our July Monetary Policy Report Update, which discusses current economic and 
financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
Overall,  the  Bank's  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation  in  Canada  is  largely  unchanged  from  that  in  its 
April  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).  Growth  in  the  first  half  of  2006  appears  to  have  been  a  little 
stronger than projected, and the Canadian dollar has traded in a higher range than was envisaged in 
the April MPR. The economy is currently judged to be operating just above its production capacity.  
Growth  in  2007-08  is  expected  to  be  a  little  weaker  than  was  anticipated  in  the  April  MPR,  owing 
primarily to the lagged effects of the higher Canadian dollar. With some anticipated moderation in U.S. 
growth,  combined  with  past  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  increases,  the  Canadian  economy  is 
projected to return to its production capacity by the end of 2008.  
The Bank projects economic growth of 3.2 per cent in 2006, 2.9 per cent in 2007, and 2.8 per cent in 
2008. Total CPI inflation is expected to average just over 1 1/2 per cent from mid-2006 to mid-2007 - 
with the reduction in the GST lowering the inflation rate by 0.6 percentage points over this period - and 
then  return  to  the  2 per cent  target  and  remain  there  through  the  projection  period.  Core  inflation 
should also remain at about 2 per cent through to the end of 2008.  
There are important upside and downside risks to the Bank's projection. But the Bank continues to 
judge  that  these  risks  are  roughly  balanced,  with  a  small  tilt  to  the  downside  later  in  the  projection 
period because of the possibility of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances.  
On 11 July, the Bank kept its target for the overnight rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent. The current 
level of this policy rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over 
the  medium  term.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  global  and  domestic  economic  and  financial 
developments, including adjustments in the Canadian economy, relative to its projection. 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 1
