Durmuş Yilmaz: Central banking in emerging economies – the Turkish 
experience  
Speech  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yilmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,  at  the 
“International Conference on Economics”, Ankara, 12 September 2006. 
 Dear professors, colleagues, and guests, 
I am very pleased to participate in such a conference covering a broad range of economic issues and 
attended by many distinguished academicians from different countries. It is also a great pleasure to 
deliver a speech on the topic of central banking in emerging economies and the Turkish experience. 
Dear guests, 
Given the wide range of issues related to central banking in emerging economies and the limited time 
available, I have decided to limit the extent of my remarks today. I’d like to talk about the challenges 
we face as today’s central bankers in emerging market countries, mainly in the context of the Turkish 
experience. However, before embarking on this subject, let me first of all step back and take a look at 
the evolution of central banking, especially in the recent past. 
There  is  no  doubt  about  that  throughout  the  20th  century,  central  banking  has  undergone  a 
tremendous transformation both in numerical terms and institutional aspects. 
At the beginning of the last century, for example, there were just 15 central banks in the world. In fact, 
what is more important than the figures is that central banks were first established mainly as the lender 
of last resort and banknote issuer, rather than as an institutional body of monetary policy. 
Today, there are 160 central banks operating around the world. Some of them are also responsible for 
supervision and regulation of financial system and have been publishing financial stability reports, and 
some of them are targeting a certain measure of general price level and have been issuing inflation 
reports. 
Thus,  in  a  broader  perspective,  the  evolution  of  central  banking  has  followed  a  course  from 
maintaining  liquidity  when  it  is  necessary  and  issuing  banknotes,  towards  keeping  inflation  low  and 
stable, and preserving stability in financial markets. 
In  some  sense,  this  evolution  process  can  be  characterized  as  the  converging  of  the  objective 
functions of central banks all around the world. 
To  be  more  precise,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  in  the  case  of  both  industrialized  nations  and 
emerging economies, the main contribution that a central bank can make to economic welfare in the 
long run is achieving and maintaining price stability. Moreover, maintaining price stability is not merely 
an issue of maximization of economic welfare. It gives people the confidence that money will retain its 
value over time, ensures that price signals function as a guide for markets to function efficiently and 
establishes trust in the interaction among economic agents, in property rights, in society and in the 
future  in  general1.  Under  this  framework,  central  banks  today  operate  mainly  with  the  overriding 
objective of price stability either explicitly or implicitly. 
Dear guests, 
The establishment of the single mandate as price stability has also had significant implications in the 
institutional design of central banks. 
In fact, as is clearly seen especially in emerging market countries, price stability can only be achieved 
through long term and determined policy implementations. It is at this point that independence, as an 
assurance given to the public to ensure long-term price stability, comes to the forefront as the crucial 
feature of institutional design of central banks. 
In  my  view,  of  all  the  changes  in  the  face  of  central  banking  in  the  last  two  decades,  the  most 
important one is the increasing emphasis that has been placed on central bank independence. 
                                                      
1  
Issing, O. (2000). “Should We Have Faith in Central Banks?”. 
BIS Review 88/2006 
 1
While inflation was falling and independence was becoming an important feature of central banking 
around the world, Turkey was unable to experience the same process. It was not until 2001 that the 
Central Bank of Turkey gained independence close to global standards. 
In 2001, with the amendments made in its Law, achieving and maintaining price stability was stated as 
the  primary  objective,  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  was  provided  with  the direct  authority  to  set 
monetary policy and choose instruments at its own discretion to achieve price stability. I believe this is 
one  of  the  major  structural  reforms  in  the  Turkish  economy,  especially  in  terms  of  its  effects  on 
inflation. Of course, independence is not a concept that can be achieved via the implementation of law 
alone. It is a concept that policy practices have a great influence upon. 
Dear participants, 
Having mentioned the two milestones in the notion of central banking, I’d now like to continue with the 
challenges of central banking in emerging economies combined with the Turkish experience in terms 
of monetary policy implementations. 
Although  objective  functions  are  similar  in  financially  liberalized  and  well-functioning  market 
economies,  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  actions  on  economies  certainly  differs  between 
industrialized countries and emerging market economies. 
Accordingly,  there  is  a  wide  range  of  views  among  economists  on  how  monetary  policy  decisions 
influence economies. If we add the uncertainties faced by the internal dynamics of emerging market 
economies to the picture, the impact of decisions taken by central banks might differ from one country 
to another both in terms of the nature and the time and even from one period of time to another for the 
same country. 
First,  it  is  important  to  note  that  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  the 
understanding of structural changes is essential since the impacts of monetary policy decisions in a 
given  economy  depend  on  its  structural  changes  and  macroeconomic  environment2.  On  the  other 
hand, it is clear that emerging economies like Turkey are subject to structural changes more frequently 
than  any  other  developed  economy.  Combining  these  two  facts,  central  bankers  in  emerging 
economies face the challenge of modeling the economy properly and react accordingly. 
In  addition,  I  believe  it  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  subsequent  crises  and  reform  processes 
have largely defined the economic landscape of emerging market economies in the last twenty years. 
Thus,  uncertainty,  which  naturally  exists  in  every  economy,  constitutes  a  real  challenge  for  central 
bankers in many emerging economies because of their volatile and unpredictable structure. 
Dear guests, 
What we have been experiencing in the Turkish economy in the last five years can be classified as 
one of the clear examples of the impact of structural changes on an economy. 
First of all, after a thirty-year period of high and chronic inflation, inflation declined from 68.5 percent in 
2001 to 10.26 percent in August 2006. This decline in inflation also made it possible to perform the 
currency reform at the beginning of 2005 and we dropped six zeros from our currency. 
Second,  we  experienced  high  growth  rates  while  inflation  was  falling.  I  can  say  that  the  Turkish 
economy has left behind the boom-bust cycle of growth and has been growing for the last eighteen 
quarters consecutively. Additionally, the sources of growth have changed, as well. 
Third, the declining trend of the ratio of public debt to national income has contributed both to the fight 
against inflation and the relative stability in financial markets. 
All these developments through the decisive implementation of policies have reflected themselves in 
reducing  uncertainty  and  increasing  predictability,  strengthening  macroeconomic  fundamentals, 
increasing resilience to shocks and changing the dynamics of the economy bringing the private sector 
to the forefront; rising productivity, changing behaviors and increasing competition. All in all, it is clear 
that the Turkish economy has been undergoing a structural transformation since 2001. 
After going through a deep structural transformation, it is safe to say that the Turkish economy has 
gradually  been  normalized.  According  to  our  studies,  the  impact  of  decisions  of  short-term  interest 
                                                      
2   BIS. (1998). “The Transmission of Monetary Policy in Emerging Market Economies”. BIS Policy Papers No. 3. 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2006
rates on inflation and on the economy is observed up to 18 and 9 months respectively in Turkey. We 
also calculated that the lag has been lengthening as we progress with the structural transformation. 
Dear participants, 
The second challenge of central banks in some emerging economies is dollarization. In fact, the issue 
of dollarization has become a common characteristic of many emerging markets like Turkey since the 
beginning of the 1990s. 
Both our experience and that of Latin American economies clearly indicate that dollarization increases 
the fragilities of almost every sector of the economy, namely the real sector, public sector and financial 
sector. 
From  the  perspective  of  the  real  sector,  dollarization  appears  in  several  respects.  First,  it  affects 
pricing behaviors. In other words, a high level of dollarization is likely to cause a higher pass-through 
effect  of  exchange  rates  on  inflation.  Besides,  in  countries  where  derivatives  markets  are  not  well 
developed,  the  balance  sheet  effect  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations  on  the  private  sector  also  has 
important implications considering the level of exposure to exchange rate risk. 
From the perspective of the public sector, a currency mismatch problem arises, given that the greater 
part  of  government  revenues  are  denominated  in  national  currency,  while  the  part  of  liabilities  are 
denominated in foreign currencies. 
Regarding  the  financial  sector,  we  observe  similar  effects.  With  negative  impacts  on  the  balance 
sheets of financial intermediaries, dollarization raises the possibility of default risk and liquidity risk in 
the sector, and then distorts effective credit allocation of available resources. 
All these fragilities caused by dollarization heavily affect the way central banks implement their policies 
by weakening the impact of monetary policy decisions. Besides, dollarization in emerging economies 
threatens  central  banking  by  causing  instability  and  uncertainty  in  money  demand,  which  in  turn 
makes it hard to predict money supply and control inflation. 
Dear guests, 
When we look at the Turkish case, we see that dollarization has its roots in macroeconomic instability, 
inefficient  market  regulations  and  lack  of  credibility  of  economic  policies  in  one  hand;  predictable 
exchange rates in the other hand. 
The high and chronic inflation period led economic agents to invest simply in foreign currency, which is 
the easiest and least costly method of risk aversion. In addition, market regulations such as blanket 
guarantee  on  foreign  exchange  deposits  and  lack  of  supervision  supported  the  process  of 
dollarization, as well. 
As of 2001, Turkey was one of the most dollarized emerging market economies with a share of 58.2 
percent of foreign exchange deposits in total deposits. The same ratio was 49.3 percent in Romania, 
46.8  percent in  Russia  and  47  percent  in  Peru, which were  generally accepted  as  highly dollarized 
economies. 
Today, looking ahead from the year 2001 we have been experiencing a reverse dollarization for the 
last four years. As of August 2006, the ratio of foreign exchange deposits to total deposits decreased 
to 36.7 percent. Similarly, the ratio of investment instruments denominated in domestic currency has 
pursued an increasing trend, while that of foreign currency has been decreasing accordingly. 
I can say that as long as the floating exchange rate regime is implemented properly and inflation is 
kept under control through credible macroeconomic policies, the floating exchange rate regime along 
with the inflation-targeting regime has a crucial role in decreasing the level of dollarization. 
However,  I  would  like  to  add  that  the  level  of  dollarization  is  not  declining  fast,  and  it  is  still  high. 
Although diminishing to some extent, we are still observing some lingering behaviors inherited from 
the past inflation period. That is why it is so important to continue with current policies and structural 
reforms. 
Dear participants, 
The third factor that stands as a challenge for central banking is sustainability of fiscal discipline in 
emerging economies. 
BIS Review 88/2006 
 3
It is a challenge because of its impacts not only on inflation through aggregate demand, but also on 
financial stability since concerns about the sustainability of fiscal policy are likely to influence economic 
variables such as interest rates, exchange rates, and other measures of risk premium. 
In this context, what differs in many emerging markets is the role of fiscal dominance, a situation in 
which fiscal policy ultimately governs price determination in financial markets3, crowds out available 
sources, disrupts effective credit allocation in the economy, and impairs the effect of monetary policy 
on  aggregate  demand.  The  high  level  of  fiscal  dominance  in  many  emerging  market  countries  is 
associated with the high level of public sector borrowing requirements. 
Additionally, vulnerability in public sectors’ balance sheet and debt structure may constitute a barrier to 
central banks’ policy decisions such as those on short-term interest rate hikes. 
Such  fiscal  distortions  are  rare  in  industrialized  economies  and  hence,  these  economies  are  less 
susceptible to adverse shocks coming from the fiscal side. 
Dear guests, 
In addition to the issues that I have mentioned, there are in my opinion two further issues related to 
fiscal policy and public debt management that cause challenges in many emerging market economies 
like Turkey. 
The first one is the relatively shorter maturity of debt compared to that of developed countries and the 
other  is  the  “original  sin”  problem,  which  is  presented  in  the  literature  by  Eichengreen  and 
Haussmann.4  In this context, emerging countries are forced to borrow in units of currencies that they 
are basically unable to issue. 
All these concerns have direct impact on the fragility of financial markets. Therefore, any doubt over 
the sustainability of fiscal discipline causes volatility in financial variables and has a high possibility of 
endangering central bank goals. 
In  the  case  of  Turkey,  when  we  look  back,  we  see  that  the  period  of  high  and  variable  inflation 
coincides  with  high  public  deficit  being  financed  by  the  Central  Bank.  An  increasing  lack  of  fiscal 
discipline in public expenditures and further widening of budget deficits caused inflation to get out of 
control and the public sector borrowing requirement to grow continuously. This structure affected the 
banking system, as well. The Turkish banking sector was not able to perform its intermediary function 
effectively. Instead, the sector mostly financed public sector deficits. 
Looking to the present, on the other hand, one of the most important changes is that the Central Bank 
of Turkey no longer extends credits to the Treasury or any other public institution by the amendment 
made in its Law in 2001. And it is no coincidence that inflation has been on a declining trend since 
then. 
Moreover, tight fiscal policies have been put into practice for the last five years. A very high level of 
primary  surplus,  that  is  6.5  percent,  has  been  targeted.  The  positive  effect  of  these  measures  has 
started to be observed in several areas. 
The ratio of consolidated budget deficit to gross national product turned into surplus of 0.4 percent in 
the  second  quarter  of  2006.  And  the  ratio  of  public  sector  net  debt  stock  to  gross  national  product 
decreased from 90.5 percent in 2001 to 52.8 percent in the first quarter of 2006. In fact, public sector 
net debt stock is on a downward path converging towards the Maastricht criterion. And maturities are 
becoming longer. More importantly, the issue of public debt sustainability is no longer at the top of the 
agenda, implying decreasing pressure in financial markets. 
I want to stress here again that the continuation of tight fiscal policies and high primary surplus is quite 
important in terms of both the price stability objective and the financial stability issue. 
Dear participants, 
The  last  concept  in  central  banking  that  I  want  to  mention  today  is  the  role  of  expectations 
management in emerging market economies. 
                                                      
3   Moreno, R. (2002). “Fiscal Issues and Central Banking in Emerging Economies: An Overview”. Meeting held at the BIS in 
December 2002. 
4   Eichengreen, B., Haussmann, R. (1999). “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility”. NBER Working Paper 7418. 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2006
As economic literature tells us, and you very well know, the management of expectations is of great 
importance for every central banker. Quoting Michael Woodford5, “For successful monetary policy is 
not  so  much  a  matter  of  effective  control  of  overnight  interest  rates  as  it  is  of  shaping  market 
expectations  of  the  way  in  which  interest  rates,  inflation,  and  income  are  likely  to  evolve  over  the 
coming year and later”. 
I  believe  it  is  the  expectations  that  form  a  bridge  between  short-term  interest  rates  and  long-term 
interest  rates.  The  more  the  expectations  converge  to  the  targets,  the  greater  the  likelihood  of  the 
success of the policies. Also, the less volatile the expectations are, the more stable and predictable 
the effect of monetary policy on the economy is. 
However, when it comes to emerging market economies, the functioning of expectations differs from 
developed countries. To be more precise, expectations affect the economy more heavily than other 
channels in many emerging market countries with a high inflationary past6. 
We  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  are  also  familiar  with  this  experience.  The  impact  of  short-term 
interest  rate  decisions  is  observed  within  a  much  shorter  period  of  time  through  the  expectations 
channel, which has made this channel the most effective one in Turkey so far. 
In this context, what I find particularly critical to my experience is that the high inflationary history of 
emerging  market  countries  stands  as  a  real  challenge  to  expectations  management  in  several 
respects. 
One  of  the  reasons  is  the  lack  of  credibility  resulted  from  the  high  and  chronic  inflation  period  in 
emerging economies. Since these periods can be characterized by the monetization of public debts by 
sources  of  central  banks  or  central  banks  having  objectives  other  than  and  sometimes  even 
contradicting price stability, economic agents tend to have doubts about the credibility of central bank 
policies. Not to mention that this constitutes a limit to the effectiveness of monetary policies. 
The other one is known as “inflationary psychology” or “inflation scare”. To be more precise, because 
of high and volatile inflationary periods, economic agents in emerging economies are more inclined to 
exaggerate adverse effects than in any other economy that has price stability. Thus, a seasonal rise in 
inflation  may  immediately  lead  to  deterioration  in  inflation  expectations  and  higher  prices  with  little 
transitional impact on the level of economic activity. 
At this point, given the importance of expectations management, a key aspect of the policy framework 
is transparency and communication. Here, it is impossible not to agree with Paul Volcker, who said; “I 
have one lesson indelible in my brain: don’t let inflation get ingrained. Once that happens, there’s too 
much agony in stopping the momentum.”7
Referring to the Turkish case, I can say that the thirty-year experience of high and chronic inflation has 
made  us  face  the  challenge  of  convincing  both  the  public  and  the  financial  markets  that  we  are 
committed to bringing inflation down and maintaining price stability. In every platform we participated 
and in every announcement we made, we emphasized our policy objective, which is to achieve and 
maintain  price  stability,  the  reasons  underlying  our  policy  implementations  and  the  importance  of 
having a medium-term vision in terms of lagged effect of policy decisions. 
To  this  end,  we  try  to  use  communication  policy  effectively  as  an  important  part  of  the  inflation-
targeting  regime.  We  base  our  communication  policy  on  the  grounds  of  trust,  transparency, 
consistency and decisiveness. 
I believe this is not peculiar to the Turkish case. Many central bankers in emerging market countries 
have to deal with the drawbacks of a past of high and chronic inflation and thus incredible policies. 
And  it  is  by  all  means  clear  that  designing  a  communication  strategy  is  not  easy  under  these 
circumstances. 
As you may all agree, the concept of communication itself is a dynamic issue. Therefore, given the 
importance of effective communication, it is important to note that we at the Central Bank of Turkey 
have been working continuously on improving our communication policy. 
                                                      
5   Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and Prices. Princeton Univesity Press. 
6   BIS. (1998). “The Transmission of Monetary Policy in Emerging Market Economies”. BIS Policy Papers No. 3. 
7   Orphanides, A. (2006). “The Road to Price Stability”. 
BIS Review 88/2006 
 5
Dear guests, 
There is no doubt that central banking can be considered as a combination of positive sciences and 
human psychology, or as you could say, the union of science and art. I can safely say that for a central 
banker of an emerging market country, managing monetary policy has more qualifications as an art, 
rather than a science. 
As Mervin King, the Governor of the Bank of England, once said, “I have raised more questions than I 
have answered, perhaps that is what happens when you become a central banker”8. I hope that you 
will find some of the answers in the panel. 
Thank you. 
                                                      
8  King, M. (2004). “The Institutions of Monetary Policy”. Lecture at the American Economic Association Annual Meeting, San 
Diego, 4 January 2004. 
6 
 BIS Review 88/2006
