Zdeněk Tůma: The role of the EBRD in the transition process towards fully 
fledged market economies 
Statement by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank and EBRD Alternate Governor, 
at the 15th Annual Meeting of the EBRD Board of Governors, London, 22 May 2006. 
 Mr Chairman, Mr President, Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  an  honour  to  address  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Board  of  Governors  in  London  and  I  wish  to 
express my appreciation also to the Government of United Kingdom and to the City of London for their 
hospitality. 
We are today participating in the fifteenth Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors and we can look 
back  on  these  years  with  considerable  satisfaction  regarding  the  role  of  the  EBRD  in  the  transition 
process towards fully fledged market economies. Many countries - including my country, the Czech 
Republic – have witnessed significant and considerable political and economic transformation. I am 
glad  to  say  that  the  European  Bank  is  one  of  those  successful  institutions  that  have  significantly 
contributed to this process. 
The  Board of  Governors  has  today  approved  the  Bank's strategy for  the  period  2006  –  2010  –  the 
Capital  Resources  Review  3.  The  new  strategy  reflects  the  successful  transition  achieved  in  the 
“Advanced  Countries”  and  the  Bank's  activities  are  being  focussed  towards  the  South-Eastern  and 
Eastern countries of its operations. We support this move. 
In Central Europe the Bank focuses on just a few sectors today. This is in line with EBRD Strategy of 
Graduation and the graduation of EU 8 countries from EBRD operations can be envisaged. 
The Czech Government has already given approval that discussions with the Bank's management on 
the graduation of the Czech Republic from EBRD operations can begin. We believe that October 2007 
-  which  would  be  the  date  of  the  regular  consideration  of  EBRD  Strategy  for  the  Czech  Republic  - 
could be considered an appropriate for this debate. 
This  time-frame  should  be  sufficient  for  the  Bank,  the  Czech  authorities  and  investors  to  make  the 
necessary  arrangements.  We  understand  that  the  Bank's  management  will  make  their  decisions 
regarding  the  supervision  of  its  portfolio  in  the  Czech  Republic,  including  decisions  concerning  the 
future of the Bank‘s representative office in Prague. 
The mandate of the EBRD in the Czech Republic is thus approaching its conclusion, and I would like 
to express our gratitude and appreciation to the Bank for its support during the ups-and-downs of the 
transition process in my country. Our sincere thanks go to the Management and all those numerous 
members  of  staff  who  for  years  and  sometime  in  difficult  circumstances  brought  many  successful 
projects to the Czech Republic. We wish the Bank much good fortune for fulfilling its mandate. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 44/2006 
 1
