Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strategic positioning in a changing environment 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  2006 
Dialogue Session with Insurers and Takaful Operators, Kuala Lumpur, 22 August 2006. 
 In a rapidly changing environment, rethinking the future and strategic repositioning needs to be a high 
priority agenda. Strategic positioning is not only necessary to deal with the new emerging challenges 
but more importantly, it needs to be part of the process that will shape the future. 
The changes taking place are on several fronts.  
• 
Nations  are  becoming  increasingly  inter-linked  and  integrated  in  a  more  globalised 
environment.  
The Malaysian economy continues to experience significant structural shifts into new areas 
of growth and comparative advantage.  
Consumers  are  becoming  increasingly  discerning  in  terms  of  the  range  and  quality  of 
financial products and services.  
The  financial  system  is  transitioning  into  a  more  competitive  environment  as  institutional 
arrangements become increasingly more deregulated and liberalized.  
Technological advancement has enabled greater innovation in the development of financial 
products and services, operational processes and delivery channels.  
The  regulatory  and  supervisory  approaches  to  maintaining  financial  stability  are  becoming 
more principle and risk-based.  
     With these changes intensifying, it is timely to reflect on the emerging issues for the insurance and 
takaful industry. 
It is my pleasure to welcome you to this year's dialogue session between Bank Negara Malaysia and 
the  insurance  and  takaful  industries  to  discuss  the  challenges  and  opportunities  the  changing 
environment presents. A year ago, the focus of the discussions was on the strategic issues facing the 
industry as we transitioned towards a more competitive market environment. The emphasis was on 
the  expectations  on  the  industry  to  deliver  a  fair  proposition  to  consumers,  its  relevance  in  the 
changing environment and its readiness in terms of capacity, and to support and sustain a successful 
strategy for growth. While the theme for this dialogue is to focus on how the industry should position 
itself to meet the new challenges, it will specifically address the transition towards a risk-based and a 
more self-regulated market conduct regime, and the development of a dual financial system for the 
insurance and takaful industry. 
This year, the dialogue has been jointly organised by the industry with the Bank. The industry's active 
involvement will be important in making this important event a success. This dialogue will provide an 
opportunity  for  deliberations  on  the  strategic  issues  confronting  the  industry  in  the  changing 
environment from the different perspectives between the industry and Bank Negara Malaysia . At this 
juncture,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  of  the  recent  economic  and  financial 
developments and the major policy initiatives by Bank Negara Malaysia . 
The global economic performance for 2006 has so far been favourable with a more balanced growth 
among the major economies, including in Japan and Europe . The world economy is however, facing 
an  extended  period  of  high  energy  prices  and  its  consequent  effects  on  inflation.  Following  these 
developments, interest rates have been raised in most economies. While risks are now emerging for a 
slower growth in a number of the major economies, growth in the Asian economies have continued to 
remain robust and resilient. This trend has not only increased Asia 's relative significance in the world 
economy but it has also contributed to a more balanced global growth. 
The Malaysian economy has benefited from this favourable external environment. Growth has been 
supported by both the strengthening exports performance that has be reinforced by strong domestic 
demand. Domestic demand also continues to be driven by the private sector as private consumption 
and  investment  have  been  an  important  source  of  growth.  The  continued  expansion  in  private 
investment is particularly important in ensuring the long-term sustainability of the growth. 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 1
The  focus  of  the  monetary  policy  in  this  environment  continues  to  be  towards  achieving 
macroeconomic  stability.  More  recently,  the  higher  energy  costs  have  resulted  in  an  increase  in 
consumer prices. In this environment, interest rates have been raised three times. In May this year, a 
pause  in  this  increase  was  announced.  With  limited  evidence  of  demand  induced  inflation,  the 
assessment is for inflation to moderate in the second half of this year. In addition, the extent to which 
the external environment will be affected by the higher energy prices and rising interest rates, and its 
implications  on  our  domestic  economy,  will  be  important  considerations  in  the  future  direction  of 
interest  rates.  The  risk  to  higher  inflation  and  to  the  growth  prospects  will  be  carefully  balanced. 
Monetary policy will continue to promote sustainable growth in an environment of price stability. 
Since  the  dialogue  a  year  ago,  the  financial  landscape  continues  to  be  transformed.  The  domestic 
financial  industry  has  seen  further  rationalisation  and  consolidation  in  the  banking  groups  in  retail 
banking and investment banking. While the rationalization in the retail banking industry would benefit 
from  the economies  of scale,  reduce  duplication  of resources and  promote cost  efficiency, the  new 
investment bank framework is expected to bring about the emergence of more effective, efficient and 
resilient capital market intermediaries. It will essentially result in the consolidation of 32 entities into 16 
investment  banks  by  the  end  of  this  year.  Another  significant  development  in  2005  was  the 
establishment  of  the  Malaysian  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  which  will  further  strengthen  the 
domestic financial infrastructure by providing an explicit guarantee of deposits, while simultaneously 
reinforcing  incentives  for  the  improvement  of  risk  management practices  by banking  institutions.  To 
promote greater financial inclusion in our financial system, development financial institutions have also 
been strengthened to ensure that they are more focused and complementary in their objectives and 
business strategies. A major initiative during the year was to promote increased access to financing to 
the  new  areas  of  growth  as  well  as  to  small  and  medium  scale  enterprises,  including  for  micro 
enterprises.  This  aims  to  enhance  the  potential  and  capacity  of  domestic  indigenous  enterprises  to 
grow and thus enhance their contribution to the economy. 
In  the  area  of  Islamic  banking  and  finance,  policy  initiatives  have  been  implemented  to  position 
Malaysia to become a leading international Islamic financial centre. Earlier this month, the Malaysian 
Government had launched the Malaysia International Islamic Financial Centre or MIFC initiative. This 
initiative is aimed at building greater intermediation linkages between the East Asian, the West Asian 
and  Middle  East  regions  which  will  in  turn,  further  expand  inter-regional  trade  and  cross  border 
investment  flows.  This  would  also  contribute  towards  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital  and  thus 
enhance  the  prospects  for  mutually  reinforcing  intra-regional  growth.  In  addition,  the  enhanced 
opportunities for raising financing offers would also facilitate greater risk diversification. To achieve this 
goal, efforts and resources are being directed towards achieving two broad objectives: 
• 
First,  to  become  an  international  leader  in  the  origination,  issuance  as  well  as  trading  of 
Islamic  capital  market  and  treasury  instruments,  fund  and  wealth  management  services, 
offshore Islamic financial services, and takaful and retakaful.  
Second,  to  position  Malaysia  as  a  centre  of  excellence  for  Islamic  banking  and  finance 
education, training, consultancy and research. This will not only provide an extensive pool of 
highly trained and capable expertise to spearhead future development, but will also promote 
greater innovation in Islamic financial products and services.  
 Given  the  functioning  of  Islamic  finance  in  parallel  with  the  conventional  financial  system  in  our 
financial  environment,  neutrality  in  treatment  between  Islamic  and  conventional  finance  products  is 
important  to  ensure  its  viability  and  sustainability.  This  competitive  environment  would  in  fact 
encourage  greater  innovation  to  take  place,  thereby  supporting  the  development  of  the  Islamic 
financial  services  industry.  With  the  much  strengthened  and  more  robust  Islamic  financial 
infrastructure that is now firmly in place, the Islamic financial services industry is well positioned to tap 
new growth opportunities to realize its full potential. This will inevitably increase the breadth and depth 
of the Islamic financial markets and, more importantly, strengthen Malaysia 's position as an attractive 
and dynamic international Islamic financial centre.  
The Bank's regulatory orientation in this changing environment continues to evolve towards a more 
robust  and  flexible  regime  to  effectively  maintain  financial  stability.  The  regulation  of  the  financial 
services  industry  in  the  changing  environment  will  continue  to  focus  on  safeguarding  the  financial 
system  against  systemic  risk,  ensuring  the  reasonable  protection  of  consumers  in  financial  service 
dealings and enhancing the efficiency of the financial system. In addition, the regulatory function will 
also continue to facilitate the achievement of the socio-economic objectives, including increasing the 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2006
a heightened focus on, and alignment with, risk;  
anticipatory, rather than reactive interventions;  
greater use of incentives to achieve desired institutional behaviours and outcomes; and  
convergence with international best practices.  
insurance penetration, promoting adequate provision for retirement needs and supporting the growth 
of target sectors. 
While  these  objectives  will  provide  the  basis  and  direction  for  regulation,  it  is  recognized  that  the 
environment  in  which  financial  institutions  operate  has  changed  significantly.  Accordingly,  the 
regulatory practices have undergone significant change in recent years to ensure that they continue to 
be  aligned  with  the  underlying  rationale  for  regulation.  More  specifically,  the  Bank's  approach  to 
regulation is increasingly characterised by: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Efforts have also been directed at achieving regulation that is more proportionate in relation to its costs 
and benefits. This has resulted in an expanded regulatory toolkit that is now beyond prescriptive rules, 
but  leveraged  more  extensively  on  inherent  checks  and  balances  within  the  system,  and  on  the 
greater use of incentives to achieve desired institutional behaviours and outcomes. In addition, there 
has been an increased focus on market conduct and harnessing more active consumerism to reinforce 
prudential regulation and supervision. 
To further reinforce these changes, the Bank has undertaken a holistic review of the regulatory and 
supervisory structures within the Bank. The internal organisational changes that are being made will 
result in a complete transition from the current approach to regulation on a sectoral basis, to one that 
will integrate the Bank's regulation of different financial institutions under its purview along functional 
lines.  In  effect,  the  existing  regulatory  departments  will  be  transformed  into  new  departments  with 
respective responsibilities for financial sector development, prudential policy, consumer protection and 
market  conduct,  and  financial  surveillance  across  both  the  banking  and  insurance  sectors.  The 
supervisory functions will similarly be integrated for financial service groups that include both banks 
and insurance companies under their umbrella. 
We  believe  this  organisational  change  will  deliver  a  more  comprehensive  overview  and  cohesive 
approach to the development of the financial system, while facilitating a clear distinction between the 
objectives of prudential regulation and financial stability, and the broader developmental objectives. It 
will also sharpen the regulatory focus on the management of risk in the financial system in a manner 
that will more effectively address the basic components of credit, market, operational and insurance 
risks. For the regulated institutions, this new structure is also intended to promote greater efficiency 
and competition in the financial system by:- 
• 
• 
minimising regulatory overlaps and duplication within the system;  
preserving regulatory neutrality in the management of similar risks between different financial 
service providers; and  
ensuring more efficient use of regulatory resources.  
• 
The Bank will be communicating the details of the new structure to the licensees in November and 
December this year. A smooth transition will be ensured to maintain continuity in the major ongoing 
regulatory initiatives currently being undertaken by the Bank, and clear arrangements will be made for 
dealings between licensees and the Central Bank during the transition. 
Under  the  new  regulatory  landscape,  the  relationship  between  the  Bank  and  the  regulated  entities, 
and thus, the supervisory expectations, will change, as the prudential framework evolves towards a 
predominantly principle-based and risk-based regulatory approach. There will be a greater emphasis 
on corporate governance, integrity and transparency as the foundations for industry players so as to 
maintain  investor  confidence  and  public  trust.  Under  this  environment,  it  is  also  envisaged  that 
insurers,  individually  or  collectively,  will  play  a  bigger  role  in  developing  market  conduct  standards, 
fostering fair market practices and improving financial literacy among consumers. Moving forward, as 
market discipline improves, and insurers and takaful operators are better positioned to implement self-
regulation, further deregulation can be expected. A differentiated regulatory approach will increasingly 
be  adopted,  where  companies  that  exhibit  strong  corporate  governance  and  risk  management 
practices will be given greater regulatory flexibility. 
BIS Review 76/2006 
 3
Commensurate with the diversity and complexity of products and services, the continuous upgrading 
of  risk  management  practices,  with  improvements  in  governance  standards  and  enhancements  of 
information management systems will be critical. With the impending implementation of the risk-based 
capital  framework,  the  responsibility  for  the  implementation  of  sound  risk  management  and  market 
conduct governance, as well as assessment of risks and management of the financial condition of an 
insurer, will rest increasingly with the Board of Directors and Senior Management of the insurers.  
Integral  to  the  increased  flexibility  provided  under  the  new  regulatory  landscape  is  the  highest 
standards of integrity and ethics in the industry. Indeed, the very foundation of insurance is one that is 
based on a relationship of trust and integrity. Reputation and trust are indeed the valued assets of the 
insurance  and  takaful  industries'  business.  Any  lapses  in  market  conduct  will  have  widespread 
implications on the business and on the industry. Ensuring fair and equitable dealings with customers 
should also be a priority. In this environment where the industry originates more and more innovative 
and  complex  financial  solutions,  insurers  and  takaful  operators  therefore  have  a  responsibility  to 
ensure that: - 
• 
• 
consumers receive sufficient information to be able to make informed decisions;  
that they understand the key features of a policy, including any significant exclusions, before 
any purchase;  
that the recommended policies are suitable for their demands and needs; and  
that their claims are dealt with promptly and fairly. 
• 
• 
The new environment of increased market discipline now places even greater emphasis on stronger 
corporate governance, integrity and transparency. High standards of integrity should also define the 
management  of  the  institution's  human  and  physical  resources.  In  this  respect,  there  can  be  no 
substitute for the commitment of an institution's leadership to uphold the highest standards of integrity 
in dealing with its human capital and corporate resources that are managed on behalf of shareholders 
and policyholders.  
Achieving success in an environment of greater competition will hinge on the ability of the domestic 
industry  to  innovate  and  provide  enhanced  value  propositions  for  consumers. This  underscores  the 
importance of capacity building by industry players in research and development, and re-engineering 
of business processes in search of operational excellence and enhanced customer service delivery. A 
strong culture of excellence is therefore vital: one that is embedded into all levels of the organization; 
one that fosters and rewards innovation and service quality. 
Increasingly, highly-skilled individuals will be needed to be able to deliver high value-added products 
and  services,  adopt  advanced  business  practices,  and  have  the  necessary  competencies  to  build 
consumer confidence and trust. It is, therefore, crucial for the industry to continuously invest in human 
intellectual capital to create the pool of talent, skills and expertise that will drive the performance of the 
industry. To meet this demand, specialised training organisations have been established. They include 
the International Centre for Leadership in Finance (ICLIF), which is now in its 3 rd year of operation, 
and  the  recently-launched  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF).  The 
programmes carried out by the Malaysian Insurance Institute (MII) have also been reviewed to meet 
the evolving demands of the financial sector.  
As we move towards the final phase of the Financial Sector Master Plan and into a more competitive 
landscape,  we  require  robust  financial  institutions  that  are  resilient,  effective  and  well  positioned  to 
serve the nation. In particular, to achieve a financial sector that will effectively facilitate and support 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  transformation.  To  complement  the  ongoing  efforts  to  build  the 
capacity of domestic insurers, the Bank will continue to leverage on strategic initiatives to achieve the 
desired  financial  landscape  which  will  also  be  better  able  to  contribute  to  the  socio-economic 
objectives of the country, as well as to be better to withstand competitive pressures in the provision of 
insurance products and services.  
Consolidation and fostering strategic alliances will have the potential to strengthen the position of the 
industry to compete more effectively as the market becomes increasingly deregulated and liberalised. 
In particular, in fostering strategic alliances within the industry, the foreign shareholding limit for new 
entries in direct insurers has been increased from 30% to 49% to harness the potential for financially 
strong  and  internationally  known  foreign  players.  This  would  contribute  towards  enhancing  the 
development of domestic capabilities, particularly in the areas of technical expertise, innovation and 
improved operating processes. This will provide an additional avenue for potential foreign partners to 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2006
participate more substantively in the domestic industry through a strategic equity interest in existing 
licensed insurers.  
As part of efforts to promote good risk management practices in the financial system, the Bank will 
also  consider  introducing  differentiated  premium  contributions  to  the  insurance  guarantee  scheme 
fund,  based  on  the  risk  profile  of  individual  insurers.  This  is  similar  to  that  being  adopted  for  the 
deposit  insurance  system  in  the  banking  sector.  This  will  provide  an  incentive  for  insurers  to 
strengthen  their  risk  management  practices  in  order  to  benefit  from  lower  contributions  to  the 
insurance compensation scheme.  
It  is  hoped  that  discussions  at  this  dialogue  will  contribute  towards  providing  greater  clarity  in  the 
thinking on the future direction of corporate strategies as well as the regulatory responses to ensure 
the sound development of the insurance and takaful industry. On this note, I wish you a successful 
and productive dialogue.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 76/2006 
 5
