Michael C Bonello: The adoption of the euro by new member states - 
challenges and vulnerabilities 
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  SUERF  Seminar 
organised by the Central Bank of Malta, Valletta, 4 May 2006. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Central Bank of Malta’s website. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
I would first like to welcome you all to this seminar which has been jointly organised by the European 
Money and Finance Forum (SUERF) and the Central Bank of Malta. A special greeting goes to our 
foreign participants and guests, including some fifty members of SUERF from twenty-three countries. 
The  topic  chosen  for  the  seminar  is  particularly  appropriate  at  a  time  when  the  ten  NMS  have  just 
entered their third year of EU membership and are increasingly focusing their attention on monetary 
union. In these introductory comments I shall, therefore, attempt to highlight some key issues which 
must be dealt with on the path towards the adoption of the euro. 
As our policy makers have become acutely aware during the past two years, this path is characterised 
by  manifold  challenges  and  vulnerabilities,  not  least  those  associated  with  real  convergence,  fiscal 
consolidation and capital account volatility. The orientation of economic policy in these areas will have 
to focus strongly, at the level of both national authorities and European institutions, on consistency, 
flexibility and credibility if we are to extract the maximum gains for all out of this next step in European 
integration. 
Long run net benefits of euro adoption 
In order to place this topic in its proper context it is first important to recall that the adoption of the euro 
is  expected  to  produce  significant  net  benefits  for  the  NMS  in  the  long  run.  A  consistent  body  of 
literature points to the likelihood of substantial output growth arising out of increased external trade in 
countries forming currency unions. Recent studies suggest trade gains of between 6% and 15% from 
the  creation  of  the  euro  after  five  years  of  its  existence.1  On  the  basis  of  these  estimates,  euro 
adoption could raise GDP by at least 1% to 2% over 20 years in the NMS.2 These gains arise from the 
elimination  of  exchange  rate  volatility  and  risk,  lower  transaction  costs,  increased  competition  and 
price transparency, all of which lead to trade creation. Lower risk premia on borrowing costs and the 
stronger frameworks for policy discipline prevailing within the euro area are other potential sources of 
economic growth. 
Such considerations will no doubt have played a part in the recent decision by the six members of the 
Gulf  Cooperation  Council  to  seek  the  advice  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  in  developing  a 
blueprint  for  forming  a  currency  union  and  introducing  a  common  currency  by  2010.  In  a  similar 
context, the announcement last week that Iceland is considering joining the euro is most significant. 
The  country’s  Prime  Minister  is  reported  to  have  said,  “It’s  clear  [that]  it’s  not  easy  to  run  a  small 
economy and a small currency in a big market”. 
There will also, of course, be long-term costs arising from the adoption of the euro associated with the 
loss  of  monetary  and,  particularly,  exchange  rate  policy  autonomy.  Studies  based  on  the  Optimum 
Currency  Area  (OCA)  criteria,  however,  suggest  that  NMS  are  not  likely  to  suffer  from  a  more 
pronounced  incidence  of  asymmetric  shocks  than  the  existing  non-core  euro  area  members.3 
Moreover, the nature of shocks to which the economies of these countries are generally subject do not 
                                                      
1   Faruqee (2004) 
2   Schadler et al (2005) 
3   Fidrmuc (2001), Boreiko (2002) 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 1
necessarily  require  intervention  on  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  provided  that  more  efficient 
mechanisms for aggregate demand management are in place.4  
Immediate concerns and inherent vulnerabilities 
Against this prospect of net long-term benefits, and indeed if the NMS are to maximize the benefits of 
euro adoption, they will have to continue making substantial reforms to their economic, financial and 
social systems. While such changes are in themselves necessary to ensure a smooth adoption of the 
euro, they will continue to be endogenously engendered once these countries become members of 
the euro area. In the meantime, however, these reforms are posing major challenges to a number of 
NMS  and  are  exposing  vulnerabilities  which,  if  not  addressed,  could  threaten  their  successful 
participation in the euro area. 
In the course of this seminar first-hand accounts of such challenges, and of the policy responses to 
deal  with  them,  will  no  doubt  reveal  the  rich  diversity  of  country  situations  within  an  enlarged  EU. 
Some challenges, however, will be common to most new NMS. One such is the need to catch up in 
terms of per capita income levels with euro area countries. In several NMS this catching-up process is 
taking place in good part due to the relatively low wage levels and high rates of return on capital in 
these countries relative to euro area economies. These characteristics of the real sector are creating 
challenges from a nominal convergence viewpoint. Chief among them are the issues of real exchange 
rate appreciation and the need to cope with large, and potentially volatile capital inflows. 
Rising real exchange rates in NMS in part reflect productivity growth in the traded sectors giving rise to 
Balassa-Samuelson  effects,  as  well  as  a  growing  demand  for  non-traded  goods  and  the  effects  of 
price  deregulation.  These  factors  would  lead  to  relatively  high  inflation  rates  unless  countered  by 
nominal exchange rate appreciation, both of which could potentially hamper the process of nominal 
convergence necessary to adopt the euro.5 The broad conclusion which emerges from a number of 
studies  on  this  issue  is  that  Balassa-Samuelson  effects  on  the  real  exchange  rate  in  NMS  are 
estimated to be of the order of 1% to 2% per year.6
With regard to capital inflows, these are usually perceived as a source of economic growth, especially 
when they take the shape of foreign direct investment (FDI). However, they can also usher in risks of 
volatility  and  speculative  pressures  on  the  exchange  rate.  This  is  indeed  a  factor  that  is  currently 
affecting  some  NMS,  as  capital  inflows  appear  to  be  shifting  from  FDI  to  portfolio  flows  of  a  more 
speculative  nature,  perhaps  in  part  a  by-product  of  the  increased  competition  for  productive 
investment  from  Asian  countries.  In  the  near  future,  capital  outflows  from  NMS  may  also  be 
occasioned by the creation of second pillar pension systems. 
Needless to say, net capital inflows are accompanied by current account deficits, reflecting expansions 
in  aggregate  demand  driven  by  investment  expenditure  or  lower  savings  prompted  by  an  expected 
growth in income. In the present scenario, pressures on the current account are being reinforced by 
the steady upward trend in international oil prices. Markets often view wide current account deficits as 
a sign of vulnerability, thereby fuelling volatility in capital flows. So far, a number of NMS with a flexible 
currency  arrangement  have  managed  such  volatility  through  exchange  rate  flexibility,  a  tool  which 
might, however, be progressively lost in the run-up to the adoption of the euro.  
Developments in financial intermediation may also pose significant challenges in this regard. Thus far 
there has been a tendency for credit to be relatively low compared to economic activity in NMS, as 
banks, which are largely foreign-owned in a number of these countries, have been generally averse to 
advancing  a  significant  amount  of  credit  to  enterprises,  although  tending  to  step  up  lending  to 
households.7 This implies the possibility that with a further internationalisation of the financial sector 
on account of the introduction of the euro, there could be a more rapid credit expansion through bank 
borrowing  from  abroad,  with  the  attendant  dangers  of  overheating  and  the  formation  of  asset  price 
bubbles. 
                                                      
4   Schadler et al (2005) 
5   Begg et al (2003) 
6   For example Cipriani (2000), Kovacs (2002) and Mihaljek and Klau (2003) 
7   Schadler et al (2005) 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2006
These considerations have important implications for the maintenance of financial stability in the NMS. 
While  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  are  generally  recognised  to  be  strong  in  these 
countries,8  they  will  have  to  withstand  increasing  stress  over  the  next  few  years  arising  from  the 
growing internationalisation of financial markets and the complexity of the global financial architecture, 
as well as from domestic macroeconomic dynamics. 
In  the  run-up  to  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  most  NMS  will  also  continue  to  face  the  challenge  of 
maintaining  acceptable  fiscal  positions.  Current  expenditures  in  many  of  these  countries  are  high 
relative to GDP, and in a number of them demographic profiles are casting doubts on the medium-
term  sustainability  of  public  finance.  This  is  a  concern  not  only  from  the  viewpoint  of  nominal 
convergence in terms of the Maastricht criteria, but also from the perspective of the need for flexibility 
in the area of fiscal policy in order to be able to counter the effects of asymmetric shocks. 
Requisites for the successful adoption of the euro 
In this scenario, the successful adoption of the euro by the NMS requires efforts on two fronts, namely 
the  implementation  of  economic  policies  designed  to  meet  the  Maastricht  criteria  on  a  sustainable 
basis,  and  the  mobilisation  of strong support  for  euro  adoption so  as  to endow  the  project  with  the 
necessary credibility. 
With regard to the former, a continued emphasis on fiscal consolidation, with deficit and debt levels 
that would be even lower than the threshold values of the Maastricht criteria, would seem to be called 
for. In addition, reforms aimed at removing rigidities and expenditure trigger effects in social welfare 
transfers  would  also  be  appropriate  in  some  countries.  The  capacity  of  economies  to  respond 
successfully to the challenge of euro adoption would be further enhanced by a greater degree of price 
and wage flexibility. Generally speaking, the NMS have a satisfactory track record on this count, at 
least compared with the non-core euro area countries, but the extent to which the existing flexibility is 
enough to enable a sufficiently rapid catching up process in the context of an increasingly competitive 
global trading environment is yet to be assessed. 
An overriding consideration relates to the degree of vulnerability that an economy might experience 
during its participation in ERM II. This is now generally perceived as a testing period to be entered into 
once the economy is deemed a credible candidate for euro area membership, but not to be postponed 
to  the  extent  of  unduly  retarding  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  with  the  consequent  negative  effects  on 
policy  credibility.  Indeed,  the  exposure  to  the  international  markets  which  participation  in  ERM  II 
implies requires NMS to follow even more prudent policies, especially on the fiscal front, compared to 
existing euro-area countries. This is needed to compensate for the vulnerabilities, not least that arising 
from capital account openness, which the NMS are facing. This aspect of ERM II appears not to be 
sufficiently understood by advocates of delayed euro adoption in some of our countries. 
These policy prerequisites for adopting the euro may, on the other hand, complicate the mobilisation of 
strong popular support for the euro project. The case for fiscal consolidation may be compelling from a 
long  run  growth  perspective,  but  the  dividends  of  such  a  policy  course  may  fail  to  materialise  in  a 
sufficiently short time to generate the necessary support. Likewise, the introduction of the euro may be 
perceived as entailing the prospect of higher prices, generating further scepticism among the social 
partners. And let us not forget that it is these same partners that have to be relied on to deliver the 
flexibility in the labour and product markets that is required for a successful transition to the euro. An 
active and constructive social dialogue is, therefore, necessary to support the process. 
Given  the  considerable  policy  challenges  inherent  in  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  the  European 
Commission and the ECB have an important role to play in providing the NMS with both practical and 
moral support for their efforts to achieve this next step in European integration. Such support might not 
only take the form of regular reports and consultations in order to reassure the markets, but also an 
effort to minimise uncertainties about the application of the criteria used to assess eligibility for euro 
adoption.  In  this  regard,  the  challenge  would  seem  to  be  to  strike  a  balance  between,  on  the  one 
hand, ensuring transparency and a level playing field and, on the other, giving due weight to the track 
record  of  economic  policy  and  performance  in  the  NMS,  as  well  as  to  the  implications  for  these 
                                                      
8   Schadler et al (2005) 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 3
countries, and indeed for the euro-area as a whole, of an unduly rigid interpretation of the provisions of 
the Treaty. 
The application of the Maastricht criteria 
In making this point I am clearly not suggesting, as some academics have done, that the Maastricht 
criteria  are  “neither  necessary,  nor  sufficient”.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  some  aspects  of  the 
criteria that could legitimately be the subject of reflection. 
The calculation of the reference value of the inflation criterion is a case in point. Over the past few 
years there has been a debate about how one should define “best performance” in relation to inflation 
and  also  about  the  term  “outlier”.  And  even  about  why  countries  outside  the  euro  area  should  be 
included among the best performing countries. This debate appears to have resurfaced again during 
the preparatory phase of the current ECB Convergence Report. 
Another, and currently very topical aspect that also has ‘level playing field’ connotations is the impact 
of the ongoing spike in the international oil price. The current reference value for the HICP inflation 
criterion  is  influenced  by  countries  whose  energy  needs  are  satisfied  in  varying  degrees  by  non-oil 
fuels. At the same time, of the NMS that would not have satisfied the inflation criterion on the basis of 
the March 2006 data, some are more heavily dependent on oil imports, so that price levels generally in 
these countries have been reflecting the higher cost of oil and energy to a much greater degree than is 
the case in the reference countries. 
This argument could also apply to Malta in the future since not only is oil the sole source of electricity 
generation, but a high proportion of drinking water needs are also met by the transformation of sea 
water, a process that involves a high consumption of electricity. 
The difficulty of controlling inflation in current circumstances is indeed also reflected in the fact that 
three  of  the  present  euro  area  members  exceed  the  inflation  reference  value  by  an  average  of  1 
percentage point, and there is evidence pointing towards a divergence in inflation rates between these 
countries  over  the  past  five  years.9  Moreover,  the  NMS  have  registered  rates  of  inflation  between 
2002 and 2005 that were around one half those recorded during the preceding four-year period. This 
is indicative of the significant degree of macroeconomic stabilisation taking place, at the same time 
that progress continued to be registered in terms of real convergence. In fact, since 2000 real GDP 
growth in NMS was on average more than double that registered in the euro area member countries.  
These considerations acquire greater significance when viewed in the context of fiscal developments. 
On  the  basis  of  2005  data,  among  the  NMS  participating  in  ERM  II  only  Malta  failed  to  satisfy  the 
relevant criterion, with a fiscal deficit to GDP ratio of 3.3%. Malta, however, expects to be within the 
reference  value  by  the  end  of  this  year.  This  represents  a  considerable  fiscal  consolidation  effort, 
especially when viewed in the context of an average ratio of 6.7% during the first five years of this 
decade. This progress is expected to prove durable, as it has been based not only on tax measures, 
but  also  on  the  restructuring  of  public  sector  entities,  spending  cuts  and  efficiency  improvements. 
Challenges  to  fiscal  sustainability  in  NMS  remain,  nevertheless,  mainly  arising  out  of  the  future 
dynamics of the welfare system combined with population ageing, but these are hardly different from 
those being faced by euro area members.  
It is furthermore interesting to note that on average the NMS participating in ERM II recorded lower 
deficit to GDP ratios compared to the present euro area member countries in 2005, among whom five 
posted deficits in excess of 3%. The positive fiscal performance of these NMS is further underscored, 
with some individual exceptions, by their lower levels of public debt, which as a percentage of GDP 
average around one half of those of the current euro area member countries. 
With  regard  to  nominal  exchange  rates,  it  is  a  matter  of  some  satisfaction  that  none  of  the  NMS 
participating in ERM II have experienced undue volatility since their entry into the Mechanism. This to 
a  large  extent  confirms  the  appropriateness  to  date  of  the  chosen  central  parity  rates.  It  is  also  a 
reflection of positive market sentiment. 
The long-term interest rate is another important indicator of the suitability of economies to participate 
in ERM II and eventually adopt the euro, as it reflects the judgement of the financial markets regarding 
                                                      
9   Busetti et al (2006) 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2006
the  credibility  of  this  process.  All  the  NMS  that  are  in  ERM  II  currently  satisfy  this  criterion,  having 
achieved a consistent track record of downward trends in long-term interest rates over the past five 
years. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I think it is important in this case to look to the future with an eye on the recent past, and 
recognize  that  the  ten  NMS  have  come  a  long  way  in  honouring  their  commitments  to  achieve  the 
established macroeconomic targets and implement significant structural reforms, often against heavy 
odds. The magnitude of this undertaking must indeed be viewed not only in terms of the difficulty of 
the  task  itself,  and  the  economic  and  social  costs  involved,  but  also  against  the  background  of  an 
unfavourable global environment. At the same time they have striven hard to narrow the gap in living 
standards between themselves and the euro area member countries. 
It is, therefore, important that in the examination that follows a country’s request for a convergence 
report due consideration be given to the policy consistency and credibility of the applicant country. A 
comprehensive  economic  analysis  that  is  not  only  quantitative  but  also  qualitative,  and  which 
recognizes  the  difficultly  of  simultaneously  satisfying  all  the  Maastricht  criteria  in  the  current  world 
environment  would  encourage  EMU  candidate  countries  to  persist  in  their  efforts  to  achieve  even 
closer nominal and real convergence. It would also provide further evidence that the euro project is 
credible, that it is both feasible and realizable in a near-term perspective. 
Let me conclude by thanking you again for being here to contribute to a deeper understanding of the 
challenges ahead. I also wish you a pleasant stay in our country. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 5
