Callum McCarthy: The challenge of Basel II for regulators 
Speech  by  Mr  Callum  McCarthy,  Chairman  of  the  Financial  Services  Authority,  at  the  Institute  for 
Independent Business (IIB) Singapore Meeting, Singapore, 18 September 2006. 
 I am delighted to have been asked to speak at this meeting, and congratulate the IIB on establishing 
an audience so far away from its home base in New York.  
It is a challenge to think what a UK regulator and supervisor should say to a US-based audience in 
Singapore – other  than  express  mutual  sympathy  as  to  the  effects  of  jet  lag. I  have  chosen  to  talk 
briefly about selected aspects of Basel II – a subject which is both current and which raises interesting 
issues of international cooperation, the subject which I've addressed on previous IIB meetings. 
There  is,  of  course,  a  continuity  between  my  previous remarks on  and  interest  in  the  issues  of  the 
responsibilities of home and host regulators and the implementation of Basel II. The implementation of 
Basel  II  represents  a  real,  practical  and  important  test  of  how  regulators  round  the  world  are 
succeeding in working together. And I am afraid that the results are mixed rather than unambiguously 
good. This morning I want to examine some of the issues, and the extent to which we collectively have 
succeeded in resolving them. 
I should make clear at the start that I recognise that different regulators operate under very different 
legislative  frameworks,  and  in  very  different  political  contexts.  I  am  always  struck  by  the  enormous 
difference between the very strong political interest in Basel II shown in the US and that fact that it is 
not a political issue at all in the UK. And, while the British political (non) standing of Basel II is not 
repeated  in  all  EU  countries  (there  has  been  some  political  interest  in  Germany  and  Italy),  as  a 
generalisation it is clear that political interest in Basel II in Europe has been a pale shadow of that 
shown in the US. 
The  obvious  effect  of  this  is  the  timing  of  implementation  of  Basel  II,  with  the  striking  difference 
between the EU implementation of the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) in little over 3 months for 
the simpler approaches and 1 January 2008 for the advanced approaches, against the US timetable of 
1 January 2009 - the first possible date a bank could start using the advanced approaches, subject to 
the capital floors. These differences in timing present significant but, by definition since they are timing 
differences, transient problems for international firms and banks which have substantial operations in 
jurisdictions which are adopting different timetables for implementation – particularly and obviously for 
EU  banks  with  substantial  US  operations.  There  will  be  extra  complexity,  diversion  of  management 
attention, and costs. The consolation, if such exists, is that timing problems are temporary, and should 
in time be settled.  
Of  more  serious  impact  –  because  not  transient  –  are  the  questions  of  how  bank  regulators  and 
supervisors in different jurisdictions, once they have converged on a timetable for implementation, will 
converge on interpretations of Basel II which are predictable and, in an ideal world, consistent. I want 
to set our some areas where we have made progress towards this end, and also some areas where 
we still need to make further progress. 
Within the EU, we have set out very explicitly how the responsibilities of home and host supervisor will 
be  exercised  in  respect  of  model  approval,  for  both  IRB  and  AMA  model  applications  –  that  is,  for 
modelling both credit and operational risk. The principle was laid down in Article 129 of the CRD, and 
establishes  the  responsibility  of  the  home  supervisor  to  take  the  decision  on  model  approval.  It 
requires  the  home  supervisor  to  consider  the  views  of  host  supervisors  on  model  approval,  but 
establishes  the  right  of  the  home  supervisor  to  take  the  decision  if  agreement  cannot  be  reached 
within  six  months.  This  principle  has  been  fleshed  out  by  work  carried  out  in  the  Committee  of 
European  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS),  which  has  agreed  more  detailed  guidelines  for  both  how 
home and host supervisors should cooperate, and exchange information; and for the practicalities of 
IRB  and  AMA  model  validation.  Both  sets  of  guidelines  respect  the  primacy  of  the  home  regulator, 
while imposing duties as well as rights upon the home regulator. 
For home and host responsibilities extending outside the EU, the position is less clear cut. In the UK, 
our intention is that, where possible, banks should not have to maintain two sets of capital calculations 
for the same business. This means that, when we in the UK supervise a banking group with activities 
in other jurisdictions where Basel II has been introduced, we will not start with the presumption that the 
BIS Review 87/2006 
 1
FSA interpretation must be applied throughout the group. Instead, we will seek to incorporate in our 
group  assessment  the  judgments  of  regulators  in  other  jurisdictions,  provided  that  the  scale  of  the 
group's activities in those jurisdictions is not so large that such a policy would be irresponsible; and 
provided that we have confidence in the regulators in those other jurisdictions. I would expect those 
conditions  normally  to  be  satisfied.  That  will  be  the  position  once  timing  differences  have  been 
eliminated. For the period during which implementation timetables differ, the position will be as follows. 
The  differing  implementation  timetables  as  between  the  EU,  US  and  other  jurisdictions  should  not 
materially hamper a bank's ability to use the advanced approaches in the UK from 2008. Thus a UK 
group should be able to include advanced approaches for its US operations in its waiver application. 
Likewise, a UK firm that is part of a US banking group can apply to use advanced approaches in the 
UK, even though its home regulator will not have approved those approaches.  
Since Basel I is not CRD-equivalent in respect of credit risk, as it will not always give a result that is at 
least the amount required under the Directive, we will not be able to allow a UK group to include the 
requirements of a US banking subsidiary as calculated under the existing US rules during the period 1 
January 2008 and US Basel II implementation. We will however deem equivalent a scaled-up credit 
risk requirement to be CRD-equivalent if the US subsidiary in question falls into the 'well capitalized 
bank' category.  
I think we have succeeded in establishing sensible, pragmatic and workable arrangements for Pillar 1 
requirements and model validation. Pillar 2 questions are likely to prove more difficult. Pillar 2 was not 
conceived  as  a  one  size  fits  all  measure.  It  was  not  designed  to  be  formulaic  or  prescriptive.  It  is 
therefore quite possible that, in seeking to address similar risks not captured in Pillar 1, the application 
of  Pillar  2  to  two  similar  banks  in  two  different  jurisdictions  could  easily  produce  two  very  different 
outcomes. It is crucial therefore that supervisors and firms share a common understanding of the key 
characteristics  that  underpin  Pillar  2.  In  Europe,  CEBS  has  sought  to  do  exactly  this  and  has 
developed  guidelines  setting  out  a  common  understanding  of  what  the  supervisory  review  process 
under  Pillar  2  should  seek  to  achieve.  But  we  have  to  recognise  that  much  of  this  common 
understanding  comprises  a  recognition,  rather  than  an  elimination,  of  differences.  We  will  all 
understand better the different decisions which different EU regulators and supervisors will take – but 
banks will face the potential frustration of the same facts resulting in different decisions by different 
supervisors. It is an area of predictable sensitivity.  
But it is not simply a matter of resolving some of these 'big ticket' home/host issues. Banks' chief risk 
officers  are  equally  concerned  by  differing  interpretations  of  key  concepts  and  definitions  used  in 
different jurisdictions. Perhaps the most prominent of these relates to the divergent approaches to the 
definition  of  default  that  are  emerging  as  between  the  US  and  other  jurisdictions.  This  too  is  a 
predictable area of sensitivity. 
The Accord Implementation Group (AIG) under Nick le Pan's Chairmanship has been grappling with 
these and other issues, with some success, notably in the context of home-host information sharing 
and cooperation. But it is important that we continue to work at these issues, particularly on a trans-
Atlantic  basis.  EU  supervisors,  all  subject  to  the  common  discipline  of  the  CRD,  are  of  necessity 
succeeding in forging many EU-wide elements of convergence. The most important task for the AIG – 
and arguably for the Basel Committee – will be to develop global convergence. I am delighted – and 
relieved – that we have as Chairman of the Basel Committee my fellow panellist this morning, Nout 
Wellink of the DNB, whose experience and skills so clearly fit him for this important and difficult set of 
challenges.  I  hope  it  will  give  banks  who  are  aware  of  these  issues  some  comfort  to  learn  that 
regulators and supervisors share your concern, and are working to develop solutions.  
2 
 BIS Review 87/2006
