Ranee Jayamaha: The financial performance of the Credit Information Bureau 
in Sri Lanka during 2005 
Speech  by  Dr  Ranee  Jayamaha,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the Annual 
General Meeting of the Credit Information Bureau, Colombo, 23 June 2006.  
 Members of the Head Table, the Board of Directors, the Shareholders of the CRIB, Chief Executives 
and Officials of Banks and Financial Institutions, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am pleased to present to you this evening the Chairperson’s report of the CRIB which summarizes 
the significant growth in business operations and the financial performances of the CRIB during 2005. 
Sri Lanka’s CRIB is one of the pioneer credit information bureaux in the South Asia region since its 
establishment in 1990. The year 2006 is a landmark in its history as the CRIB will begin to re-engineer 
its core business processes with enhancements and upgrades to the technological infrastructure.  
As  indicated  in  the  Annual  Report,  during  2005,  the  CRIB  has  recorded  a  remarkable  growth  in  its 
businesses and achieved its primary objective of collecting, collating and dissemination of aggregate 
credit  information  for  the  use  of  stakeholder  institutions.  Reporting  of  credit  information  to,  and 
complying with the Bureau’s requirements are mandatory and the CRIB has made a conscious effort 
to educate the member institutions of the reciprocal benefits of providing reliable credit information. 
Throughout the year, the CRIB has continued follow up work in refreshing and updating the existing 
credit database. 
These measures have resulted in an increase of regular advances by 31% and a reduction of irregular 
advances by 3% during 2005. In addition to the increase in the number of credit reports disseminated 
by the CRIB, considerable efforts have been made to improve the quality of credit information through 
data-cleansing. By making mandatory the inclusion of the NIC number of individuals together with the 
business  registration  number,  the  CRIB  has  been  able  to  provide  more  reliable  credit  reports  thus 
facilitating the lenders’ credit decisions. 
In addition to the speedy dissemination of quality credit reports, the CRIB lays claim to a number of 
operational efficiencies achieved during 2005. With the introduction of the web-enabled credit report 
delivery  system,  CRIB’s  operational  efficiency  has  improved  significantly  while  reducing  its  cost  of 
operations.  The  one-hour  service  has  been  very  popular  and  it  has  substantially  enhanced  CRIB’s 
income.  Despite  limitations  and  operational  weaknesses,  the  collation  of  a  delinquent  credit  card 
holder  database  was  an  added  facility  made  available  to  its  members.  These  witness  the  high 
performance  of  the  CRIB  during  last  year  and  its  contribution  to  financial  system  stability  by 
safeguarding  the  financial  institutions  from  credit  defaults  and  inculcating  credit  discipline  among 
borrowers. 
While  technological  improvements  and  operational  efficiencies  are  taking  place,  let  us  focus  for  a 
moment to assess whether the CRIB has been able to meet its public policy objectives and provide 
social  justice  for  a  wider  segment  of  the  population,  although  such  objectives  are  not  enshrined 
explicitly in the CRIB Act. As a service provider, the CRIB should look after its clients, but its action 
should not lead to social injustice and be detrimental to public policy objectives. As we know, the CRIB 
was set up at a time during which high credit default rates were posing a threat to the stability of the 
financial system with the failure of several finance companies. Undoubtedly, the CRIB has been able 
to prevent the wide-spread credit indiscipline by willful defaulters. However, one needs to weigh the 
costs and benefits of flagging the defaulting borrowers within the CRIB’s network against the resultant 
denial of access to, or elimination of, certain borrower groups from the formal credit institutions. In this 
connection, it is important to identify the class, the segment, or the group of defaulting borrowers who 
have  been  denied  access  to  the  formal  credit  institutions.  According  to  information  available  at  the 
CRIB as at 20.06.2006, of the 261,322 loans reported, 67% of borrowers have taken loans less than 
Rs 1 million. The percentage for those who have borrowed less than Rs 5 million was 95% as at the 
same date. Loans over Rs 5.0 million was only 5% of the total number of loans reported. However, 
these  figures  do  not  include  the  regular  loans  below  Rs  500,000/=  and  irregular  loans  below  Rs 
100,000/=. Following the default records forwarded by credit institutions, the CRIB attaches a negative 
label and that does not allow many of these defaulters to access any credit institution in this country. In 
other words, these borrowers have been permanently denied of access to formal lending institutions. 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
There may be others in this group such as the SMEs, the retailers, self-employed and micro borrowers 
who,  for  reasons  beyond  their  control,  have  faced  the  same  fate.  Even  if  a  few  of  them  have  the 
potential, in terms of their cash flows or earning capacity, to repay debt at a later time and become 
honourable customers, the negative label issued by the CRIB would not give them another chance of 
reaching formal credit institutions. The inevitable result would be to drive them back to the informal 
sources of borrowing or to seek political redress. There is no doubt that there could be several willful 
defaulters in this group who deserve to be blacklisted, but among them the influential ones will seek 
ways and means of getting back into the system. 
It is well known that the banks and the credit institutions do not report the full list of borrowers to the 
CRIB.  It  is  also  no  secret  that  the  institutions  cherry-pick  the  borrowers  according  to  the  former’s 
preference.  The  affluent  borrowers,  multi  national  companies,  large  corporates,  highly  connected 
borrowers  and  the  banks’  other  preferred  customers  do  not  get  reported  to  the  CRIB,  even  if  they 
default altogether. The credit profiles of the affluent customers will continue to have clean records of 
regular payments which protect their image. The CRIB is totally dependent on these institutions for 
reliable information and given the objective of looking after its client institutions, the CRIB would fix 
negative labels on defaulting borrowers. The CRIB is not in a position to verify or go into details of the 
operations of any credit institution and establish the class, creed or social status of the customer. It 
only  fix  labels  according  to  what  is  reported  by  the  credit  institution.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Bank 
Supervision Dept. and Non-Bank Supervision Dept. of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, within their own 
regulatory ambit, can detect the non-reporting by institutions to the CRIB, but these departments are 
not mandated to share such information with the CRIB or vice versa. Hence, the injustice continues 
and often some of the deserving borrowers are denied access to credit institutions. In such a situation, 
how can the CRIB ensure social justice and equity in terms of public policy? The CRIB can be fair only 
if the credit institutions resolve to report on all defaulting customers with no exceptions.  
This situation clearly indicates that the decision to groom, retain or eliminate a customer rests largely 
with the bank or the credit institution. The injustice begins when the reporting institutions do not report 
defaults of all segments of borrowers. The extent to which the banks and credit institutions have done 
a  disservice  to  some  of  the  deserving borrowers,  is  known only to  the  banks and credit  institutions 
themselves. It is in this context that small businesses have raised concerns and aired their views to 
the  political  and  regulatory  authorities.  It  may  be  relevant  to  quote  a  statement  made  by  H.E.  the 
President at a recent meeting with the state banks where he said “I have seen banks getting tough on 
small time defaulters, but the same attitude must be there for large scale defaulters too”. When the 
government policy framework is geared towards enhancing access to credit, we should not leave room 
to deny access to those who wish to use the formal credit institutions.  
That is why I said that it is difficult to assess the performance of a service organization, using only the 
financial  and  operational  performances.  It  is  important  to  look  at  the  disservice  it  has  inadvertently 
inflicted on the society, perhaps due to reasons beyond its control. Of course, the root cause is the 
defaulting borrowers due to reasons within or beyond their control. For good order and conduct, the 
credit  institutions  should  report  credit  profiles  of  all  segments  of  borrowers  and  clientele  and  the 
reporting  formats  should  clearly  indicate  the  repayment  schedule  from  the  beginning  up  to  the 
reporting  time.  Until  such  time  the  reporting  credit  institutions  make  a  conscious  attempt  to  send-in 
reliable credit details of all borrowers, the CRIB will not be able to provide an equitable service. The 
CRIB  on  its  part  should  remove  the  label  fixed  on  defaulters  and  prepare  aggregate  credit  reports 
indicating the repayment pattern by borrowers over the reporting period. It should, as planned under 
the technical enhancement, prepare a “credit scoring” module which will indicate some sort of ranking 
of  borrowers.  This  would  enable  the  lending  institutions  to  better  assess  whether  the  borrower  is  a 
willful defaulter from the beginning or whether he has defaulted only on a few instalments. This is how 
credit bureaux world over provide both positive and negative information of their borrowers.  
The CRIB would endeavour to accomplish and provide an equitable service through its business plan 
which  will  come  into  effect  from  the  second  half  of  2006.  Accordingly,  it  intends  to  engage  in  a 
horizontal  expansion  in  collection  of  information  from  multiple  sources,  i.e.  credit  granters,  utility 
service providers, insurers, public databases and lenders for SMEs and micro sector borrowers in its 
new database in a phased manner. I hope that the expansion of customer databases to include their 
payment schedules for other utility services might help the lending institutions to form a better opinion 
of the borrower. In addition, using the new technology, the CRIB intends to enable customers to have 
easy  access  to  their  own  credit  profile  and  apprise  the  CRIB  of  erroneous  reporting.  With  the 
introduction of the new technology, the reporting institutions as well as the CRIB should work together 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2006
to  provide  positive  information  of  the  borrowing  clientele,  so  that  their  ability  to  stay  in  the  formal 
market is made easier.  
While embarking on new technology, I appeal to the banks, credit institutions, the stakeholders of the 
CRIB and all other officials who are present here today to change the attitude of officials working in 
your  organizations  and  to  carry  the  message  that  they  should  establish  justice  and  equity  in  credit 
reporting.  This  would  help  both  the  CRIB  and  the  credit  institutions  to  meet  their  public  policy 
obligations, in addition to the primary objective of safeguarding the financial system stability.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 3
