Ewart S Williams: A brief overview of developments in Trinidad and Tobago 
Opening remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Launch of Intercommercial Trust & Merchant Bank Limited, Port of Spain, 16 February 2006. 
 I  am  delighted  to  be  here  to  share  in  the  celebration  of  what  I  believe  is  the  rebirth  of  the 
Intercommercial Trust and Merchant Bank Limited (ITMBL). Let me extend my sincere congratulations 
to  the  Board,  management  and  staff  of  Intercommercial  Bank  Limited  and  its  Trust  and  Merchant 
Bank. 
The rebranding of the Intercommercial Trust and Merchant Bank and all that goes with it – its stand-
alone status; a new, restructured entity; its new location, situated in Port of Spain, in the middle of the 
financial centre, as it were – all of this carries enormous significance. It sends the message that IBL is 
now a full-fledged national financial institution which, with the support of its strategic partners, is willing 
to take on competitors both locally and regionally. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  significant  event  is  taking  place  at  a  most  important  juncture  in  our 
country’s  economic  and  financial  (history).  In  2005,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  registered  its  twelfth 
consecutive year of robust economic growth; with inflation still basically in check; with a very strong 
balance of payments and with unemployment at perhaps at its lowest point ever. While much of this 
success  can  be  traced  to  our  oil  fortunes,  it  also  has  to  do  with  several  years  of  sound  economic 
policies, of which the liberalization of the financial sector was a significant part. 
This  re-launch  of  Intercommercial  Trust  and  Merchant  Bank  is  taking  place  at  a  time  when  we  are 
seeing the full benefits of financial sector liberalization. This is being reflected in the proliferation of a 
diversified range of financial institutions and the exponential growth in the financial asset base. With 
the structural changes now ongoing in the financial sector, Trinidad and Tobago has become a major 
source of regional financing, while our home-based financial institutions have expanded their presence 
through the CARICOM region.  
Despite the rapid pace of expansion, the banking system has remained robust, as evidenced by all the 
main macro-prudential indicators. The data shows, for example, that: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Intercommercial Bank has been very much a part of this extraordinary period of development of 
the financial sector, having been born out of the process of financial liberalization, which dominated 
the mid-1990s. 
From its inception, IBL was a unique institution. While the initial capital may have been foreign, it 
was  essentially  a  local  bank  with  local  management,  emerging  not  too  long  after  three  local 
commercial banks had got into difficulties and needed to be liquidated. As such, the creation of the IBL 
was  a  strong  affirmation  on  the  part  of  its  founders,  of  their  confidence  in  the  economy  and  in  the 
financial sector of Trinidad and Tobago. 
From the outset, IBL had to face severe challenges – it was a small bank, in competition with much 
larger  and  long  established  banks.  It  did  not  enjoy  the  economies  of  scale  that  go  with  size  but 
moreover, it was a regional bank, in central Trinidad, without the national reach of the larger banks. 
Against this background, the fact that IBL has survived and has prospered, is a credit to its founders, 
to  its  Board  and  to  the  management  and  staff  of  the  Bank,  who  had  to  substitute,  efficiency  and 
service quality for financial strength. With commendable insight the management of IBL, early in the 
(i) 
          averaging close to 20 percent, far exceeding the statutory 8 percent minimum; 
(ii) 
non-performing  loans  for  the  banking  system,  as  a  whole,  are  in  the  region  of  2 
          percent,  having  come  down  markedly  from  double-digit  levels  that  prevailed  during  the 
 
(iii)   provisions  are  at  a  reassuringly  high  level,  with  the  coverage  ratio  relative  to  non-
          performing loans, exceeding 61 percent; and 
(iv)   banks are recording strong profits with the average return on assets in the vicinity of 3.5 
 
the  banks  are  more  than  adequately  capitalized,  with  their  capital  adequacy  ratio 
nineties; 
percent. 
BIS Review 17/2006 
 1
game, staked out a strategic market niche focusing on core banking, geared to meeting the personal 
and business needs of a small but thriving geographical area. 
IBL is unique in another sense – it has turned the conventional CARICOM order on its head. Over 
the last few years there has been a proliferation of crossborder ownership in the CARICOM region. 
However, invariably, this has meant Trinidad and Tobago banks expanding their wings abroad. The 
acquisition of IBL by the Jamaica Money Market Brokers reflected a reversal of this dominant order. 
Today, with its stake in IBL and CMMB, among others, JMMB has become an important player in the 
regional financial markets. 
The re-launch of the Intercommercial Bank Trust and Merchant Bank Limited is an affirmation 
that IBL has consolidated its position in its core banking business and now feels itself secure enough, 
confident enough and strong enough to spread its wings. The re-launch is also timely from a business 
viewpoint as it places the bank in a position to participate in the burgeoning capital market, which is 
now rivaling the traditional banking sector institutions as a preferred source of business financing. It 
will certainly help that the Intercommercial Trust and Merchant Bank would have the capital market 
experience of both JMMB and CMMB to rely on.  
Over  the  last  five  years  the  value  of  sovereign  bond  placements  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has 
amounted to more than $16 billion while private debt issues have amounted to $10.5 billion over the 
period.  Also,  with  the  rapid  diversification  of  the  economy,  trade  and  project  financing,  commercial 
paper and various forms of structured finance typical of merchant banks, are increasingly becoming 
important sources of funding business activity. So there is a good case for a re-entry into merchant 
banking. 
However,  merchant  banking  has  its  own  challenges.  As  bankers,  you  know  that  dependence  on 
diversified  funding  sources  such  as  money  market  instruments  and  long-term  foreign  currency 
borrowings is invariably more risky than dependence on vanilla deposits. 
On the assets side, secured loans and advances, which are the standard fare of commercial banks, 
carry lower risk than the investments that are likely to dominate the balance sheets of merchant banks. 
In short, the shift to merchant banking will create demands for new competencies, new systems and 
new governance and risk management structures. 
As  you  know,  the  evolving  structure  of  the  financial  system  is  also  creating  new  challenges  for  the 
Central Bank as regulator. We are currently addressing these challenges through: 
 
 
 
In particular, this implies, inter alia: 
(i)  
 
 
(ii)  
          (iii)  
 
 
 
I was very impressed by the mission statement of the Intercommercial Trust and Merchant Bank – to 
be a champion for financial development and prosperity of individuals and companies while adhering 
to  your  core  values  of  honesty,  integrity,  openness,  respect  and  love.  This  is  indeed  a  laudable 
mission. 
But I am sure you know that to succeed, you will face challenges not least among which will be the 
reality  of  facing  competition  from  your  rivals,  with  greater  financial  strength  and  the  tremendous 
advantage of a head-start. 
But IBL, your parent institution, faced similar challenges and overcame. 
I am certain that with the help of your strategic partners, JMMB and CMMB, you would not only survive 
but thrive and hopefully grow to be in your words “the most admired financial services organization”, 
not only in Trinidad and Tobago, but in the region. 
ensuring that institutions – big and small – have adequate governance systems in place; 
insisting on enhanced reporting and disclosure standards; 
 putting  in  place  procedures  for  the  sharing  of  information  with  other  regulators  both 
 locally  and  regionally;  and  (iv)  ensuring  that  financial  institutions  strengthen  their  risk 
 management  practices.  In  this  context,  the  Bank  is  working  on  amending  capital 
 adequacy rules to ensure that all major risks are appropriately identified and mitigated. 
transforming our supervisory system into a more integrated risk-based framework; and 
strengthening our overall legal and regulatory infrastructure, in line with international best 
practices.  
(i)  
(ii)  
 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2006
Once again, let me congratulate the Board, management and staff of the Intercommercial Trust and 
Merchant Bank and extend my best wishes for your success. 
BIS Review 17/2006 
 3
