Jean-Claude Trichet: Looking at EU and euro area enlargement from a central 
banker’s angle - the views of the ECB 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Diplomatic 
Institute, Sofia, 27 February 2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very honoured to be able to speak here today before such a distinguished audience. I would like 
to  thank  our  hosts  for  their  kind  invitation.  I  must  say,  I  actually  feel  quite  at  home  here  at  the 
Diplomatic Institute. I would like to share with you today my views as a central banker on an issue that 
has many dimensions, namely EU enlargement. Of course I will focus my attention on the economic 
and, in particular, the monetary aspects of this process, and on the issue of euro area enlargement. 
Permettez-moi,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs,  de  commencer  mon  intervention  par  quelques  mots  en 
français.  En  effet,  la  Bulgarie  est  membre  à  part  entière  du  mouvement  de  la  francophonie;  à  cet 
égard,  dans  moins  de  trois  mois,  la  Banque  nationale  bulgare  accueillera  la  treizième  réunion  des 
gouverneurs  des  banques  centrales  des  pays  francophones.  J’ai  toujours  pris  part  à  ces  réunions 
avec le plus vif intérêt; cette année aussi, j’aurai le plaisir de revenir à Sofia à la mi-mai comme invité 
du Gouverneur Iskrov pour une réunion consacrée à la stabilité financière.  
Avant de présenter la structure de mon discours, permettez moi d’abord de faire une remarque d’ordre 
général. Je crois que l’on est pas toujours sensible au fait que l’élargissement n’est pas un présent 
offert  aux  nouveaux  Etats  membres;  en  effet,  pour  ceux  qui  souhaitent  adhérer,  l’élargissement 
occasionne à la fois un travail assidu et aussi parfois des choix difficiles. Je ne veux pas dire par là 
qu’il faudrait qu’il en soit autrement. Prenez par exemple le monde du sport: lorsqu’un sportif rejoint sa 
nouvelle équipe, c’est lui qui doit travailler dur pour faire évoluer son talent et c’est d’abord lui qui doit 
s’ajuster au style de jeu de l’équipe, et non le contraire. Ceci garantit l’efficacité et permet à l’équipe 
de  fonctionner  comme  une  équipe  plutôt  qu’un  ensemble  d’individus.  Ceci  dit,  l’équipe  doit  aussi 
savoir apprécier les efforts d’ajustement importants du nouveau venu car elle peut devenir plus forte 
grâce à lui. Par conséquent, je respecte et j’admire les autorités et le peuple bulgares pour leur travail 
assidu dans leurs préparatifs à l’entrée dans l’Union Européenne.1  
Let  me  continue  in  English  and  set  out  the  structure  of  my  speech.  There  are  two  main  facets  of 
preparing  for  accession  that  I  will  focus  on  today  because  they  are  particularly  relevant  from  an 
economic  point  of  view.  The  first  concerns  catching  up  to  play  at  the  level  of  the  team.  For  the 
economy, this entails institutional development and stable macroeconomic policy-making. In the first 
part  of  my  speech,  I  will  deal  with  Bulgaria’s  achievements  and  the  outstanding  challenges  in  this 
regard. The second facet is the commitment to play along with the rules and strategy of the team. In 
this part, I will set out the path to eventual euro adoption that would need to be followed when Bulgaria 
joins the EU. I will illustrate some of the challenges that tend to arise along this path, drawing on our 
experiences with the new Member States.  
So,  how  has  Bulgaria done  in  terms of  institutional  development  and  stable macroeconomic  policy-
making?  The  first  indicator  that  you  have  done well  is  the  European  Commission’s  Comprehensive 
Monitoring Report for 2005. The Report makes clearly the difference between the institutional realm 
where shortcomings are stressed and the economic preparation which is judged rather positively. It 
notes, for instance, that the rule of law must be strengthened and that more should be done to combat 
corruption  and  organised  crime.  The  economy,  on  the  other  hand,  is  described  as  having  “a  high 
degree  of  macroeconomic  stability  with  strong  economic  growth,  relatively  low  inflation  and  falling 
                                                      
1   But  before  I  set  out  the  structure  of  what  I  will  say,  let  me  first  make  a  general  remark.  I  believe  it  is  not  always  fully 
appreciated that enlargement is not simply a present to the new entrants; indeed, for those who want to join, enlargement 
entails both hard work and, sometimes, difficult choices. And I am not saying that it should be any other way. Take the world 
of sport, for example: when a sportsman joins a new team, it is he who must work hard to improve his skills and it is he 
primarily who must adjust to playing the styles and techniques of the team, not the other way around. This is efficient and 
enables the team to function as a team instead of as a set of individuals. That said, the team should appreciate that the new 
entrant makes most of the efforts of adjustment and that the team can become stronger as a result of the new entrant. So, I 
respect and admire the Bulgarian authorities and the Bulgarian people for your hard work in preparing to join the EU. 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 1
unemployment”. Moreover, it states that continuing the current pace of reform will make the economy 
robust to competitive pressure and market forces within the EU. 
I agree with the Commission that economic progress in Bulgaria has been significant. Of course this 
has not been automatic. It is the result of difficult choices taken and a lot of hard work. So, let me 
mention three aspects of this preparatory process that seem to me particularly important. 
First, the introduction of a currency board arrangement eight years ago was a significant decision on 
Bulgaria’s road towards economic and monetary stability. The currency board has been successful in 
finally  bringing  much-needed  macroeconomic  stability  to  post-communist  Bulgaria.  This  has  been 
helped by its strong credibility both with the Bulgarian population and internationally. So clearly, it has 
been the backbone for macroeconomic stability in your country.  
Second, I would like to highlight the policy consistency of the various successive policy-makers. You 
understood  from  the  outset  that  currency  board  arrangement  can  only  be  sustained  if  supporting 
policies are in place. Let me emphasise in particular the role of fiscal policy. As you know, a currency 
board  does  not  allow  for  discretion  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  monetary  policy 
becomes  entirely  endogenous.  So,  the  only  macroeconomic  management  tool  at  the  disposal  of 
policy-makers is fiscal policy. I find that the conduct of fiscal policy in Bulgaria has been appropriate. 
Before  looking  at  some  numbers,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  what  impresses  me  most  is  that  fiscal 
management  has  remained  prudent  over  time.  The  broad  consensus  among  policy-makers  on  the 
absolute need to follow a prudent fiscal policy has prevented harmful policy reversals.  
This is also shown by the figures. When I look at the deficit and debt performance between 1997 and 
2005, I see that the budget position has remained consistently close to balance. I also see that fiscal 
policy  has  judiciously  been  tightened.  The  surplus  increased  to  2.4%  of  GDP  last  year  and  I 
understand that a 3% surplus has been agreed upon for this year. This will certainly contribute to the 
maintenance of macroeconomic stability.  
The third and final facet I want to touch upon concerns cooperation, and I would like to focus here on 
cooperation  in  the  field  of  central  banking.  When  I  said  earlier  that  the  entrant  does  most  of  the 
adjustment,  I  meant  most,  not  all.  The  team  also  prepares  for  the  entry  of  the  new  member.  The 
European System of Central Banks (ESCB) has worked with Bulgaria to prepare it to join the EU and 
the ESCB, involving activities at many levels. An early example was the cooperation project involving 
the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  the  Banque  de  France  and  De  Nederlandsche  Bank.  As  part  of  this 
project, experts exchanged knowledge and experience on issues such as forecasting tools for bank 
reserves,  risk  management  processes  and  the  cash  operations  strategy.  I  believe  that  such 
cooperation helps in itself to create a family spirit among the central banks. It forms a good example of 
what such cooperation can achieve in mobilising our vast amount of knowledge and expertise. Indeed, 
the  cooperation  was  so  good  that  the  project  was  commended  by  the  European  Commission  for 
setting  an  example.  We  have  followed  up  on  this  with  a  new  project,  which  has  just  started  and, 
besides  the  original  participants,  also  includes  the  Banca  d’Italia.  In  general,  cooperation  between 
Bulgaria and the ESCB now extends across most areas of central banking, from exchanging statistics 
to  our  annual  bilateral  policy  dialogue.  Moreover,  since  the  signing  of  the  Accession  Treaty,  the 
Bulgarian  National  Bank  has  participated  as  an  observer  in  the  ECB’s  General  Council  and  in 
meetings of ESCB committees and task forces. In this way, Bulgaria is already contributing to the work 
of the ESCB. 
Besides these successes, there are naturally also challenges. Let me now turn to what are in my view 
the  two  most  important  economic  challenges  that  still  remain  for  Bulgaria.  As  I  mentioned  earlier, 
growing external imbalances are seen as a possible source for concern. From the economic literature, 
we know about the difficulty of assessing the sustainable level of the current account, particularly in 
the context of transition. But the recent dynamic of Bulgaria’s external accounts indisputably calls for 
enhanced vigilance. This dynamic has been largely fed by robust credit growth to the private sector. In 
this context, the measures taken by the Bulgarian National Bank [credit growth limits for banks, higher 
reserve  requirements]  to  contain  credit  expansion  are  fully  justified.  Their  impact  has  already  been 
visible. At the same time, we should be aware of the limitations of these measures in an environment 
of an open capital account. I have no doubt that the Bulgarian National Bank will continue to monitor 
the situation closely and take additional measures if necessary.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  inflation,  which  is  certainly  a  major  challenge  on  the  road  to  future  EMU 
membership  after  entry  in  the  European  Union.  Indeed,  at  6.5%  at  the  end  of  last  year,  headline 
inflation is high. That there remains a lot to be done to fully control inflation is illustrated by its volatility 
over  the  recent  years,  moving  from  10.3%  in  2000  down  to  2.3%  in  2003  and  now  back  up  again. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2006
Fiscal policy and the stepping-up of structural reforms will play a key role in efforts to contain inflation. 
I  know  that  the  Bulgarian  authorities  are  aware  of  these  challenges  and  I  encourage  them  to  exert 
sufficient vigilance. It is particularly important as regards the stated objective of Bulgaria to enter the 
exchange rate mechanism (ERM II) quickly after accession and to do what will be necessary to join 
the  euro  area.  I  appreciate  very  much  your  determination  to  do  all  what  is  necessary  to  meet  the 
ultimate goal that you have in mind. As you know the ECB, when time comes, will apply a very simple 
principle  when  making  its  judgement:  the  criteria  set  out  by  the  Treaty  will  have  to  be  met  in  a 
sustainable fashion, nothing but the criteria and all the criteria.  
Euro area enlargement  
This brings me to the second part of my speech, in which I will discuss the path towards joining the 
euro area that should be followed upon accession. Along this path, every team member can have their 
own  style,  as  long  as  the  style  respects  the  rules.  Pre-euro-entry  “euroisation”  for  example  is  not 
acceptable.  I  will  now  explain  in  more detail  the  process  of  monetary  integration  and  the  rules  that 
apply to it.  
With the exception of Denmark and the United Kingdom, EU Member States do not have an opt-out 
clause.  The  path  towards  euro  adoption  is  embedded  in  a  well-defined  multilateral  institutional 
framework and comprises three phases:  
•  The first phase is the period from EU accession up to the country joining ERM II. In this 
phase, the respective Member States continue to be fully responsible for their monetary and 
exchange  rate  policies.  Yet,  EU  Member  States  are  required  to  treat  their  exchange  rate 
policies as a matter of common interest and pursue price stability as the primary objective of 
monetary policy. More generally, during this phase, Member States are expected to undertake 
major  policy  adjustments  –  such  as  to  implement  a  credible  fiscal  consolidation  path  and 
advance with price liberalisation – in order to already prepare for the next steps of monetary 
integration. 
•  The second phase relates to participation in ERM II. As you know, the mechanism defines a 
regime characterised by fixed, but adjustable, exchange rates, with a mutually agreed central 
rate against the euro and a standard fluctuation band of 15%. The euro plays a central role as 
the  anchor  currency  in  the  mechanism.  At  the  moment,  eight  countries  are  participating  in 
ERM II. Besides the long-standing participant Denmark, most of the new Member States that 
joined the EU in 2004 entered the mechanism over the past 18 months. As regards the entry 
conditions for ERM II, there are no legal criteria to be met beforehand. Thus, participation can 
be requested at any time by a Member State. As regards the length of participation, the Treaty 
foresees  a  minimum  of  two  years  prior  to  the  examination  of  convergence.  This  should 
certainly not prevent a Member State from remaining within the mechanism for more than two 
years,  if  this  is  deemed  supportive  in  accompanying  real  and  nominal  convergence.  With 
respect to Bulgaria and its monetary integration plans, it is important to note that ERM II can 
accommodate features of a number of exchange rate regimes, including currency boards, so 
that countries operating currency boards might not be required to go through a double regime 
shift. I should stress, however, that participation in ERM II with a currency board is regarded 
as  a  fully  unilateral  commitment  by  the  respective  country.  It  involves  no  obligations 
whatsoever on the part of the ECB. 
•  The third phase is the period from the fulfilment of the Maastricht convergence criteria to 
the  eventual  adoption  of  the  euro.  To  qualify  to  join  the  euro  area,  each  country  must 
achieve a high degree of sustainable economic and legal convergence. It is in the interest of 
all  parties  involved  that  the  achievements  in  convergence  are  sustainable  and  can  be 
maintained over the long term. To assess the state of economic convergence, the ECB makes 
use  of  a  common  framework  of  analysis,  which  is  based  on  the  Maastricht  convergence 
criteria. In addition, a range of backward and forward-looking indicators are used to back up 
the  analysis,  which  is  done  in  the  so-called  Convergence  Reports.  These  Reports  are 
prepared  regularly  by  both  the  European  Commission  and  the  ECB.  The  last  Convergence 
Report  was  published  in  October  2004  and  included  for  the  first  time  the  ten  new  Member 
States  that  joined  the  EU  in  May  2004.  As  required  by  the  Treaty,  we  will  again  prepare  a 
Convergence Report in the second half of 2006.  
BIS Review 14/2006 
 3
•  For the sake of completeness, let me briefly mention that, for those countries complying with 
the convergence criteria, more practical arrangements will have to be set in motion to prepare 
for euro adoption. Once the ECOFIN Council has decided that an EU Member State outside 
the  euro  area  can  adopt  the  euro,  the  country  needs  to  prepare  for  example  the  cash 
changeover and the full integration of its central bank into the Eurosystem. 
It is important to bear in mind that the process of monetary integration, which I have just illustrated, is 
based  on  some  general  principles  that  guide  the  process.  These  are  defined  by  the  Maastricht 
Treaty and other key documents. One basic principle that I would like to draw your attention to is that 
there  is  no  single  trajectory  towards  the  euro  that  can  be  identified  and  recommended  to  all  EU 
Member States at all times. This principle reflects the fact that most Member States are far from being 
a  homogeneous  group  of  countries.  The  current  EU  Member  States  outside  the  euro  area  differ 
substantially  with  respect  to  the  size  and  structure  of  their  economies,  the  present  state  of  their 
fundamentals, and the monetary and exchange rate regimes that are currently in place. Yet, diversity 
in economic structures and policies is not an obstacle per se to qualify for the euro. Incidentally, this 
was also not the case for the current euro area countries when they adopted the euro back in 1999.  
In this context, another important principle evolves, namely that the economic situations and strategies 
of the respective Member States and their readiness to adopt the euro are assessed on a case-by-
case basis. Thus, the examination of economic and legal convergence is done on the basis of the 
countries’ own individual merits and particular situation. With respect to the new Member States, their 
progress  towards  nominal  convergence  varies  widely  across  countries.  Consequently,  they  are 
expected to join the euro area at different points in time.  
The  third  and  last  key  principle  that  I  would  briefly  like  to  touch  upon  is  the  principle  of  equal 
treatment. This means that comparable situations and cases will be treated in a comparable manner, 
both  across  countries  and  over  time.  With  respect  to  the  forthcoming  Convergence  Report,  I  can 
assure you that the application of the convergence criteria, as laid down in the Treaty, will not change. 
No new criteria will be added; and the existing criteria will not be relaxed. More specifically, on the 
assessment of  exchange rate  stability  against  the  euro,  this will  be  done  –  as  in  the  past  –  on  the 
exchange rate being close to the central rate, while also taking into account factors that may have led 
to  an  appreciation.  In  this  context,  let  me  also  re-state  that  the  exchange  rate  criterion  requires 
participation in ERM II for at least two years without severe tensions and without devaluing. On the 
inflation criterion, I would like to be clear that, in line with the Treaty requirements, the reference value 
will be calculated on the basis of the three best performing EU Member States in terms of inflation.  
EU  and  euro  area  enlargement  can  be  seen  as  a  process  that  is  mutually  beneficial  for  all  parties 
involved  as  it  is  expected  to  foster  economic  and  financial  integration  among  the  Member  States. 
Currently the new EU Member States exchange around 55% of their total exports and imports with the 
euro area. Also, financial integration has advanced strongly in recent years, with around 80% of FDI 
inflows in the new EU Member States currently originating from the euro area countries. Moreover, 
there  are  reasons  to  assume  that  further  monetary  integration  will  impact  positively  on  economic 
growth  in  the  new  Member  States.  Besides  lower  transaction  costs  and  the  elimination  of  currency 
risks, the process of monetary integration is expected to act as a catalyst for sound macroeconomic 
policies, which is assumed to be conducive to economic growth in the region as a whole. Yet, the size 
of these effects and their time profile seem to be uncertain. Moreover, it needs to be borne in mind that 
enlargement, in particular euro area enlargement, could also bear some risks if a country were to rush 
too quickly to join the euro area. To illustrate this point let me return to sporting imagery. While it is 
fully understandable for a young, ambitious and talented sportsperson to want to join the champion’s 
league  as  soon  as  possible,  this  person  might  sometimes  be  better  off  taking  a  bit  more  time  for 
training in order to further develop and strengthen his talents in a favourable environment. When he 
joins the Champions League team, the rules are strict and the flexibility for playing one’s own strategy 
is limited. This might dampen his performance. Coming back to the euro area, I am convinced that the 
various  stages  of  the  road  to  the  euro  as  stipulated  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty  can  offer  talented 
aspirants excellent “training opportunities” to perform even better at a later stage. 
Experience with the new member states on their way to adopting the euro  
Let me now turn to the experience that the new Member States have made so far on their way to the 
euro and look at whether any lessons can be drawn from them for Bulgaria. I would like to touch upon 
basically three issues that in my view are of key importance for the new Member States with respect to 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2006
their euro adoption plans, namely to preserve price stability, to advance with real convergence and to 
conduct sound fiscal policies. 
•  Let  me  start  with  the  need  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability.  Price  stability  is  an 
essential requirement for a successful monetary integration process. At the same time, it could 
contribute to a more rapid catching-up process in real income levels by fostering trade and 
investment.  Where  do  countries  currently  stand  with  respect  to  price  stability?  The  new 
Member States have made significant progress in terms of disinflation in the past years, by 
bringing their average inflation rates close to that of the euro area. Yet, inflation developments 
in  the  new  Member  States  continue  to  be  rather  volatile  and  diverse  across  countries. 
Following a substantial rise in inflation in the course of 2004, from on average 1.9% in 2003 to 
4.1%, inflation moderated again to 2.5% in 2005. The pick-up in 2004 was mainly driven by 
factors related to EU accession [such as higher food prices and increases in indirect taxes and 
administered prices] and the strong increase in world energy prices. Looking ahead, while in 
some countries inflation is currently below the euro area level, inflation dynamics require high 
vigilance in some of the fastest growing countries.  
This brings me to the issue of real convergence. The process of real economic convergence of the 
new and future Member States such as Bulgaria to the euro area, i.e. their catching-up in standards of 
living with those of the euro area, will remain one of their most important economic developments in 
the coming years. Although remarkable progress has been made in the past in terms of catching-up, 
most of the countries display GDP per capita and price levels which are still considerably below those 
of  the  euro  area.  In  2004,  the  average  GDP  per  capita  level,  as  expressed  in  purchasing  power 
standards,  was  roughly  half  of  that  of  the  euro  area.  Catching-up  in  income  levels  is  partially 
accompanied by a certain element of rise in price levels. Thus, the process of real convergence can 
be expected to continue to play a role in the inflationary developments in these countries. To limit the 
inflationary impact of real convergence, it is therefore crucial that policy-makers continue to pursue a 
policy  directed  towards  macroeconomic  stabilisation  to  avoid  excessive  domestic  demand  and  the 
resulting price pressures in the countries concerned. Moreover, it underlines the need for structural 
reforms to limit nominal price and wage rigidities and to allow for improved supply-side conditions.  
This  brings  me  to  the  third  issue  that  I  wish  to  discuss  briefly,  namely  the  need  to  foster  fiscal 
consolidation  and  achieve  sound  fiscal  positions.  Although  the  fiscal  situation  varies  across 
countries, fiscal deficits are on average high or even very high in a number of new Member States. As 
I  mentioned  before,  Bulgaria  stands  out  as  an  example  to  the  contrary.  It  is  clear  that  fiscal 
consolidation  is  a  major  challenge  for  most  of  the  new  Member  States.  Their  governments  are 
confronted with competing expenditure demands, including inter alia public investment in infrastructure 
and the need to strengthen the effectiveness of public administration and the judicial systems. At the 
same time, in some of the new Member States, the fiscal deficits are largely of a structural nature, 
reflecting  rather  generous  social  benefits.  High  lasting  fiscal  deficits  can  be  expected  to  be 
impediments to economic growth and to bear risks to the sustainability of the government debt levels 
in  some  countries.  Consequently,  policy-makers  have  to  design  and  implement  a  credible 
consolidation path based on durable and growth-enhancing structural reforms in the public sector.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude,  first  with  a  few  words  in  French.  La  Bulgarie  a  fait  des  progrès  notables  dans  la 
poursuite d’une politique macro-économique de stabilité. Avec la caisse d’émission (currency board) 
vous vous êtes engagés dans une voie qui requiert parfois des choix difficiles. Grâce à la cohérence 
de votre politique, en particulier dans le domaine  budgétaire, vous avez prouvé que vous êtes à la 
hauteur de la tâche. De plus, la Banque nationale bulgare a démontré sa capacité de coopération au 
sein du SEBC. En résumé, je crois que la Bulgarie s’est bien engagée dans la voie des efforts pour 
préparer son économie à l’entrée dans l’Union.  
Bulgaria has made noticeable progress in terms of conducting a stable macroeconomic policy. With 
the currency board, you have embarked upon a path that sometimes requires tough choices. Through 
policy-consistency, especially in the fiscal realm, you have shown you are up to the task. Moreover, 
the Bulgarian National Bank has demonstrated its capacity for cooperation with the ESCB. In short, I 
believe Bulgaria has correctly engaged itself in preparing its economy for EU entry. 
I have also set out the process of monetary integration. There, I have emphasised the importance of 
playing  along  with  the  team  and  respecting  the  rules  that  come  with  each  of  the  three  stages  of 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 5
integration. There are several challenges associated with the process of monetary integration, which I 
discussed. At the current juncture, the main challenge for Bulgaria with regard to nominal convergence 
will  be  price  stability.  I  noted  the  importance  of  using  structural  policy,  not  temporary  measures,  to 
contain inflation. Amongst the other challenges that Bulgaria is presently facing, I would like to mention 
the level of the current account deficit and the rapidity of the growth of outstanding credit. All these 
challenges call for a high level of prudence in the fiscal policy - which I understand is the policy of the 
government - and a careful monitoring of the unit labour cost which is always of the essence in such 
circumstances.  
In  that  context,  I  also  touched  upon  the  speed  of  entry.  There,  my  main  message  is,  do  not  worry 
about whether it will be quick or slow. The team is ready and happy to receive new members when 
they are ready and patient for them to become ready.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2006
