European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
press conference following the meeting of the ECB Governing Council, Madrid, 8 June 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  press 
conference here in Madrid. I would particularly like to thank Governor Caruana for his kind hospitality 
and express our special gratitude to the staff of the Banco de España for their excellent organisation.  
Let me now report on the outcome of today’s meeting, which was also attended by the President of the 
Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia. 
At  today’s  meeting,  we  decided  to  increase  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  This 
decision  reflects  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  that  have  been  identified 
through  both  our  economic  and  monetary  analyses.  The 
further  withdrawal  of  monetary 
accommodation will thus contribute to ensuring that longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area 
remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with  price stability.  As stressed on previous occasions, 
such  anchoring  is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards 
supporting economic growth and job creation in the euro area. Overall, also after today’s increase, the 
key ECB interest rates are still low by historical standards, liquidity is ample and our monetary policy 
remains accommodative. Given the outlook for price developments and the dynamism of money and 
credit growth in the euro area, we will continue  to monitor closely all developments to ensure price 
stability over the medium and longer term.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
All  the  main  indicators  of  economic  activity  that  have  recently  become  available  are  positive. 
According to Eurostat’s first estimate, on a quarter-on-quarter basis, real GDP grew by 0.6% in the 
euro  area  in  the  first  quarter  of  2006,  compared  with  0.3%  in  the  previous  quarter,  with  domestic 
demand making a significant contribution. The expected re-acceleration of real GDP growth in the first 
months of 2006 has thus materialised, confirming our view that economic growth is broadening and 
becoming  more  sustained.  This  assessment  is  further  supported  by  information  on  activity  in  the 
second  quarter  –  such  as  various  confidence  surveys  and  indicator-based  estimates  –  which 
continues to be encouraging.  
Looking further ahead, the conditions are in place for growth in the euro area to remain close to its 
trend potential rate, despite the impact of the rise in oil prices. Growth in the economies of the euro 
area’s  main  trading  partners  remains  robust,  providing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Strong 
investment growth is expected to continue, benefiting from favourable financing conditions, corporate 
balance  sheet  restructuring,  and  gains  in  earnings  and  business  efficiency.  Consumption  growth 
should  continue  to  strengthen  gradually  over  time,  in  line  with  developments  in  real  disposable 
income, as the labour market situation gradually improves.  
This outlook is also reflected in the June Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, which provide 
additional  input  into  our  analysis  of  the  prospects  for  economic  activity.  The  projections  foresee 
average annual real GDP growth in a range between 1.8% and 2.4% in 2006, and between 1.3% and 
2.3% in 2007. The growth projections for 2006 are broadly unchanged from the ECB staff projections 
of March 2006, while those for 2007 are slightly lower, reflecting mainly the recent rise in oil prices. 
Most  recent  forecasts  by  international  organisations  and  private  sector  institutions  give  a  broadly 
similar picture. It is the Governing Council’s view that risks to these projections for economic growth 
are broadly balanced over the shorter term, while longer-term downside risks relate mainly to potential 
further oil price rises, global imbalances and protectionism. 
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation increased 
to 2.5% in May, compared with 2.4% in April and 2.2% in March. Although no detailed information is 
available as yet, this increase probably stems from energy price developments. In the months to come 
and  in  2007,  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  remain  above  2%,  the  precise  levels  depending  on  future 
energy price developments. While the moderate evolution of labour costs in the euro area is expected 
BIS Review 51/2006 
 1
to  continue  in  2007  –  also  reflecting  ongoing  global  competitive  pressures,  particularly  in  the 
manufacturing  sector  –  indirect  effects  of  past  oil  price  increases  and  the  announced  changes  in 
indirect taxes are expected to have a significant upward effect on inflation. Against this background, it 
is crucial that the social partners continue to meet their responsibilities. 
Further  input  into  our  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments  is  provided  by  the  June 
Eurosystem staff projections. Annual HICP inflation is projected to lie between 2.1% and 2.5% in 2006, 
and between 1.6% and 2.8% in 2007. Compared with the March 2006 ECB staff projections, these 
ranges  imply  a  slight  upward  shift  to  the  profile  for  HICP  inflation  in  2006,  largely  reflecting  the 
assumption of higher oil prices. 
In the view of the Governing Council, risks to the outlook for price developments remain on the upside 
and include further increases in oil prices, a stronger pass-through of past oil price rises into consumer 
prices than currently anticipated, additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, and – 
more fundamentally – stronger than expected wage developments due to second-round effects of past 
oil price increases.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  Governing  Council  again  had  a  thorough  discussion  of 
underlying developments in money and credit. In a context of already ample liquidity and very strong 
monetary and credit growth, the annual growth rate of loans to the private sector has increased further 
in  recent  months  to  reach  double-digit  levels.  Credit  growth  has  also  been  broadly  based  across 
sectors. Borrowing by households – especially for house purchase – and by non-financial corporations 
has been growing very strongly. At the same time, monetary growth has risen further over the past few 
months, with the annual growth rate of M3 standing at 8.8% in April.  
The rapid rate of monetary growth continues to be driven mainly by the expansion of its most liquid 
components.  Thus,  the  latest  developments  confirm  that  the  stimulative  impact  of  the  low  level  of 
interest rates remains the dominant factor behind the current high trend rate of monetary expansion, 
which signals inflationary risks over the medium to longer term. The further acceleration of monetary 
and  credit  growth  in  this  environment  of  already  ample  liquidity  points  to  increased  upside  risks  to 
price  stability  at  longer  horizons.  Monetary  developments,  therefore,  require  careful  monitoring,  in 
particular in the light of strong dynamics in housing markets. 
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to remain elevated in 2006 and 2007, with risks to this 
outlook  on  the  upside.  Given  the  strength  of  monetary  and  credit  growth  and  the  ample  liquidity 
situation, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis 
confirms  that  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  prevail.  A  further  adjustment  of 
interest rates was therefore warranted. By acting in a timely fashion, the Governing Council is helping 
to  keep  medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  in  line  with  price  stability,  thereby  making  an 
ongoing  contribution  to  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation.  Overall,  our  monetary  policy 
remains accommodative and the Governing Council will continue to monitor closely all developments 
to ensure that risks to price stability do not materialise. 
With regard to fiscal policies, the forecasts published recently by the Commission point to a broadly 
unchanged situation in the euro area in 2006 and 2007; deficit ratios are expected to remain at around 
the  2005  level  of  2.4%,  while  debt  ratios,  after  declining  only  marginally,  are  forecast  at  levels  still 
above  70%  of  GDP.  This  is  disappointing  against  the  background  of  the  economic  outlook.  Most 
countries with an excessive deficit have not corrected their position in a timely manner. Furthermore, 
there is a risk of consolidation delays in other countries. It is crucial to avoid the mistakes of the past, 
when many countries failed to consolidate sufficiently in good times. The Governing Council considers 
that more determined progress is required towards sound public finances in a number of countries, 
that concrete and credible measures should be implemented swiftly as part of a medium-term-oriented 
strategy,  and  that  it  is  vital  to  consolidate  confidence  in  the  revised  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  by 
ensuring the sustainability of public finances in the euro area. 
In terms of structural reforms, the Governing Council reiterates its call for the implementation of firm 
measures to ensure open, competitive and well-functioning product and labour markets, so as to foster 
an attractive environment for investment and innovation and to promote flexibility in wages and prices. 
There  is  a  broad  and  firm  consensus  that  such  reforms  are  beneficial  in  promoting  growth  and 
employment  and  in  enhancing  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy  to  external  shocks.  At  the 
same time, these reforms would further facilitate intra-euro area adjustments by reducing rigidities that 
contribute, in some economies, to wage developments that lead to high and persistent unit labour cost 
growth, higher inflationary pressure and losses in competitiveness. Examples of such rigidities are low 
productivity growth due to a lack of competition in some sectors and an explicit or de facto indexation 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2006
of nominal wages to prices. All in all, a comprehensive set of reforms is essential to strengthen the 
foundations  for  sustained  growth  in  output  and  employment  across  the  euro  area,  to  underpin  the 
ongoing economic recovery and to further smoothen the functioning of adjustment mechanisms in the 
euro area, thereby facilitating the conduct of the single monetary policy.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 51/2006 
 3
