M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Challenges and opportunities facing the Thai 
futures market  
Remarks  by  Mr  M  R  Pridiyathorn  Devakula,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  gala  dinner 
hosted by The Agricultural Futures Exchange of Thailand, Bangkok, 23 February 2006. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  privilege  for  me  to  be  here  today  amongst  distinguished  personalities  from  the  banking  and 
finance industry. First of all, I would like to thank the Agricultural Futures Exchange of Thailand for 
inviting me to address this distinguished audience. I have been asked to share some thoughts with 
you on the challenges and opportunities that I see facing Thai futures market going forward. 
Thailand has been one of the world’s leading producers of agricultural products. Thailand has always 
been  top-ranked  in  rice,  tapioca  starch,  sugar  and  natural  rubber  production.  In  fact,  Thailand  has 
been the world’s largest rice exporter for more than a decade. Our rice export accounts for no less 
than one quarter of total world’s rice exports. Likewise, we supply more than one-third of the world’s 
total natural rubber production. With roughly half of our labour force being employed in the agricultural 
industry and with rice alone earning almost 2 billion U.S. dollars last year, the importance of the sector 
towards Thai economy cannot be overstressed.  
However, unique characteristics of agricultural products are that of long supply adjustment lags and 
inelastic demand. Prices therefore tend to exhibit inherently high volatility. Thus, the establishment of 
the Agricultural Futures Exchange of Thailand (AFET) by the Ministry of Commerce was a major step 
in the right direction. The futures market aims to provide an efficient and effective mechanism for the 
management of price risks. By buying or selling futures contracts - contracts that establish a price level 
now  for  items  to  be  delivered  later  -  individuals  and  businesses  have  access  to  insurance  against 
future adverse price changes. Futures market is a continuous auction market whereby prices should 
reflect  the  latest  information  about  supply  and  demand  conditions.  This  price  discovery  mechanism 
allows producers to be better informed when making their production plans. Even for small producers 
who  may  not  actively  participate  in  the  futures  market,  the  transparency  and  the  availability  of  the 
futures  prices  in  the  public  domain  should  enable  them  to  negotiate  and  obtain  fair  prices  for  their 
produce.  
Since AFET opened for trading in May 2004, the daily average turnover for a rubber sheet in the AFET 
rose  almost  8-fold  in  2  years  to  400  contracts.  This  increase  may  look  impressive,  but  if  we  look 
across  to  the  futures  exchanges  in  the  neighboring  countries,  we  find  that  the  Tokyo  Commodity 
Exchange (TOCOM) registers daily turnover for rubber sheets at 20,000 contracts while the Singapore 
Commodity  Exchange  (SICOM)  sees  around  8,000  contracts  being  traded  daily.  Given  our 
prominence as the world’s leading producer, it came as a surprise to me that Thailand remains a mere 
price-taker  in  the  world’s  agricultural  produce  markets.  I  feel  strongly  that  we  should  leverage  our 
competitive  advantage  as  the  key  producer  to  ensure  the  success  of  our  futures  market.  Our  main 
producers should be able to play an active role in the determination of the world prices – that is; AFET 
prices should be used as the world’s benchmark. I believe we are well-placed to achieve that goal. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Now  it  is  time  to  channel  our  energy  and  effort  into  making  AFET  a  successful  futures  market  for 
agricultural products, especially in the international arena. The next key question then is “How”? This 
task is indeed a challenge and if we all agree on this part, I think the best approach is for us to focus 
on one product at a time. I propose that AFET conduct an in-depth study into each of the products 
currently  listed  on  the  exchange  and  evaluate  their  chances  of  success.  AFET  can  then  prioritise 
whether they should first concentrate on smoked rubber sheet, block rubber, tapioca starch or white 
rice. Commodity Trading normally involves reference prices based on a certain futures exchange. For 
instance,  market  participants  prefer  to  use  futures  prices  from  the  London  International  Financial 
Futures  and  Options  Exchange  as  a  reference  for  white  sugar  while  benchmark  prices  for  rubber 
products  are  currently  determined  in  the  Tokyo  Commodity  Exchange  and  Singapore  Commodity 
BIS Review 14/2006 
 1
Exchange. It is worth noting that there are no well-established reference prices for white rice just yet. I 
see this as a great opportunity for AFET to prosper and fill in this void. At the same time opportunity 
does exist for us to steal the show on some rubber products as well. 
To increase the role of AFET we should start by asking why is it then that players have not expressed 
interests in trading on the AFET? I will provide a few hypotheses of my own as to why market liquidity 
still  remains  unsatisfactory.  First,  it  is  said  that  liquidity  begets  liquidity.  The  Singapore  Commodity 
Exchange  (SICOM)  has  been  in  operations  for  11  years  while  the  Tokyo  Commodity  Exchange 
(TOCOM) will  be celebrating  its  22nd  anniversary  this  year.  So,  the  big  players  have  already  grown 
accustomed to trading on these two exchanges and enjoyed the liquidity, depth and variety that they 
offer. Even some large Thai market participants of these products have established an offshore entity 
in  Singapore  to  trade  the  futures  contracts  on  SICOM.  For  AFET  to  overcome  their  first-mover 
advantage, we need to channel all efforts into removing key impediments in order to convince these 
major players to make a switch.  
Second, transaction costs in the AFET be it fees charged or margin requirements are comparatively 
higher  than  that  in  SICOM,  and  thus  discouraging  players  from  coming  into  the  AFET  market.  The 
existing high level of fees may have contributed to the lower trading volume while in turn, inadequate 
trading volume means that AFET is not able to reduce the fees while hoping to become self-financed. 
Given this catch-22 situation and the fact that other exchanges have had a head start, I do not think 
we can afford to wait for a pick-up in volume before planning for a fee reduction. On the contrary, I 
advocate that AFET’s fees should be adjusted to a competitive level as soon as possible. Admittedly, 
in the initial phase, operating losses may mount up as liquidity takes time to migrate. Therefore, it is 
imperative  for  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  to  express  its  full  support  for  this  initiative  and  earmark  a 
special budget for subsidising AFET’s operating costs  
Third, as mentioned previously, one primary objective of a futures market is that of providing hedging 
instruments. However, the use of futures or derivatives per se does not add or subtract to the risks 
inherent  in  the  economy,  but  they  allow  risks  to  be  borne  more  efficiently  by  transferring  risk  from 
those with low risk tolerance to those with higher risk tolerance. Therefore, a futures market cannot be 
complete with only those players with genuine hedging demand. In order to enhance efficiency in the 
economy, we need international arbitrageurs or traders with relatively higher risk tolerance to bear the 
risks.  In  addition  to  providing  liquidity,  this  group  of  players  will  also  ensure  that  prices  reflect  all 
currently  available  information  in  the  market.  Prices  will  be  aligned  with  fundamentals  through  their 
arbitrage activities. 
How  then  do  we  convince  these  arbitrageurs  that  they  should  become  active  in  the  AFET?  One 
possible solution I think is that of making all contracts on AFET U.S. dollar denominated. This way, the 
arbitrageurs are not exposed to any foreign exchange risk and they can manage their positions across 
markets with ease. Of all the commodities listed on SICOM, only one contract namely ribbed smoked 
rubber  sheet  no.  1  is  Singapore  dollar-denominated  and  coincidentally,  it  is  also  the  least  liquid 
contract  on  the  SICOM.  All  other  contracts  are  denominated  in  U.S.  dollar.  Moreover,  commodity 
prices  in  the  world  are  generally  quoted  in  U.S.  dollar,  therefore,  corporate  buyers  and  sellers  are 
already aware of their costs and revenues in terms of U.S. dollar. If we aim to establish futures price 
of,  for  instance,  white  rice  on  the  AFET  as  a  benchmark,  it  is  logical  for  this  reference  price  to  be 
denominated in an international currency such as the U.S. dollar. That way, the price quotations would 
purely reflect all relevant information relating to demand and supply conditions of the products and are 
not influenced by exchange rate fluctuations.  
Some  may  express  concern,  however,  that  by  eliminating  foreign  exchange  risk  for  foreign 
arbitrageurs, we in turn, expose our local producers and end-users to the very same risk. I feel, on the 
contrary, that local buyers and sellers are already accustomed to commodity prices being quoted in 
U.S.  dollar  in  the  world  market  and  manage  the  risk  in  a  proficient  manner.  Given  the  increasing 
availability  of  innovative  financial  products  and  much  improved  risk  management  techniques  by 
commercial banks in Thailand, the Bank of Thailand has gradually relaxed our regulations in this area. 
At  the  moment,  importers  and  exporters  who  wish  to  hedge  this  foreign  exchange  risk  for  a  trade-
related transaction can choose from forward contracts, plain-vanilla options or even certain structured 
products to suit their needs and preferred level of sophistication.  
My  final  point  concerns  the  role  of  the  futures  market  as  an  insurance  mechanism.  As  mentioned 
previously, agricultural products tend to exhibit highly volatile prices causing farmers to suffer from this 
risk  of  violent  price  fluctuation.  The  government  has  stepped  in  to  provide  relief  in  the  form  of 
government  price  support  scheme.  At  present,  the  government  is  running  commodity  price 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2006
stabilisation schemes in four products namely paddy rice, corn feed and tapioca. These price support 
schemes provide an insurance for farmers against adverse price movement- in the form of selling put 
options  to  the  farmers.  The  schemes  have  grown  to  become  a  substitute  for  the  futures  market-
eliminating the very incentive for farmers, traders and producers to participate in the futures market. 
This  is  particularly  the  case  when  the  guaranteed  buying  prices  from  the  government  are  set  at 
relatively high level compared to market-determined prices.  
I mentioned before that the average daily turnover in the AFET now is around 400 contracts. However, 
the majority of the trading is heavily concentrated in the ribbed smoked rubber sheet no. 3 while the 
contracts for white rice are rarely traded. I cannot help but feel that the existence of the price support 
scheme may have contributed to this apparent lack of interests in rice futures trading. As of last Friday, 
only  3  contracts  for  white  rice  were  traded  and  the  open  interests  were  only  for  60  contracts  - 
equivalent to 300 metric tonnes. For a country that exported 7.6 million tonnes of rice last year-the 
highest volume in its history, I believe our rice futures market has high potential to grow, if conditions 
are right. 
The government guaranteed prices are set once a year and thus, do not incorporate new information 
into the price. On the contrary, futures contracts are traded on a daily basis and these prices are said 
to be the best predictor of prices in the future – pricing in all currently available information. Players 
should be encouraged to hedge their produce through the futures market rather than through a static 
price-support scheme. In the medium term, the price-support scheme should be eventually phased out 
so that our producers would be freed to stand on their own feet. It is crucial that we implement the 
change gradually to enable those involved to adjust. I feel that we should strive in this direction - it is 
only then would our producers be able to respond to competition in the global market place.  
These days, many agricultural-related products in Thailand are subject to price ceilings. These price 
control  schemes  coupled  with  the  price  support  projects  outlined  above  mean  that  the  market 
mechanism  is  not  well-functioning.  Distorted  prices  in  the  spot  market  may  have  also  discouraged 
foreign  players  from  participating  actively  in  our  futures  markets.  A  freely  traded  spot  market  is  a 
necessary condition for a successful futures market.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would urge the board of directors of AFET and AFTC, the Ministry of Commerce, the government, all 
members of AFET and key players in our main agricultural products to be totally committed to making 
AFET  a  highly  successful  futures  market  -  an  exemplar  to  our  neighbours  and  one  where  global 
trading  is  benchmarked.  We  need  to  be  strategic,  prioritising  our  products  and  evaluating  needs  of 
different participating groups. I pledge my full support to this cause.  
I have spent a great deal of time talking about the AFET, I would now like to briefly touch on its sibling- 
TFEX. TFEX is launching its very first product SET50 futures in the next few months and from the road 
shows  to  date,  I  hear  that  it  has  been  very  well-received.  As  the  next  step,  the  Stock  Exchange 
Commissioner and the Bank of Thailand are currently working on launching the much-anticipated bond 
futures  or  interest  rate  futures.  I  hope  that  once  Thai  financial  market  has  been  complemented  by 
these  interest  rate  futures,  our  players  will  be  able  to  make  much  progress  in  the  area  of  risk 
management, financial product innovation and trading. 
I  personally  feel  that  it  is  imperative  for  a  country  to  have  a  well-developed  futures  market.  They 
enable growers, traders and end-users to benefit from improved riskmanagement practices. For the 
price discovery mechanism to be well-functioning, the futures market needs to command respectable 
volume and liquidity - the achievement of which is a goal that I feel we should set for ourselves. To 
sum up, the future of futures promises to be exciting and challenging. For TFEX, I hope that it gets off 
to a very successful start. For AFET, I am seeing a lot of potentials for it to be a futures market with 
sustainable  growth  and  efficacy,  enhancing  the  efficiency  in  the  agricultural  market.  To  realise  its 
vision statements is only possible with full and complete cooperation from all of us. Again, I would urge 
the board of directors of AFET to take a lead and push for the much-needed change. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 14/2006 
 3
