Jaime Caruana: The implementation of Basel II - central banks and the 
challenge of development 
Remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  "Central  Banks  and  the  Challenge  of  Development"  conference 
organised by the BIS, Basel, 13 March 2006. 
 Introduction and overview  
I am honoured to have the opportunity to share some brief remarks on the ongoing implementation of 
the Basel II capital framework.  
I realise that not all of our institutions are responsible for banking supervision, but, as central bankers, 
we all share a common goal of promoting financial stability. In that regard, I’m sure we can all agree 
that  a  stable  banking  system  is  critical  to  the  long-term  growth  of  an  economy.  Businesses  and 
consumers  need  to  have  access  to  credit  on  fair  and  reasonable  terms  through  all  stages  of  the 
business  cycle  so  that  they  can  build  and  grow.  And  this  access  to  financial  services  must  be 
widespread, including all income brackets of the population, because it is one of the key elements that 
can help to improve living standards. We need an efficient and resilient payments system to maintain 
the  flow  of  funds  through  the  economy  at  all  times.  We  need  financial  markets  that  remain  active, 
liquid, and trusted regardless of events in the economy.  
We also know that banking crises can threaten macroeconomic stability through their potential effects 
on  confidence,  savings,  financial  flows,  monetary  control  and  the  budgetary  impact  of  bank  rescue 
packages.  
In  sum,  achieving  an  inclusive,  efficient,  sound  and  stable  financial  system  is  an  important  and 
complex task, and it has many dimensions. To me, Basel II represents a tremendous effort of more 
than six years to analyze and promote some of the main elements of a sound banking system: those 
related to risk management and capital.  
My talk will address two main issues. First, I will share some reflections on how I believe Basel II will 
contribute  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Secondly,  I  will  offer  some  thoughts  on  steps 
countries can take in preparation for adopting Basel II.  
Basel II and financial stability  
Banking  is  fundamentally  about  trust.  Banks  are  charged  with  a  special  public  trust  to  safeguard 
customers’  wealth.  We  have  all  seen  what  happens  when  customers  lose  trust  in  the  ability  of 
individual banks or the banking system as a whole to protect their savings. This puts a special onus on 
banking supervisors to ensure that banks operate soundly. No bank can maintain public trust for long if 
it lacks sufficient capital, so supervisors impose capital requirements to safeguard the banking system. 
Since capital is the last line of defence against bank insolvency, regulatory capital requirements are 
one of the fundamental elements of banking supervision.  
This  is  why  the  Basel  Committee  has  devoted  so  much  effort  to  developing  the  so-called  Basel  II 
capital framework, which was released in June 2004.  
The new capital framework is built on three mutually reinforcing pillars. The first pillar aligns minimum 
capital  requirements  more  closely  with  banks’  actual  underlying  risks.  The  menu-based  approach 
means that qualifying banks may also rely partly on their own measures of those risks, which will help 
to create economic incentives to improve those measures. In concept the first pillar is similar to the 
existing “Basel I” capital framework in that it provides a measure of capital relative to risk. What is new 
are the second and third pillars.  
The second pillar – supervisory review – allows supervisors to evaluate a bank’s assessment of its 
own risks and determine whether that assessment seems reasonable. It is not enough for a bank or its 
supervisors  to  rely  on  the  calculation  of  minimum  capital  under  the  first  pillar.  Supervisors  should 
provide  an  extra  set  of  eyes  to  verify  that  the  bank  understands  its  risk  profile  and  is  sufficiently 
capitalised against its risks.  
BIS Review 45/2006 
 1
The third pillar – market discipline – ensures that the market provides yet another set of eyes. The 
third pillar is intended to strengthen incentives for prudent risk management. Greater transparency in 
banks’ financial reporting should allow marketplace participants to better reward well-managed banks 
and penalise poorly-managed ones.  
Basel II, in my view, is fundamentally about better risk management and corporate governance on the 
part of banks, as well as improved banking supervision and greater transparency. Thereby, it is also 
about increasing the stability of the global financial system, to the benefit not only of banks, but also 
consumers and businesses. This is especially critical in markets where banks are the primary source 
of funding and therefore key drivers of sustainable development.  
How will Basel II contribute to financial stability?  
Allow me then to take a few minutes to elaborate on several areas where I believe Basel II will foster 
financial stability.  
First,  I  believe  that  Basel  II  is  a  major  step  forward  in  strengthening  the  incentives  for  the  ongoing 
improvement of banks’ risk measurement and management systems. The new capital framework is 
both incentive-based and risk-based. It therefore offers us the opportunity to ensure that supervision 
and regulation takes a forward-looking view on risk, that it remains up-to-date with sound practices in 
the  industry  and  that  our  supervisory  framework  motivates  responsible  risk-taking  and  prudent 
behaviour in our markets.  
Improved and more formalised risk management will bring better assessment, better quantification and 
greater  awareness  of  risks.  To  the  extent  that  risk  assessment  and  control  methods  become  more 
formalised and rigorous, this will lessen the likelihood of making bad decisions and will improve risk-
adjusted pricing policies. It will also contribute to the prompt detection of errors and deviations from 
targets, allowing banks to implement corrective measures at an early stage. Increased awareness of 
the risks and early reaction to problems is likely to lead to a smoother adjustment to new conditions or 
to the correction of mistakes, making decisions less abrupt. Basel II is built on the expectation that a 
country’s banks should be able to manage their risks today and respond to challenges tomorrow.  
The second reason I believe Basel II will enhance financial stability is that it promotes more effective 
corporate governance. A bank can have the most sophisticated measurement tools in the world, but if 
it is poorly governed, it will be vulnerable to financial and operational weaknesses.  
While much attention has been paid to some of the more complex quantitative aspects of Basel II, I 
believe  the  most  important  aspects  are  those  that  address  how  the  bank’s  risk  management 
framework  is  governed.  Banks  that  adopt  Basel  II  will  be  expected  to  have  a  comprehensive  and 
sound  planning  and  governance  system  to  oversee  all  aspects  of  their  risk  measurement  and 
management  process.  The  board  of  directors,  senior  management,  and  audit  and  other  control 
functions will be expected to exercise their duties in a rigorous manner. I believe that better managed 
banks  under  Basel  II  will  be  safer,  sounder,  and  more  resilient.  I  should  also  add  that  the  Basel 
Committee last month published a paper on sound corporate governance practices for banks, which I 
believe will be useful for all countries, whether they are ready or not to adopt Basel II.  
The third reason I believe that Basel II will promote financial stability is that it reinforces the need to 
implement sound policies in both capital and provisioning. I have already mentioned that no bank can 
maintain  public  trust  for  long  if  it  lacks  sufficient  capital.  One  of  the  fundamental  tenets  of  risk 
management  and  banking  supervision  is  that  banks  need  to  create  provisions  to  absorb  expected 
losses and to have sufficient capital to absorb unexpected losses.  
Let  me  add  here  that  given  the  unique  positions  of  banks  at  the  crossroads  of  businesses  and 
consumers  in  every  economy  –  and  their  special  role  as  intermediaries  of  credit  to  both  –  nothing 
threatens  financial  stability  more  than  the  presence  of  poorly  managed  and  poorly  capitalised  and 
provisioned  banking  institutions.  I  believe  that  Basel  II  will  contribute  to  a  more  resilient  and  stable 
banking system that is capable of promoting sustainable economic growth.  
Adoption of Basel II: who and when?  
Let me turn now to my second point, which is the timing of adoption of the new framework in different 
countries.  Whenever  I  speak  with  colleagues  from  other  countries,  I  stress  that  only  national 
authorities  can  decide  when  to  adopt  Basel  II.  While  the  Committee  believes  that  the  framework  is 
appropriate for all economies and banks, no country should adopt Basel II until it is ready. This view 
has been expressed consistently by not only the Basel Committee, but by the IMF and World Bank as 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2006
well.  We  are  all  in  agreement  that  if  a  country  decides  to  adopt  Basel  II,  the  timing  should  be 
determined by its own circumstances, not the timetable for Basel Committee members.  
Unlike the 1988 Accord, which was relatively simple to adopt, Basel II is more complex and demands 
more  of  banks  and  supervisors.  Therefore,  we  don’t  expect  Basel  II  to  be  adopted  as  widely  and 
quickly as the 1988 Accord, at least at the outset. However, we expect and hope that the number of 
countries that adopt the new framework will grow over time. We believe that countries should adopt 
the options and approaches contained within the framework that are most appropriate for the state of 
their markets, their banking systems, and their supervisory structures. Basel II is not a “one size fits 
all” framework. Supervisors can adopt the framework on an evolutionary basis and use elements of 
national discretion to adapt it to their needs.  
For  any  country  that  is  considering  adopting  Basel  II  but  may  not  yet  be  ready,  I  like  to  suggest  a 
three-stage  approach  towards  building  a  foundation  for  the  new  framework:  (1)  strengthening  the 
supervisory  infrastructure;  (2)  introducing  or  reinforcing  the  three  pillars;  and  then  (3)  making  the 
transition from the 1988 Accord to Basel II.  
The first stage is strengthening the supervisory infrastructure. Basel II is not intended simply to ensure 
compliance  with  a  new  set  of  capital  rules.  Rather,  it  is  intended  to  enhance  the  quality  of  risk 
management and supervision. One of the things that I strongly encourage for all countries is a review 
of implementation of the Basel Committee’s Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision. These 
principles  are  key  to  laying  a  successful  supervisory  foundation.  Likewise,  sound  accounting  and 
provisioning standards are critical to ensuring that the capital ratios, however calculated, meaningfully 
reflect the bank’s ability to absorb losses.  
This brings me to the second stage. Supervisors do not need to wait for the formal adoption of Basel II 
to  start  introducing  or  using  the  principles  of  the  three  pillars.  On  the  contrary,  incorporating  these 
principles is excellent preparation for adopting Basel II in the future. For example, supervisors might 
choose to move towards a more risk-based approach to supervision, developing skills in assessing the 
quality of a bank’s risk management and its ability to assess risk exposures. At the same time, banks 
could  be  reminded  of  their  responsibility  to  develop  their  own  processes  for  evaluating  their  capital 
needs and a strategy for maintaining their capital levels, consistent with the principles of Pillar 2. With 
regard  to  the  principles  of  market  discipline  in  Pillar  3,  supervisors  may  wish  to  focus  initially  on 
ensuring a baseline level of disclosures across all banks. This might include discussing with banks, 
investors, and other users of financial information their information needs and the tools available so 
that supervisors can tailor requirements accordingly.  
In  my  view,  these  two  preliminary  stages  provide  an  excellent  preparation  for  the  “final”  stage  of 
moving  to  Basel  II.  With  a  strong  foundation  in  place,  supervisors  can  then  select  the  alternatives 
within Basel II that are most appropriate for their own circumstances.  
In addition to the steps I have outlined for supervisors, there is also a wider set of preconditions that 
we as central bankers can help to promote, including appropriate macroeconomic policies which are 
consistent and sustainable over time.  
All these considerations allow us to underline the notion that the achievement of financial stability must 
be based on a broad range of tools which we should all seek to strengthen. I don’t want to play down 
the challenge of achieving a coherent approach to financial stability that fosters financial innovation, 
promotes a level playing field and ensures that the banking system can remain resilient in the face of 
internal and external shocks. Nevertheless, I believe that the effective implementation of Basel II will 
contribute to the proper functioning of the economy under a wide range of circumstances.  
Conclusion  
To  conclude,  I  think  that  Basel  II  recognises  the  importance  of  a  combination  of  micro  and  macro 
factors  for  achieving  greater  financial  stability.  Furthermore,  I  would  say  that  Basel  II  incorporates 
some of the key basic principles that are also built in modern approaches to monetary policy: a flexible 
and forward-looking approach, anticipatory rather than reactive behaviour to risk, and the need to take 
into account market views.  
Looking into the future, we must direct our resources to ensure that banking supervision in the 21st 
century is more dynamic, more preventive, more flexible, more inclusive, and more transparent. We 
should continue adapting and learning. I believe the ultimate objective of financial stability increasingly 
BIS Review 45/2006 
 3
requires  co-operation  and  properly  aligned  incentives  on  the  part  of  the  industry,  markets,  central 
banks and supervisors.  
Let  me  close  by  saying  that  the  Committee  welcomes  the  work  being  done  in  a  number  of  non-
member countries and believes that continued outreach is essential. Dialogue with countries outside 
the  Basel  Committee  played  a  critical  role  in  the  development  of  the  revised  framework,  and  I  am 
personally committed to continuing such dialogue in the future.  
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2006
