Yves Mersch: Monetary policy-making in the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
Annual  Meetings  of  the  ACIIA  (Association  of  Certified  International  Investment  Analysts)  and  the 
EFFAS (the European Federation of Financial Analysts Societies), Luxembourg, 28 June 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be here again today and to address such a distinguished audience of highly 
qualified professionals and specialists from the financial sector. Your work in developing financial skills 
and promoting professionalism and knowledge is commendable. It is also important for this financial 
centre. 
The  topic  I  have  been  asked  to  cover  today  is  extremely  broad.  I  will  start  by  briefly  outlining  the 
institutional framework, strategy and objective of the Eurosystem. Subsequently, I will address what 
seems to be a permanent feature of central banking, and perhaps also of human destiny, namely the 
need to take decisions in an uncertain environment and based on imperfect knowledge. 
1.  
• 
  Essential features of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy  
Central Bank independence  
Crucial  to  this  novel  framework  are  the  concepts  of  central  bank  independence  and  the 
assignment  of  a  clear  mandate  to  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem.  The  movement  towards 
central bank independence is not limited to the euro area. Based on the experience gained 
during  the  inflation-prone  period  ranging  from  approximately  the  mid-1960s  to  the  mid-
1980s,  a  broad  consensus  emerged  that  price  stability  is  the  responsibility  of  the  central 
bank,  at  least  over  the  medium  term,  and  that  fighting  inflation  is  best  ensured  by  an 
independent central bank.   
The Eurosystem’s mandate 
The  Treaty  is  equally  unequivocal  when  it  comes  to  the  ESCB’s  primary  objective,  which, 
according to article 105, “…is to maintain price stability”. It is only “Without prejudice to the 
objective of price stability,” that “…the ESCB shall support the general economic policies in 
the  Community  with  a  view  to  contributing  to  the  achievement  of  the  objectives  of  the 
Community as laid down in Article 2.”  
Summarising, one can therefore state that the independence of the ECB and the NCBs of 
the  Eurosystem  is particularly  strong, as  it  is  enshrined  in an  EU  Treaty  and  therefore  far 
more complex to modify than a national act of legislation. Similarly, the primary objective of 
the  Eurosystem  is  clearly  defined.  By  contrast,  certain  other  central  banks  have  to  meet 
several objectives, including e.g. employment.  
The Eurosystem’s definition of price stability 
The Treaty did not define the concept of price stability and in October 1998, the Governing 
Council of the ECB announced the following definition: 
“Price stability shall be defined as a year-on-year increase in the HICP for the euro area of 
below 2%. Price stability is to be maintained over the medium term.” 
Every word in this definition is important and I would like to highlight the following points: 
- 
The ECB is one of the few central banks to have quantified its inflation objective. 
This  contributes  to  anchoring  expectations  and  makes  it  easier  for  the  public  at 
large  and  for  financial  markets  to  judge  how  the  Eurosystem  is  delivering  on  its 
mandate. 
By setting the upper bound for inflation above zero, the ECB takes into account the 
possibility  of  measured  inflation  overstating  true  inflation  as  a  result  of  small  but 
positive  measurement  errors.  Such  errors  may,  e.g.,  arise  if  prices  are  not 
 BIS Review 67/2006 
 1
    is 
taken 
inflation,  rather 
inflation  concept 
than  some  core 
adequately adjusted for changes in quality. Moreover, a zero inflation rate for the 
Eurosystem  as  a  whole  would  necessarily  entail  that  if  some  euro  area  Member 
States experienced positive inflation rates, this would have to be compensated by 
deflation in other euro area Member States. 
into 
Headline 
consideration.    Oil  prices  are  high  largely  due  to  demand  effects  from  countries 
which  at  the  same  moment  provide  the  euro  area  with  low  import  prices  and 
pressure  on  wages.  Eliminating  therefore  oil  from  the  price  index  would  risk 
creating a downward pressure to the true inflationary pressures. 
Headline  inflation  is  measured  by  means  of  an  index  of  consumer  prices  whose 
statistical  methodology  has  been  harmonised  for  all  EU  Member  States.  This 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, or HICP, is compiled by Eurostat. 
This definition makes clear that in implementing its monetary policy, the Governing 
Council does not look at individual countries, but at the euro area as a whole. 
Finally,  in  order  to  avoid  a  hectic  and  possibly  pro-cyclical  monetary  policy,  the 
ECB  explicitly  states  that  price  stability  has  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium 
term.  This  reflects  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  affects  price  developments  with 
significant and variable time lags and that an economy is continuously subject to 
large unforeseeable shocks. 
In May 2003, after more than four years of conducting monetary policy, the ECB undertook a 
thorough  evaluation  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy  and,  while  confirming  its  initial  price 
definition, it clarified its position by stating that “…it will aim to maintain inflation rates close to 
2% over the medium term “. The goal is thus to keep inflation rates below, but close to 2%, 
emphasising that the ECB wishes to provide a sufficient safety margin against the risks of 
deflation. 
The Eurosystem’s two-pillar strategy 
The  Eurosystem  analyses  the  risks  to  price  stability  from  two  analytical  perspectives, 
economic analysis and monetary analysis, which together constitute its two-pillar strategy. 
The  main  purpose  of  this  two-pillar  strategy  is  to  analyse  all  relevant  information  and  to 
cross-check it from two different analytical points of view. 
The economic analysis focuses on real activity and the interplay of supply and demand in the 
goods,  services  and  factor  markets  in  order  to  assess  the  short  to  medium-term 
determinants of price developments. 
The  monetary  analysis  focuses  on  a  longer-term  horizon,  analysing  the  long-run  link 
between money and prices.  
With these two analyses, the ECB covers the entire chronological spectrum. The monetary 
analysis  mainly  serves  as  a  means  of  cross-checking,  from  a  medium  to  long-term 
perspective, the short to medium-term indications from the economic analysis. 
Communication, transparency and accountability 
The move towards central bank independence has been accompanied by great progress in 
the areas of accountability and independence.  
The concept of accountability refers to the legal and political obligation of an independent 
central bank to justify and explain its decisions to its constituents, finance Ministers, analysts 
and academics as well as to the citizens and their elected representatives.  
Transparency is more of an economic concept and can be defined as an environment in 
which the central bank provides in an open, clear and timely manner all relevant information 
on its mandate, strategy, assessments and policy decisions as well as its procedures both to 
the general public and to markets.  
We  have  seen  earlier  that  the  Treaty  gave  a  clear  mandate  to  the  ECB:  to  ensure  price 
stability. Moreover, the Governing Council of the ECB quantified this primary objective and 
stated that it will aim to maintain inflation rates below but close to 2% over the medium term 
BIS Review 67/2006
  2 
 and explained in great detail its two-pillar strategy. Overall the ECB uses a combination of 
rules and judgment and its approach is one of constrained discretion. 
Imperfect knowledge and the conduct of monetary policy 
2. 
Since the introduction of the euro, inflation rates averaged slightly more than 2% in the euro area and 
this in a complex environment, characterised by a series of external and temporary shocks such as the 
bursting of the dotcom bubble, terrorist attacks, geopolitical tensions and a continuous increase in the 
prices of commodities, notably oil. However, since the introduction of the euro, inflation expectations – 
notably average long term expectations as measured for example by Consensus Economic Forecast 
or  the  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters-  are  firmly  anchored  at  a  level  consistent  with  the 
Eurosystem’s  quantified  inflation  objective  of  below  but  close  to  2%.    Break-even  inflation  rates, 
defined as the yield differential between conventional nominal bonds and inflation-linked bonds, are 
slightly above 2% but this may reflect risk premia for the latter type of bonds due to liquidity constraints 
or technical factors. This anchoring of expectations at these levels is of vital importance, as it confirms 
the credibility of the Eurosystem and its forward-looking, medium term orientation and as expectations 
play an important role in shaping economic dynamics. 
Taking decisions based under conditions of uncertainty is an unavoidable element, and perhaps even 
a characteristic ingredient, of central banking. This uncertainty stems from two elements.  
- 
First,  economic  knowledge  is  imperfect.  There  is  no  model,  however  sophisticated,  which 
can  faithfully  replicate  the  exact  functioning  of  the  economy.  More  particularly,  uncertainty 
clouds  our  knowledge  of  the  transmission  mechanism  from  interest  rates  to  prices.  This 
transmission is characterised by long, variable and uncertain lags. Our imperfect knowledge 
of  the  economy  and  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  is  further  compounded  by  the 
delays with which economic and financial data become available, and sometimes also by the 
quality of these data, and this despite all efforts and progress made in the area of statistics. 
Second,  the  future  is  uncertain.  Economic  developments  are  continuously  influenced  by  a 
large  variety  of  demand  and  supply  shocks.  Fiscal  policies  may  turn  out  different  than 
expected. Exchange rates may move by more than warranted by underlying fundamentals. 
Commodity prices not only depend on supply and demand but also on geopolitical tensions. 
It is therefore a permanent challenge for the central bank to extract relevant information from 
diffuse data and events and to determine the appropriate path of monetary policy.  
 Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  Eurosystem  systematically  analysed  and  cross-checked 
economic and monetary information under its two-pillar strategy, in the context of its forward-looking, 
medium-term framework.  
• 
In  2001  the  economic  outlook  deteriorated  rapidly  and  medium-term  inflation  expectations 
were in line with the Eurosystem’s objective. The rapid expansion of M3 during the 2001-03 
period was  not  considered  a  threat  to price stability,  as  it  reflected  a  portfolio  shift  to  less 
risky assets during a period of uncertainty. Consequently, it was possible to lower interest 
rates during this period. 
By  contrast,  in  December  2005,  after  a  lengthy  period  of  unchanged  interest  rates,  the 
Governing Council of the ECB decided to raise the rate on the main refinancing operation. 
The re-acceleration of real GDP growth in the first months of 2006 materialised, confirming 
the Eurosystem’s views that economic growth is broadening and becoming more sustained. 
The June 2006 Eurosystem staff projections foresee growth in the 1.8-2.4% range in 2006 
and between 1.3 and 2.3% in 2007. Risks to price stability are signalled by the 2 pillars of the 
monetary policy strategy. The first pillar, which indicates short-term to medium-term risks to 
price stability, shows inflation above 2% for that period. The monetary pillar, which signals 
medium-term  to  long-term  risks  to  price  stability,  also  indicates  heightened  risks  to  price 
stability as reported in the latest Monthly Bulletin. This is the case even if one would filter out 
a certain amount of noise in the statistics such as e.g. portfolio shifts. In this vein one could 
also discuss whether there is a structural break in trend velocity developments in the euro 
zone  or  whether  the  statistics  are  influenced  by  institutional  product  or  regulatory 
developments.  However, even  if  these  elements  are  discarded,  we  would  still  find  a  large 
monetary  overhang  in  the  euro  zone  with  heightened  risks  for  unloading  into  transactions 
balances and therefore into inflationary pressures. 
 BIS Review 67/2006 
 3
As President Trichet1 remarked during a lecture at the Banco de España in early June, other central 
banks, such as the US Federal Reserve system, changed interest rates more frequently and by larger 
amounts during the 1999-2006 period than the ECB. This is very clear on this slide, which shows the 
MRO rates in blue and the target Federal funds rate in red. While phases of interest rate hikes and 
decreases broadly coincide on both sides of the Atlantic, the Eurosystem modified interest rates 18 
times from 1999 until today, while Federal Reserve changes were about twice as frequent (35). 
MRO and Federal  Funds Target-  January 1999 - June 2006
7,00%
6,00%
5,00%
4,00%
3,00%
2,00%
1,00%
0,00%
05/01/1999
05/04/1999
05/07/1999
05/10/1999
05/01/2000
05/04/2000
05/07/2000
05/10/2000
05/01/2001
05/04/2001
05/07/2001
05/10/2001
05/01/2002
05/04/2002
05/07/2002
05/10/2002
05/01/2003
05/04/2003
05/07/2003
05/10/2003
05/01/2004
05/04/2004
05/07/2004
05/10/2004
05/01/2005
05/04/2005
05/07/2005
05/10/2005
05/01/2006
05/04/2006
 
Does this mean that the Eurosystem is passive, or at least relatively more passive than other central 
banks? 
In the opinion of the Eurosystem, activism cannot be quantified by the frequency or size of changes in 
interest  rates.  Activism  refers  to  a  strategy,  not  to  policy  implementation  or  changes  in  a  policy 
instrument. A central bank should be as active as it needs to be in order to fulfil its mandate. What 
matters, is that the Eurosystem is permanently pursuing its primary objective and that it is constantly 
on alert to risks to price stability.  
Moreover, how often and by how much a central bank should adjust interest rates in order to maintain 
price stability depends also on the structure of an economy and the type and frequency of shocks it is 
subject to. Several remarks can be made here. 
- 
The  euro  area,  compared  with  the  USA,  is  more  rigid  and  a  central  bank  operating  in  a 
relatively rigid economy is able to deliver the same degree of monetary accommodation by 
adjusting its interest rate in more moderate steps than in a more flexible economy. 
The  type  of shocks  affects  the  optimal  reaction  by  the central bank.  In  case  of  a  demand 
shock, forecasted inflation and output move in the same direction, leading the central bank to 
adjust  rates  more  often  and  to  a  greater  extent.  By  contrast,  supply  shocks  cause  more 
substantial transitory increases in inflation, possibly followed by second round effects. It is 
advisable  for  the  central  bank  to  adjust  its  policy  instrument  only  to  the  extent  needed  to 
neutralise the anticipated more permanent effects of the shock on inflation over the following 
months or quarters. As, relative to the USA, the euro area seems to be exposed to demand 
shocks of smaller magnitude but to be hit more frequently by supply shocks2, less frequent 
and less forceful changes in the policy instrument seemed appropriate.  
                                                       
1   J-C. Trichet, “Lecture on activism and alertness in monetary policy”, at the conference on Central Banks in the 21st Century, 
organised by the Banco de España, Madrid, 8 June 2006. 
2   F.  Smets  and  R.  Wouters,  “Comparing  shocks  and  frictions  in  US  and  euro  area  business  cycles:  a  Bayesian  DSGE 
approach”, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 20(1), January 2005. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2006
 In addition, important structural elements of an economy, that influence the relation between 
inflation and the shocks to which an economy is subject are price flexibility and the anchoring 
of price setting. In the euro area prices are less flexible than in the US3. Retailers reprice 
their products every 13 months, compared to 6.7 months in the US. Stickier prices imply that 
adjustments  to  external  shocks  operate  more  through  changes  in  output,  income  and 
employment than would be the case in a situation where prices are more flexible. They also 
imply an increased persistence of inflation. Nevertheless, despite these rigidities, inflationary 
shocks  dissipate  quickly  in  the  euro  area.  An  ECB  study4  shows  that  this  paradox  is 
explained  by  the  fact  that  the  impact  of  the  ECB’s  inflation  objective  on  the  evolution  of 
inflation outweighs the influence of past shocks and thus at least partly compensates for the 
added inertia resulting from a more rigid economic structure.  
In other words, when the economy adopts the central bank’s objective, the inflation process becomes 
less  persistent  and  more  forward-looking.  All  economic  agents  anticipate  that  the  central  bank  will 
eventually bring inflation back to its pre-shock level and treat past inflationary shocks as transitory and 
inconsequential for the future. In an economy like the one of the euro area, where expectations are 
well-anchored,  monetary  policy  can  be  more  patient  and  focused  on  the  medium-term  when 
confronting a cost-push shock. The reverse side of the coin is that deviations of expectations from the 
inflation objective could prove more costly to correct at a later stage and therefore require a stronger 
policy response in terms of timing and or size. 
Expectations that inflation will not diverge from its anchor afford some short-term flexibility to respond 
to  economic  disturbances.  Establishing  and  maintaining  its  credibility  is  therefore  of  paramount 
importance for the central bank and requires commitment to a systematic strategy. The fact that the 
Eurosystem  is  particularly  transparent  by  having  a  clearly  defined  primary  objective,  a  quantified 
inflation target, a well-documented two-pillar strategy and has implemented its monetary policy in  a 
consistent  manner  since  1999  explains  this  success  in  anchoring  inflationary  expectations,  even  in 
turbulent times. 
Success  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  facilitating  the  task  of  the  public  and  the  financial 
markets in predicting future monetary policy decisions is not, however, tantamount to pre-committing 
the  Eurosystem  to  a  certain  policy  path.  Vigilance  for  the  Eurosystem  requires  keeping  all  options 
open,  including  a  quick  change  in  policy  if  warranted  by  new  information.  There  is  no  pattern  of 
historical monetary policy decisions that could simply be repeated or mechanically extrapolated into 
the future. 
The  ECB  will  continue  to  check  carefully  all  available  information  concerning  risks  to  price  stability 
under both the economic and the monetary analysis of its two-pillar strategy in order to avoid acting 
belatedly and to anchor inflation expectations. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your attention and stand ready to reply to your questions. 
                                                      
3   E.  Dhyne,  L.  Alvarez,  H.  Le  Bihan,  G.  Veronese,  D.  Dias,  J.  Hoffmann,  N.  Jonker,  P.  Lünnemann,  F.  Rumler  and  J. 
Vilmunen, “Price-setting in the euro area: some stylised facts from individual consumer price data”, ECB Working paper No 
524,  2005,  see  also  M.  Bils  and  P.  Klenow  in  “Some  evidence  on  the  importance  of  sticky  prices”;  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 112, 2005. 
4   L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno, “Financial factors in business cycles”, presented at the IMF-IRF Conference on 
DSGE Modelling at Policymaking Institutions: Progress and Prospects hosted by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors 
(Washington, 2-3 December 2005). 
BIS Review 67/2006 
 5
