Wu Xiaoling: Stepping up the study of the housing financing system and 
promoting the healthy development of housing finance in China 
Speech  by  Ms  Wu  Xiaoling,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  International 
Seminar on the Housing Financing System, Beijing, 25 April 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentleman,  
Good morning. 
I am happy to join you in such a warm spring season to discuss housing financing issues and provide 
explore policy options for development of housing financing system in China. Here, on behalf of the 
People’s Bank of China, I would like to express my warmest welcome and sincere appreciation to your 
presence at this important gathering.  
The Seminar was part of the cooperation program between the PBC and the World Bank to conduct a 
joint research on strategic issues concerning China’s housing finance. I hope through this seminar, we 
could  learn  from  the  successful  experiences  of  other  countries  to  design  the  framework  and 
development targets of China’s housing financing system from a strategic point of view. Here, I would 
like to stress three points. 
Great attention should be paid to issues of real estate and real estate financing.  
I. 
Maintaining price stability and promoting economic growth are the main policy targets of almost every 
central bank in the world. After 1980’s, large fluctuations in the real estate market have drawn high 
attention of governments and central banks around the world.  
First, the real estate industry plays an important role in an economy and interacts with the commodity, 
service and factor markets as a pillar industry; therefore it can significantly pull the growth of the GDP. 
The  real  estate  industry  has  direct  and  indirect  relations  with  some  57  industries  according  to 
estimation, and in 2001, contribution of the real estate industry to the GDP growth is around 1.9 to 2.5 
percentage points. In 2005, investment in real estate development reached RMB1575.9 billion yuan in 
China, accounting for 17.78 percent of the total fixed assets investment and 8.6 percent of the GDP. In 
the  Chinese  economic  transition,  continued  urbanization  process  and  housing  monetization  will 
promote  the  development  of  real  estate  industry,  so  the  real  estate  industry  will  be  one  of  the 
important pillar industries for a long period of time in future. 
Second, Housing is related to people’s lives. A suitable house provides the basic living protection and 
a comfortable living environment that improves living quality, so housing policy and real estate industry 
development  policy  are  important  components  of  a  moderately  wealthy  society  and  relevant  to  the 
realization of social development targets. According to the National Statistics Bureau’s investigation in 
2002,  housing  property,  the  main  assets  of  households,  accounts  for  47.9  percent  of  households’ 
assets,  while  housing  loans  are  the  main  liabilities  of  the  Chinese  households  that  have  direct 
influence on other households’ expenditures.  
Third, real estate finance concerns with financial stability.  Development of the real estate industry is 
characterized by long production period, intensive capital requirements and time difference between 
capital  supply  and  demand.  Accordingly,  financial  support  is  needed  to  solve  the  difference.  In  the 
European and American countries, except housing construction, other housing related business falls 
in the category of financial service. In China, the proportion of real estate financing to total financing 
grew rapidly, with the real estate loans reaching 3.07 trillion yuan at end-2005, accounting for 14.84 
percent of the outstanding balance of total RMB loans of the financial institutions, or 16.75 percent of 
the GDP. In particular, commercial housing loans stood at 1.84 trillion yuan, accounting for 8.9 percent 
of the outstanding balance of the RMB loans of the financial institutions, or 10.0 percent of the GDP. 
Therefore,  sound  development  of  real  estate  financing  is  crucial  to  maintaining  a  sound  financial 
system. Real estate bubbles will affect the economy and people’s lives seriously, especially when the 
bubbles  burst,  so  each  central  bank  in  the  world  has  to  keep  a  close  watch  on  it.  Both  Japan  and 
Hong Kong had very impressive lessons in this regard. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 1
Fourth, housing price is closely related to the consumers’ price. Although housing price is a sort of 
asset price, due to the fast flow of money between commodity market and capital market in modern 
era, central banks should keep an eye on housing price and capital movement. In recent years, real 
estate financial control measures have become an important part of macro adjustment policies.  
In short, central bank is responsible for promoting the healthy development of the real estate financing 
and must conduct a deep analysis of the relevant institution building. 
Research on housing financial system must be accelerated. 
II. 
Housing reform in China was conducted gradually following the famous dictum by Mr. Deng Xiaoping, 
i.e.  “crossing  river  by  touching  the  stones”.  A  market-based  housing  system  in  line  with  Chinese 
situation has been basically established after 20-year explorations, and at the same time the housing 
financial system dominated by banking loans was formulated. In recent years, however, the system 
has shown some unsuitable signs and required further reform to accelerate its development. Leaders 
of  the  State  Council  have  instructed  that  we  should  review  the  housing  reform  and  the  real  estate 
development experiences in full scale so as to identify the broad target and tasks in the future. 
I think we should focus on the following aspects in studying the housing financial system: 
First  is  the  products  system.  A  variety  of  financial  products  should  be  developed  to  serve  different 
purposes and customers. Currently, we don’t have such housing financial products that are targeted at 
special  groups  of  people  in  the society,  such as  low-income  families and  entry-level staffs.  Even  in 
commercial  housing  financial  field,  bank  loans  are  the  major  products,  so  risks  are  excessively 
concentrated in the banking sector.  We should promote housing financial products innovation to ward 
off risks. 
Second is the market system. Housing financial market should consist of different layers, including not 
only  the  indirect  credit  market,  but  also  direct  financing  market  which  provides  both  direct  financial 
instruments and marketplace to defuse relevant risks, such as credit maturity mismatch and liquidity 
problems. Development of the housing financing should also rely on the development of the capital 
market and money market.   
Third  is  the  organization  system.  Housing  financial  market  should  comprise  not  only  financial 
institutions  providing  direct  financing  to  the  customers,  but  also  institutions  that  involve  in  housing 
construction,  trading  and  consumption  such  as  the  property  appraisal  agencies,  loan  insurance 
(guarantee) institutions, accounting offices, law offices and rating institutions etc. 
III. 
Research should be conducted down to the earth to formulate a proper development 
blueprint. 
Both  academics  and  governments  have  made  great  efforts  to  improve  China’s  housing  financial 
system by studying international experiences, with some policies achieving good results while others 
entailing further studies. Starting in 2003, the PBC has focused on resolving the strategic issues of 
housing financial development and communicated with the Ministry of Construction, the China Banking 
Regulatory  Commission  and  have  reached  important  consensus.  In  2005,  the  PBC  began  to 
cooperate with the World Bank in relevant research and study program aimed to learn from the mature 
experiences of other countries. This Seminar represents a further endeavor in this direction. I would 
like to give my personal views about the comprehensive research project: 
First, we must learn the essence of other countries’ experiences, not only the surface. Attention should 
be  paid  to  successful  experiences  and  failure  lessons.  The  housing  financial  system  of  China  and 
development  strategy  should  be  designed  through  summarizing  experiences  and  exploring  the 
embedded rules. 
Second,  Chinese  social,  financial  and  economic  situation  should  be  fully  considered  and  market 
development principles should be observed when mapping out our housing financial system and the 
development strategy. The long-term plan and strategy should be made in conjunction with the current 
development requirement of the housing market. We have already had some lessons in this regard. 
Third,  Research  should  be  based  on  concrete  work.  Development  plan  and  framework  should  be 
formulated  considering  actual  market  needs.  Currently,  products  innovation  should  be  made  a  top 
priority  to  promote  market  development.  In  2005,  the  PBC  led  the  initiative  of  credit  assets 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2006
securitization on a pilot basis and launched MBS in the inter-bank market successfully. At the same 
time, commercial banks have made great efforts in self-initiated product innovation after the removal of 
the ceiling on interest rates of housing loans, and new products such as fixed rate housing loans were 
developed. Generally speaking, great efforts should be further made in products innovation, especially 
financial  products  for  the  middle  &  low-income  customers.  I  hope  efforts  could  be  made  in 
strengthening  research  in  housing  financial  products  for  different  type  of  customers.  Additionally, 
efforts should be made not only to increase financing channels in the primary market, say REITs and 
real estate development bonds, but also to develop secondary market tools. 
All in all, I hope we could jointly make efforts to promote the healthy development of the real estate 
market, financial stability, the improvement of living conditions of the people and the sustained and 
sound development of national economy. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 3
