Usha Thorat: Financial inclusion and millennium development goals 
Speech by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 4th Program on 
Human  Development  and  State  Finances  jointly  organised  by  College  of  Agricultural  Banking, 
Reserve Bank of India, UNDP and the Planning Commission, at CAB, Pune, 16 January 2006. 
 At  the  outset,  I  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  Planning  Commission,  the  United  Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) and the College of Agricultural Banking for inviting me to this very 
relevant program on human development and State finances.  
The central theme of the Millenium Development Goals (MDGs) is reduction of poverty in all its forms. 
The  MDGs  emphasise  human  development  indicators,  especially  those  relating  to  women  and 
children, to enable people to live a life of dignity. The role of the State in the achievement of the MDGs 
through fiscal measures to increase investment in economic and social capital is primary. The financial 
system can play a role in reinforcing many of the objectives of the MDGs involving savings, livelihood 
and  economic  infrastructure  apart  from  providing  an  efficient  payments  system.  The  role  of  the 
community based organisations and NGOs has been found to be vital in catalysing local participation 
to  enhance  the  efficiency  and  transparency  in  the  delivery  of  services  essential  for  achievement  of 
human development goals. Thus the State Governments, the formal financial system and community 
based  organisations  can  be  considered  as  the  three  pillars  in  achieving  societal  transformation.  
These three pillars perform distinct but mutually reinforcing roles that can have tremendous synergies.  
By financial inclusion we mean the provision of affordable financial services, viz., access to payments 
and remittance facilities, savings, loans and insurance services by the formal financial system to those 
who tend to be excluded. It is important to recognise that in the policy framework for development of 
the formal financial system in India, the need for financial inclusion and covering more and more of the 
excluded population by the formal financial system has always been consciously emphasised. What 
has now come to the fore is that even after decades of such emphasis there are large segments of the 
society outside the financial system. Simultaneously the growth of the NGO and the Self Help Groups 
has  been  significant  and  their  linkage  with  banks  has  facilitated  greater  financial  inclusion.  These 
groups are mainly of women and the recovery rates are high. There is no subsidy element and the 
outreach  and  penetration  continues  to  grow.  The  coverage  is  several  times  that  under  government 
sponsored schemes. Where groups have been consciously promoted under government sponsored 
schemes,  the  recovery  is  just  50  per  cent  as  compared  to  90  per  cent  plus  recovery  under  the 
voluntary movement. Furthermore, there are reports that groups are promoted under the sponsored 
programmes just to avail of the subsidy. It is, therefore, essential that the strengths of the voluntary 
NGO/SHG  movement  are  not  lost  while  establishing  linkages  between  this  sector  and  banks  in 
achieving the MDGs. In the context of the overall fiscal constraint faced by most States, the linkages 
between  the  formal  financial  system  and  the  community  based  organisations  can  be  effectively 
exploited by the State Governments to meet the challenges of ensuring achievement of the MDGs. 
I would like to share with you two recent cases witnessed by me that could be of some interest and 
relevance.  The  first  relates  to  women  self  help  groups  (SHGs)  that  I  recently  visited  in  Ajmer.  The 
NGO, has catalysed groups that consist of poor Muslim women and trained them in making crochet 
caps  for  the  nearby  dargah.  The  groups  now  supply  these  caps  and  other  items  to  distant  places. 
Initially the women were neither taken seriously nor supported by their men folk, but after successive 
drought years when they found that the supplementary income from the women enabled the families 
to  be  free  from  starvation,  the  SHGs  gained  credibility  and  won  the  support  of  the  men  folk.  The 
leaders have become so empowered that they go to Ajmer and even to Jaipur for procurement of yarn 
and for marketing the produce. In the process of empowerment the women are actively encouraging 
their children including girls to be regular in school and they have shown active interest in adult literacy 
classes. They now want to learn how to keep their accounts on the computer. There is much more 
consciousness on sanitation issues and preventive health care. These women are also prepared to 
travel  as  far  as  Kutch  for  exchange  of  experiences  with  other  women  SHGs  involved  with  craft 
production. The SHG is supported by banks and NABARD under the SHG bank linkage programme.  
BIS Review 2/2006 
 1
The other case relates to a visit to three villages near Kolhapur where the Zilla Parishad with active 
involvement of the gram panchayat and banks are building toilets with the entire expenditure of a toilet 
construction met through bank loans given to individual families through a very simple procedure. The 
loans are based on assessment of family’s cash flow and repayable over four years. The toilets range 
from the simplest soak pit type to more elaborate ones linked to bio gas units. The procurement of 
septic tanks and material has been arranged on wholesale basis; locally trained masons are executing 
the work, with labour inputs from the villagers themselves so as to keep costs and consequently the 
loan amount low. There is no subsidy element in the financing. While returning from this village, we 
passed through another village. It was dark and suddenly as the cars headlights hit the road, we saw 
women from either side of the road getting up hurriedly. This image starkly brought home the meaning 
of the MDGs for ensuring human dignity.  
These cases represent the progress that can be made in achievement of MDGs where there is local 
leadership,  community  participation  and  involvement  of  the  financial  sector  with  the  Government 
playing  a  facilitating  role.  What  is  significant  is  that  in  both  these  cases  there  is  no  subsidy  or 
budgetary  support.  The  question  is  whether  these  are  replicable  and  can  we  achieve  the  desired 
scale? The answer is yes provided the three pillars, viz., the State government, the formal financial 
system and the community based organisations work together. Without connecting rural roads, there 
is very little that can be achieved by the formal financial system or NGOs. Hence it is appropriate that 
due emphasis is being placed on rural roads and rural connectivity. This has to be an area for priority 
for state funding.  
The SHG movement in India has enabled social and economic inclusion of women. The SHG-bank 
linkage movement where SHGs are linked to banks in a gradual way - initially through savings and 
later through loan products - has been able to ensure financial inclusion to a certain extent. However, 
there is a need to increase their credit absorptive capacity as a large number of SHGs linked to the 
banking  system  are  utilising  the  credit  only  for  consumption  purposes.    They  have  to  migrate  to 
employment  generating  activities  so  as  to  be  able  to  fully  reap  the  benefits  of  economic  freedom. 
Nevertheless, the SHGs and in many cases SHG federations have played a pivotal role in the creation 
of social capital and empowerment.  There are hundreds of examples where the SHGs  have worked 
with NGOs  and Government agencies to bring drinking water to their villages, conduct regular health 
camps,  organise  adult  literacy  camps  and  generally  improve  the  social  status  of  members.  For 
example, the SHG Federations active in Tamil Nadu have been able to provide life insurance products 
through  an  internally  administered  scheme.    In  Kerala,  the  Kutumbashree  model  set  up  by  the 
Government covers a variety of financial services as also health insurance. The Friends of Women's 
World  Banking  (FWWB)  have  started  a  Social  Security  Project  in  association  with  micro  finance 
agencies/NGOs and insurance companies to provide life insurance to lakhs of persons and non life 
insurance products like livestock insurance and health insurance. Other innovative products like hut 
insurance,  food  security,  pension  scheme,  etc.,  too  have  been  launched.    Since  the  SHG 
Federations/NGOs  or,  the  MFIs  provide  the  gateway  to  a  large  number  of  families  and  absorb 
administrative costs both in insuring and in claim settlement, such schemes have been able to keep 
the premium to the minimum. In Orissa there are reports about an NGO working amongst disabled 
women  living  in  abject  poverty.  Their  intervention  has  resulted  in  finding  a  united  voice  for  these 
women, getting the necessary certificates and thus getting facilities due to them and also bank finance 
for economic activities.  
Apart from the SHG bank linkage, the experience of the formal banking system partnering with micro 
finance  organisations  set  up  as  societies,  cooperatives,  trusts  and  NBFCs  including  Section  25 
companies has also been extremely encouraging. These tend to be on a larger scale with services 
ranging from health, education, marketing apart from savings, loans and insurance.  These linkages 
have also grown without government intervention and have proved to be efficient. In both models, the 
challenge is in reducing transaction cost so as to keep the services affordable while covering costs 
and thereby ensuring increase in outreach and sustainability.  
The  formal  financial  system  has  to  recognise  the  huge  business  potential  coming  from  the  unmet 
demand for financial services from those who normally tend to be excluded. The focus on financial 
inclusion  comes  from  the  recognition  that  financial  inclusion  has  several  externalities  which  can  be 
exploited to the mutual advantage of those excluded, the banking system and society at large.  Banks 
need  to understand  the  market  and  develop  products  suited  to  the  clientele.  They  need  to develop 
data sets to evolve risk assessment models for proper rating and pricing. Financial inclusion has to be 
viewed as a business strategy for growth and banks need to position themselves accordingly.  Further 
improvements in rural connectivity, through roads, power and telecom, can ensure greater penetration 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2006
by  the  financial  system  into  remote  areas  and  provide  safe  and  efficient  financial  services  to  large 
segments of the financially excluded. Use of IT, apart from speeding up transaction time and reducing 
cost,  facilitates  building  automatic  safeguards  by  ensuring  on-line  identification,  authorisation, 
monitoring,  transparency  and  accountability  and  in  turn  enables  banks  to  deal  with  much  larger 
numbers with minimum risk. The State governments will need to ensure such rural connectivity and 
also facilitate capacity building to use IT in a big way.  
Let me now proceed to highlight some of the recent initiatives that RBI has taken to promote financial 
inclusion  
i. 
As  a  proactive  measure,  the  RBI  in  its  Annual  Policy  Statement  for  the  year  2005-06,  while 
recognising the concerns in regard to the banking practices that tend to exclude rather than attract 
vast  sections  of  population,  urged  banks  to  review  their  existing  practices  to  align  them  with  the 
objective of financial inclusion. In the Mid Term Review of the Policy (2005-06), the RBI exhorted the 
banks, with a view to achieving greater financial inclusion, to make available a basic banking  ‘no frills’ 
account either with nil or very minimum balances as well as charges that would make such accounts 
accessible to vast sections of the population. The nature and number of transactions in such accounts 
would  be  restricted  and  made  known  to  customers  in  advance  in  a  transparent  manner.  All  banks 
have  been urged  to give wide publicity  to  the  facility  of  such  ‘no  frills’  account.  A  number of  banks 
have since come out with schemes for such ‘no frills’ account facility. 
ii. 
Further, in order to ensure that persons belonging to low income group both in urban and rural 
areas  do  not  face  difficulty  in  opening  the  bank  accounts  due  to  the  procedural  hassles,  the  KYC 
procedure for opening accounts has been simplified for those persons with balances not exceeding 
rupees  fifty  thousand  (Rs.  50,000)  and  credits  in  the  accounts  not  exceeding  rupees  one  lakh 
(Rs.1,00,000) in a year.  
iii. 
RRBs  have  been  specifically  advised  to  allow  limited  overdraft  facilities  in  ‘no  frills’  accounts 
without any collateral or linkage to any purpose. The idea is that provision of such overdraft facility 
provides  a  ready  source  of  funding  to  the  account  holder  who  is  thereby  induced  to  open  such 
accounts.  From  the  bank’s  point  of  view,  the  offering  of  a  "no  frills"  account  should  represent  the 
beginning  of  a  sustainable  relationship  that  will  be  mutually  beneficial.  Looking  at  the  numbers 
involved, there is no doubt that banks should look at technology based solutions and low cost delivery 
mechanisms that will reduce transaction cost of such services with the volumes required to make such 
a model sustainable.  
iv. 
For all borrowers where the principal amount is less than Rs 25000, banks have been asked to 
offer a one time settlement scheme. As there are large number of such very small NPAs with banks, 
offer of such an OTS is expected to restore borrowing relationship with the formal system and thereby 
obviate the need to go back to the informal system. Banks, however  need to give wide publicity to the 
scheme  at  their  rural  and  semi  urban  branches.  In  case  where  the  loans  are  under  government 
sponsored  schemes  the  State  Level  Bankers'  Committee  (SLBC)  is  expected  to  evolve  a  suitable 
policy. 
v. 
In urban areas, credit cards enable households to manage to get their credit needs met by the 
banking system, with not only the ability to make purchases on credit but also facility to draw cash 
against card. In the rural areas, there are no points of sale or outlets where plastic cards can be used. 
Banks have been recently advised by RBI to provide a General purpose Credit Card (GCC) facility at 
their rural and semi urban braches The credit facility extended under the Scheme will be in the nature 
of revolving credit. The GCC-holder will be entitled to draw cash from the specified branch of bank up 
to  the  limit  sanctioned.  Banks  would  have  flexibility  in  fixing  the  limit  based  on  the  assessment  of 
income  and  cash  flow  of  the  entire  household.  However,  the  total  credit  facility  under  GCC  for  an 
individual  should  not  exceed  Rs.25,000.  Interest  rate  on  the  facility  may  be  charged  as  considered 
appropriate  and  reasonable.  The  borrowers  would  be  eligible  for  availment  of  the  credit  facilities 
provided under GCC, as per their requirement, without any insistence on security and the purpose or 
end-use of the credit. Fifty per cent of credit outstanding under GCC up to Rs.25,000 will be eligible for 
being treated as indirect agricultural financing coming under the ambit of priority sector lending norms. 
The  eligibility  criteria  will  be  subject  to  review.  It  is  not  necessary  that  GCC  should  be  linked  to 
purchases and GCC may not necessarily be in the form of a card. GCC can be issued in the form of a 
Pass  Book,  if  the  holder  of  GCC  desires  to  operate  cash  withdrawals  from  bank  branches.  It  is 
expected that banks will come out with their own schemes to popularise this product amongst the rural 
clientele.  
BIS Review 2/2006 
 3
A  major recommendation made  by  the  Internal  Group  set  up  by  RBI  on  micro  finance  (Khan 
vi. 
Committee),  currently  under  consideration,  is  to  permit  banks  to  use  micro  finance  institutions  as 
business  facilitators  and  correspondents  to  enable  banks  to  increase  their  outreach  and  ensure 
greater financial inclusion. This recommendation which will lead to provision of micro-finance services 
at  the  doorstep  of  the  customer,  can  make  substantial  change  in  the  availability  of  comprehensive 
financial  services  in  rural  areas  and  to  the  poor  and  the  disadvantaged  in  both,  rural  and  in  urban 
areas.  
Banks need to view these recent measures as an opportunity to provide timely and adequate financial 
services and increase their share in a rapidly growing market. In case of GCC or overdfrafts in ‘no 
frills’  accounts,  the  interest  rates  can  be  appropriately  fixed  while  building  in  incentives  for  prompt 
payment. 
Financial inclusion has several benefits. Establishment of an account relationship can pave the way to 
the customer availing of a variety of savings products, loan products for consumption livelihood and 
housing.  The  account  can  be  used  for  making  small  value  remittances  at  low  cost  and  making 
purchases on credit. The same banking account can also be used by State Governments to provide 
social  security  services  like  health  and  calamity  insurance  under  various  schemes  for  the 
disadvantaged. It is often felt that some contribution should be made by the beneficiary so that he has 
some stake. However, the deterrent is that the cost of collection of the premium that can be more than 
the premium itself. If however it is collected through a no frills account, the cost is practically nil. From 
the bank’s point of view, having such social security cover makes the financing of such persons less 
risky and hence can be covered by the loan component. Reduced risk means more flow of funds at 
better rates. Furthermore there is a complete audit trail and transparency. In other words the single 
gateway of a banking account can be used for several purposes and represents a win-win situation. 
The Employment Guarantee Scheme being rolled out in 200 districts in the country which would bring 
in  large  number  of  people  through  their  savings  accounts  into  the  banking  system  is  another 
opportunity to promote financial inclusion in its fullest sense.  
I would now like to focus on the role of the State governments. While there is no alternative to raising 
revenue  through  taxes  and  user  charges  so  as  to  have  the  resource  base  to  undertake  huge 
investment  in  physical  and  social  capital,  it  is  possible,  even  in  the  present  milieu  to  give  focused 
attention to a few areas.  
•  Firstly, there are many programmes where the central assistance is not drawn down due to 
the inability on the part of States to provide matching contribution and such allocations often 
lapse. It could be considered whether contribution from the beneficiary (supported by a loan 
from a bank) can be blended with the State’s contribution to achieve the amount required to 
use the Central assistance. Banks can tie up with community based organisations having a 
good track record to provide the comfort of knowledge of the borrower. 
•  Secondly,  States  can  leverage  on  the  provision  of  guarantees.  There  is  a  recent  instance 
where the State housing board has partnered with a bank for housing schemes for families 
below  poverty  line  (BPL)  in  urban  areas  where  the  housing  board  provides  a  first  loss 
guarantee to the extent of 10 per cent of the loan amount. The housing board identifies the 
beneficiaries and helps in recovery. The title is passed only on completion of loan repayment.  
In addition to making available the housing loan, health insurance cover is also provided with 
either  the  premium  being  fully  or  partly  provided  by  the  State  Government.  There  could  be 
calamity or accident cover as well. Like I mentioned earlier, such insurance reduces the risk of 
the loan asset and can lead to more flow of funds and better pricing.   
•  Thirdly, in urban areas, there is considerable scope for better pricing of services. It is common 
knowledge that the poor end up paying more for various public goods, such as, water, power, 
sanitation.    Efficient  provision  of  services,  with  minimum  leakages,  and  their  comparative 
pricing  is  critical.  Formulation  of  schemes  that  have  a  viable  pricing  policy  will  enable  the 
involvement  of  the  financial  system  to  ensure  that  adequate  funds  are  available  for  such 
infrastructure projects.  
This  initiative  of  the  Planning  Commission  in  conducting  this  programme  in  collaboration  with  the 
United  Nations  Development  Programme  and  the  College  of  Agricultural  Banking  is  indeed  a  very 
welcome  one  to  build  synergy  through  mutuality  and  convergence  of  the  efforts  of  all  the  major 
stakeholders in the progress towards achievement of MDGs.  
4 
 BIS Review 2/2006
I find that your time here has been structured well with presentations by a number of eminent persons 
on various aspects having a critical bearing on human development, such as, public health, livelihood, 
government and group work as well as experience sharing ending up with an interesting quiz. I wish 
you a fruitful week ahead. 
BIS Review 2/2006 
 5
