Jaime Caruana: Concluding remarks - conference on “Central Banks in the 
21st Century” 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at the conference on “Central Banks in the 21st Century”, hosted by the Bank 
of Spain, Madrid, 9 June 2006. 
 It is my pleasure to participate in this concluding session of the conference and to be accompanied at 
this  table  by  Pedro  Solbes.  I  hope  you  found  the  presentations  and  discussions  inspiring  and 
motivating. I certainly did. We are now witnessing some profound changes in the way our societies 
organise  their  economic  relationships,  and  these  naturally  pose  new  challenges  to  central  banks, 
regarding both their role of monetary policymakers and their responsibility to preserve and foster safer 
and more efficient financial systems.  
Over  the  last  two  days  we  have  discussed  some  of  the  underlying  forces  of  change  and  their 
implications for the design of sound monetary policy and financial architecture, including the question 
of how best to arrange payment and security settlement systems. Let me briefly elaborate on some of 
the  issues  raised  at  the  conference  which  I  found  particularly  interesting.  I  will  first  reflect  on  the 
difficult question of how monetary and financial stability relate to each other and then move to some 
particular issues of special interest for a currency area, such as Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).  
Monetary and financial stability  
The global financial system has developed at an unprecedented pace in the last two or three decades. 
During this time, many countries have undergone significant processes of financial liberalisation that 
have contributed to deeper and wider markets, in terms of both the number of participants and the 
assets traded on them. In the international sphere, financial liberalisation has led to a growing number 
of  countries  gaining  access  to  global  capital  markets  and  to  a  stepping  up  of  the  economic  and 
financial links among different regions. Technological progress has also played an important role. The 
ability of market participants to obtain and process vast amounts of information almost instantaneously 
and to conduct complex transactions at low cost has grown enormously.  
In  short,  all  these  changes  have  significantly  increased  the  possibilities  for  risk-sharing  among 
economic  agents.  And,  as  such,  there  is  ample  consensus  that  this  process  of  financial  deepening 
brings tangible benefits for businesses, households and governments alike. There is little doubt either 
that this phenomenon will continue its course over the foreseeable future.  
In  parallel  to  the  changes  on  the  financial  landscape,  we  have  also  witnessed  a  remarkable 
performance by our monetary policy frameworks in terms of attaining and maintaining low and stable 
inflation, with noticeable effects on economic welfare. I believe that those achievements are largely 
permanent.  I  further  consider  that,  as  stressed  by  Alan  Blinder  in  the  introduction  to  his  insightful 
paper, the debate over some of the core principles for sound monetary policy practice seems to be 
resolved for now. For example, there is currently substantial agreement, both among academics and 
monetary  authorities,  on  the  need  to  provide  central  banks  with  sufficient  formal  and  effective 
institutional  independence,  the  superiority  of  interest-rate  operational  targets  over  quantitative 
instruments, and the pursuit of low inflation as the main objective for monetary policy.  
Both  trends  -  towards  deeper  and  more  integrated  financial  markets,  at  one  end,  and  towards 
monetary  policies  clearly  determined  to  deliver  price  stability,  at  the  other  -  are  important  factors 
behind the sound macroeconomic performance recorded practically worldwide over the last decade.  
Notwithstanding this positive view on the recent past, central banks must deploy their best efforts -
improving  their  monetary  policy  and  regulatory  and  supervisory  arrangements  -  to  preserve  and 
consolidate the attainments I mentioned, since various significant risks and challenges lie ahead. As 
stressed  by  Frederic  Mishkin,  the  final  success  of  the  processes  of  financial  liberalisation  and 
globalisation  in  developing  economies  hinges  crucially  on  the  ability  of  both  policymakers  and  the 
private  sector  to  properly  respond  to  a  rapidly  changing  environment.  No  doubt,  the  spirit  of  this 
proposition applies likewise to developed countries.  
BIS Review 53/2006 
 1
following 
facing,  and 
the  hypothetical  consequences 
An increasingly liberalised and globalised financial system necessitates a reconsideration of some key 
inputs in our current monetary strategies. The greater relevance of markets and their evolving nature 
requires an ongoing assessment of the different monetary policy transmission mechanisms. This area, 
while  critical  to  successful  monetary  policy  decision-making,  still  remains  shrouded  in  considerable 
uncertainty. Undoubtedly, the emergence of new financial assets and financial intermediaries poses 
fresh questions here.  
Furthermore, the magnitude of the financial funds flowing across different countries at the present time 
and the uncertainty surrounding the sustainability and the possible effects of an eventual correction of 
the so-called global imbalances means that central banks worldwide must take a much broader and 
complex set of indicators into consideration when formulating their policies. Moreover, we are probably 
at a juncture that can be best described as one of “Knightian uncertainty”, in that some of the risks we 
are 
their  realisation,  are  essentially 
immeasurable.  Consequently,  good  monetary  policymaking  requires  not  only  a  continuous 
reassessment  of  market  conditions  and  expectations,  but  also  forecasts  and  projections  flexible 
enough to encompass a wide set of scenarios.  
I share the view set out yesterday by Jean-Claude Trichet that a sound communication strategy takes 
on  special  importance  in  the  current  environment,  as  well.  Anchoring  expectations  about  future 
inflation  is  a  valuable  asset,  and  especially  at  times  of  financial  and  real  turbulence.  Fluent 
communication  with  market  participants  and  the  general  public  is  also  of  great  help  in  preserving 
credibility, especially when circumstances lead to relatively persistent temporary departures from what 
is sometimes called a “neutral” monetary policy stance, as some of our central banks have faced in 
recent  times,  or  when  specific  factors  push  inflation  rates  above  what  the  monetary  authorities 
normally consider as satisfactory.  
Moreover, alignment of market expectations with the central bank’s own targets, through fluent and 
transparent communication, allows monetary policy to exert a stronger influence along the entire yield 
curve. Yet notice that this latter channel becomes most relevant if central bankers approach markets 
from  the  sort  of  leadership  position  emphasised  by  Professor  Blinder.  I  agree  with  him  on  this 
important point: central bankers should continuously monitor markets and should extract from them as 
much  information  as  possible.  But  they  must  not  put  themselves  under  the  thumb  of  what  is 
sometimes capricious and short-sighted market sentiment.  
In any event, one of the most robust lessons we can extract from the recent period of global monetary 
and output growth stability is that low inflation may well be consistent with episodes of high financial 
volatility. Cases of financial stress have been recorded both in industrialised and in emerging market 
economies over the last few years without noticeable inflationary pressure. Even in countries whose 
financial system has proved more resilient, financial cycles have become wider and more volatile.  
Indeed, a long period of monetary stability coupled with low interest rates, as has been the case for 
some years now, may arguably be conducive to certain types of imbalances in asset markets. In such 
an environment the poor returns on low-risk investments and the softening of lending standards may 
lead  investors  to  take  on  increasingly  riskier  projects.  As  economic  agents  underestimate  the  total 
risks of their positions, the volume of investment in financial –and, in some cases, also real estate- 
markets rises at a strong pace, and with it, asset prices and the overall level of credit, perhaps, with 
both  being  further  fuelled  through  the  feedback  mechanism  operating  between  collateral  value  and 
credit capacity. In that situation, there is a risk that a sharp asset price reversal might have a sizeable 
impact on the stability of the whole system. Therefore, an otherwise beneficial context of price stability 
and low financing costs might sometimes sow the seeds for the emergence of financial imbalances.  
This  latter,  somewhat  ironic  conclusion  has  spurred  a  recent  debate  on  the  role  to  be  assigned  to 
monetary  policy  as  an  instrument  of  use  in  correcting  financial  and  real  estate  market  excesses. 
Should  central  banks  react  to  asset  prices  over  and  above  their  direct  effects  on  purely  monetary 
goals, such as inflation? The answers vary depending mainly on the confidence that one places in the 
ability of central banks to detect price misalignments early and to undo them without causing major 
damage to the economy. 
I  tend  to  think  that  while  in  normal  conditions  monetary  policy  should  react  only  to  changes  in 
economic variables insofar as they bear some influence on inflation dynamics, there are exceptional 
circumstances in which policymakers have enough signals to conclude that the economy, as a whole, 
is facing significant risks, thus warranting a more pre-emptive policy approach. This pragmatic view is 
consistent with the idea that monetary policy decisions should be based not only on the most likely 
scenarios but also on other, less probable ones which, however, may have far-reaching implications 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2006
for the entire system should they materialise. Certainly, an abrupt asset price correction pertains to 
this class of low-probability event that may ultimately entail significant costs for a country’s welfare.  
More importantly, to place this approach to monetary policy in its right place, it is critical to recognise 
that  some  of  the  risks  inherent  in  the  financial  sphere  should  first  be  the  subject  of  an  appropriate 
prudential  framework.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  any  concern  about  unbalanced  market 
developments  is,  at  core,  a  concern  about  a  problem  of  inappropriate  risk  management.  This 
statement  applies  to  the  case  in  which,  due  to  over-optimism  or  short-sighted  behaviour,  market 
participants fail to appreciate the true risk of their investment or lending strategies. Yet even if their 
behaviour can be thought as being fully rational from an individual perspective, nothing ensures that 
the final outcome will not convey important risks at a systemic level that are not properly internalised 
by single agents. As a result, a portion of the marked volatility and procyclicality of some key financial 
variables, like asset prices and credit, may be understood as a reflection of individual and collective 
risk misjudgement.  
Hence, there is much to be gained in terms of greater resilience and efficiency of the financial system 
through  the  design  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  aimed  at  combating  the  factors  that 
underlie a poor assessment of risks at their root. In this sense, a sound prudential framework should 
provide financial institutions with the right incentives to properly assess and monitor the risks of their 
investment and lending policies, incorporating them accordingly into their pricing decisions. Increased 
awareness  of  risks,  and  how  these  evolve  along  the  business  cycle,  favours  earlier  reactions  to 
changing  conditions  and  smoother  adjustments  in  the  flow  of  credit,  thus  reducing  the  likelihood  of 
episodes of abrupt liquidity and credit contraction.  
The New Capital Accord, known as Basel II, is an example of a prudential framework that makes the 
foregoing  principles  I  have  outlined  its  centrepiece,  since  it  seeks  to  strengthen  the  stability  of  the 
international banking system by promoting the implementation of more robust and comprehensive risk 
management practices. It does so mainly by establishing a more precise and sensitive system to link 
banks’ real risks and the minimum regulatory capital requirements, and by imposing higher levels of 
transparency in banks’ financial reporting, hence fostering closer scrutiny by market participants. 
A  more  risk-sensitive  capital  framework  tends  to  make  banks  more  watchful  of  the  actual  risks  of 
lending policies focused on short-run targets, such as market share or portfolio size, which presumably 
are  important  ingredients  in  periods  of  credit  booms  sustaining  speculative  activities.  Furthermore, 
greater  transparency  in  the  information  provided  by  banks  on  their  balance-sheet  and  risk  position 
must  help  alleviate  the  informational  asymmetries  among  shareholders,  lenders  and  borrowers  that 
arguably lie behind most episodes of financial distress.  
Yet despite the recent advances in the design of a banking supranational prudential framework, much 
remains  to  be  done,  especially  with  regard  to  other  financial  institutions  and  markets.  From  my 
personal  experience  as  governor  of  a  central  bank  with  supervisory  and  regulatory  responsibilities, 
member  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  member  of  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, I strongly believe that there is much merit in central banks playing 
an active role in the pursuit of prudential policies that rightly respond to the challenges posed by the 
current process of intense financial deepening. I would agree that one specific institutional model is 
unlikely  to  fit  all.  Moreover,  the  operational  separation  between  prudential  and  monetary  policies 
should in any event be preserved. However, it is in the general interest of societies to take advantage 
of the institutional strength and the valuable information and analytical expertise held by most central 
banks in order to safeguard the soundness of financial systems.  
Reflections on challenges in EMU 
The challenges faced by a central bank are certainly not smaller if it has to conduct a single monetary 
policy for a multinational currency area.  
We have seen that in the new economic and financial landscape, central banks should explore ways 
to fully internalise the close links between financial and macroeconomic stability. The Eurosystem is 
well suited to take into account the existing synergies. The Treaty itself establishes price stability as a 
primary  objective  while  at  the  same  time  calling  on  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  to 
contribute to the smooth conduct of prudential policies and the proper operation of payment systems.  
Nonetheless, central bank policies must deal with a heterogeneous economic scenario where national 
economies  retain  distinctive  features  both  in  terms  of  exposure  to  specific  shocks  and  as  a 
BIS Review 53/2006 
 3
consequence of the different functioning of domestic policies and allocation mechanisms. Moreover, 
while markets are increasingly integrated there are still frictions impeding sufficiently flexible flows of 
products, capital and labour. Even in the financial services area, and although progress in developing 
the  single  market  is  already  evident,  some  transactions  involving  agents  in  several  euro  zone 
countries are still penalised in comparison with purely domestic operations.  
Against  this  background,  the  Eurosystem  has  had  to  face  the  challenges  posed  by  economic 
heterogeneity and imperfect integration in two ways. Firstly, by complementing the monitoring of euro-
wide aggregate variables with the analysis of relevant national developments in order to identify the 
policy  that  best  helps  ensure  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Secondly,  by  promoting  a 
better integration of markets, particularly financial markets, in the euro area.  
Regarding this latter issue, the role of payment systems is crucial. As we have heard this morning, the 
Eurosystem is making a significant contribution by developing a wholesale payment system, known as 
TARGET2, which will provide for safer and more efficient large-value payment flows within the euro 
area.  I  would  agree  that  more  has  to  be  done  by  the  competent  authorities  to  achieve  higher 
integration for retail payments and securities transactions. However, the Eurosystem, together with the 
European  Commission,  is  actively  supporting  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  initiative  and  has 
devoted  much  effort  to  promoting  more  efficient  and  safer  securities  settlement  systems  and  to 
facilitating the cross-border use of collateral.  
In  any  event,  I  have  the  impression  that  in  years  to  come  the  Eurosystem  will  have  to  strengthen 
further both aspects of its policy approach. As EMU is not likely to become a much more homogenous 
area in the foreseeable future, the need might be felt to pay more attention to key national economic 
developments on the basis of the contribution by the National Central Banks, therefore making more 
intensive  use  of  the  federal  organisation  of  the  European  monetary  authority.  My  feeling  is  that 
country-specific  analysis  is  proving  increasingly  informative  for  fully  understanding  the  situation, 
prospects and policy needs of the euro area as a whole.  
Similarly, I would not be surprised if the ECB were to find it appropriate in the future to raise its profile 
somewhat in defending a more integrated and liberalised market for financial services in Europe.  
Conclusions 
In sum, our economies are now experiencing some important changes, both with regard to how goods 
and  services  are  produced  and  traded,  and  the  possibilities  that  agents  face  to  organise  their 
economic decisions over time. Most of the underlying forces causing these changes must be judged 
as  largely  beneficial  per  se.  Yet  as  occurs  with  any  new  situation,  we  face  much  uncertainty  that 
requires a comprehensive learning effort. As central bankers, we have learnt that price stability should 
be deemed as a highly valuable but insufficient achievement to promote financial stability. We have 
also gained some understanding as to why this is so, and, hence, on the need to take some steps 
towards making the goals of monetary and financial stability compatible and sustainable. Admittedly, 
our knowledge is still scarce in some important areas. However, as the interaction between the two 
objectives is becoming more pronounced, the role of central banks is probably more complex but also 
more relevant.  
4 
 BIS Review 53/2006
