Timothy F Geithner: Principles to guide the future evolution of financial 
supervision and regulation 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the Bond Market Association's Annual Meeting 2006, New York, 19 May 2006. 
 Thanks for inviting me to speak to you today.  
You are meeting at a time of significant confidence in the strength of the global economy and in the 
overall health of the financial system. On the available evidence, the core of the U.S. financial system 
is stronger than it has been in some time. Capital levels are higher and earnings stronger and more 
diversified.  
This strength is the result of many factors. It is the result of the length and strength of the economic 
expansion  in  the  United  States  and  the  associated  improvements  in  credit  fundamentals.  It  reflects 
increases  in  the  scale  and  scope  of  the  operations  of  the  largest  institutions.  It  is  the  result  of  the 
dramatic  innovations  in  the  technology  of  finance  and  in  the  opportunities  that  has  created  for 
managing risk more effectively. And it reflects the increased integration of national financial institutions 
and the resulting competitive pressure and opportunities for diversification.  
We have seen substantial improvements in risk management practice and in internal controls over the 
past decade. These improvements are the product of large investments in people and technology, as 
well as changes to the internal architecture around control and compliance. These investments were, 
of course, driven by a series of important changes in law and regulation, but they also reflect a rational 
response by the institutions themselves to the financial and reputational damage associated with some 
of the earlier weaknesses.  
The progress achieved in internal control regimes has of course come with some costs. Many of these 
costs  can  be  measured  in  dollars,  but  others,  such  as  management  attention  and  the  uncertainty 
induced  by  greater  vulnerability  to  enforcement  action  and  litigation,  are  more  difficult  to  measure. 
Despite the difficulty of adding up all these costs, it is hard to challenge the widespread view that they 
have  been  quite  substantial.  But  the  relevant  metric  is  not  merely  their  magnitude,  but  how  they 
compare to the magnitude of the resulting gains.  
There is no straightforward way to make this assessment, but today I want to offer some perspectives 
on  our  continued  efforts  to  balance  critical  financial  stability  objectives  with  the  need  to  foster  and 
encourage the innovation and dynamism that is such a central part of the U.S. financial system.  
I’ll  begin  with  the  observation  that  profitability  measures  suggest  that  the  business  of  financial 
intermediation  is  reasonably  healthy,  despite  the  costs  induced  by  changes  in  the  regulatory 
environment. Part of this reflects the reduction in credit costs and increased macroeconomic stability 
of the past several years. The financial performance of the well-run U.S. financial institutions seems to 
compare favorably to that of their peers in other markets.  
The pace of innovation in U.S. financial markets has continued to be robust. The explosive growth in 
the volume and type of credit derivatives is only one example of the overall creativity and dynamism of 
U.S.  financial  markets  in  recent  years.  This  suggests  that  the  incentives  and  opportunities  for 
innovation in our markets remain powerful despite concerns about the impact of changes in the overall 
regulatory environment.  
And confidence in the integrity of U.S. financial markets seems to be strong today - integrity in the 
sense of reduced vulnerability to illicit activity and improvements in the reliability of public disclosure. 
We can see evidence of this confidence in the apparent willingness of the world’s savers to invest in 
the United States and in the scale of capital formation in our markets.  
The apparent robustness of market activity and innovation in the face of fairly substantial changes in 
the  legal,  supervisory  and  enforcement  environment  is  encouraging.  But  the  cumulate  effects  may 
take years to manifest themselves fully. Therefore, the official community has to be very attentive to 
the risk that we have the balance wrong.  
BIS Review 54/2006 
 1
I thought I might outline some broad principles that should guide the official community as we apply 
the existing body of regulation and supervisory guidance, as we refine current proposals, and as we 
design future changes.  
It is imperative that we get it right. The efficiency, dynamism and resilience of the financial system are 
strategic assets for U.S. economy. The relatively favorable performance of the U.S. financial system is 
the result both of the wisdom of past choices made to foster a very open and competitive financial 
system, but also is the result of good fortune and some of the special advantages that have come from 
the unique role of the United States and the dollar in the world economy and financial system.  
Some of these relative advantages are likely to decline over time with the maturation and deregulation 
of other financial markets around the world. And this healthy evolution prompts us to be even more 
attentive to the potential risk that the costs we impose on financial institutions in our markets and on 
companies that want to raise capital in our markets become prohibitively high.  
Here are a few considerations or principles that I believe should guide us in the official community as 
we  strive  to  improve  the  regulatory  framework  going  forward.  I  want  to  emphasize  that  these 
principles, as in the case of many principles, are easier to state than to achieve. 
Let me start by acknowledging there are aspects of the exacting standards we have sought to impose 
on our financial system that have turned out to be expensive in relation to the return against our public 
policy objective. And provisions that seem optimally designed at any given time are likely to need to 
evolve  as  conditions  change. That  this  should  occur  is  a  natural  aspect  of  a  dynamic  financial 
environment. There are areas where we are likely to have erred in being too prescriptive and others 
where we left too much room for discretion and judgment. It would be good if we could find a way to 
build  into  the  initial  design  of  guidance  and  regulation  the  capacity  for  quicker  and  continuous 
evolution as we learn more.  
Second,  we  need  to  continue  to  adapt  our  approach  to  the  imperatives  of  a  much  more  integrated 
global  financial  system.  Global  integration,  of  course,  gives  us  all  a  greater  stake  in  the  quality  of 
supervision  outside  our  borders.  This  pragmatic  interest  will  lead  us  to  spend  progressively  more 
resources  and  attention  on  the  international  dimension  of  our  work.  This  recognition  informed  the 
efforts  that  led  to  the  Basel  Capital  Accord,  the  Lamfalussy  Standards  for  payment  and  settlement 
systems and many other international cooperative efforts. But the imperative is much stronger today 
because of the much greater extent of financial integration, and it is only likely to grow.  
It is also important that the design of regulatory initiatives in the United States be informed by a careful 
assessment of their relative impact on U.S. institutions and markets. Effective solutions to many of the 
concerns we face in our national financial systems will require multilateral approaches. Rather than 
starting with a presumption that we will act in the United States and then hope to induce the world to 
follow, there are some areas where the more effective approach will be to start with the borderless 
solution by which I mean one designed to apply to  a class of institutions and financial instruments, 
independent of geography and currency. Where this does not prove possible on terms or in a time 
frame we like, we of course preserve the option to move alone.  
Third, we live in a financial system in which nonbank financial institutions play a much larger role than 
they  did  in  the  past,  a  system  in  which  the  differences  between  the  activities  of  the  bank-centered 
financial  institutions  and  nonbanks  has  diminished,  and  in  which  the  largest  commercial  banks  and 
investment  banks  compete  with  each  other  and  with  other  nonbank  institutions  in  both  the  United 
States and abroad.  
These  changes  in  market  structure  have  many  positive  implications  for  financial  efficiency  and 
stability,  but  they  also  mean  that  differences  in  the  size  and  nature  of  the  incentives  faced  by 
institutions with different supervisory and regulatory regimes can have larger competitive effects. The 
resulting  opportunities  for regulatory  arbitrage have the  potential to  reduce  the  impact  of  provisions 
that apply only to regulated or supervised institutions. The risk that regulating the core of the system 
simply pushes financial activity to the periphery can raise the risk that distress among nonbanks can 
cause greater damage to the financial system. This means that we have to look for ways to cooperate 
more closely with other supervisors across the functional lines of supervision in our system in such as 
way as to impact the incentives of a broader range of market participants.  
Fourth,  we  need  to  find  ways  to  accelerate  the  pace  at  which  the  regulatory  framework  evolves  to 
meet  new  challenges.  The  increase  in  the  pace  of  change  in  financial  innovation  and  in  market 
structure requires greater agility among supervisors and regulators. Without this agility we risk lagging 
too far behind changes in the frontier of risk. This does not mean that each innovation needs to be met 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2006
with  a  regulatory  response.  That  would  be  an  unfortunate  and  surely  counterproductive  impulse  to 
encourage in regulation. But when a problem in the existing framework has significant implications for 
financial stability or efficiency, we need the flexibility and expertise required to act more quickly than 
we have been able to in some areas in the past.  
Fifth, we need to be creative in identifying areas where market-led initiatives, rather than new laws, 
regulations or formal supervisory guidance, are likely to be successful and possibly more efficient in 
achieving certain policy objectives. Where collective action problems limit the incentive or the ability of 
individual  institutions  to  make  the  necessary  investments  in  infrastructure,  the  official  sector  can 
facilitate or motivate cooperative effort among market participants to solve the problem. At times, we 
may be more effective by helping to convene a group of market participants to reach consensus on 
best practices or a common solution than we would be defining or imposing a solution ourselves. Of 
course,  not  all  problems  are  amenable  to  a  solution  by  public  support  of  private  initiative,  but  we 
should be open to these types of approaches when they are likely to be successful in achieving our 
objectives.  
And sixth, we have to be careful that the necessary and constructive attention that has been devoted 
over the past several years to meeting control and compliance challenges does not detract from the 
classic  safety  and  soundness  requirements  of  risk  management.  These  should  not  be  competing 
priorities. The financial costs and reputational damage associated with compliance and control failure 
can be very large. And the investments in the internal control infrastructure—in audit and corporate 
governance changes and in controls over financial reporting—are crucial parts of the foundation for a 
credible  risk  management  framework.  But  we  need  to  make  sure  that  the  demanding  and  ever 
evolving  challenges  of  managing  credit  and  market  risk  receive  a  degree  of  attention  by  senior 
management and boards that is commensurate with the risks. And this balance needs to be reflected 
in where we focus our supervisory efforts, as well. These classic prudential issues, those that make a 
critical difference in reducing the vulnerability of markets to systemic risk, need to be a principal focus 
of supervisory attention.  
This is a time where I believe it is important to encourage more care and conservatism in the discipline 
of risk management. There are three areas at the top of our hierarchy of concerns.  
First,  it  is  very  important  that  the  major  dealers  make  the  investments  necessary  to  improve  the 
operational  infrastructure  that  underpins  the  credit  derivatives  and  broader  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives market. Operational risk and infrastructure failures have played a prominent role in past 
financial  crises,  and  the  infrastructure  weaknesses  that  have  characterized  the  credit  derivatives 
markets since their inception are another credible source of concern.  
The major market participants, both the dealers and the traditional and nontraditional investors, are in 
the  process  of  improving  the  infrastructure  that  supports  these  markets.  The  changes  underway  to 
clean  up  the  backlog  of  unconfirmed  trades,  to  automate  the  entire  post-trade-processing 
environment, and to improve the settlement process in events of default will help reduce operational 
risk in the derivatives market and reduce some sources of uncertainty that could exacerbate a market 
shock.  We  are  encouraged  by  the  progress  made  to  date  and  will  continue  to  encourage  further 
improvements.  
Second, we believe that the major dealers, as well as the large commercial and investment banks, 
should take a cold, hard look at financing conditions and margin practice, particularly with respect to 
hedge  fund  counterparties  and  in  OTC  derivatives.  The  reports  issued  by  the  Counterparty  Risk 
Management Policy Groups I and II both make the important observation that the financial system is 
likely to be more resilient under conditions of stress when counterparties set initial margins at levels 
that  are  likely  to  be  sustainable  in  less  benign  conditions.  When  margin  levels  are  set  more 
conservatively, firms are likely to have more flexibility in responding to stress and are less likely to take 
action that might amplify the market shock and exacerbate the reduction in liquidity. When competitive 
pressure drives margins down, markets may be less resilient.  
Third, we believe the major financial institutions need to continue to improve their capacity to measure 
their exposure to risk in a less benign market and economic environment than we have experienced in 
recent years. The discipline of stress testing and scenario analysis that is designed to measure tail risk 
is at the frontier of this challenge. Senior management and the boards of directors need to understand 
the limitations of the tools we use to assess these risks, to try to better understand the potential scale 
of losses the firm may face, and to carefully examine how well risk exposures reflect the overall risk 
appetite of  the  firm,  and  the size  of  the  capital and  liquidity cushion  maintained  in  relation  to  those 
exposures.  
BIS Review 54/2006 
 3
I want to conclude with the observation that the requirements of effective risk management and control 
regimes  are  likely  to  become  more  rather  than  less  demanding  over  time.  Those  charged  with 
managing the major financial institutions need to continue to make the investments necessary to stay 
abreast  of  change  and  to  get  as  close  to  the  frontier  as  possible.  This  reality  makes  it  even  more 
important that we in the supervisory community continue to look for ways to address aspects of the 
existing  supervisory  regime  that  impose  unnecessary  costs  and  burdens  or  that  pull  resources  and 
attention away from potential sources of risk to the financial system.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2006
