Jaime Caruana: Words of welcome - ECB Governing Council Dinner 
Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Governing  Council  Dinner  on  the  occasion  of  the  meeting  of  the 
European Central Bank Governing Council, Madrid, 7 June 2006. 
 It is a source of great satisfaction for me to welcome you to this dinner on the occasion of the meeting 
of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  in  Madrid.  We  are  particularly  honoured  by  the  presence  of  the 
President of the Government and by that of the other authorities and personalities accompanying us 
today.  
As many of you are aware, this is the second time the Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank has met here. The first was in March 2000, a little more than one year after the start of Monetary 
Union, unquestionably the most visible feature of European construction. On that occasion, the euro 
area economy appeared set on a notably dynamic path with year-on-year growth exceeding 3% and 
the  Spanish  economy,  in  turn,  was  maintaining  a  sustained  pace  of  expansion,  benefiting  from  the 
favourable monetary and financial conditions and strong job creation. Against this backdrop, Spanish 
citizens  could  already  perceive  the  favourable  effects  of  our  participation  in  the  euro  area  and, 
therefore, the success of the economic policies applied during the convergence process.  
It is thus no exaggeration to say that those present at a similar dinner six years ago felt quite optimistic 
about the prospects for the European economy, within Monetary Union, although the Union had only 
just taken its very first steps and euro banknotes and coins had not even begun to circulate.  
We  now  have  the  benefit  of  the  experience  built  up  in  the  intervening  period.  The  euro  has  meant 
tangible benefits in terms of savings on transaction costs for citizens, eliminating exchange rate risks 
within  the  area,  facilitating  market  integration  and  it  has  provided  an  environment  of  economic  and 
monetary stability.  
The ECB has attained high credibility in a short period of time which is undoubtedly a result of the 
clarity  of  its  objectives,  the  effectiveness  of  its  strategy  and  the  soundness  of  its  decisions. 
Nevertheless, it is a fact that the European economy has not managed to repeat growth figures close 
to those seen in 2000. It has been prone to bouts of notable sluggishness, highlighting - in addition to 
the effect of an unusual series of adverse shocks - the structural shortcomings holding back activity 
and  employment.  We  have  therefore  seen  that,  despite  the  favourable  effects  a  monetary  policy 
unequivocally  geared  to  price  stability  has  on  economic  prosperity,  the  full  effectiveness  of  its 
contribution requires an ambitious reform agenda in other economic policy spheres.  
The  Spanish  economy  has,  in  recent  years,  managed  to  sustain  and  even  step  up  its  pace  of 
expansion, benefiting from the notable migratory flows that have bolstered the expansionary impact of 
low  financing  costs.  At  the  same  time,  the presence  of certain  imbalances has been  detected.  And 
these,  though  consistent with  the  buoyancy  of  the economy,  give  rise  to certain  risks  for  the  future 
continuity of the expansion and, therefore, are focusing the attention of national economic authorities 
at present.  
In the few short years since the introduction of the euro, EMU has, admittedly, already revealed its 
capacity  to  promote  widespread  well-being.  But  it  has  also  revealed  specific  challenges  for  the 
authorities and economic agents as a whole, the nature and significance of which are not fully uniform 
across the member countries.  
In this respect, the federal structure of the Eurosystem is particularly useful for making the monetary 
authority’s conduct in the euro area efficient. This structure allows us to reconcile the unicity of our 
primary  objective  and  of  our  core  messages  with  detailed  knowledge  of  relevant  national 
developments and with a proximity to citizens that the national central banks provide.  
It is, therefore, my belief that these ECB Council meetings outside Frankfurt are a timely and regular 
reminder of the plurinational national nature of this governing body, which exercises its functions in a 
collegial and cohesive fashion for the benefit of all euro area countries and citizens.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 53/2006 
 1
