Erkki Liikanen: How to boost Europe's growth potential?  
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  CEPS  Breakfast  Meeting, 
Brussels, 10 March 2006. 
Slides for this speech can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website. 
 Economic growth in the EU has been sluggish in recent years, despite the robust world economy. As a 
matter of fact, growth has been strong in almost all parts of the world except for Western Europe.  
The weak performance of the euro area economy in recent years is not due to monetary policy. On the 
contrary, interest rates have been very low – both the long and the short term rates. Neither can the 
exchange rate be blamed for the sluggish growth. The external value of the euro has not been at a 
level  that  would  have  hurt  the  overall  price  competitiveness  of  euro  area  industries.  Therefore,  we 
have to look elsewhere for the reasons for the unsatisfactory growth performance.  
Weak  demographic  trends  have  been  one  of  the  factors  restraining  the  growth  of  the  EU  economy 
compared  with  many  other  parts  of  the  world.  In  the  future,  the  negative  demographic  trends  will 
continue. In addition, rising oil prices have in recent years held back growth in the EU. Unfortunately, 
economic policies cannot do much to reduce the effects of demographics and oil prices on growth. 
Luckily,  however,  there  are  also  issues  that  economic  policies  can  deal  with  in  order  to  increase 
Europe's growth potential. Let us now turn to those.  
It appears that the European economy has not been able to take advantage of new technologies and 
globalisation  as  effectively  as  the  United  States.  The  growth  of  labour  productivity  in  the  U.S.  has 
exceeded that of the EU since the mid 1990s.  
This table shows that the difference in productivity increases between the EU and the U.S. is largely 
due to developments in the IT goods producing sector, and – even more importantly – in the service 
sector. Within services, it is retail trade, wholesale trade, and financial services that count for most of 
the diverging productivity developments. These sectors are important users of IT.  
Indeed, there seems to be a lot of unexploited potential in the EU when it comes to labour productivity. 
First of all, productivity can improve within each industry and within each firm. Secondly, aggregate 
labour productivity can also be raised by the exit of industries and firms with weak productivity, and the 
entry of those with better productivity.  
Public authorities can facilitate improvements of this kind by removing obstacles to a more productive 
private sector. In the EU, such obstacles are largely related to national boundaries and to regulation of 
private businesses. Policy measures that promote competition and economic integration within the EU 
can significantly enhance productivity, employment, and economic growth.  
The  relation  between  competition  and  productivity  has  been  the  focus  of  a  significant  amount  of 
research in recent years. Several studies suggest that an increase in competition normally increases 
innovation  and  thereby  productivity  (e.g.  Aghion  et  al.  2002).1  This  is  because  companies  with 
monopoly power have less need to reform and to innovate.  
 Apart  from  the  effect  that  competition  has  on  innovations,  it  also  directly  improves  the  allocation  of 
resources  in  the  economy.  This  is  the  beneficial  characteristic  of  competitive  markets  according  to 
basic microeconomic theory. Competition increases production and lowers prices.  
A  few  recent  studies  investigate  the  macroeconomic  benefits  from  economic  reforms  that  promote 
competition. These studies utilise modern dynamic general equilibrium models. Simulations performed 
with such models show the effects of increases in competition, essentially starting from the effects that 
are familiar from the basic microeconomic theory.  
                                                      
1   Aghion,  Philippe  –  Bloom,  Nicholas  –  Blundell,  Richard  –  Griffith,  Rachel  –  Howitt,  Peter  (2002):  Competition  and 
Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship. NBER Working Paper No. 9269. 
BIS Review 19/2006 
 1
One of these studies focuses on the euro area. It investigates how increases in competition affect the 
euro area itself, as well as the rest of the industrial world.2 It is assumed that competition increases in 
the product and labour markets. In the language of the model, this means that mark-ups diminish in 
prices  and  wages.  The  mark-ups  are  defined  as  the  deviations  of  prices  and  wages  from  the 
theoretical case of perfect competition. The study assumes that competition in the euro area increases 
so much that it reaches the estimated level of the U.S. economy. This means that the price mark-up 
declines  by  12  percentage  points  (35  %  →  23  %)  and  the  wage  mark-up  by  14  percentage  points 
(30 % → 16 %). The central results of the study are shown in this slide.  
The slide shows the long-run effects of increased competition: first, in the product market and, second, 
in  the  labour  market.  The  combined  effect  is  shown  in  the  last  column  of  the  table.  Production, 
consumption, and employment are increased in each case. In addition, investment expands, as the 
increase in production requires an increase in the capital stock. One should note that the table does 
not show the values of the variables as such, but it shows how much they differ from the baseline case 
of no change in the level of competition.  
It  is  assumed  in  the  study  that  there  is  a  very  significant  increase  in  competition.  Therefore,  the 
estimated consequences are dramatic. Euro area GDP increases by as much as 12.4 % in the case 
presented in the last column of the table. 
The  product  market  reform  has  greater  effects  than  the  labour  market  reform,  particularly  on 
production and investment. Regarding employment, the effect of the labour market reform is almost as 
large. Outside the euro area, there are some positive spill-over effects. This is partly because foreign 
consumers benefit from the decline in the prices of the goods produced in the euro area.  
One way to look at the results of the study is to consider what they tell us about the possible future 
adjustment of the U.S. current account. According to the results, competition enhancing reforms in the 
euro area would make the adjustment less painful for the euro area itself, as well as for the rest of the 
world.  
In Finland, increases in competition would benefit the economy in much the same way as in the case 
of the whole euro area. This is shown by a simulation study made in the Bank of Finland. The study 
uses a dynamic general equilibrium model of the Finnish economy, the AINO model of the Bank of 
Finland. Again, the effects of increased competition in the product and labour markets are studied. The 
results  are  briefly  reported  in  the  Bank  of  Finland  Bulletin,  the  first  issue  of  2005.  The  results  are 
summarised in this slide.  
The  slide  shows  the  effects  of  decreases  in  the price  and wage  mark-ups  in  the  Finnish economy. 
Both the short-run and the long-run effects are shown. The long-run effects are smaller than those in 
the  previous  slide.  This  is  because  in  the  study  concerning  Finland,  the  assumed  increase  in 
competition is much smaller. The price mark-ups are assumed to decline by 2 percentage points and 
the wage mark-ups by 5 percentage points. Two-thirds of the increase in GDP is due to the increase in 
competition  in  the  product  markets,  and  one-third  is  due  to  the  increased  competition  in  the  labour 
market.  
Again, one should note that the figures in the slide do not show the values of the variables as such, 
but rather their deviations from the baseline case of no change in competition. For example, the level 
of real wages after two years is 0.4 % higher than what it would have been without the increase in 
competition.  
The next slide shows how the effects of increased competition propagate in the economy.  
In the long run, increased competition boosts production, consumption, and employment. Obviously, 
the increase in competition does not benefit every agent in the economy. There is a decrease in the 
profits of the firms that face a reduction in their monopoly power. Also, the short run developments are 
affected  by  the  fact  that  resources  shift  from  production  of  consumer  goods  to  production  of 
investment goods. This is because there is an early increase in investment due to the need for a larger 
capital stock to support the long-run increase in the level of GDP. Indeed, consumption is decreased in 
the short run. However, in the long run it increases by almost as much as GDP.  
                                                      
2   Bayoumi, Tamim – Laxton, Douglas – Pesenti, Paolo (2004): Benefits And Spillovers Of Greater Competition In Europe: A 
Macroeconomic Assessment. NBER Working Paper No. 10416. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2006
Of course, these model simulations only provide rough estimates of the effects of economic reforms. 
However, the qualitative results are clear: an increase in competition boosts GDP and welfare. One 
should  also  keep  in  mind that  these  results  are only  based  on  the  direct  effects  that  the  degree  of 
competition has on resource allocation. As I mentioned earlier, competition also increases innovation 
and thereby productivity. This effect comes on top of those indicated by the studies just discussed.  
 As  I  already  pointed  out,  the  growth  of  labour  productivity  in  the  service  sector  has  been slower  in 
Europe than in the U.S., and the financial services production is among the sectors with the largest 
differences  in  productivity  performance.  Moreover,  when  discussing  Europe's  growth  potential,  the 
development of the financial services sector is far more important than what its direct contribution to 
productivity growth would suggest. The development of financial services is crucial to the dynamism of 
Europe's economy.  
The function of financial services and financial markets in the economy is twofold. First, banks, capital 
markets,  and  other  parts  of  the  financial  system  play  a  central  role  in  evaluating,  trimming,  and 
promoting innovations and business ideas. In this way, the financial sector takes part in developing the 
economy, while at the same time it acts as an intermediary supplying financing to those who need it. 
The second central  task of  the  financial  sector  is related  to  payment  systems.  They  form  the  basic 
structure that makes the financial markets to operate as one entity. Without well-functioning payment 
systems  markets  would  be  fragmented:  locally,  regionally,  or  nationally.  Broad  and  competitive 
financial markets are impossible without an efficient and a unified payment system.  
Financial integration within the EU offers great opportunities to improve Europe's growth potential. The 
integration promotes economic growth for several reasons:  
•  First  of  all,  the  required  return  on  an  investment  project  is  reduced,  because  financing  is 
available at a lower price. This increases investment and employ-ment.  
•  Second, consumers benefit directly from smaller interest rate margins and decreased service 
fees.  
 •  Third, a greater variety of financial services becomes available. This adds to the benefits of 
the customers of the financial services sector.  
In  addition,  financial  integration  increases  the  stability  of  the  EU  economy,  because  an 
integrated financial system balances risks between countries. The effects of country specific 
fluctuations are dampened and shared more evenly, as the cross border ownership and trade 
of  financial  claims  increase.  In  the  U.S.,  a  significant  part  of  so  called  asymmetric  region 
specific income fluctuations are neutralised through the integrated financial system.  
The common monetary policy creates another, specific need for the euro area financial system to be 
as integrated as possible. Integration reduces the asymmetry of the effects of monetary policy across 
countries.  
Today,  we  have  a  common  monetary  policy  but  we  do  not  have  an  integrated  internal  market  for 
financial services.  
A lot has already been done within the EU to promote financial integration. An important instrument in 
this process has been the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP). It contains 42 measures, and almost 
all of them have been adopted at the EU level. However, the national implementation of many of the 
measures is still incomplete. A continuation to the FSAP in the form of further measures has already 
been discussed.  
Ultimately, the integration of the EU financial system, however, will not result from authorities' actions 
or regulation. Integration is realized when the market participants change their way of doing business. 
The task of the authorities is to remove obstacles to integration and to take care of the development of 
the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  The  three  main  areas  where  financial  integration  should 
proceed are all related to market infrastructures. The first is to create a common European market in 
retail  banking.  Here,  the  development  of  payment  systems  plays  an  important  role.  Secondly, 
securities clearing and settlement systems need to be made more integrated and efficient. The third 
area where progress is most needed is the integration and coordination of financial supervision. Of 
these three areas, I will next briefly focus on securities trade.  
BIS Review 19/2006 
 3
A  problem  in  the  securities  markets  is  their  current  lack  of  depth  and  integration.  An  important 
challenge is the fragmentation of clearing and settlement systems. It is an important factor behind the 
high price of securities transactions in Europe.  
This applies particularly to trade in equities. The cost of an equity transaction across national borders 
but within the EU can be as much as four times the cost of a similar transaction in the U.S. It is exactly 
these costs that prevent the integration of equity markets. They hurt the issuer of a stock via reducing 
its  price.  The  provider  of  financial  services,  in  turn,  faces  higher  costs.  The  infrastructure  of  the 
markets  has  too  strong  an  effect  on  the  location  of  transactions  and  businesses.  In  this  situation, 
current national features of the clearing and settlement systems should be evaluated from the point of 
view of their future in the integrating European market.  
4 
 BIS Review 19/2006
