Svein Gjedrem: Terms of trade shocks and challenges for stabilisation policy 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Symposium 
in Honour of Victor D Norman, Bergen, 7 June 2006. 
The speech does not contain new assessments of the economic situation or of current interest rate setting. Please note that the 
text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
The 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me first say that I am glad of the opportunity to speak at this symposium. Victor Norman has made 
valuable  contributions  to  our  understanding  of  international  economics,  both  as  a  researcher  and 
teacher.  Most  economists  that  have  graduated  in  Norway  since  the  early  1980s  are  familiar  with 
Victor’s textbooks.  
Victor has also been a powerful contributor to the public debate for more than a quarter of a century. 
While international trade and capital flows are key topics in his teaching and research, his involvement 
in the public debate also include issues like the competitive condition for business and industry, the 
effective  utilization  of  resources  –  not  least  in  the  public  sector  –  taxation  and  the  tax  system, 
pensions, health care, and many more.  
Substantial improvements in Norway’s terms-of-trade  
Looking at economic developments globally and in Norway over the last few years, it is reasonable to 
say that Victor’s main fields of interest are more important than ever.  
Trade  liberalisation,  political  changes,  technological  advances,  and  a  sharp  reduction  in  transaction 
costs have fuelled a globalisation process that seems to have accelerated over the last 15-20 years. 
As a result, cross-border flows of goods, services and capital are growing at a markedly faster pace 
than world production.  
Few countries are benefiting as much as Norway – and losing as little – in the current environment of 
freer  trade  and  increased  cross-border  labour  mobility.  Prices  for  goods  we  import  are  falling  in 
relation  to  prices  for  goods  we  export.  Norway’s  terms-of-trade  are  improving.  The  Norwegian 
economy  has  experienced  a  strong  positive  income  shock.  Real  national  disposable  income  will 
increase by 25-30 per cent in the period from 2003 to 2006. The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices 
is particularly strong, but the terms-of-trade gains for the mainland economy have also been high.  
The  situation  in  Norway  differs  from  that  of  our  Nordic  neighbour  countries.  Sales  of  Swedish  and 
Finnish high-tech products are growing strongly in volume terms, but prices are falling. Denmark has a 
diversified business sector, which is overall moving on a steady path.  
The terms-of-trade gains partly stem from a sharp rise in prices for oil, gas and other commodities. 
Strong  global  economic  expansion  in  combination  with  rapid  production  growth  in  China,  India  and 
other  newly  integrated  economies  has  led  to  a  substantial  rise  in  demand.  High  demand  for  oil 
combined with limited idle production capacity and uncertain production levels in many oil-producing 
countries  have  led  to  a  sharp  rise  in  oil  prices  and  other  energy  prices.  High  energy  prices  are 
boosting  investment  in  the  petroleum  and  electricity  sectors,  with  considerable  impetus  to  the 
engineering  industry.  Increased  trade  has  engendered  higher  demand  for  shipping  services  and 
favourable freight rates. This has in turn led to a boom in the shipbuilding industry.  
While oil prices are high, they are still lower than the prices that prevailed after the OPEC II shock in 
1979. Norwegian oil production, on the other hand, has increased considerably since then.  
Price developments have also been favourable for many metals. Prices for fresh farmed salmon have 
also shown a pronounced rise in recent years.  
As consumers, we are benefiting from ongoing globalization through falling prices for many imported 
goods.  After  a  shift  towards  a  higher  share  of  imports  from  low-cost  countries,  prices  for  Norway’s 
imported consumer goods have fallen virtually every year since the mid-1990s.  
BIS Review 50/2006 
 1
The change in clothing prices may serve as an illustration. Prices rose by around 3 per cent annually 
for a long period, but since 1995 they have been falling by about 6 per cent annually. This kink point 
coincides with the dismantling of barriers in the textile trade and with a period of rationalisation in retail 
trade in Norway.  
The  magnitude  of  the  current  income  shock  is  best  seen  in  a  longer,  historical  persepective.  The 
improvement over the last few years is the largest since the First World War. The level of our terms-of-
trade has not been as high since the late 1940s.  
Sweden  has  experienced  a  decline  in  terms-of-trade.  If  we  again  compare  terms-of-trade 
developments in Norway and Sweden, we see that the shocks to the Swedish economy have tended 
to be smaller.  
Challenges in a petroleum economy 
The  current  macroeconomic  framework,  most  notably  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  regimes,  has 
been  quite  successful  so  far  in  shielding  the  Norwegian  economy  from  excessive  fluctuations.  The 
increase  in  income  has  not  led  to  a  pronounced  rise  in  price  and  wage  inflation.  Businesses  have 
become  increasingly  efficient  in  their  use  of  resources,  and  the  supply  of  labour  has  been  ample. 
Nevertheless,  in  the  face  of  such  strong  external  influences,  smoothing  developments  in  the 
Norwegian economy is no easy task.  
Government revenues include large net cash flows deriving from oil, which gives us an economic base 
that is not available to many other countries. The size of the cash flow from petroleum activities varies, 
however.  And  if  petroleum  revenues  were  to  be  spent  as  they  accrue,  the  result  would  be  wider 
fluctuations in the Norwegian economy.  
Petroleum  revenue  spending  also  has  an  impact  on  competitiveness  in  Norwegian  business  and 
industry.  Extensive  and  uneven  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  would  have  a  negative  impact  on 
exposed industries.  
The particular challenges of petroleum revenues can be illustrated by looking at the basic relationship 
between aggregate production, consumption and relative prices.  
The potential production frontier shows alternative combinations for the production of sheltered goods 
and  goods  exposed  to  international  competition  when  labour  and  capital  are  used  efficiently. 
Consumers prefer a combination of sheltered and traded goods. In equilibrium, the relative price of 
sheltered goods in terms of traded goods is the price that clears the markets. In this simple one-period 
model, the trade balance is zero. Furthermore, the relative price is equal to the real exchange rate.  
Introducing petroleum revenues, which can be seen as a cost-free foreign exchange gift, separates 
the  consumption  possibility  frontier  from  potential  production  in  mainland  Norway.  Consumers  can 
increase their consumption of traded goods without producing more. However, with a higher income 
level, demand for sheltered goods also increases. In order to facilitate the transfer of resources, wages 
are bid up and prices for sheltered goods increase. Consequently, the real exchange rate appreciates. 
The  new  equilibrium  implies  that  consumption  and  production  of  sheltered  goods  have  risen. 
Production of traded goods has declined, while the consumption of these goods has increased due to 
the foreign exchange gift.  
Structural changes – i.e. the transfer of resources from production of exposed to sheltered goods – are 
amplified when petroleum revenue spending increases substantially. And the challenges resulting from 
these structural changes would be amplified if petroleum revenue spending varied from one period to 
another.  
Victor Norman has described this mechanism and presented charts similar to the ones shown here in 
textbooks that have been widely used at Norwegian universities and business schools since the early 
1980s.  
This mechanism was also recognized at an early stage by the Norwegian government. In 1974, in a 
report1 to the Parliament entitled “The role of petroleum activities in Norwegian society”, this issue was 
discussed in depth. I quote: “A transfer of production and employment between firms and industries 
                                                      
1   Report no. 25 to the Storting (the Parliament), 1974. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2006
may occur through higher domestic cost pressures” … and further … “How strong the pressures will 
be, depends in particular on how strongly Norwegian business and industry is involved in petroleum 
activities and the scale of revenues that are spent domestically”.  
The risk of “Dutch disease”2 has been a common reference in the discussion on petroleum revenue 
spending.  Dutch  disease  occurs  when  spending  is  so  high  that  the  basis  for  exposed  industries  is 
eroded and fluctuations in economic activity are amplified.  
Changes  in  industry  structure  involve  costs  in  that  invested  capital  may  remain  idle  and  labour 
resources may be used less efficiently in periods. It may take time and be difficult to re-establish the 
use  of  these  resources.  Restructuring  costs  would  probably  be  so  substantial  that  the  government 
should take them into account. An economist3 in Norges Bank has found, using a stylised model, that 
in order to minimise restructuring costs over time, petroleum revenue spending should be limited in 
such a way that a constant share of imports can be financed by petroleum revenues for an indefinite 
period. Furthermore, he found that spending one per cent of total petroleum wealth per year would 
achieve  this.  Petroleum  wealth  comprises  here  both  financial  wealth  accumulated  in  the  petroleum 
fund and the value of oil and gas under the seabed. The rule implies that petroleum revenue spending 
would not affect the real exchange rate. This work focused on minimising restructuring costs, and did 
not analyse the issue on the basis of a more general welfare function.  
Moreover, the flexibility of the economy to adapt to a shifting economic environment may change over 
time. Increased flexibility and efficiency in labour, capital and goods markets may reduce the need to 
take restructuring costs into consideration.  
I will come back to our current fiscal rule for petroleum revenue spending shortly.  
The need for some sort of rule in fiscal policy aimed at restraining petroleum revenue spending should 
become clear when we look at our experience over the last 30 to 40 years.  
The government began at an early stage to budget on the basis of future strong growth in petroleum 
revenues.  The  result  was  that  we  spent  a  large  share  of  our  petroleum  income  in  the  1970s  and 
1980s.  Welfare  schemes  were  expanded  significantly.  The  real  exchange  rate  appreciated,  and 
manufacturing  industry  was scaled  back.  Frequent devaluations from  1976  were  unable  in  the  long 
term  to  prevent  a  decline  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  On  the  contrary,  they  proved  to  be  self-
reinforcing.  
The absence of a nominal anchor was one of the main reasons behind the pronounced swings in the 
Norwegian  economy  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  With  a  policy  of  low  interest  rates  and  devaluations, 
inflation took root. Nominal interest rates were kept at a low level even though inflation rose. The wide 
fluctuations culminated in a credit boom in the mid-1980s.  
Victor Norman recognized this mechanism. In 1986, he argued in a newspaper article4 that: “We are 
again  treading  a  path  where  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  amplify  cyclical  fluctuations  instead  of 
moderating them. We saw this clearly in 1982/1983 and again last year.”  
The  value  of  petroleum  exports  can  be  quite  volatile  and  uncertain.  Petroleum  exports  rose  rapidly 
until the oil price declined markedly in 1986.  
The recession after the credit bubble burst and after oil prices fell was deep. The recession was more 
severe  than  would  have  been  the  case  if  we  had  maintained  a  larger,  competitive  manufacturing 
sector.  Norwegian  manufacturing  lost  export  market  shares  in  the  late  1980s  in  spite  of  booming 
conditions abroad and substantial capacity slack at home.  
The value of petroleum exports rose again to historically high levels in 2000. High petroleum revenues 
to the government made it increasingly challenging to smooth cyclical fluctuations by means of fiscal 
policy. Greater responsibility for stabilising inflation and output fell to monetary policy.  
                                                      
2   The expression “Dutch disease” originates from the Netherlands, where the government rapidly spent large revenues from 
the extraction of gas in the 1960s. 
3   Q.  Farooq  Akram  (2005):  “Efficient  consumption  of  revenues  from  natural  resources  –  An  application  to  Norwegian 
petroleum revenues”. Norges Bank, Working Paper 2005/1. 
4   Aftenposten Morgen 11 September 1986. 
BIS Review 50/2006 
 3
Economic  policy  was  revised  in  spring  2001.  The  most  important  policy  change  was  the  plan  for 
phasing in petroleum revenues – the so-called fiscal rule. An inflation target for monetary policy was 
introduced at the same time.  
The fiscal rule and the inflation target can also be seen as an answer to the problems raised by Finn 
Kydland and Edward Prescott. The insights from their influential work was that economic policy can 
achieve  better  results  if  the  authorities  can  commit  themselves  to  a  pre-established  set  of  credible 
policy rules.  
The  need  for  rules  in  the spirit  of  Kydland  and  Prescott  is  perhaps greater  in  Norway  than  in  most 
other  countries.  Other  countries  often  find  themselves  in  situations  where  they  have  to  limit  and 
stabilise their fiscal deficits and government debt levels. Balanced budgets serve as a long-term guide 
for fiscal policy. For us, balanced budgets will not work as a guideline.  
Macroeconomic framework  
Norway’s  stabilisation  policy  now  rests  on  four  pillars.  Under  the  petroleum  fund  mechanism, 
increased  government  petroleum  revenues  are  invested  abroad.  This  curbs  the  impact  of  oil  price 
fluctuations on domestic demand and production – and on inflation and the exchange rate. A floating 
krone  also  has  a  stabilising  effect,  as  the  exchange  rate  normally  appreciates  in  good  times  and 
depreciates in bad. At the same time, the fiscal rule and the inflation target anchor exchange rate and 
inflation expectations. As a result, the impact on these variables of a terms-of-trade change, stemming 
from variations in the oil price, becomes less pronounced. Moreover, the fiscal rule slows the pace at 
which exposed industries are scaled back.  
According  to  the  fiscal  rule,  petroleum  revenue  spending  shall  be  limited  to  four  per  cent,  i.e.  the 
expected annual real return on the accumulated financial wealth in the petroleum fund. This implies a 
steady  phasing-in  of  petroleum  revenues  into  the  mainland  economy.  This  partly  insulates  the 
economy from fluctuations in petroleum prices and extraction rates in the petroleum sector – and when 
followed  it  ensures  that  revenue  spending  in  the  Norwegian  economy  is  at  a  level  that  can  be 
sustained  over  time.  Nevertheless,  as  the  petroleum  fund  is  becoming  very  large,  the  fiscal  rule 
implies  that  sizeable  and  increasing  revenues  will  be  spent  every  year,  thereby  leading  to 
expansionary impulses from fiscal policy.  
We must also strive for an equitable distribution of our wealth across generations. Although the value 
of the petroleum fund is considerable, financing the large future pension payments under our universal 
pay-as-you-go scheme will be very demanding.  
The  cost  level  in  the  Norwegian  economy,  compared  with  that  of  our  trading  partners,  rose 
substantially with the beginning of the oil age. The level has fluctuated somewhat since then, without a 
clear tendency to become higher or lower, and has, over time, been adapted to a steady phasing-in of 
petroleum revenues into the mainland economy. When we reach a point in the future when the share 
of imports that can be financed by petroleum revenues declines, the relative cost level will have to be 
reduced. The real exchange rate may have to be brought back to around the level prevailing at the 
end of the 1960s, prior to Norway’s emergence as an oil nation.  
This depreciation can be achieved either by lower price and wage inflation in Norway than in other 
countries or by a nominal depreciation of the krone. The latter would be the least painful channel, and 
with a flexible exchange rate it is also the most likely.  
Final remarks 
To sum up, increased globalisation and the ensuing terms of trade improvements have exposed the 
Norwegian economy to a significant upward income shock. This has amplified the domestic upswing. 
So  far,  however,  strong  growth  impulses  have  not  led  to  major  imbalances  in  the  labour  market  or 
strong upward wage and price pressures.  
This  may  be  seen  as  an  indication  that  our  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  guidelines  have  been  quite 
successful so far in shielding the Norwegian economy from excessive fluctuations.  
In principle, these policy guidelines are just as appropriate for coping with favourable periods as with 
adverse periods. We will face another test of the macroeconomic framework when the terms-of-trade 
change is reversed and the gains either fully or partly dissipate.  
4 
 BIS Review 50/2006
Structural policies aimed at maintaining flexibility in labour, capital and goods markets are, however, 
probably more important than stabilisation policy to sustain both high growth and economic stability in 
the future.  
Developments in labour productivity over the last two decades may be an indication of the importance 
of structural policies. Norway has managed to sustain productivity growth at a high level. Restructuring 
in  the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  1990s,  changes  in  the  tax  system,  broader  and  deeper  financial 
markets, and deregulation in trade and service markets appear to have resulted in a more efficient use 
of resources.  
Many of these changes were advocated by Victor Norman in the 1980s and early 1990s. For example, 
in 1991 he chaired an official committee5 exploring possible efficiency gains in the government sector. 
In  the  report,  high  possible  efficiency  gains  were  envisaged  as  a  consequence  of  the  committee’s 
proposals, including a better functioning labour market. Victor’s conviction as to what economic policy 
can accomplish can be illustrated by the following quote from the committee’s report: "We believe that 
in  principle  it  should  be  possible  to  once  again  reduce  unemployment  in  Norway  to  one  per  cent 
without creating permanent pressures and restructuring problems in the economy."  
Thank you for your attention! 
                                                      
5  See NOU 1991: 28, ”Mot bedre vitende? Effektiviseringsmuligheter i offentlig sector” (only available in Norwegian). 
BIS Review 50/2006 
 5
