Yves Mersch: Monetary policy and time inconsistency in an uncertain 
environment 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the NOBELUX Seminar, 
Luxembourg, 11 September 2006. 
1  
Time inconsistency and policy 
 About time inconsistency 
1.1  
On October 11, 2004 Fynn Kydland and Edward Prescott were rewarded the "Bank of Sweden Prize 
in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel". One of the reasons for granting them the so-called 
"Nobel-prize in economics", was that they enriched the economics profession with an insight that was 
to change the thinking about economic policy. At first, their research was meant to merely shed some 
light on the execution of control theory in dynamic systems. All of a sudden, however, they ran into a 
problem, which although seemingly harmless, was to direct their work into a completely unexpected 
direction. They discovered the power of expectations in a policy planning framework. 
In  the  late  1960s,  the  role  of  expectations  was  investigated  thoroughly  and  they  were  found  to  be 
important variables, which may determine economic outcomes. Academics like Milton Friedman and 
Edmund Phelps strongly contributed to this line of research in the framework of monetary policy. Later 
Robert Lucas introduced the concept of "rational" expectations. According to this concept, individuals 
form their expectations rationally, using all information available to them. The information includes the 
functioning  of  the  economy,  the  objectives  of  the  government  and  all  other  relevant  variables.  This 
concept  implies  that  a  government  (or  the  monetary  authority)  cannot  systematically  betray  market 
participants by pretending to follow a certain policy and subsequently acting differently. 
Using  this  argument,  Kydland  and  Prescott  included  government  behaviour  in  their  model  and 
assumed that individuals form rational expectations. They showed that even if the government and its 
citizens pursue the same objectives, i.e. maximising the welfare of the population, discretionary policy 
is subject to a fundamental time consistency problem. The fundamental problem is that a government 
policy  that  is  optimal  at  a  certain  point  in  time  may  not  be  optimal  later  on.  Since  individuals  form 
rational expectations, they realize that the government has this incentive to deviate from its previously 
announced policy, and behave accordingly. 
The point is that the population’s expectations put an extra constraint on government policy and so if 
the government has an incentive to deviate, consistent policy will not be optimal and an optimal policy 
will  not  be  time  consistent.  If,  for  example,  the  government  chooses  the  policy  optimal  at  a  certain 
point in time, it does not take into account the expectations previously formed by the private sector. 
Since  the  private  sector  did  take  some  economic  decisions  based  upon  these  expectations,  the 
government  policy  is  not  time  consistent.  On  the  contrary,  if  the  government  were  to  follow  a  time 
consistent policy, this would not be optimal. To illustrate this theory, Kydland and Prescott used some 
very accessible examples such as the following. 
Imagine a flood plain in which the government does not want its citizens to build their houses because 
it  would  have  to  construct  dams  in  order  to  protect  the  houses.  If  there  were  houses  in  this  plain, 
however,  it  would  be  optimal  for  the  government  to  construct  dams  to  protect  its  citizens. 
Consequently, if rational agents are certain that the government is not going to build dams to protect 
the plain, they will not build houses, which would be the best outcome for the economy as a whole. On 
the  other  hand,  since  the  citizens know  that,  once the  houses  are  there,  the optimal choice  for  the 
government is to construct the dams and hence rational citizens will build houses in the flood plain. 
Now, what is the solution to this time inconsistency problem? The only solution can be summarized in 
one single word: commitment. Commitment in this case means that the government abandons control 
over certain policy options in order to credibly communicate to its subjects that policy is not going to be 
changed in the future. In the above example, if the government could enact a law that prohibits it from 
constructing  dams  in  the  flood  plain,  implying  that  the  decision  on  dams  would  no  longer  be  in  its 
hands, citizens would not expect the government to change its mind and consequently they would not 
build their houses in the flood plain. 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 1
Whenever  a  time  consistency  problem  arises,  policy  rules  of  some  kind  are  clearly  superior  to 
discretionary policy. Policy rules can be understood as any mechanism that helps the government to 
credibly commit to a certain policy and which prevents it from changing its mind later on. 
In the domain of monetary economics, the issue of policy rules was picked up in the late 1980s. Most 
important  was  the  work  of  Bennet  McCallum  but  also  of  John  Taylor  who  introduced  the  famous 
"Taylor rule".  
Bounded discretion versus explicit policy rules 
The idea behind rules is to give up the discretionary influence that policy makers have upon monetary 
policy. This is to make credible that monetary policy only depends upon the predetermined factors that 
are included in the rule. Since economic agents can cross check the results, credibility can easily be 
achieved. Another advantage of rules is the ease with which the public can determine its expectations. 
Under  a  regime  led  by  rules,  at  least  some  if  not  all  elements  that  guide  monetary  policy  are 
observable and thus agents can derive future monetary policy by means of the rule. 
But policy rules do have important drawbacks, which in the end are the reason why they are never 
used  in  practice  as  a  guide  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  John  Taylor  himself  notes  it  in  his 
famous  1993  article  that  "[…]  operating  the  rule  requires  judgement  and  cannot  be  done  by  the 
computer". What he means is that policy rules have the disadvantage of being inflexible. Since a rule 
must include some variables at the expense of others, it is obviously ill-prepared to unforeseen shocks 
that affect the economy. For example some demand shocks might require a quick response by the 
monetary authority in order to guarantee price stability. 
A  solution  to  this  problem  consists  in  using  a  broader  definition  of  a  policy  rule.  Taylor  gives  the 
example of patent laws. If an inventor obtains a patent, he has the right to exploit a certain principle for 
a couple of years. The details of the invention are not subject to the patent. In a similar way, a policy 
rule  can  be  understood  as  a  set  of  objectives  and  targets  subject  to  which  the  monetary  authority 
takes its decisions. In this sense, bounded discretion is a systematic collection of discretionary policy 
actions  which,  while  leaving  the  flexibility  to  react  to  unforeseen  events,  offers  the  credibility  and 
purposefulness of a rule. 
Time inconsistency and policy 
1.2  
There are hardly any scientific publications in economics that had as important an impact on day-to-
day policy-making as the contribution of Kydland and Prescott. Soon after identifying the inherent time 
inconsistency  problem  of  optimal  policy  plans  with  rational  expectations,  similar  problems  were 
discovered in many areas of economic policy. The most important and influential ones were the time 
inconsistency problems concerning capital taxation in fiscal policy and the output inflation trade-off in 
monetary policy. Although both problems reside in different domains of public policy the core of both 
remains  the  same.  In  addition  to  dealing  with  these,  I  will  also  review  a  peculiar  kind  of  time 
inconsistency related to fiscal sustainability. 
Fiscal policy 
1.2.1 
One important finding in the domain of public finance is the Ramsey principle of optimal factor income 
taxation. Developed in 1927 by the economist Frank Ramsey, it asserts that the input factor with the 
lowest  elasticity  of  substitution  should  be  taxed  most.  In  order  to  keep  the  distortionary  effects  of 
taxation as moderate as possible, those factors that react least to taxation should be taxed most. 
Since the savings of today are the capital stock of tomorrow, a problem of time inconsistency arises in 
capital taxation. In order to promote savings and assure the capital stock of tomorrow, the government 
has to be wary of the elasticity of substitution of capital. That is to say, the government must account 
for the relatively high mobility of capital. This implies setting a low tax rate on capital income. 
Ex-post  however,  once  capital  is  installed,  its  mobility  drops  to  zero.  Applying  the  same  Ramsey 
principle  then,  implies  taxing  capital  at  100  %.  Of  course  rational  individuals  would  anticipate  this 
outcome, and not save in the first place. Again the government needs a commitment mechanism that 
helps it to credibly communicate that it won’t change its mind. In this case, reputation serves in part as 
such a mechanism. 
Besides  the  Ramsey  principle,  time  inconsistency  could  feed  through  to  another  avenue  in  public 
finance. At a given point in time, governments could be tempted to depart from the optimal strategy, 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2006
i.e. fiscal soundness. They could, for instance, increase public expenditure in order to accommodate 
the demands of the median voter or specific constituencies. This move would of course result in higher 
deficits  and  therefore  future  taxes.  However,  governments  are  in  a  position  to  conceal  this 
uncomfortable message over the short or even the medium term, at least if the "rational expectations" 
assumption  is  relaxed.  First,  it  could  make  overly  optimistic  macroeconomic  projections  in  order  to 
hide  the  challenge  to  fiscal  sustainability.  Second,  it  could  throw  a  veil  of  mist  on  this  problem  by 
capitalising on the uncertainty inherent in the definition and measurement of sustainability, especially 
over a long-term horizon. 
In many cases, the "true state of the world" will be disclosed well after the government responsible for 
higher expenditure has departed. This form of time inconsistency is quite peculiar and distinct from the 
concept I referred to so far. In the latter, as already said, the government might "betray" the citizens by 
pretending to follow a certain policy and by acting differently ex post. In the current, "peculiar" form of 
the  concept,  the  government  would  confuse  the  citizens  ex  ante  by  pretending  to  follow  a  rigorous 
fiscal  policy.  The  "true  state  of  the  world"  would  manifest  itself  through  higher  deficits  or  other 
breaches of sustainability, probably when it would be too late to address this challenge in an efficient 
way. The government does not renege on its promises in an active way, through the implementation of 
new, explicit measures, but it distorts ex ante the "true state of the world". 
Two  commitment  mechanisms  could  mitigate  this  peculiar  kind  of  time  inconsistency.  First, 
independent  budgetary  institutions  could  be  set  up.  They  would  endeavour  to  lift  the  veil  of 
uncertainty,  for  instance  by  conducting  independent  macroeconomic  projections.  These  projections 
could  be  the  cornerstone  of  the  elaboration  of  general  government  budgets  (central  government, 
social  security,  State  and  local  governments).  Independent  institutions  could  also  be  in  charge  of 
measuring  and  monitoring  fiscal  sustainability  based  on  long-term  projections.  Such  institutions  are 
already  in  place  in  many  countries,  in  particular  in  small,  open  economies.  Let  me  mention  as 
examples Belgium (High Council of Finance), The Netherlands (the Central Planning Bureau provides 
independent  macroeconomic  and  budgetary  forecasts),  Denmark  (Economic  Council)  and  Austria 
(Government Debt Committee). 
In  Luxembourg,  to  a  certain  extent,  the  BCL  assumes  the  role  of  an  independent  fiscal  institution. 
Accordingly  the  BCL  staff  continuously  analyses  the  situation  and  structure  of  the  Luxembourg 
economy. This enables the BCL to comment on the fiscal sustainability and time consistency of policy 
actions taken by the government. Examples for this are the general government budget deficit, which 
amounted  to  1.9%  of  GDP  in  2005  after  significant  surpluses  from  1993  to  2002  and  a  balanced 
situation  in  2003.  The  BCL  explicitly  warned  the  government  of  risks  to  the  fiscal  balance  well  in 
advance,  already  in  2002.  Furthermore,  the  demographical  and  macroeconomic  challenge  to  the 
pension system, which by now is widely acknowledged, was subject to a BCL working paper in 2003. 
The  health  system  was  also  under  scrutiny  in  several  issues  of  the  BCL  monthly  bulletin.  In  these 
respects the BCL by adding an independent and critical point of view to the policy of the government 
enhances consistency  in  the  process  of  policy-making  in  Luxembourg.  The major  problem  the  BCL 
faces  in  these  independent  monitoring  tasks  is  the  absence  of  sufficiently  detailed  information  on 
budget  outturns,  in  particular  as  regards  direct  taxes  and  the  implementation  of  the  expenditure 
programmes of the so-called "special" extra-budgetary funds. The setting up of an independent council 
– for instance along the lines of the Belgian "Conseil Supérieur des Finances" – with a transparent 
flow of information between the participants could help overcome this problem. 
Numerical fiscal rules and multi-annual budgetary frameworks are also essential in this respect. Since 
they constrain ex ante the behaviour of governments, for instance via expenditure limits, the scope for 
time  inconsistent  policies  is  narrowed.  Independent  budgetary  institutions  could  be  in  charge  of 
monitoring  the  implementation  of  fiscal  rules.  These  institutions  could  contribute  to  improving  the 
definition  of  fiscal  rules,  which  is  of  paramount  importance.  For  instance,  expenditure  rules  will  not 
effectively  influence  budgetary  outcomes  if  they  overlook  the  transactions  carried  out  by  extra-
budgetary institutions or funds. The rules and their definitions would ideally be enshrined in law. The 
fact that legal acts are more difficult to change is a protection against time inconsistency. According to 
a recent study of the European Commission, legally binding rules tend to be more efficient than softer 
rules. 
1.2.2   Monetary policy 
In 1958 London School of Economics professor A. W. Phillips published an article in which he showed 
an empirical connection between wage inflation and unemployment. His data on British wage inflation 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 3
and the unemployment rate covered the timeperiod between 1861 and 1957 and showed a negative 
relation between the rate of change in nominal wages and the number of people without a job. 
Of  course  the  idea  that  a  trade-off  between  employment  and  inflation  exists  was  and  still  is  a  very 
tempting one to politicians. The so-called Phillips curve could then be interpreted as a menu card that 
allows politicians to choose whether they want to have high inflation or high unemployment. Soon the 
temptation was followed and many governments tried to fight unemployment by conducting inflationary 
monetary policy. 
However,  when  the  attempt  was  made  to  exploit  the  above  relationship,  it  collapsed.  The 
employment-inflation  trade-off  that  seemed  stable  for  a  whole  century  broke  down  during  the  late 
1960s  and  early  1970s.  All  of  a  sudden,  those  countries  that  tried  to  fight  unemployment  with 
inflationary  policy  ended  up  with  both:  high  inflation  and  unemployment.  Time  inconsistency,  could 
again be made responsible for this puzzling fact. Moreover, the solution to the collapse of the Phillips 
curve was to become the foundation of modern central banking. 
The output-inflation trade-off example 
In  the  late  1960s  and  the  first  half  of  the  1970s,  the  reason  for  the  breakdown  of  the  relationship 
discovered by Phillips was found. It was mainly due to Friedman, Phelps and Lucas that the difficulty 
with  the  simplistic  "menu-card"  view  of  politics  was  unveiled.  The  newly  discovered  expectations 
played a main role in their arguments. 
The most important thing to comprehend, these academics claimed, was that the relationship between 
unemployment and inflation was stable only when inflation expectations were stable. If this was not the 
case,  then  the  relationship  itself  would  change  in  structure,  and  hence  collapse.  The  Phillips  curve 
would simply shift. 
The  key  argument  was  that  inflation  expectations  of  individuals  enter  the  relationship  between 
unemployment  and  inflation  because  individuals  need  a  measure  of  inflation  to  determine  the  next 
periods’ real wage. In the end, real variables like unemployment or output can only be determined by 
real  variables  like  the  real  wage.  Once  individuals  have  adapted  their  expectations  to  the 
accommodative monetary policy of the monetary authority, further monetary expansion is like pushing 
on a string. It can only lead to high inflation, leaving unemployment unaltered. 
The time inconsistency nature of this problem lies in the fact that only unanticipated inflation leads to 
lower  unemployment  because  it  depresses  real  wages.  Again,  the  socially  optimal  strategy  of  the 
monetary  authority  changes  between  periods.  Ex-ante  it  is  optimal  to  follow  a  restrictive  monetary 
policy aiming at low inflation. Ex-post however, when expectations of the public are formed, and have 
induced  a  certain  behaviour  of  the  agents,  it  is  optimal  for  the  monetary  authority  to  defect  and 
produce  "surprise"-inflation.  The  monetary  authority,  however,  cannot  permanently  fool  agents  with 
rational expectations, because they are aware of the incentives of the monetary authority to regress on 
its decision about inflation. So in the end, any attempt of the monetary authority to exploit the Phillips-
relationship is doomed to produce inflation without reducing unemployment. 
A related example in the Luxembourgish context consists in the nominal wage-indexation rule, which 
characterizes wage setting behaviour in the Grand Duchy. The wage-indexation rule may in a model of 
the Phillips curve, prima facie, seem as a device to stabilize inflation expectations, and alleviate the 
inflationary  bias.  However  some  important  caveats  do  apply.  Wage-indexation  is  per  definition 
backward  looking  so  that  information  concerning  expectations  is  ignored.  Moreover,  it  is  prone  to 
supply shocks that strike the economy and may, through second-round effects, heat the wage-price 
spiral.  Recent  oil  price  increases,  to  name  but  the  most  prominent  example,  have  fed  into  price 
increases, which in turn have triggered several increases of the index. Through this channel supply 
shocks  have  a  stronger  and  more  lasting  effect  than  they  would  without  indexation.  Several 
alternatives to resolve this problem have been suggested, mostly by excluding goods with high price 
volatility  from  the  relevant  inflation  measure  or  by  tying  the  index  to  price  developments  in 
neighbouring  countries.  Further  caveats  concerning  wage-indexation  point  out  that  it  introduces 
rigidities into labour markets, which hampers adjustment processes. Lastly by mitigating the cost of 
inflation for wage earners it may reduce the will to fight inflation. Hereby wage-indexation influences 
the incentives and hence the credibility of the authorities. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2006
2  
The monetary policy of the Eurosystem and the time inconsistency problem 
Central banking and the time inconsistency problem 
2.1 
The  insight  on  the  time  inconsistency  problem  of  monetary  policy  made  it  clear  that  some  sort  of 
commitment  device  was  necessary  in  order  to  overcome  the  inflation  bias  of  monetary  policy. 
Research had shown that under discretionary monetary policy certain equilibria were not attainable in 
the  presence  of  rational  agents.  In  the  1980s  several  proposals  were  made  on  how  to  resolve  this 
problem. 
One idea was for the monetary authority to invest in "good reputation" by continuously fighting inflation 
and by this shape the expectations of the private sector concerning future inflation. In the end it was 
the economist Kenneth Rogoff who showed that a good solution was to delegate monetary policy to 
an independent central bank. The incentives set for the central bank had to be such that it would be 
able to make economic agents believe in its determination to deliver price stability. For instance, one 
could make the central bank president’s wage depend on the degree of price stability that his policy 
delivers. New Zealand went even further as according to his employment contract, the Governor can 
be  dismissed  if  the  inflation  rate  exceeds  the  target.  The  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  has  to 
explain  the  underlying  reasons  and  to  present  appropriate  monetary  policy  measures  if  inflation 
deviates more than 1 p. p. from the target set by the Government. So to delegate monetary policy to 
an  independent  central  bank  was  supposed  to  allow  for  a  good  balance  between  credibility  and 
flexibility. On the grounds of these arguments central banks throughout the world were reformed with a 
special focus on giving them more operational independence. 
Independent central banks have to keep in touch with markets and guide market participants through 
sensible monetary policy. The central banks’ obligations are mainly twofold. On the one hand a central 
bank has to conduct monetary policy such that price stability is maintained. On the other hand, central 
banks can help to stabilise the economy, when it is shaken by fluctuations. Those obligations are two 
sides to one medal and what is of utmost importance to fulfil them is credibility. 
On  February  7th  1991  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  was  signed  in  Maastricht.  After  having 
experienced an extended period of very high inflation between the mid 1960s and the mid 1980s, an 
essential aim of the participating nations was to assure price stability. In order to achieve this, the aim 
of  price  stability  and  the  independence  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  were 
enshrined in the Treaty. 
Next, I will present the strategy of the Eurosystem to you, thereby focusing especially on the issue of 
time consistency. 
The Eurosystem monetary policy 
2.2 
As a relatively young organisation, the ESCB with at its heart the ECB was able from start to cherish 
the  fruits  of  the  research  I  just  presented.  As  a  result,  many  important  results  were  implemented 
straightaway. The first and foremost example thereof is the crucial role that is given to price stability. 
To manifest this importance, Article 105 of the Treaty on European Union stipulates that the primary 
objective of the ESCB "[…] is to maintain price stability". All other objectives are subordinate to this. 
Obviously, this is to make clear to the public, that the ESCB is committed to price stability only. To 
emphasise this, the article continues: "[w]ithout prejudice to the goal of price stability, the ESCB shall 
support the general economic policies in the Community with a view to contribute to the achievement 
of the objectives of the Community […]". 
2.2.1  Commitment devices of the Eurosystem 
As  I  just  described,  it  is  not  only  important  to  clearly  state  a  certain  goal  in  order  to  influence 
expectations.  The  other  important  and  presumably  more  difficult  part  is  to  make  that  statement 
credible to the public. 
In order to make its monetary policy ambitions credible, the Eurosystem needs devices that prove its 
determination to maintain price stability. A key ingredient, if not the most important, for credibility, is a 
clear quantitative definition of price stability. 
Milton  Friedman,  at  the  time,  trusted  neither  politicians  nor  central  bankers  and  thus  advocated  a 
constitutional rule that required constant money growth. Constitutions are devices well suited to prove 
the  seriousness  of  a  purpose.  Since  it  is  hard  to  change  them,  even  for  politicians,  they  provide  a 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 5
strong insurance against a government changing its mind. It is certainly with this fact in mind that the 
price stability target was included in the article 105 of the Treaty on European Union. As a primordial 
prerequisite for the monetary union and considering the above-mentioned time inconsistency issues, 
the Treaty is the appropriate place for defining the major objective of the ESCB. In order to further 
clarify this target, the Governing Council of the ECB defined price stability in October 1998 as: "[…] a 
year-on-year  increase  in  the  HICP  for  the  euro  area  of  below  2  %".  In  May  2003  the  Governing 
Council further narrowed its target by restraining inflation rates to be "[…] below but close to 2 % over 
the medium term". 
A clearly defined and appropriately fixed objective is one part of ensuring credibility. The other part is 
taking responsibility for the results of monetary policy. This gives the public the opportunity to hold the 
Eurosystem  accountable.  The  fact  that  the  target  is  clearly  defined  makes  it  easier  to  evaluate  the 
results of the policy measures taken. Accountability is important since with central bank independence 
it is difficult to sanction its actions. 
Transparency  is  a  key  prerequisite  for  accountability.  An  important  part  of  transparency  lies  in  the 
definition of the targeted inflation rate. Furthermore, the steps taken to achieve this goal have to be 
clarified as well. An important instrument in this respect is the two-pillar strategy of the Eurosystem. By 
analysing  the  real  and  the  monetary  side  of  the  economy  and  by  subsequently  cross  checking  the 
results of this analysis all decisions can be justified. Moreover, policy decisions, once they have been 
taken, understood easily by the public, since the underlying data is published regularly. The ECB tries 
to  meet  all  these  communication  requirements  with  its  wide  range  of  publications  and  press 
conferences. 
The  credibility  and  the  independence  of  monetary  policy  is  enhanced  if  fiscal  discipline  prevails.  In 
spite  of  the  monetary  union,  fiscal  policy  remains  in  the  hands  of  the  national  states.  In  order  to 
guarantee  the  soundness  of  national  budgets  and  to  avoid  any  disruptions  to  the  mechanisms  of 
monetary  transmission  induced  by  fiscal  imbalances,  the  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
puts certain constraints upon the ability of Member States to run deficits and make debt. 
Inflation and expected inflation in the Euro area 
2.2.2  
Central banks throughout the world have built up their reputation over time. Among the best known are 
obviously  the  United  States’  Federal  Reserve,  the  Bank  of  England  or  previously  the  Bundesbank. 
This  tradition  implies  that  market  participants  have  some  experience  on  how  those  central  banks 
conduct their monetary policy, how they react to shocks and how "hawkish" or "dovish" they are on 
inflation. Reputation helps those central banks enhance their credibility and stabilize markets because 
it reduces uncertainty. The Eurosystem did not have such a track record when it started its mission in 
1999.  Market  participants  first  had  to  collect  some  experience  on  the  Eurosystem  monetary  policy 
conduct. 
Since the introduction of the Euro in 1999, the average HICP inflation rate according to Eurostat was 
1,97 percent, since 2000 the average lies around 2,1 percent. This is very close to the price stability 
set.  
As  I  laid  out  to  you,  stabilising  prices  implies  stabilising  expectations  on  prices,  since  inflation 
expectations  are  as  important  to  economic  processes  as  actual  inflation  is.  In  order  to  gauge  the 
public’s assessment on how committed the Eurosystem is to fight inflation, I will report the results of 
the Survey of Professional Forecasters to you. This survey has been carried out by the ECB since 
early 1999, and consists of a questionnaire on expectations sent to experts affiliated with financial or 
non-financial institutions based within the EU. The expectations are reported for several time-periods. 
For  example,  one  year  ahead  inflation  expectations  started  off  at  a  level  of  1,2  percent  in  the  first 
quarter 1999. They reached a temporary maximum in the second quarter 2002 at a value of 1,9 and 
during  the  whole  period  from  1999  until  the  beginning  of  2006  they  never  crossed  the  2  percent 
barrier. Only recently, in the second quarter of 2006, did one year ahead inflation forecasts rise to 2,1 
percent  reflecting  the  oil  price  and  fiscal  shocks  (i.e.  the  German  VAT  increase)  the  Euro  area  is 
undergoing. Concerning longer-term expectations, the forecasts are similar. Expectations on two year 
ahead HICP inflation rates vary mainly between 1,5 and 1,9 percentage points. These results can be 
interpreted as a proof of confidence of the "expert" public in the ability of the Eurosystem to achieve its 
target. 
Important  and  complementary  indicators  for  the  credibility  the  Eurosystem  are  longer  term  inflation 
expectations.  These  are  more  stable  and  less  affected  by  different  shocks  than  short  term 
expectations. For example, short-term expectations are for the moment influenced by rising oil prices 
6 
 BIS Review 84/2006
or the insecure political situation in the middle East. In the long run, the fundamental economic data 
are of more relevance for inflation expectations. Long term average inflation expectations as reported 
by  the  ECB’s  Survey  of  professional  forecasters  have  been  at  1,9  %  for  the  last  18  quarters 
consecutively. Very similar results have also been extracted from other surveys like that of ‘Consensus 
Economics’ or the ‘Euro Zone Barometer’. 
Overall,  the  Eurosystem  has  achieved  credibility  among  market  participants.  This  is  also  very 
important considering the uncertain environment, which the Governing Council of the ECB faces, in its 
day-to-day decision-making. In what follows, I am going to touch on this issue. 
Monetary policy and uncertainty 
3  
Far from the deterministic world of models in which researchers can exactly predict the effects of a 
change in a certain variable, there is the real world, which the Governing Council of the ECB faces at 
its monthly meetings. There are many possible disturbances that feed the monetary framework with 
uncertainty in numerous respects. In the recent past, we had to deal with terrorist attacks, asset price 
bubbles and extraordinary rises in the oil price, just to mention a few. All of these events affect and 
change  the  structure  of  the  framework  a  central  bank  has  to  deal  with  and  add  uncertainty  to  the 
process of conducting monetary policy. 
Among the many forms of uncertainty the most relevant for central banks is twofold. The first concerns 
the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, the second is about the current state of the economy. 
Concerning the mechanism of monetary policy transmission first of all, since the introduction of the 
Euro  we  have  noticed  an  important  move  towards  a  closer  integration  of  capital  markets  and  the 
banking system. This has impacting repercussions on the way and the amount by which interest rate 
decisions  are  passed  through  to  the  economies.  Nevertheless,  since  the  Euro  area  still  remains 
heterogeneous in structure, the pass-through may be quick in one region while it is rather stodgy in 
another. Recent labour market reforms in several member states as well as changes in social security 
systems  influence  the  transmission  mechanism  further.  All  this  continuously  affects  the  process  at 
hand and the Euro area of today may well be quite different from that of 1999. 
The second important source of uncertainty concerns the state of the economy. Again the division can 
be  made  between  aggregate  uncertainty  and  uncertainty  at  the  country  level.  Among  experts  the 
opinion is not always unanimous concerning the state of the economy. There are many indicators and 
many ways of interpreting them, so discriminating between a temporary slowdown of the economy and 
the  beginning  of  a  recession  or  between  a  sound  recovery  and  irrational  exuberance  is  not  always 
obvious. It is no wonder that at times reference is made to the "art of central banking". 
In  order  to  cope  with  the  special  situation  of  the  Euro  area  and  with  uncertainty  in  general  the 
Eurosystem applies several instruments, which are either substitutes or complementary to each other. 
To start with, a solid foundation for monetary policy was created. The detailed and published monetary 
policy strategy reduces the uncertainty on behalf of the public concerning the objectives and behaviour 
of  the  Eurosystem.  As  I  have  just  explained  the  Eurosystem  tries  to  achieve  the  highest  possible 
reliability  by  means  of  a  clear  objective  and  a  high  degree  of  transparency  and  accountability.  The 
Eurosystem  tries  to  reduce  uncertainty  about  the  structure  of  the  economy  to  the  maximum  extent 
possible  through  the  systematized  analysis  of  the  full  information  set,  i.e.  the  renowned  two-pillar 
strategy. By closely monitoring the real and the monetary side of the economic situation of the Euro 
area,  the  Eurosystem  gathers  all  available  information  and  by  cross  checking  this  information,  the 
uncertainty  is  reduced  to  a  minimum.  Furthermore,  in  order  to  be  prepared  for  broader  changes  in 
market structure and to foster the understanding of economics a heavy weight is laid on the conduct of 
genuine  research.  Lastly  considering  the  remaining  uncertainty,  policy  is  generally  conducted  in  a 
cautious manner. Indeed, the main body of literature considers a "non-activist" and gradualist policy 
conduct to be optimal in most cases of parameter uncertainty. 
Conclusion 
4  
Kydland and Prescott have shown in their work about time inconsistency of policy, how important it is 
for a government (or a monetary authority) to make itself and its policy credible among the public. This 
has led to widespread reforms in the sector of central banking throughout the world in the mid- to late- 
1980s and the Authors of the Maastricht Treaty on European Union have integrated these insights. 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 7
By  carefully  adopting  a  specific  monetary  policy  strategy  appropriate  for  the  Euro  zone,  the 
Eurosystem succeeded, even without a track record and in spite of many turbulences and shocks of 
various markets, to keep inflation low and close to its target. Moreover, inflation expectations, a key 
indicator for the trust of the public in the policy of the Eurosystem, were also kept at a level compatible 
with the announced definition of price stability. 
In conclusion the time inconsistency problem has been well solved in the practice of modern central 
banking, notably by the Eurosystem. Even if uncertainty and unforeseen events, have in the past and 
will in the future prevail, the ECB has had a good start and achieved credibility with the public. This 
has  been  achieved  by  means  of  a  framework  that  on  the  one  hand  delivers  the  determination 
necessary for credibility and on the other gives the flexibility that is essential to react to unforeseen 
events. 
References 
Eurostat  (2006),  Harmonized  Index  on  Consumer  Prices,  Eurostat  web  page,  downloaded  on 
08.08.2006. 
Friedman, M. (1968), The Role of Monetary Policy, American Economic Review, vol. 58. 
Garcia,  J.,  A.  (2003),  An  Introduction  to  the  ECB’s  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters,  Occasional 
Paper Series No. 8, September 2003, European Central Bank. 
Heinemann, F. (2005), Wage Indexation and Monetary Policy, Working Papers Ludwig-Maximilians-
Universität, München. 
Kydland,  F.  and  E.,  Prescott  (1977),  Rules  Rather  than  Discretion:  The  Inconsistency  of  Optimal 
Plans, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85, no. 3. 
Lucas,  R.  (1976),  Econometric  Policy  Evaluation:  A  Critique,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics, 
supplement. 
McCallum,  B.  (1988),  Robustness  Properties  of  a  Rule  for  Monetary  Policy,  Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference series on Public Policy, 29, North-Holland. 
Muth, J. (1961), Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements, Econometrica, vol. 29. 
Phelps, E. (1967), Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment Over Time, 
Economica, vol. 34. 
Phelps,  E.  (1968),  Money  Wage  Dynamics  and  Labor  Market  Equilibrium,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, vol. 76. 
Phillips, A., W. (1958), The Relationship between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money 
Wages in the UK 1861-1957, Economica. 
Ramsey, F. (1927), A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation, Economic Journal, vol. 37. 
Rogoff, K. (1985), The Optimal Degree of Precommitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target, Journal 
of International Economics, 18. 
Taylor, J. (1993), Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice, Carnegie-Rochester Conference series 
on Public Policy, 39, North-Holland. 
8 
 BIS Review 84/2006
