Dr X P Guma: Economic developments in South Africa during 2005 and 
prospects for 2006 
Address by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Govenor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the conference on 
South Africa: Today and Tomorrow, London, 24 January 2006. 
 1. Chairperson, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it is a great honour for me to address you 
this morning, not least because the confluence of favourable developments referred to by President 
Thabo  Mbeki  in  his  State  of  the  Nation  address  early  last  year  has  indeed  contributed  to  another 
banner year for South Africa. 
Today, I wish to highlight only a few of the most important domestic economic developments that have 
transpired during 2005 and some of the encouraging prospects for 2006. 
2. Growth in real gross domestic product amounted to 4,5 per cent in 2004, and preliminary anecdotal 
evidence  suggests  that  this  performance  may  have  been  exceeded  somewhat  in  2005.  The  record 
economic upswing in South Africa continued apace throughout 2005 and the third quarter marked the 
twenty-fourth  consecutive  quarter  of  uninterrupted  growth  since  the  economy  began  the  current 
upswing in 1999. This is the longest upswing in the recorded economic history of the country. 
2.1  The  performance  of  the  South  African  economy  in  recent  times  has  also  been  more  solid  and 
consistent than before. One of the reasons is that the economy is in the process of changing from one 
driven  predominantly  by  consumption,  to  one  driven  to  a  greater  degree  by  fixed  investment.  The 
growth  momentum  over  the  past  year-and-a-half  was  sustained  by  strong  domestic  expenditure, 
alongside the stronger world economy and generally favourable terms of trade. 
2.2 Growth in real gross domestic expenditure picked up considerably in the third quarter of 2005 as 
both fixed capital formation and inventory accumulation gained momentum. Growth in real fixed capital 
formation accelerated mainly on account of higher capital spending by the private sector. 
3. With gross domestic expenditure consistently exceeding gross domestic product over the past three 
years, the current account of the balance of payments has recorded a deficit during ten consecutive 
quarters. Buoyed by rising imports of capital and consumer goods as well as crude oil, the volume of 
imports rose faster than the volume of exports over this period. Favourable export prices and the fairly 
strong  external  terms  of  trade  nevertheless  contributed  to  the  containment  of  the  current-account 
deficit.  Surpluses  on  the  financial  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  moreover  more  than  fully 
covered the deficits on the current account, leading to continued surpluses on the overall balance of 
payments over the past seven quarters. 
4.  Apart  from  significant  inflows  of  capital  in  the  form  of  portfolio  and  other  capital,  large  direct 
investment inflows contributed to stronger gold and other foreign-reserve levels. 
Foreign direct investment into South Africa was bolstered by the acquisition of a majority interest in a 
South African bank by an international banking group, as well as by increased shareholding by a non-
resident  investor  in  a  domestic  telecommunications  company  and  other  significant  foreign  direct 
investment  announcements  which  are  indicative  of  an  increasingly  positive  investment  outlook  for 
South Africa. 
The sustained capital inflows into the country have allowed for the continued build-up of the official 
foreign reserves and this, in turn, has contributed to the relatively moderate amplitude of the exchange 
rate movements of the rand. The South African Reserve Bank’s gross reserves now stand at almost 
US$21 billion – more than US$6 billion higher than a year ago. 
5.  The  responsible  economic  policies  pursued  by  the  authorities  and  improved  prospects  for  the 
economy were recognised by three rating agencies that upgraded their rating of South African debt 
instruments during the course of the past year. The improvement in South Africa’s long-term foreign 
currency debt rating from BB (high risk, speculative grade credit) in 1994 to BBB+ in 2005 (investment 
grade rating), made South Africa’s debt much more attractive to the international investing community 
thereby  contributing  towards  tighter  spreads  on  South  African  debt.  The  yield  spreads  on  South 
African  foreign-currency  denominated  bonds  continue  to  remain  substantially  lower  than  those  of 
emerging markets in general (the Emerging Market Bond Index), indicating that investors share the 
BIS Review 5/2006 
 1
confidence  expressed  by  international  rating  agencies  and  regard  South  Africa  in  an  increasingly 
positive light in comparison to competitors. 
6. The Eurorand bond market witnessed a flurry of activity this year, with a total net issuance size for 
2005 of close to R6 billion, the highest net issuance since 1999. The issuance of randdenominated 
bonds by non-resident borrowers in the Japanese Uridashi market also continued to grow during 2005 
and demand for rand-denominated bonds issued by highly rated non-resident institutions contributed 
positively to the value of both the rand and domestic bonds. 
7. Non-residents have also been very active participants in the domestic bond and equity markets this 
year.  Non-resident  participation  in  trading  on  the  Bond  Exchange,  measured  as  the  sum  of  their 
purchases and sales as a percentage of total purchases and sales of bonds, increased markedly from 
a level of about 9 per cent in early 2004 to as high as 18,9 per cent by early 2005. Furthermore, non-
resident participation in share trading on the JSE averaged approximately 20 per cent in both 2004 
and  2005.  South  Africa  also  attracted  some  secondary  listings  of  foreign  companies  on  the  JSE 
Securities Exchange as well as the first listing of a non-resident bank on the Bond Exchange, again 
displaying increased confidence in South Africa. Prices in the financial and real-estate markets have 
reached new record highs and financial and real-estate markets have remained buoyant, but the rate 
of increase in real estate prices, which at times exceeded 35 per cent on a year-on-year basis in 2004, 
tapered off significantly over the course of 2005. 
8. Inflation picked up in the second half of 2005 in response to the increase in the prices of crude oil 
and its derivative products. However, when crude oil and petrol are excluded from the production price 
index and consumer price index baskets, the inflation in the prices of the remaining items remained 
quite  subdued,  suggesting  no  firm  evidence  of  second-round  inflationary  effects  arising  from  the  oil 
price  increase.  Moreover,  the  targeted  twelve-month  CPIX  inflation  rate  –  which  incorporates  petrol 
price  inflation  –  only  accelerated  to  a  high  point  of  4,8  per  cent  in  August  2005  and  subsequently 
receded to 3,7 per cent in November, partly on account of the somewhat lower levels of international 
oil  prices  at  the  time.  So  far,  the  high  oil  price  has  therefore  not  prevented  CPIX  inflation  from 
remaining  comfortably  within  the  target  range  of  3  to  6  per  cent  –  an  outcome  which  has  been 
maintained for 27 successive months, and which has helped to anchor inflation expectations. 
9. The exchange rate of the rand appreciated significantly towards the end of 2005 and in the first part 
of  January  2006.  From  its  most recent  dip  at  the  end  of  October  to R6,71  against  the US  dollar,  it 
appreciated by more than 11 per cent to trade below R6,00 level by mid-January 2006. Although much 
of this appreciation mirrored the recent depreciation in the value of the US dollar, the rand has also 
gained significant ground against the other major currencies. As a result, the nominal trade-weighted 
index of the rand increased by a similar percentage over this two-and-a-half-month period of 99.18 on 
17 January – stronger than its year-end peak recorded in December 2004. In the year to 20 January, 
the TWI has increased by almost three per cent. A notable development in the exchange rate of the 
rand during the last few months has been that it has become less volatile: the rand’s historical volatility 
– a measure based on an average daily standard deviation calculation – declined from almost 21 per 
cent in June 2005 to below 10 per cent in October 2005, and has remained there in the subsequent 
two months.  
9.1 It bears repeating the fact that the South African Reserve Bank (the Bank) has been given a target 
for inflation: it has not been given a target for the exchange rate. Of course, the Bank cannot disregard 
the exchange rate because the exchange rate can exercise considerable influence on developments 
in inflation. But the Bank understands that neither it nor anyone else can claim with any confidence to 
know the equilibrium level or time path of the exchange rate. The Bank also understands that to switch 
focus to the exchange rate could mean losing control of inflation.  
10. Broadening access to financial services, targeted investment and increased economic cooperation 
remain high priorities on the agenda for South Africa and the Bank continues to monitor and support 
new initiatives in this regard. The Bank makes a significant contribution to economic co-operation in 
Africa by liaising closely with the Association of African Central Banks regarding the implementation of 
the African Monetary Cooperation Programme. 10.1 In February 2005 the Bank hosted a Seminar with 
the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  attended  by  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC) 
Central Banks in which views on the road towards a Single Central Bank for SADC were discussed 
against  the  background  of  the  ECB  experience.  The  MoU  on  the  Harmonisation  of  Legal  and 
Operational frameworks of SADC Central Banks was finally approved by Ministers for Finance at their 
meeting held on 5 August 2005 after extensive consultations. At their September 2005 meeting, the 
Committee of Central Bank Governors (CCBG) in SADC signed Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2006
on  Exchange  Control,  Information  and  Communications  Technology  and  Payment,  Clearing  and 
Settlement Systems. 
10.2  Looking  forward  to  the  future,  it  is  the  case  that  there  are  promising  signs  that  the  targeted 
inflation  rate  will  remain  within  the  stipulated  range.  This,  as  my  former  colleague  Ian  Plenderleith 
noted, is not just something to look back on with satisfaction. Rather, it is important to recognise that 
the  stable  framework  for  a  normal,  wellrun  economy  that  has  been  achieved  to  date  provides  the 
foundation for sustained, if not improved economic performance in the years ahead. 
10.3 Going forward, further structural reforms will be important prerequisites to unlocking the economic 
growth  and  development  potential  of  South  Africa.  All  of  theses  reforms  will  need  to  be  nurtured 
carefully  and  it  is  crucial  that  they  be  supported  throughout  by  a  stable  and  transparent 
macroeconomic policy framework.  
10.4 In conclusion it is reasonable to look forward to the future with confidence: and this we do.  
 
References 
T. Mbeki (2005) “State of the Nation Address” 
I. Plenderleith (2004) “Always Something Normal from South Africa” 
BIS Review 5/2006 
 3
