European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 31 August 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  welcome  you  to  our  press conference  and  report  on  the  outcome  of 
today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended by Commissioner 
Almunia. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, at today’s meeting we decided to leave 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  our  last 
meeting has further underpinned the reasoning behind our decision to increase interest rates earlier 
this month. It has also confirmed that strong vigilance remains of the essence so as to ensure that 
upside  risks  to  price  stability  are  contained.  With  key  ECB  interest  rates  at  still  low  levels  in  both 
nominal  and  real  terms,  money  and  credit  growth  dynamic,  and  liquidity  ample  by  all  plausible 
measures,  our  monetary  policy  continues  to  be  accommodative.  If  our  assumptions  and  baseline 
scenario continue to be confirmed, a progressive withdrawal of monetary accommodation will remain 
warranted.  Indeed,  acting  in  a  timely  manner  to  contain  risks  to  price  stability  remains  essential  to 
ensure that inflation expectations in the euro area are kept solidly anchored at levels consistent with 
price stability. Such anchoring of inflation expectations is a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an 
ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro 
area.  
Turning  first  to  the  economic  analysis,  all  the  main  indicators  in  the  euro  area  that  have  recently 
become available for the first half of the year show a significant improvement in underlying economic 
activity  and  indicate  that  economic  growth  was  stronger  than  previously  projected  by  official  and 
private  forecasters.  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  real  GDP 
grew by 0.9% in the euro area in the second quarter of 2006, significantly above the 0.6% growth rate 
recorded in the previous quarter. In interpreting recent GDP data, due account needs to be taken of 
the  degree  of  volatility  of  quarterly  growth  rates,  but  they  generally  confirm  our  view  that economic 
growth is broadening and becoming more sustained. The information on activity in the third quarter – 
coming from various confidence surveys and indicator-based estimates – continues to be favourable 
and  supports  the  assessment  of  real  GDP  growing  at  rates  around  potential.  Looking  forward,  the 
conditions remain in place for the euro area economy to continue growing at around the potential rate. 
Global  economic  activity  remains  robust,  providing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Investment  is 
expected to remain strong, benefiting from an extended period of very favourable financing conditions, 
balance  sheet  restructuring,  accumulated  and  ongoing  strong  earnings,  and  gains  in  business 
efficiency. Consumption growth in the euro area should also strengthen further over time, in line with 
developments in real disposable income, as employment conditions improve further.  
This outlook is also reflected in the new ECB staff macroeconomic projections, which for the first time 
include Slovenia as part of the euro area projections for 2007. The projections foresee average annual 
real GDP growth in a range between 2.2% and 2.8% in 2006, and between 1.6% and 2.6% in 2007. In 
comparison with the June Eurosystem staff projections, the ranges projected for real GDP growth in 
2006 and 2007 have been revised upwards, mainly reflecting the stronger growth recorded in the first 
half of this year, along with continued positive signals from a number of other indicators.  
It  is  the  Governing  Council’s  view  that  risks  to  these  projections  for  economic  growth  are  broadly 
balanced over the shorter term. Over the longer term, uncertainty has augmented and downside risks 
relate  mainly  to  potential  further  oil  price  rises,  global  imbalances  and  protectionist  pressures, 
especially after the suspension of the Doha round of trade talks.  
With respect to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 
2.3% in August 2006, compared with 2.4% in the previous month. During the second half of 2006, and 
on average also in 2007, inflation rates are likely to remain elevated at above 2%, with the precise 
levels  depending  mainly  on  future  energy  price  developments.  While  in  our  main  scenario  the 
moderate evolution of labour costs in the euro area is expected to continue in the remainder of 2006 
and in 2007 – partly reflecting ongoing global competitive pressures, particularly in the manufacturing 
sector – lagged indirect effects of past oil price increases and already announced increases in indirect 
taxes are expected to exert a significant upward effect on inflation in the course of next year.  
BIS Review 78/2006 
 1
In the new ECB staff projections, annual HICP inflation is projected to lie between 2.3% and 2.5% in 
2006,  and  between  1.9%  and  2.9%  in  2007.  Compared  with  the  June  2006  Eurosystem  staff 
projections, the range for 2006 is within the upper part of the previous range, while that for 2007 has 
been shifted slightly upwards, largely reflecting the assumption of higher oil prices. 
In  the  view  of  the  Governing  Council,  risks  to  this  outlook  for  price  developments  remain  on  the 
upside. They include further increases in oil prices, a stronger pass-through of past oil price rises into 
consumer  prices  than  currently  anticipated,  additional  increases  in  administered  prices  and  indirect 
taxes, and – more fundamentally – stronger than expected wage developments.  
Against  this  background,  it  is  crucial  that  the  social  partners  continue  to  meet  their  responsibilities, 
also in the context of a more favourable environment for economic activity and employment. 
Regarding prospects for inflation over medium to longer horizons, our assessment that upside risks to 
price stability prevail continues to be confirmed by the monetary analysis. The rates of monetary and 
credit  expansion  remain  rapid,  reflecting  the  still  low  level  of  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area.  In 
particular, loans to the private sector continue to grow at double-digit rates on an annual basis, with 
this  rapid  growth  remaining  broadly  based  across  the  household  and  corporate  sectors.  The 
moderation of annual M3 growth observed in the past two months – to 8.5% in June and 7.8% in July 
– may possibly reflect the impact of previous increases in interest rates. However, it also needs to be 
viewed against the high growth rate witnessed in May, which represented one of the highest annual 
rates  of  M3  growth  seen  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  More  generally,  recent  monetary 
developments  should be assessed with  the  appropriate  medium-term  perspective,  and  thus  against 
the background of the persistent upward trend in the underlying rate of monetary expansion observed 
since mid-2004. On this basis, liquidity in the euro area remains ample by all reasonable measures. 
Continued strong monetary and credit growth in the context of already ample liquidity points to upside 
risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Monetary  developments  therefore  require 
careful  monitoring,  especially  against  the  background  of  improved  economic  conditions  and  strong 
property market developments in many parts of the euro area. 
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to remain elevated in 2006 and 2007, with risks to this 
outlook continuing to be clearly on the upside. Given the ongoing dynamism of monetary and credit 
growth in an environment of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic 
analysis with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability 
prevail over the medium term. It is essential that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored at levels 
consistent with price stability. Accordingly, strong vigilance is warranted in order to ensure that risks to 
price  stability  are  contained.  If  our  assumptions  and  baseline  scenario  continue  to  be  confirmed,  a 
progressive withdrawal of monetary accommodation remains warranted. Acting in a timely manner will 
make an ongoing contribution to sustainable economic growth and job creation. 
As regards fiscal policy, in several Member States public finances appear to be on track to meet or 
even exceed this year’s targets as the favourable economic situation, revenue windfalls and effective 
consolidation measures exert a positive influence on fiscal balances. However, in other countries, the 
current  fiscal  outlook  suggests  a  shortfall  in  terms  of  the  required  structural  improvement  in  public 
finances.  This  is  worrying  in  view  of  the  objectives  and  commitments  agreed  under  the  revised 
Stability and Growth Pact. It is therefore essential that 2006 budgets are executed strictly during the 
remainder  of  this  year,  and  that  budget  plans  for  2007  and  beyond  are  sufficiently  ambitious.  All 
countries  should  take  advantage  of  the  current  economic  recovery  to  consolidate  fiscal  balances. 
Especially countries in excessive deficit procedure and with a high debt-to-GDP ratio should use the 
current economic recovery to bring the public deficit ratio to below 3% within the agreed deadline, and 
more  ambitious  fiscal  consolidation  is  essential  to  achieve  the  medium-term  objectives.  It  is  also 
crucial  that  comprehensive  reform  programmes  strengthen  economic  incentives  and  enhance  the 
sustainability  of  social  security  systems.  This  is  the  best  contribution  that  fiscal  policies  can  make 
towards building confidence in the outlook for growth and stability in the euro area and in the revised 
Stability and Growth Pact. 
As regards structural reforms, the Governing Council stresses the need to raise the potential growth 
rate of the euro area, to foster incentives to work and to strengthen the euro area’s capacity to absorb 
shocks.  Comprehensive  reform  measures  to  ensure  a  fully  operational  internal  market,  a  higher 
degree  of  wage  and  price  flexibility,  and  a  more  favourable  business  environment  would  offer  new 
opportunities  for  firms  and  workers  and  promote  investment,  innovation  and  job  creation.  Such 
structural reforms would not only help to underpin the momentum of the ongoing economic recovery, 
but would also safeguard the standard of living of euro area citizens in the longer run.  
2 
 BIS Review 78/2006
