Ewart S Williams: Supporting the growth of small and medium enterprises  
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, to the Nova 
Committee of the Trinidad and Tobago Chamber of Industry and Commerce, Port of Spain, 16 March 
2006. 
 Let  me  first  of  all  congratulate  the  NOVA  Committee  of  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Chamber  of 
Commerce for its initiative in organizing this conference. I consider it a particularly encouraging sign 
that,  at  a  time  when  the  energy  sector  is  leading  one  of  the  strongest  expansions  in  our  post-
Independence history, we have seen the need to convene a forum on “Supporting the Growth of 
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises in Developing Countries”. It is a discussion which, in many 
ways, brings us face to face with the crux of our development challenge. 
In virtually all economies in the world – developed and developing alike – small- and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) are critical to the generation of economic activity and to long-term sustainability. 
It  is  sometimes  assumed  that  in  industrialized  countries  large  firms  constitute  the  main  drivers  of 
economic activity. However, in a sample of developed countries drawn from the World Bank database, 
SMEs  accounted  for  about  three-quarters  of  GDP  and  just  over  60  per  cent  of  employment.  The 
figures are generally much higher in the case of the developing countries, confirming the critical role of 
SMEs in the development process.  
In addition to the contribution of SMEs to economic growth and to the creation of jobs, SMEs broaden 
the  base  of  participation  in  society,  decentralize  economic  power  and  give  people  a  stake  in  the 
society’s 
individual 
empowerment and contributes to social and political stability. In many developed countries, the SME 
sector has been the catalyst for product innovation and for productivity enhancement. 
For these reasons, in virtually all successful economies, the development of small- and medium-sized 
enterprises is given special priority. 
An  analysis  of  countries  that  have  had  the  most  success  in  the  development  of  the  SME  sector 
suggests that there is no single blueprint that is effective for all times and in all places. The analysis, 
however,  points  to  certain  pre-conditions  and  best  practices  which  are  paramount.  The  main 
preconditions have been: 
future.  Small-business  ownership  encourages  personal 
freedom  and 
(1)  a macro-economic environment in which entrepreneurial activity is able to thrive and prosper; 
(2)  an education, or more broadly, a value system, that encourages an entrepreneurial culture; 
(3)  a comprehensive support regime, including financial assistance in various forms, as well as 
technical  support  and  training.  This  is  the  area  in  which  governments  usually  have  a 
critical role to play. 
I would like to expand a bit on these critical requirements. 
The  experience  in  many  Latin  American  countries  has  shown  that  macroeconomic  stability  creates 
the  essential  cradle  for  the  expansion  of  the  SME  sector.  Macro  stability  is  conducive  to  SME 
development  because  it  implies  low  inflation,  low  interest  rates,  a  stable  exchange  rate  and  ample 
external  reserves.  The  macro-economic  pre-conditions  (which  incidentally  come  under  the  Central 
Bank’s  mandate)  provide  the  kind  of  environment  in  which  particularly  small  and  medium-sized 
businesses are able to plan and prepare to take risks. 
The importance of an entrepreneurial culture for SME development is more subtle but no less a real 
pre-condition. In Trinidad and Tobago, for example, my generation grew up in a culture in which you 
studied hard to get a job, to work for a large firm or the Government. At that time, business acumen 
was considered hereditary and involvement in small business was not generally encouraged. It is now 
acknowledged  that  the  culture  most  conducive  to  SME  development  is  one  in  which  business 
studies are an integral part of the school curriculum; one in which a high school or a university student 
sees starting a business as one of a number of viable career options ; one in which students have a 
passion, not solely to get a job, but also to create a job. 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 1
Many countries in Latin America make special efforts to lift the status of small-business activity and of 
entrepreneurship.  The  idea  in  that  region  seems  to  be  that  a  country  that  wants  to  promote  small 
business must work to have its population look up to entrepreneurs, as they do to doctors and lawyers. 
Improving access to finance is deemed to be the major challenge to the development of small- 
and  medium-sized  enterprises  all  over  the  world.  Because  of  imperfections  in  financial  markets, 
small  enterprises  almost  never  have  the  same  access  to  finance  as  do  their  larger  more  powerful 
counterparts.  For  commercial  banks,  for  example,  small  enterprises  are  considered  to  be  of  lower 
profitability and are assumed to carry greater risks than large enterprises. Thus the availability of bank 
finance for SMEs is usually limited and, even when credit is available, it is usually at a higher cost and 
on  unfavorable  terms  –  for  example,  through  high  cost  overdraft  facilities  rather  than  through  term 
loans. 
For  these  reasons, Governments which  are  committed  to  SME  development  focus  on  making 
funding available on reasonable terms. One challenge they and central banks face is to encourage 
the traditional financial institutions, particularly the commercial banks, to lend to SMEs. Invariably they 
try to do this through lo an guarantee schemes. The logic is that banks are more likely to make loans 
to  perceived  “risky”  small  businesses  when  they  know  that  the  Government  (or  some  government 
agency) will guarantee repayment even if the borrower defaults. 
Credit guarantee schemes have become the most popular of government support schemes worldwide 
since they combine a subsidy element with market-based characteristics. The arrangements are 
also  intended  to  make  use  of  the  banks’  infrastructure  for  loan  administration.  But  guaranteed 
schemes are not perfect and lead to moral hazard since the banks’ funds are not at risk, and since the 
small businesses can default with little cost. Variations of the scheme have been devised to deal with 
these issues.  
To supplement credit available through the traditional institutions, several governments see the need 
to  establish  institutions  that  provide  direct  credit  to small  and  medium  enterprises.  Such  institutions 
(development banks in most countries) face unique challenges in avoiding political interference and 
operating along strictly commercial lines. 
At  times,  rapidly  growing  small  businesses  require  equity  as  well  as  debt  financing.  Several 
countries  have  sought  to  address  this  deficiency  through  the  development  of  a  venture  capital 
industry. The United Kingdom has a very interesting concept called “the business angel” where small 
amounts  of  venture  capital  come  with  considerable  technical  expertise  and  general  management 
advice. 
It has been demonstrated that the successful promotion of SMEs development requires the integration 
and linkage of technical training and business support services with financial assistance programmes. 
Governments are best placed to take the lead in adapting the education system to the needs of 
business,  and  in  particular,  small  business.  Governments  are  also  well  placed  to  provide 
arrangements for entrepreneurial training and support perhaps in collaboration with private sector or 
non-governmental  organizations  (NGOs).  In  many  countries,  the  state  has  sought  to  nurture  an 
enterprise culture through an alliance of business education and training programmes with initiatives 
like  “business  incubators”,  which  in  effect  are  facilities  where  aspiring  entrepreneurs  can  learn 
business skills. 
Some people think that the effect is exaggerated and that the best thing that the Government can 
do for SME development is to reduce regulatory impediments and bureaucratic red tape and 
implement tax policies that promote small-business growth. 
A bit about our local situation……. 
Notwithstanding our abundant energy resources and our robust energy based industrial platform, the 
imperatives  of  economic  diversification  and  the  need  to  provide  productive  and  sustainable 
employment  have  led  to  increased  attention  to  the  development  of  the  small-  and  medium-
sized  enterprise  sector.  Our  strategy  recognizes  the  importance  of  an  enabling  business 
environment of macro-economic and financial stability and provides for a critical role for the state. The 
Government’s  involvement  centres  on  two  state-owned  institutions  viz:  the  National  Entrepreneurial 
Development Company (NEDCO) and the Business Development Company (BDC). 
(i) 
NEDCO’s  primary  mandate  is  the  management  of  a  credit  programme  for  small 
businesses.  NEDCO  also  offers  a  suite  of  business  support  services  including 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2006
(iii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
to  secondary  schools  and 
is  to 
entrepreneurial  education  and  development,  business  advisory  and  coaching 
services, training and business mentorship.  
In an effort to strengthen the entrepreneurial culture, NEDCO recently expanded its 
institutions.  The 
tertiary 
training  programmes 
integrate  entrepreneurship 
Government’s  vision 
into  the  school 
curriculum at all levels, starting at the primary school level. 
The  mandate  of  the  BDC  is  to  facilitate  the  growth  and  expansion  of  small-  and 
medium-sized enterprises. BDC pursues its mandate by providing loan guarantees 
for commercial bank lending to these enterprises. BDC also provides direct support 
for capital investment by way of lease financing. 
The  Government  has  sought  to  provide  venture  capital  financing  by  offering  tax 
credits  for  contributions  to  a  venture  capital  fund.  The  supply  of  venture  capital  to 
prospective entrepreneurs has however been very limited. 
 
 
 
While comprehensive data are not available to allow a precise estimate of the impact of the new SME 
expansion thrust, the evidence is that there has clearly been strong growth in the SME sector over the 
last few years. The NEDCO programme has built a client base of 5,600 businesses and has advanced 
close to TT$100 million in loans to various sectors including light manufacturing, services, and food 
and agro-processing. Since 2002, close to 5,000, persons have also benefited from the training and 
mentorship programmes. 
Let  me  end  by  raising  what  I  think  is  a  very  important  challenge  for  SME  development  in  the 
Caribbean today.  
Globalization  and  trade  liberalization  are  presenting  new  opportunities  and  challenges  for  small 
business  development.  In  the  case  of  the  Caribbean,  SMEs  have,  to  date,  largely  confined  their 
activities  to  catering  for  the  domestic market  place.  If  SMEs  are  to  contribute  more  meaningfully  to 
Caribbean  development,  they  need  to  adopt  a  more  outward  oriented  strategy,  seeking  export 
opportunities or finding ways to participate in production chains with large producers abroad. There is 
no reason why the Caribbean SMEs cannot capture a share of the outsourcing market that is 
now dominated by countries such as India. 
To  take  this  leap  forward,  the  focus  must  be  on  innovation  and  increasing  productivity  and 
competitiveness. The strategy may need strengthened financial support and perhaps more trade and 
export  market  facilitation.  In  Singapore,  for  instance,  a  new  SME  Loan  Programme  has  been 
introduced to help Singaporean firms penetrate global markets. As a start, a similar scheme could be 
devised under the recently launched Caribbean single market programme to enable Caribbean SMEs 
to develop the potential and capacity to export.  
While most SMEs will remain focused on the local market, those that are likely to thrive and expand 
are the ones that embrace the export challenge and are prepared to adopt new technology, develop 
new information systems and devise innovative products that are globally competitive. 
Here at home, as part of its diversification effort, the Government is investing in the development of a 
cluster  of  technology  industries  linked  to  the  University  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  This  cluster  is 
expected to develop a range of innovative products that can compete at the global level. 
There is no reason why this should not be fertile ground for the expansion of the SME sector. 
Let  me  end by  again congratulating  the  NOVA  Committee  of  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Chamber  of 
Industry and Commerce for arranging this most important forum. I am sure that the dialogue and the 
exchange  of  ideas  and  experiences  that  will  take  place  over  the  next  two  days  will  help  the  SME 
sectors  throughout  the  Caribbean  come  closer  to  realizing  their  potential  and  expanding  their 
contribution to the transformation of the region. 
The future of the region is in their hands. 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 3
