Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: An e-learning initiative for Ugandan financial 
institutions  
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the  launch  of 
Barclays University, Kampala, 20 July 2006. 
 The Board of Directors, Management & Staff 
Barclays Bank of Uganda Ltd 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me begin by expressing my appreciation to the Board of Directors and Management of Barclays 
Bank  of  Uganda  Limited  for  inviting  me  to  launch  the  Barclays  University  in  Uganda.  Barclays 
University, which is an initiative of the Barclays PLC, is an internet based learning concept, was first 
hatched  out  in  2002  and  has  since  been  rolled  out  in  Kenya,  Zambia,  South  Africa,  Botswana  and 
Ghana.  Today,  Uganda  joins  the  above  mentioned  African  countries  in  hosting  Barclays  University 
learning centre. The opening of Barclays University learning centre in Uganda at this particular time is 
an indication of the confidence Barclays PLC has placed in Uganda. 
I have been made to understand that the key objective of the Barclays University, is to avail learning 
opportunities to all the bank’s staff in various areas of banking operations in order to empower them 
with  superior  skills  and  expertise  for  attaining  competitive  advantage  to  match  the  escalating 
competitive  strategies  being  rolled  out  by  the  various  providers  of  financial  services  in  the  local, 
regional and global markets. 
Barclays  University  will  employ  e-learning  to  provide  educational  opportunities  to  staff  to  acquire 
leadership skills. The move to e-learning provides more people with access to leadership development 
opportunities  at  their  local  work  stations,  hence  being  cost  effective.  The  programme  aims  at 
influencing  staff  attitudes  to  view  learning  as  a  continual  development  opportunity  that  can  be 
achieved through a range of channels. 
Barclays  University  learning  centre  will  create  a  unique  learning  environment,  which  is  relaxed  yet 
inspiring, buzzing yet contemplative and will be equipped with the state of the art learning technology. 
The programmes offered by Barclays University are designed to be highly flexible, allowing users to 
adapt to whichever form of learning they find appropriate to their specific needs. The University will 
employ personal computers designed to run business focused courses with CD-ROM access, internet 
based  e-learning  courses,  as  well  as  access  to  the  Barclays  University  Website  to  provide  a  wide 
range  of  learning  menu  to  the  bank’s  staff.  The  learning  centre  has  been  designed  as  an  informal 
meeting  point,  a  central  information  point  and  an  exciting  visual  space  featuring  one  large  plasma 
screen providing information about Barclays University or can be used to conduct group presentations, 
learning videos or programmes. 
As  you  all  know,  Uganda’s  financial  sector  has  registered  positive  developments  over  the  last  five 
years. While applauding these positive developments, it is necessary to learn that such achievements 
have  in  turn  raised  new  managerial  challenges  of  instituting  prudent  risk  management  systems 
necessary to match the complexity of risk profiles that have emerged in the financial institutions. 
Operational risk, which largely occurs on account of lapses in systems and processes, is increasingly 
posing  serious  managerial  challenges,  hence  calling  upon 
institute 
comprehensive risk management framework. I am sure that the establishment of Barclays University 
will  definitely  go  a  long  way  in  promoting  training  opportunities  for  developing  strategies  and 
techniques of combating infiltration of unscrupulous practices into the financial sector. 
Bank  of  Uganda  therefore  most  heartily  congratulates  Barclays  Bank  of  Uganda  Limited  on  this 
auspicious occasion of launching Barclays University in Uganda. It my sincere hope that over time, the 
learning facilities at Barclays University could be tapped by other financial institutions in Uganda as a 
way of enhancing the development of risk management skills that is very vital in fostering safety of 
depositors’ funds and stability and soundness of the financial system as a whole. 
With those few remarks, it is now my singular privilege to declare Barclays University in Uganda open. 
institutions 
financial 
to 
BIS Review 72/2006 
 1
