Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Review of the past five years and prospects 
for the future 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  a  get-together 
reception, Kampala, 17 March 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am pleased to welcome you all to this get-together reception. 
I am sure some of you may be wondering what this get-together is all about but as most of you know, 
the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni re-appointed me as 
governor for my last term of five years in office. Allow me publicly to express my gratitude to H.E The 
President  for  renewing  his  confidence  in  me  and  giving  me  the opportunity  to  continue serving  this 
great institution as Governor. I hope he might be tempted to change the constitution to allow me to run 
for a third term. 
I am pleased that you have been able to join me in celebrating this achievement. All of you assembled 
here  this  evening  and  many  others  who  are  not  with  us  this  evening  have  in  one  way  or  another 
helped me succeed in the last five years at the helm of the central bank. I am indeed very grateful to 
the  Management  and  Staff  of  Bank  of  Uganda  for  being  there  for  me.  I  also  highly  appreciate  the 
continued  harmonious  relationship  between  the  various  arms  of  government  and  not  least  with  the 
Ministry of Finance and the donor community. I thank them all. 
I want to make a few comments to outline some of our achievements in the last five years at the Bank 
and where we want to go for the next 5 years. 
On the 2nd March 2001 in my maiden speech at this very venue, I made a pledge to you and to the 
whole  country  on  my  policy  priorities  as  Governor.  These  were  first,  control  of  inflation,  second, 
exchange rate stability, third, enhanced and strong bank regulation and supervision, fourth, enhancing 
communication at all levels in the Bank. 
I am pleased to say that during these past five years we have recorded remarkable achievements in 
all these areas. 
On  the  inflation  front,  I  am  sure  you  are  aware  that  we  maintained  low  and  stable  inflation  levels 
averaging  5%  per  annum;  Some  of  the  best  results  in  Africa.  The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  will 
continue to focus on maintaining overall macroeconomic stability and low inflation. We have achieved 
this largely due to a combination of very strict financial discipline and sound monetary policies by the 
Bank conducted within the framework of fiscal and monetary policy programmes agreed between the 
Ministry of Finance and the Bank. 
One of the measures agreed upon during this period was the phased transfer of Government Donor 
funded project accounts from commercial banks to the central bank. The main objective of transferring 
these  resources  was  to  moderate  the  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  created  by  government 
expenditure and  thus  limit  the  use  of government securities  for  mopping  up  liquidity  and  thereby  to 
reduce the upward pressures on interest rates and on the exchange rate. I am glad to report that this 
has been largely successful.  
The Bank in conjunction with Government launched the Government Treasury bond in January 2005 
as an additional monetary policy tool and to make the financial sector deeper and more robust. Some 
of you who are in the know, know that some of our collaborators in the international field did not think 
that we should launch this bond, I doubted their seriousness and went ahead and launched the bond 
much  to  their  shock  and  the  bond  has  been  declared  one  of  the  most  successful  programmes  of 
tendering issue in Africa. I have forgiven them. 
With regard to exchange rate policy, the Bank has maintained a flexible market determined exchange 
rate. The Bank has from time to time been forced to intervene to avoid volatility and to ensure stability 
in the market. I am pleased to note that commercial banks and other market participants heeded my 
warning  at  that  time  that  the  Bank  of  Uganda  would  not  allow  the  exchange  rate  of  the  shilling  to 
BIS Review 28/2006 
 1
become one-way bet for speculators. And just in case there are some speculators who still doubt my 
resolve, I will burn their fingers if they attempt this kind of speculation. 
Financial  Institutions  regulation  and  supervision  have  been  strengthened  with  the  enactment  of  the 
Financial Institutions Act 2004 and the Micro Finance Deposit Taking Institutions Act 2003. This legal 
framework coupled with improved supervision methodologies and prudent management of monetary 
and  exchange  rate  policies  have  contributed  to  the  strengthening  of  the  financial  sector.  This  is 
reflected in the growth of banks’ deposits and assets and increased private sector credit. 
The banking sector has also witnessed a tremendous improvement in the payment system with the 
introduction  of  ATMs,  electronic  funds  transfer  system  including  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement 
(RTGS).  This  will  hinder  money  laundering,  over  any  rogue-elephant  banks.  Chief  executives  must 
understand that, while I want good relationships with them, they must not deal with matters that might 
force the central bank to intervene. I have no problem with dfcu bank ltd; the bank is conducting itself 
in an orderly manner consistent with Bank of Uganda’s requirements. 
It is my sincere hope that despite the expenditure pressures, obviously attend to an election year that I 
hope the Ministry of Finance will carefully consider the consequences for interest rates and exchange 
rate stability of increased deficit financing or borrowing domestically. I hope that on this matter we can 
quickly  find  agreement  between  the  Bank  and  the  Ministry.  Should  any  agreement  fail,  the  central 
bank will not accept to take any measures that are inconsistent with our desire to have stable and low 
inflation and stable and strong financial system. If anybody doubts my resolve on this matter, they can 
try it.  
The management of forex bureaux and money transfer has also been streamlined with the enactment 
of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Act  2004  which  abolished  formerly  the  Exchange  Control  Act  1964  which 
was  laying  in  abeyance.  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  invite  those  interested  in  Money  Transfer 
business to come to us for licenses.  
One  problem  that  has  persisted  is  the  relatively  high  interest  rates  and  bank  charges  levied  by 
commercial banks. I will continue to urge the financial institutions for more realistic rates and charges 
to the customers in order to promote the culture of saving in the country. 
My policy priorities for the five years that is past remain for the five years to come. Before I conclude 
let me thank the board of directors who have attended this function and governor emeritus Onegi Obel 
for having honoured my invitation to come. Let me emphasize that all the Emeritus governors are on 
my permanent invitation list. 
As  you  know  we  have  announced  that  Bank  of  Uganda  will  be  celebrating  its  40th  Anniversary  in 
August and once again I am glad that President Museveni has given me the unique opportunity to be 
governor when the Bank is celebrating its 40th Anniversary. I have already announced that as part of 
our  corporate  social  responsibility  on  the  occasion  of  the  40th  Anniversary,  we  shall  donate  a 
motorized water system for an IDP camp in Gulu. It estimated to cost shs 100 million and the Bank is 
happy to contribute this to the stabilization of Kitgum and Gulu. 
I also want to invite you in advance to come and celebrate our 40th anniversary. I will be honoured if 
as many of you as possible would attend these events. Among other events will be a Public lecture 
and a Charity Walk whose proceeds will be used to donate a specialized heart machine to Mulago 
Hospital. If we buy this machine in advance of the walk, I will be committing you as my friends to meet 
the cost of this machine and I am confident you will not let me down. 
Today is a special day in another way, the Uganda Banker’s Association (UBA) had a general meeting 
today and agreed to re-elect most if not all their current executives. I am pleased to announce that Mr. 
Samwiri  Njuki,  MD  Orient  Bank  has  been  re-elected  as  Chairman  UBA  and  Mr.  Nick  Mbuvi,  MD 
Barclays has been re-elected Vice Chairman of UBA. Congratulations. 
Let me conclude by once again thanking you for being here this evening. May God bless you all. 
 2 
 BIS Review 28/2006
