Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Further development of the Islamic financial 
services industry in Malaysia 
Speech by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
official launch of HSBC Amanah Takaful (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd., Kuala Lumpur, 12 September 2006. 
 Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  to  be  here  this  morning  to  commemorate  the  launching  of  HSBC  Amanah 
Takaful (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd. This occasion chalks up another accomplishment in the takaful industry 
in Malaysia, as we position ourselves towards achieving a dynamic, competitive and efficient Islamic 
financial system that is able to contribute to the overall development of our economy, and to enhance 
the integration of our Islamic financial system with the global market. The launching of HSBC Amanah 
Takaful  (Malaysia)  Sdn.  Bhd.  marks  another  significant  milestone  in  terms  of  our  strategy  towards 
developing  a  progressive  takaful  industry,  that  is  able  to  adapt  to  the  increasingly  challenging  and 
competitive environment as well as adjust to the forces of change that has redefined the domestic and 
international financial landscape. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Over the past two decades, the takaful industry in Malaysia has grown progressively, underpinned by 
the holistic and pragmatic approach in the development of the Islamic financial industry. Indeed, we 
have  witnessed  an  orderly  development  of  the  takaful  industry.  The  takaful  industry  continues  to 
exhibit good financial results each year, as reflected in the three-fold increase in total assets to RM6.5 
billion in June 2006, as compared to RM1.9 billion five years ago. More significantly, average double-
digit growth rate of 18.9% for net contributions of combined family and general takaful in the past three 
years,  demonstrated  the  high  potential  of  the  industry.  Whilst  sustaining  the  current  pace  of 
development, there still exists high growth prospect for the takaful sector, in view of the large untapped 
potential, with the market penetration rate recorded at merely 6.1% in June 2006.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Bank Negara Malaysia has laid down a number of initiatives to further enhance the competitiveness 
and  growth  momentum  in  the  development  of  the  takaful  industry.  These  initiatives  emphasised  on 
enhancing operational efficiency, strengthening corporate governance and risk management as well 
as improving the market practices and consumer awareness. All players need to capitalize on these 
initiatives for the takaful industry to achieve sustainable success and unleash the potential gains of the 
Islamic finance in Malaysia and abroad.  
Allow me to share some significant developments that may shape the future direction of the takaful 
industry moving forward. 
Firstly, as the prudential framework evolves towards a predominantly principle-based and risk-
based regulatory approach, there will be a greater emphasis on risk management, corporate 
governance  and  transparency  so  as  to  maintain  investor  confidence  and  public  trust. 
Commensurate  with  the  diversity  and  complexity  of  takaful  operational  framework,  products  and 
services, the continuous upgrading of risk management practices, with improvements in governance 
standards  and  enhancements  of  information  management  systems  will  be  critical.  Under  this 
environment, it is envisaged that takaful operators, individually or collectively, will play a bigger role in 
enhancing  risk  management  practices,  developing  market  conduct  standards,  fostering  fair  market 
practices and improving financial literacy among consumers. This will be even more important with the 
implementation of the risk-based regulatory regime, whereby the responsibility for the implementation 
of  sound  risk  management  and  market  conduct  governance,  as  well  as  assessment  of  risks  and 
management  of  the  financial  condition  of  a  takaful  operator,  will  rest  increasingly  with  the  Board  of 
Directors and Senior Management of the takaful operators. Moving forward, a differentiated regulatory 
approach will increasingly be adopted, where companies that exhibit strong corporate governance and 
risk  management  practices  will  be  given  greater  regulatory  flexibility  and  may  enjoy  greater  capital 
savings.  
Secondly,  it  is  vital  to  have  in  place  an  efficient  and  cost-effective  delivery  channel  for  the 
takaful  business,  strategically  aligned  to  fulfil  the  participants'  reasonable  expectation. 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 1
Bancatakaful  strikes  as  an  attractive  value  proposition  that  enables  takaful  operators  to  tap  into 
banking institutions' large customer base and attract the existing clientele of the latter to have access 
to  integrated  financial  service  offerings  in  the  most  cost  effective  manner.  Strategic  alliance  in  the 
bancatakaful  arrangement  has  indeed  shown  a  significant  improvement  in  the  takaful  contributions 
over the past few years. This is evident with the significant three-fold increase in contributions of the 
product  marketed  through  bancatakaful  in  2005  which  accounted  for  20.4%  of  total  contributions. 
Bancatakaful has contributed considerably to the increased penetration in the family takaful business, 
especially for single contribution takaful plans. We envisage significant inroads in the penetration rate 
of bancatakaful in future years in line with the positive trend shown by the conventional counterparts, 
where the bancassurance captured 45.3% of the new life insurance business premiums generated in 
2005. 
Through efficient cost structures of bancatakaful and with the entry of joint-venture takaful operators 
involving banks and savings institution with extensive nationwide branch network, the takaful industry 
should maximize the potential of this alternative distribution channel.  
Finally,  on  the  global  front,  Islamic  finance  has  made  significant  inroads  and  has  achieved 
growing global recognition. Another significant milestone in the progress of Islamic banking 
and finance as recently announced by Bank Negara Malaysia is the initiative to enhance the 
position of Malaysia as an international Islamic financial centre (MIFC). With the vibrant domestic 
Islamic financial industry that has become an integral component of the financial system, Malaysia is 
now  well  positioned  to  be  an  international  centre  of  origination  and  issuance  of  Islamic  financial 
instruments, fund and wealth management, Islamic financial activities in international currencies and 
takaful and retakaful businesses.  
As  at  year  2005,  the  total  gross  contributions  from  takaful  business  outside  Malaysia  recorded  an 
insignificant  proportion  of  the  total  contributions  of  the  industry.  The  relatively  low  participation  of 
takaful  operators  in  international  business,  is  however  set  to  change  with  the  recently  announced 
MIFC initiatives, to allow qualified local and foreign financial institutions to conduct the full range of 
Islamic  banking  and  takaful  businesses  in  foreign  currencies.  It  was  also  announced  in  the  recent 
budget that attractive tax packages in terms of 10 year tax holiday are given to all takaful operators on 
their international currencies takaful business. In addition, MIFC accords greater operational flexibility 
for  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  conduct  Islamic  financial  services  in  foreign  currencies  from 
anywhere in Malaysia. To ensure effective delivery system under MIFC initiatives, the MIFC Executive 
Committee, with Bank Negara Malaysia as secretariat, has been set up to provide directions and drive 
implementation of policies and strategies to foster effectiveness and efficiency of the MIFC. 
Well capitalised and reputable financial institutions that possess sound track record are encouraged to 
set up international takaful operation in Malaysia to conduct out-out takaful and retakaful businesses. 
The Malaysian takaful operators should seize the opportunity to venture into out-out takaful business 
establishing  an  international  currency  business  unit  to  offer  takaful  business  in  international 
currencies.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In tandem with the rapid changes and expansion of the Islamic financial sector, it is vital for us to have 
a  strong,  continuous  support  in  talent  management  and  development.  Towards  this  end,  several 
initiatives in regards to sustaining and improving the level of expertise in the industry have been put in 
place. Earlier this year, Bank Negara Malaysia has launched the International Centre for Education in 
Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF),  an 
internationally  recognised  certification  and 
programmes with the aspiration to strengthen the pool of specialists in Islamic finance. INCEIF offers 
an international professional certification programme for Islamic financial practitioners that includes a 
dedicated  module  on  takaful.  This  complements  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Institute  Malaysia 
(IBFIM) and International Centre for Leadership in Finance (ICLIF) in providing adequate training at all 
levels to the industry players and technical programmes in Islamic finance. In addition, Bank Negara 
Malaysia has recently announced the Shariah Scholarship Award that is offered to local and foreign 
candidates to pursue post-graduate studies in the field of Shariah relating to fiqh muamalat (Islamic 
commercial jurisprudence) in recognised universities as well as to obtain the Certified Islamic Finance 
Professional  offered  by  INCEIF.  The  Bank  also  offers  Shariah  Research  Grant  to  research 
organisations and institutions of higher learning, both local and foreign, to undertake research in the 
areas of Shariah relating to Islamic finance, takaful and the Islamic capital market. All these initiatives 
are  aimed  to  enhance  the  pool  of  talents,  knowledge  and  research  capacity  in  the  field  of  Shariah 
relating to Islamic banking, takaful and the Islamic capital market.  
institute  providing 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2006
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The growth and development that have been achieved thus far have provided takaful operators with 
greater  opportunities  or  avenues  to  progress,  both  at  domestic  and  international  levels.  HSBC 
Amanah  Takaful  (Malaysia)  Sdn.  Bhd.  and  HSBC  Bank  Malaysia  Berhad,  with  the  group's  strong 
international  network  and  experience,  are  well  positioned  to  make  Malaysia  as  their  regional  and 
global hub for Islamic banking and takaful. HSBC Amanah Takaful (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd. should also 
leverage  on  the  strengths  of  its  shareholders  i.e.  HSBC,  Jerneh  Insurance  Berhad  and  Employees 
Provident Fund, to further accelerate the growth of the takaful business. On this note, it is my pleasure 
to congratulate HSBC Insurance (Asia Pacific) Holdings Limited, Jerneh Asia Berhad, and EPF on this 
momentous  occasion  of  the  official  launch  of  HSBC  Amanah  Takaful  (Malaysia)  Sdn.  Bhd.  I  wish 
HSBC Amanah Takaful (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd. every success in its endeavours and look forward to its 
contribution towards further development of the Islamic financial services industry in Malaysia. 
Dengan lafaz Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim, saya dengan sukacitanya merasmikan pelancaran HSBC 
Amanah Takaful (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd. 
Terima kasih. 
BIS Review 84/2006 
 3
