Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy 
Comments by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of the Central Bank of Norway, on the Norges Bank Watch 
2006 report, Oslo, 9 March 2006. 
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website.  
The 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech does not contain references to the 
next Inflation Report or the monetary policy meeting on 16 March. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  CME  for  again  providing  a  thorough  review  of  Norges  Bank’s  conduct  of 
monetary policy in the Norges Bank Watch report. I am also pleased to be invited to comment on the 
preliminary  Norges  Bank  Watch  2006  report.  It  is  an  extensive  report  that  discusses  a  number  of 
issues.  
The report discusses Norges Bank’s conduct of monetary policy in 2005 and the previous years, but 
also focuses on some aspects of our interpretation of the mandate for monetary policy. I will comment 
first of all on the relationship to the Regulation on Monetary Policy.  
As last year, the report emphasises the objective of stabilising the nominal exchange rate. It points to 
the reference to the exchange rate in the Regulation on Monetary Policy. Last year’s recommendation 
that the Regulation should be printed in its entirety in each Inflation Report is reiterated.  
Norges Bank’s mandate provides a basis for the conduct of monetary policy:  
“Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s national and international value, 
contributing  to  stable  expectations  concerning  exchange  rate  developments.  At  the  same  time, 
monetary  policy  shall  underpin  fiscal  policy  by  contributing  to  stable  developments  in  output  and 
employment.  
Norges Bank is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy.  
Norges  Bank’s  implementation  of  monetary  policy  shall,  in  accordance  with  the  first  paragraph,  be 
oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target of monetary policy shall be annual 
consumer price inflation of approximately 2.5 per cent over time. [...]”  
The  responsibility  for  implementing  monetary  policy  is  delegated  to  Norges  Bank  pursuant  to  the 
Norges  Bank  Act  and  the  appurtenant  Regulation.  The  Bank  sets  interest  rates  based  on  our 
interpretation of the Regulation. In our interpretation, we give weight to the Government’s rationale for 
the  Regulation,  to  the  purpose  as  expressed  in  the  first  section,  and  to  our  knowledge  about  the 
relationships between the interest rate, the exchange rate, output, employment and inflation.  
The first sentence in the mandate refers to the value of the krone. Stability in the krone’s internal value 
implies that inflation must be low and stable. Low and stable inflation contributes to economic growth 
and to stability in financial and property markets.  
The Regulation also states that monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s 
external  value,  contributing  to  stable  expectations  concerning  exchange  rate  developments.  Norges 
Bank has not set a specific target for the level of the krone exchange rate. With open trade with other 
countries  and  free  capital  movements,  we  do  not  have  the  instruments  to  fine-tune  the  krone 
exchange rate. The task of monetary policy is to provide a nominal anchor. The inflation target is such 
an  anchor.  Stable  inflation  expectations  can  contribute  to  more  stable  expectations  concerning  the 
krone,  but  the  rise  in  public  expenditure  and  in  prices  for  internationally  traded  goods  also  affect 
economic agents’ expectations as to the krone exchange rate.  
Our interpretation of the mandate is included in the Inflation Report. An account is also given of how 
different  developments,  including  movements  in  the  exchange  rate,  will  affect  the  monetary  policy 
outlook.  
Over time, the real exchange rate will be determined by conditions other than monetary policy. The 
real exchange rate may be measured in a number of ways: for example, by relative consumer prices 
and relative labour costs between Norway and its trading partners, measured in a common currency. 
The real exchange rate has fluctuated considerably and has at times deviated substantially from the 
BIS Review 17/2006 
 1
average  level  since  1970.  Nevertheless,  there  has  been  a  tendency  for  the  real  exchange  rate  to 
revert to this level.  
The cost level in the Norwegian economy compared with our trading partners rose sharply when the 
oil age began. Since then, the level has fluctuated to a certain extent without showing a clear upward 
or  downward  tendency.  Over  time,  the  level  has  been  adjusted  to  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues. 
When we subsequently arrive at the point where the portion of our import requirements that can be 
financed  by  petroleum  revenues  starts  to  diminish,  Norwegian  competitiveness  will  have  to  be 
improved.  Prize-winning  research  conducted  by  Farooq  Akram  (“Oil  Wealth  and  Real  Exchange 
Rates; the FEER for Norway”, Norges Bank Working Paper 2004/16) shows that the real exchange 
rate may have to revert to the levels prevailing at the end of the 1960s, before Norway became an oil 
nation. Such a depreciation can be achieved either through price and wage inflation that is lower in 
Norway  than  in  other  countries  or  through  a  depreciation  in  the  nominal  exchange  rate.  The  latter 
would be the least painful method, and with a flexible exchange rate, it is also the most probable.  
Norges Bank Watch also raises the issue of how monetary policy should safeguard the objective of 
financial  stability.  The  report  emphasises  that  economic  literature  does  not  provide  unequivocal 
recommendations  as  to  whether  or  how  this  should  be  done.  The  report  nevertheless  expresses 
concern with regard to the rise in house prices and credit growth. The report notes that asset prices, 
and particularly house prices, can influence household and business saving and investment decisions, 
and thereby affect real economic developments. Monetary policy can also influence developments in 
inflation,  output  and  employment  through  its  impact  on  asset  prices.  This  description  corresponds 
closely with our own understanding of how the economy functions.  
Household  debt  has  increased  sharply  since  the  mid-1990s.  At  the  same  time,  house  prices  have 
shown a marked increase. Debt developments in the 1990s can probably be viewed to some extent as 
a delayed adaptation to the deregulation of the housing and credit markets in the 1980s, after many 
households  burned  their  fingers  immediately  after  deregulation.  In  recent  years,  household  income 
growth has been solid, household confidence regarding the future has been strong and households 
probably  perceive  higher  income  levels  as  permanent.  This  may  have  resulted  in  a  further  rise  in 
house prices and debt. In addition, low real interest rates are now making a contribution.  
In  countries  that  have  had  liberalised  credit  markets  for  a  long  time,  Denmark  for  example,  where 
credit markets were liberalised over a hundred years ago, the household debt-to-income ratio is higher 
than in other countries. Norwegian households have a high level of debt, but there are examples of 
countries where household debt is even higher when we compare Norway with some of our trading 
partners.  
Developments in growth in credit to households in Norway nevertheless give cause for concern. We 
have examples showing that the subsequent effects of a period of unusually high house prices can 
persist for a very long time. At the end of the 1800s, house prices rose sharply in Christiania (now 
Oslo). The effects of the very high level of housing construction that resulted from the rise in prices are 
still  perceptible  in  parts  of  Oslo.  At  that  time,  the  housing  market  collapsed.  The  market  for  new 
dwellings was saturated. Real house prices did not revert to the 1899 level until the mid-1980s.  
The rise in house prices has been high in Norway in recent years, but not particularly high compared 
with  other  countries.  We  have  limited  scope  for  restraining  structural  changes  that  occur  when 
households increase their debt over several years to invest in housing and other property and assets. 
An  interest  rate  that  would  effectively  restrain  these  structural  adjustments  would  also  have  an 
adverse impact on economic activity. But households are more vulnerable when debt levels are high. 
Long  periods  of  a  sharp  rise  in  asset  prices  and  debt  may  give  rise  to  instability  in  output  and 
employment  at  a  later  stage.  Debt  developments  also  affect  banks’  behaviour.  A  particular 
responsibility for monitoring developments in financial institutions has been assigned to Kredittilsynet 
(Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway), and we are happy to have a well-equipped supervisory 
authority in this field.  
In its forecasting of economic variables, Norges Bank uses a broad approach. Current statistics and 
impressions  from  Norges  Bank  regional  network  are  important  in  assessing  the  current  economic 
situation.  In  its  forecasting,  the  Bank  uses  several  macroeconomic  models:  one  core  model  and  a 
number  of  smaller  models.  There  is,  however,  no  mechanical  relationship  between  the  models  the 
Bank  uses  and  its  forecasts.  The  Bank’s  forecasts  are  based  on  a  broad  and  varied  range  of 
information sources and include a substantial element of judgment.  
2 
 BIS Review 17/2006
Important components in the assessment of what constitutes a good interest rate path – and which 
stress the element of judgment in this assessment – are expressed in a set of criteria that should be 
met.  The  criteria  are  included  in  the  Inflation  Report.  Criteria  have  been  set  for  robustness  and 
financial  stability.  It  is  also  appropriate  to  assess  interest-rate  setting  against  cross-checks  such  as 
simple monetary policy rules.  
The  central  balance  is  nevertheless  between  the  inflation  outlook  and  the  outlook  for  capacity 
utilisation in the economy, expressed in the chart as the output gap. The projections are from Inflation 
Report 3/05. If monetary policy is to anchor inflation at the target, the interest rate must be set so that 
inflation moves towards the target. Inflation should be stabilised close to the target within a reasonable 
time horizon, normally 1-3 years. Provided inflation expectations are on target, the inflation gap and 
the output gap should be in reasonable proportion to each other until they close. Looking ahead, the 
inflation gap and the output gap should normally not be positive or negative at the same time.  
Several  of  the  recommendations  from  Norges  Bank  Watch  can  be  translated  into  how  we  should 
weigh the outlook for these two variables against each other.  
According to the report, Norges Bank’s inflation projections through 2005 were fairly accurate. Inflation 
has risen somewhat but is still very low, even 2½ years after the cyclical change. Inflation is still being 
restrained  by  the  fall  in  prices  for  imported  consumer  goods,  increased  competition  in  a  number  of 
markets  and  the  current  period  of  lower  nominal  pay  increases.  The  trend  in  prices  for  consumer 
goods over the past two or three years is a result of favourable developments in the Norwegian and 
global economies. Low inflation is being accompanied by real income growth and a rise in production. 
It  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  small  open  economies  are  particularly  vulnerable  to  fluctuations  in 
international prices. Deviations from the inflation target in Norway are broadly in line with Sweden and 
New Zealand, but are larger than for example in the UK and Canada.  
Developments in recent years have also been influenced by the fairly large favourable disturbances to 
which the Norwegian economy has been exposed. Developments in Norway’s terms of trade provide 
an illustration of this here.  
As consumers, we enjoy the benefits of falling prices for many imported goods. As a nation, we benefit 
from a fall in prices for the goods we import in relation to prices for the goods we export. Norway’s 
terms of trade are improving. The impact of the rise in oil and gas prices is particularly strong – and 
the domestic economy is shielded to a certain extent through the oil fund mechanism – but there have 
also been terms-of-trade gains in the mainland economy. The situation in Norway differs from that of 
our Nordic neighbours.  
It should also be noted that the figures for the twelve-month rise in consumer prices are considerably 
more  volatile  in  Norway  than  in  other  countries.  We  see  from  the  figures  that  consumer  prices  in 
Norway, even when tax changes and energy products are excluded, are more volatile than indices in 
other countries where these products are included.  
Low inflation is not the result of declining demand, activity or employment. In our conduct of monetary 
policy,  we  weigh  the  objective  of  stabilising  inflation  close  to  2½  per  cent  over  time  against  the 
objective of stable growth in output and employment. Since inflation is low, we have chosen to keep 
the interest rate at a low level and have at times considered an even lower interest rate. However, as 
the Norwegian economy has shown solid growth since summer 2003, we decided instead to use some 
time to bring inflation back to target. In a period of increasing cross-border labour flows, substantial 
technological advances, changes in competitive conditions and new trading patterns, we may, with our 
very open economy, have to accept a somewhat greater variation in inflation and deviations from the 
target, as we have witnessed over the past two to three years.  
BIS Review 17/2006 
 3
