Ardian Fullani: Economic outlook and important developments in Albania  
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at The Economist's Conference – First 
Business Roundtable with the Government of Albania: Identifying new business opportunities, Tirana, 
14 September 2006. 
 Honorable Chairman, Distinguished Participants, 
I am very pleased to be here today to share and discuss with you our views, future macroeconomic 
and  financial  market  developments  and  outline  our  policy  orientation.  I  was  looking  forward  to 
converse to this forum. It is a great opportunity that such well known institution, focus their attention 
toward  Albania.  I  would  like  to  thank  The  Economist  Conferences  and  express  my  deepest  and 
highest appreciation for this venture. 
I am confident that members of all communities, foreign and domestic, gathered here today will leave 
this forum with a clear image on the economic reality and business opportunities Albania has to offer. 
Assisted  by  geopolitical  conditions  and  actual  state  of  affairs,  although  small  at  a  glance,  Albanian 
economy presents numerous financial and economic advantages and incentives. 
Recently Albanian economy has reached a commendable macroeconomic equilibrium, sustained by 
an economic growth of 5-6 percent, low inflation levels well contained within a 2-3 percent band, and 
continuously shrinking budget deficits. It is my pleasure to emphasize that the Bank of Albania and its 
policy  has  been  rightfully  credited  and  earned  accolades  by  established  foreign  and  domestic 
institutions  for  its  notable  role  in  such  accomplishments.  Monetary  policy  has  been  designed  and 
implemented in line with midterm country’s macroeconomic program: with specific focus on price and 
financial stability 
Let me now briefly summarize what I believe are the latest most important developments, and outline 
our economic outlook.  
Economic growth 
After  the  significant  electricity  shortages  at  the  end  of  2005,  it  appears  that  traditional  growth 
promoting industries like services (tourism) and construction are growing at a stable pace, contributing 
at  a  sustainable  economic  growth.  Building  upon  these  developments  as  well  as  other  positive 
indicators,  we  expect  the  economy  will  grow  at  a  solid  rate  of  5-5.5  percent.  The  main  challenge 
remains  ensuring  sustainability  of  these  growth  rates,  even  higher  in  the  long  run.  I  believe  that 
respective Albanian authorities have already identified the major priorities of these challenges which 
fully converge with Bank of Albania views. Just to remind you I would briefly summaries some of these 
priorities.  Building  new,  preferably  alternative,  energy  sources  and  improving  the  efficiency  is  top 
priority.  In  our  view,  sufficient  and  reliable  energy  supply  remains  a  main  concern  to  achieving 
economic  growth.  Providing  a  solution  to  this  problem  is  a priority  in  the  verge  of  increasing  global 
demand  and  energy  prices.  Speeding  up  the  privatization  process  of  the  remaining  state  assets  is 
another  important  step  forward.  Special  attention  should  be  paid  to  structural  reforms,  particularly 
property rights and legal framework. In our opinion services, construction and in particular agriculture 
will remain driving forces of the GDP growth in the coming years.  
Therefore  I  would  strongly  agree  with  any  initiative  that  encourages  FDI’s  in  these  sectors  through 
attractive laws and other measures. I believe FDI’s are very important for providing long term stability 
of  the  foreign  sector.  Moreover  the  productivity  growth  that  usually  follows  FDI’s  inflows  will  play  e 
significant  role  in  reducing  current  account  deficit.  Our  economy  needs  more  foreign  direct 
investments hence Country Credit Ratings constitute a chief priority for our economy.  
It is my belief that FDI’s represent a regional rather than an individual challenge for the South East 
Europe.  Countries  in  the  region  must  coordinate  their  efforts  toward  creating  a  regional  market. 
Regional infrastructure projects will significantly increase attractiveness and competitiveness as well 
as international financial market awareness toward our region. It will improve confidence and provide 
necessary  economic  incentives  to  enter  in  the  region  leading  to  higher  FDI’s  inflows  for  each 
economy. 
BIS Review 85/2006 
 1
Inflation 
Our  economy  has  experienced  a  relatively  long  period  of  stable  prices.  Annual  inflation  figure  as 
measured  by  the  consumer  price  index,  for  the  last  12  months  is  reported  at  2.4  percent.  Both 
monetary and fiscal policies have been important factors in keeping inflation low. However, recently 
inflation pressures have accelerated. The fast growth of credit to economy, the steep increase of oil 
prices,  administrative  increase  of  energy  prices,  as  well  as  other  risks  have  the  potential  to  create 
inflationary  pressures  and  pose  risk  to  elevate  inflation  expectations.  Bank  of  Albania  will  take  all 
necessary actions to ensure an inflation rate of 3 per cent with a tolerance band of ± 1 percent, in the 
short and long run.  
Interest rates 
During the recent years interest rates have dropped reflecting the ease of monetary policy. This has 
been  a  general  trend  for  all  financial  assets  either  in  Lek  or  foreign  currency.  On  average  banking 
system  applies  9.7  percent  for  loans  in  domestic  currency.  The  yield  of  12  month  Government 
securities dropped at a minimum of 5.74 percent in June 2006. However, following the last decision of 
the Bank of Albania and latest trends in global markets, a modest increase in interest rates has been 
observed during the last three months for both domestic and foreign financial instruments. We expect 
this trend to persist within the next 6-12 months.  
Banking system 
The Albanian banking system continues to expand. It is solid, consolidated and fully capitalized. The 
system consists of 17 banks, of which only 3 are entirely domestically owned. Banking network has 
been  extended  continuously  including  remote  areas.  Banking  products  increased  in  number  and 
improved in quality. Entrance in the market of important European financial groups created a better 
competitive environment and further enhanced efficiency. The expansion of lending portfolio and more 
competitive lending rates has deepened financial intermediation. Latest data show that in June 2006, 
the assets of the banking sector reached 60 per cent of the Albanian Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 
Rapid changes in the banking system in light of credit boom, and global market financial integration 
impose  the  need  for  higher  standards  of  transparency,  accountability  and  governance  from  the 
banking  system  itself.  Not  only  with  regard  to  Bank  of  Albania,  but  public  as  well.  Banks  should 
behave responsibly and must integrate the stability of the entire system into their utility function. 
Financial system reforms 
Since  years  the  banking  systems  has  been  in  a  constant  process  of  transformation.  The  Financial 
Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP)  marks  a  significant  moment  in  this  process.  On  behalf  of  the 
Bank of Albania I would like to thank IMF and WB, for their excellent efforts on this professional and 
transparent financial certification of the Albanian Financial System.  
Bank of Albania remains very much focused in fulfilling the recommendations of the FSAP following 
the priority and institutional hierarchy.  
• 
Bank of Albania has increased the access and investment opportunities of commercial banks 
in the securities market. 
The draft on Banks Law is completed.  
Automated clearing house system is operational.  
The number of electronic transfers has increased significantly. There is concrete evidence 
that shows a continuous reduction of cash economy.  
Bank of Albania has extended its supervisory authority over all non-bank financial institutions 
that operate within the economic territory of the Republic of Albania. 
Supervisory  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  further  increased  the  transparency  of  its 
decision  making  process.  Minutes  are  released  regularly  and  Bank  of  Albania  website 
provides fresh info on daily activity.  
   2 
 BIS Review 85/2006
  There is significant progress on establishing the Credit Information Bureau. We hope by the 
end of next year that will be fully operational. 
Last but not the least I would stress out that we have already presented a detailed action 
plan for the remaining part of the FSAP recommendations.  
Honorable participants,  
Designing and implementing monetary policy has become more challenging. Globalization in particular 
has exposed our economy to foreign shocks. In addition policy actions of ECB and FED, exert their 
impact on Albanian economy mainly due to high extend of currency substitution. 
Rapid growth of lending activity is the most notable development among domestic factors. According 
to our figures over the last two years credit to economy has expanded by an equivalent of 10-12 GDP 
percentage points. At this rate it is expected to reach 18-20 percent of GDP at the end of current year. 
Is  worth  mentioning  that  approximately  30  percent  of  the  outstanding  credit  represents  consumer 
credit, moreover 75 percent of the outstanding stock is loaned in foreign exchange currency. 
This represents a very important development and deserves scrupulous attention. Our main concerns 
relate to inflationary pressures and non-performing loans that such credit expansion might generate.  
In the light of these developments Bank of Albania assessed that existing stance of monetary policy 
was not providing enough stimulus to curb aggregate demand. Therefore in July 2006 Bank of Albania 
decided to shift the course of monetary policy by raising the base rate (7 days repo rate) with 25 basis 
points. We are happy to observe that market is reacting following our decision. However based on our 
short  term  inflation  forecasts  and  in  presence  of  several  risks,  some  of  which  I  already  explained 
above,  Bank  of  Albania  perceives  that  inflation  pressures  for  the  next  12  months  remain  elevated. 
Currently we are cautiously evaluating the extend of market response and assessing whether further 
action is needed.  
Simultaneously  Bank  of  Albania  is  becoming  increasingly  concerned  regarding  the  quality  of  loan 
portfolio.  The  accelerated  pace  of  credit  expansion,  is  posing  challenges  to  both  banks  and  to 
supervisory authority. The response to these challenges will aim at achieving macroeconomic stability, 
by means of a well capitalized banking system. With this goal in mind, the Bank of Albania, as the 
supervisory  authority,  has  intensified  the  dialogue  with  the  banks  in  order  to  find  an  adequate 
consensus  for:  setting  realistic  objectives  of  annual  activity  growth;  containing  the  credit  expansion 
and maintain good credit portfolio quality; strengthen the internal control and risk monitoring systems; 
and monitor carefully the capital indicators. 
I would like to use this floor to emphasize that Bank of Albania will be very firm to follow strictly all 
requirements  that  derive  from  the  law  and  regulatory  framework.  On  our  part,  we  will  make  the 
necessary modifications in the supervisory and regulatory framework that target the above mentioned 
issues  with  a  realistic  and  flexible  approach.  The  sole  purpose  of  this  conformist  approach  to 
supervisory  rules,  is  to  provide  a  cushion  for  avoiding  potential  future  disturbances  in  the  financial 
stability.  
Finally  I  would  like  to  strongly  emphasize  for  all  business  community,  households  and  all  other 
economic  agents  that  Bank  of  Albania  will  make  all  efforts  to  ensure  and  further  consolidate  the 
general macroeconomic equilibrium in Albanian Economy, with specific role on financial stability.   
I believe that business community comprehends this important mission. Bank of Albania intends to be 
vocal regarding its prospects for economic developments, so that none of its actions should come to 
you as a surprise. Therefore I invite you to interpret our signals fairly and smoothly integrate them into 
your decision making process. I would like to remind you that our medium term agreement with IMF 
and focused policy orientation toward EU and European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) provides 
additional collateral for our pledge. 
Thanking The Economist Conference for giving me this opportunity I am open to take questions and 
share comments.  
BIS Review 85/2006 
 3
