Shamshad Akhtar: Global transaction banking 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Annual 
Global Transaction Banking Seminar, organised by Deutsche Bank, Karachi, 3 May 2006. 
 Let me first welcome the Deutsche Bank global team to Pakistan. Deutsche Bank has been an age-old 
partner in the development of Pakistan’s banking industry and we look forward to the advice of their 
global team, and their contribution to supporting the enhancement of global transactions in Pakistan’s 
banking industry. 
Today,  Pakistan  offers  a  promising  ground  for  financial  experimentation  and  innovation.  Pakistan’s 
banking industry has seen brisk growth in banking assets which today stand at over $60 billion. Bank’s 
profitability  is  at  an  all  time  high  and  unprecedented,  reaching  close  to  Rs  95  billion  by  end  2005. 
Aside  from  higher  efficiency  gains  in  the  industry  attributable  to  benefits  arising  from  significant 
banking  sector  restructuring  and  reforms,  high  profitability  of  banks  has  been  achieved  because  of 
high interest margins. In the period ahead, the financial industry however has to be positioned for a 
more  competitive  environment  and  has  to  cater  for  more  diverse  and  complex  requirements  of 
Pakistan’s consumers and infrastructure. Pakistan, like the rest of Asia, is growing fast and the rise in 
per capita income, emergence of the middle income group and relative wealth increases altogether 
bring  with  them  new  demands  for  the  retail  banking  industry.  Among  others,  both  investors  and 
industry  are  seeking  better  investments  and  financing  alternatives  and  solutions,  with  demand  for 
private debt, asset based and mortgage based securities, credit derivatives and hedge products etc. 
now emerging from different segments of the economy and population. 
Beside these real sector developments and requirements, financial industry of Pakistan has to catch 
up fast with the global developments and achieve better financial diversification and strengthen its risk 
management  systems.  In  Pakistan’s  context,  it  has  to  be  recognized  that  while  large  banks  will 
continue  to  thrive  on  volumes  of  business  which  they  have  traditionally  captured  given  their  reach 
across the country, it is the foreign banks with their competitive edge in global transaction banking that 
can offer unique and new financial solutions and lead the way for the rest of the banking industry to 
provide  to  customers  an  integrated  solution  that  caters  for  emerging  consumer  and  industry 
requirements.  
Global changes in the financial industry 
Compulsions to go this route are mounting. World-wide, the financial landscape has changed driven 
by: 
•  Changing macroeconomic factors such as economic growth and demography and institutional 
development as capital markets have matured and population demands for retirement funding 
and insurance has grown 
•  The phenomenal growth in financial markets and cross border flows 
•  The  ability  of  the  financial  industry  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  provided  by  the 
lending  and  mortgage  markets,  and  development  of  credit  risk  transfer  instruments  which 
involve structuring and trading of credit derivatives and asset backed securities that allows risk 
inherent  in  a  loan  to  be  repackaged  into  two  or  three  tradable  components  to  offer  optimal 
allocation of risks– this is particularly relevant in the context of developing financial markets 
where the risk profiles of banks are still dominated by credit risk predominantly of the issuance 
of loans even though there are moves towards corporate bonds or transactions in over-the-
counter markets, which involve the risk of a counterparty defaulting. 
•  Adoption  and  adaptation  of  technological  advancements  in  communication  and  information 
technology  that  has  seen  the  explosion  of  financial  innovation  with  service  providers  now 
offering multiple and diverse solutions that enhance efficiency and reach of products across 
boundaries and across national jurisdictions. 
•  Need  to  globally  integrate  financial  systems  and  encourage  end-to-end  straight  through 
processing  capabilities  and  development  of  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems  to 
overcome time zone and currency constraints. 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 1
•  With  globalization  of  markets  &  businesses,  there  is  greater  need  for  global  transaction 
solutions  for  effective  cash  management,  trade  finance,  trust  &  securities  services,  and 
continuous linked settlement. 
•  Finally,  there  are  now  mounting  regulatory  pressures  to  seeking  greater  IT  solutions  to 
tracking money laundering as well as adopting the new risk management framework including 
Basle II. 
Role of the central bank 
Recognizing that Pakistan’s banking industry subsequent to its restructuring is now positioned to move 
to  the  next  level  of  development,  SBP  has  been  focusing  on  promoting  gradual  migration  from  a 
predominantly cash and paper-based system to electronic payments. This has involved on one hand 
development of the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system, awareness creation and information 
dissemination about the role, importance and issues of payment systems and protection of consumer 
interests. On the other hand, it has involved encouraging banks to invest in technology and improve 
their payment and settlement system infrastructure, internal controls and move to e-banking. 
Clearing and settlement systems in Pakistan 
As a custodian of the Payment System of the country, SBP has nurtured and supervised the operation 
of  the  clearing  house  for  the  member  banks  operating  within  its  jurisdiction.  Automated  Clearing 
services  are  now  provided  by  National  Institutional  Facilitation  Technologies  (NIFT)  under  the 
supervision of SBP in nine major cities of Pakistan. A complete range of conventional clearing services 
including overnight clearing, same day high value clearing, intercity clearing etc are provided by NIFT. 
In rest of the business centres the process is manual but would eventually need to be automated. The 
Local  US  dollar  clearing  system  provides  a  low  cost  and  efficient  clearing  system  for  US  dollar 
denominated local instruments. The new system has reduced the clearing time of US dollar cheques 
from three weeks to only four days and has reduced the cost to the account holders. Banks and their 
branches in eleven cities are fully utilizing this facility. 
Real Time Gross Settlement 
Pakistan’s Real time Inter bank Settlement Mechanism (PRISM) is at an advanced stage of installation 
and is expected to be live by the 3rd quarter of 2006. It will automate the current inter-bank settlement 
systems for large value payments at SBP and will minimize risks like credit, liquidity and settlement 
risks  inherent  in  the  end  of  the  day  settlement  system.  Its  implementation  will  make  the  payments 
system  much  more  efficient  and  resilient,  offering  transactional  features  which  are  hard  to  achieve 
under the current settlement systems. The RTGS system is based on the Society for Worldwide Inter-
bank Financial Telecommunication topology and includes the functionalities of Queue management, 
Grid Lock Resolution and interfacing with Globus. 
PRISM  will  not  only  automate  the  Inter  Bank  funds  transfer  but  will  also  facilitate  the  settlement  of 
government  securities  transactions  in  Primary  and  Secondary  Markets.  After  the  implementation  of 
PRISM, settlement of securities between the participants will be on Delivery vs. Payment basis thus 
reducing the risk in securities trading by minimizing the settlement lag. SBP will also be able to settle 
the open market operation transaction through PRISM. PRISM will also bring more efficiency in inter-
city and intra-city clearing between the banks as NIFT will handle clearing on multilateral basis and 
these  clearing  results  will  be  settled  on  a  real  time  basis  in  PRISM.  PRISM  will  also  facilitate  the 
commercial banks in making time critical third party funds transfers on behalf of its customers. 
Payments System and Electronic Funds Transfers Act 2005 
To facilitate nation-wide RTGS and electronic funds transfer, Pakistan has now drafted the “Payments 
System and Electronic Funds Transfers Act 2005” that ensures conformance with industry demands 
and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  Core  Principals  for  Systemically  Important  Payment 
Systems.  The  proposed  Act  addresses  issues  like  operation  of  payment  systems,  including  the 
clearing  and  settlement  obligations  of  the  parties  involved,  supervisory  role  of  SBP,  documentation 
requirements  by  the  participants,  liabilities  of  parties  in  payment  systems  and  legal  proceedings  in 
case of any conflict, finality and irrevocability of settled transactions etc. The Act also gives necessary 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2006
legal  coverage  to  PRISM.  SBP  is  also  framing  the  requisite  rules  and  regulations  for  the  smooth 
operations and participation in PRISM. 
Progress in electronic payment systems 
There  has  been  substantial  improvement  in  the  payment  system  infrastructure  and  consumers’ 
payment  patterns  over  the  last  few  years,  particularly  in  urban  areas,  which  is  evident  from  the 
exponential growth in Automated Teller Machines (ATM) Cards, Debit & Credit Cards, ATM outlets, 
Points  of  Sales  (POS)  accepting  payments  through  cards  and  number  of  online  branches  of 
commercial  banks  providing  SWIFT  intra  bank  account  to  account  funds  transfer  facilities  and  the 
interconnectivity of the two ATM switches viz. the MNet and 1-Link. With the strategic focus of SBP to 
develop  a  well  functioning  and  efficient  payment  system  in  the  country  coupled  with  rapid 
technological changes, the pace of growth in payment system infrastructure will further accelerate in 
the medium term and its outreach will extend to even smaller towns. This will enable a larger number 
of consumers to use the enhanced and extended payment system infrastructure, and will bring greater 
efficiency and cost effectiveness in the system.Figure 5.1: Growth 
Online branches network 
The online branch network is also expanding at a fast pace and reached to 3,265 at the end of Dec 
2005 from 2,475 at the end of the preceding year, indicating an impressive increase of 32 percent or 
790 branches. The addition of 315 branches into the online network in the fourth quarter is signalling 
further acceleration in the pace of growth of the online branches. The coverage of online branches as 
a percentage of total branches (7,245 branches) has now reached 45 percent. At this pace, the whole 
branches network of the banking system will be online in the very near future, which will substantially 
improve efficiency of the payment system.  
Point of sale transactions 
Usage  of  cards  at  POS  is  expanding  with  the  passage  of  time.  This  channel  recorded  remarkable 
growth of 62 percent in number of transactions, to 13 million transactions in FY05 from 8 million in the 
previous year. Value of transactions grew by 56 percent to Rs 42.8 billion in FY05 from Rs27.4 billion 
in FY04.Figure 5.3: Number of Cardholders 
Conclusion 
The  GTB  concept  though  newer  to  Pakistani  banks,  will  help  service  the  ever  growing  need  for 
Pakistan’s  trade  &  finance  and  facilitate  investors’  awareness  to  the  growing  Pakistani  economy  & 
markets. We see inter-exchanges like this to further strengthen the transaction banking business in 
Pakistan. SBP is conscious of the need to further strengthen the payments & settlement systems in 
Pakistan to reduce inherent settlement risks and bringing efficiency to the financial system. We look 
forward  to  global  entities,  like  Deutsche  Bank,  in  performing  their  due  role  to  facilitate  providing 
awareness & expertise to further strengthen the financial system. 
GTB  will  help  in  providing  fully  integrated  risk  mitigation,  settlement,  financing  and  information 
solutions, which help unlock working capital trapped in inefficient order-to-cash and purchase-to-pay 
cycles. It will also assist businesses to achieve greater integration of the supply chain, which facilitates 
greater  efficiencies  and  streamlined  workflows,  whilst  reducing  operating  costs  and  accelerating 
payment cycles. More efficient trade processes also mitigate risk exposure and help the businesses 
optimise returns from trade assets. 
BIS Review 37/2006 
 3
