Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Testimony by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, before the Committee 
on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 21 June 2006. 
 Madame  la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs  les  membres  de  la  Commission  des  affaires 
économiques  et  monétaires,  je  me  réjouis  de  paraître  devant  votre  Commission  aujourd’hui  et  de 
poursuivre ainsi notre dialogue régulier. Comme vous le savez, nos rencontres trimestrielles sont très 
importantes  pour  la  Banque  centrale  européenne.  Je  commencerai  mon  intervention  par  une 
évaluation de la situation économique et monétaire.  
Anschließend  möchte  ich  einige  Ausführungen  zum  Beitrag  der  Geldpolitik  zu  wirtschaftlicher 
Wohlfahrt und Stabilität machen. Hiermit möchte ich nochmals die Grundprinzipien der Geldpolitik der 
EZB erläutern.  
Economic and monetary issues 
At the time of my last appearance before the European Parliament in February, I described how the 
available data at that time were in line with an assessment of a re-acceleration in economic growth in 
the euro area in the first months of 2006 and with a broadening of the expansion of economic activity. 
In addition, the cross-checking of our economic and monetary analyses underlined the prevalence of 
upside risks to price stability over the  medium to longer term. I  will now present to you our current 
assessment of how the economy and the outlook for price stability have evolved since February.  
Starting with the economic analysis, the main indicators that have become available since the start of 
2006  are  positive,  providing  further  evidence  that  the  economy  is  evolving  broadly  in  line  with  the 
scenario for economic developments that emerged at the end of 2005. According to Eurostat’s first 
estimate, real GDP in the euro area grew in the first quarter of 2006 by 0.6% on a quarter-on-quarter 
basis. This compares with 0.3% in the last quarter of 2005, with domestic demand, including private 
consumption, making a significant contribution to higher real GDP growth. Our previous expectation of 
a re-acceleration of real GDP growth in the first months of 2006 has thus materialised, confirming our 
assessment  that  economic  growth  is  broadening  and  gradually  becoming  more  sustained.  This 
assessment is further confirmed by available information on economic activity in the second quarter, 
notably by the main confidence surveys and indicator-based estimates, all of which continue to provide 
encouraging signals on the evolution of the economic outlook.  
Looking further ahead, the conditions and economic fundamentals are in place for growth in the euro 
area  to  remain  close  to  its  trend  potential  rate  on  a  sustained  basis.  Economic  growth  in  the  euro 
area’s  main  trading  partners remains strong,  providing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Investment  is 
expected  to grow  robustly,  benefiting  from  favourable  financing conditions,  corporate balance sheet 
restructuring,  and  gains  in  earnings  and  business  efficiency.  Furthermore,  we  expect  consumption 
growth to further strengthen gradually over time, in line with developments in real disposable income, 
as the labour market situation, and in particular employment growth, gradually improves.  
This  outlook  for  economic  developments  is  also  reflected  in  the  June  2006  Eurosystem  staff 
macroeconomic projections, which foresee average annual real GDP growth between 1.8% and 2.4% 
in  2006,  and  between  1.3%  and  2.3%  in  2007.  These  projections  for  growth  in  2006  are  broadly 
unchanged from the ECB staff projections of March 2006. For 2007 the latest projections are slightly 
lower,  mainly  reflecting  the  recent  rise  in  oil  prices.  The  most  recent  forecasts  by  international 
organisations and private sector institutions also confirm a broadly similar picture.  
In  the  view  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council,  risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  growth  provided  by 
these  projections  are  broadly  balanced  over  the  shorter  term,  while  over  the  longer  term  downside 
risks relate mainly to potential further oil price rises, a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances and 
protectionism. 
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation increased 
further  in  May,  to  reach  2.5%  from  2.4%  in  April,  largely  as  a  consequence  of  higher  energy  price 
developments. In the remainder of 2006 and in 2007, inflation rates are likely to remain elevated, with 
BIS Review 63/2006 
 1
the precise levels depending mainly on future energy price developments. Meanwhile, the moderate 
evolution of labour costs in the euro area is expected to continue, notably reflecting ongoing global 
competitive pressures, particularly in the manufacturing sector. However, the indirect effects of past oil 
price increases are expected to have an upward effect on inflation in 2007, as already signalled inter 
alia by recently observed strong increases in industrial producer prices, which grew at an annual rate 
of 5.4% in April. The announced changes in indirect taxes will also have a bearing on inflation next 
year.  
This outlook for inflation is also reflected in the June 2006 Eurosystem staff projections, which foresee 
annual HICP inflation in a range between 2.1% and 2.5% in 2006, and between 1.6% and 2.8% in 
2007. Compared with the March 2006 ECB staff projections, these ranges embody a slightly higher 
baseline profile for HICP inflation in 2006, largely reflecting the assumption of higher oil prices. 
This outlook for price developments remains subject to upside risks including further increases in oil 
prices, a stronger pass-through of past oil price rises to consumer prices than currently anticipated, 
additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, and – more fundamentally – stronger 
than expected wage developments due to second-round effects of past oil price increases.  
Turning to developments in monetary aggregates and credit, liquidity in the euro area remains ample 
by all reasonable measures. The annual growth rate of M3 increased to 8.8% in April 2006, from 8.5% 
in March 2006, supported by the robust expansion of its most liquid components. Credit growth has 
also remained very strong, with the annual rate of growth of loans to the private sector standing at 
double-digit levels.  
The rapid rate of monetary growth continues to be driven mainly by the expansion of its most liquid 
components.  Thus,  the  latest  developments  confirm  that  the  stimulative  impact  of  the  low  level  of 
interest rates remains the dominant factor behind the current high trend rate of monetary expansion, 
which signals inflationary risks over the medium to longer term. The further acceleration of monetary 
and  credit  growth  in  this  environment  of  already  ample  liquidity  points  to  increased  upside  risks  to 
price  stability  at  longer  horizons.  Monetary  developments  therefore  require  careful  monitoring,  in 
particular in the context of continued strong dynamics in housing markets. 
To sum up, annual HICP inflation rates are projected to remain elevated in 2006 and 2007, mainly as 
a consequence of upward pressures from high oil prices and indirect taxes. Risks to this outlook for 
inflation  remain  on  the  upside.  Against  the  backdrop  of  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth  and  the 
ample liquidity situation, the cross-checking of the outcome of the economic analysis with that of the 
monetary analysis confirms that upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term prevail.  
On  8  June  2006  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  increased  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis 
points, thus further adjusting its monetary policy stance after the interest rate increases in December 
2005 and March 2006. By means of its timely further action, the Governing Council is helping to keep 
medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  at  levels  which  are  in  line  with  price  stability,  thereby 
making  an  ongoing  contribution  to  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area. 
Notwithstanding the increase in key ECB interest rates on 8 June, our monetary policy in the euro area 
remains accommodative. It is essential to ensure that inflation expectations in the euro area remain 
firmly  anchored  at  levels  in  line  with  price  stability.  The  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  has 
permitted  inter  alia  to  maintain  since  the  creation  of  the  euro  a  low  level  of  risk  premia  across  the 
whole maturity spectrum, and to prevent costly wage-price spirals in the context of considerably higher 
oil prices. It is essential that this important asset of the euro area economy is preserved. 
The contribution of monetary policy to economic welfare and stability 
Having explained the more specific and current reasons for the ECB’s recent monetary policy moves, 
let me now put them in a broader perspective. As you know, the Treaty states that, without prejudice to 
the primary objective of price stability, the Eurosystem shall support the general economic policies in 
the Community, aiming at a high level of employment and sustainable and non-inflationary growth.  
It is sometimes argued that the ECB’s overriding focus on price stability implies that we do not pay 
sufficient attention to this latter part of our mandate; in other words, that in our policy we do not attach 
sufficient  importance  to  growth,  employment  and  the  welfare  of  European  citizens.  I  would  like  to 
explain  to  you  that  these  assumptions  are  misguided:  price  stability,  and  economic  growth  and 
employment,  rather  than  being  substitutes,  are  complements  in  a  relationship  which  makes  price 
stability a necessary condition for sustainable growth and job creation.  
2 
 BIS Review 63/2006
The contribution of monetary policy to economic welfare and stability 
Price stability contributes to economic welfare and sustainable growth in many ways. An immediate 
way in which price stability contributes to welfare is by protecting the purchasing power of money, both 
for  consumers  and  for  savers.  By  protecting  purchasing  power,  monetary  policy  also  makes  an 
important contribution to social cohesion, as the weakest groups of society are generally the least able 
to protect their savings against inflation. Moreover, inflation has the effect of transferring wealth from 
savers to debtors, as savers face a loss in the value of their assets, whereas the real value of debts 
diminishes  as  a  result  of  inflation.  Maintaining  price  stability  prevents  such  arbitrary  and  unjust 
redistributions of wealth and income brought about by inflation. 
Price  stability  also  contributes  to  a  better  economic  performance.  Inflation  undermines  the  proper 
functioning of markets, as the information deriving from price developments becomes blurred. Stable 
prices, on the other hand, enable markets to better allocate resources to their most efficient use, which 
enhances growth and employment. Very importantly, an environment of stable prices also reduces risk 
premia  in  medium-  and  long-term  interest  rates,  as  investors  will  not  demand  a  high  inflation  risk 
premium to compensate them for the loss in purchasing power. This reduces real medium- and long-
term market interest rates and increases the incentives to invest.  
All these arguments show that price stability provides a substantial contribution to economic growth 
and social welfare. Yet, against the backdrop of relatively low growth rates in Europe, it is sometimes 
asked  whether  we  could  not  achieve  higher  growth  rates  by  accepting  a  somewhat  higher  rate  of 
inflation.  History  has  clearly  shown,  however,  that  growth  and  employment  cannot  be  increased  by 
inflating  the  economy  by  means  of  a  loose  monetary  policy.  This  means  that  in  the  long  run  an 
increase in the quantity of money will only lead to an increase in prices, whilst leaving the levels of 
growth  and  employment  unchanged.  This  implies  that,  in  the  long  run,  monetary  policy  can  only 
influence the level of prices. The levels of real income and employment are ultimately determined by 
real factors. These include technological progress and productivity growth, the growth of the labour 
force and all structural aspects of the economy, such as the flexibility of goods and labour markets, tax 
policies  and  the  quality  of  education,  which  are  all  outside  the  realm  of  monetary  policy.  By 
maintaining  price  stability,  monetary  policy  is  providing  the  conditions  for  such  real  factors  to  work 
better. 
The  strong  consensus  among  academics  and  policy-makers  on  the  basic  principles  that  I  have 
outlined has not always existed. Forty years ago, there was a widespread view that monetary policy 
could durably raise the growth rate of the economy and that it could achieve permanently lower rates 
of unemployment by accepting higher inflation. This view was proven wrong by reality. The inflationary 
policies adopted in the 1970s to counter the effects of the oil price shocks did not succeed in reducing 
unemployment.  On  the  contrary,  these  policies  in  fact  only  led  to  persistently  higher  inflation.  In 
addition, these policies also caused large fluctuations in real activity. 
By contrast, the recent oil price increases have had a limited effect on inflation and also on output and 
unemployment.  This  has  been  the  case  because  of  the  high  credibility  of  the  ECB  in  safeguarding 
price stability. Because of this high credibility, inflation expectations are now well-anchored. Since the 
public has remained convinced that inflation will remain low in the long run, the energy price increases 
have not generated significant second-round effects on wages and prices. As a result, monetary policy 
has  been  able  to  maintain  a  more  accommodative  stance.  This  stance  has  been  decisive  in 
counteracting the negative effects of the oil price increases on the real economy. 
Price stability is the goal of monetary policies around the globe 
Today, the insight that price stability is the primary goal for monetary policy has also been translated 
into  the  mandates  of  central  banks  of  advanced  economies  and  also  of  a  very  large  number  of 
emerging economies. For instance, it is the case in the UK, it is the case in Japan, it is the case in 
Canada, in Australia and New Zealand. Price stability is the goal of modern monetary policy around 
the world.  
This also holds true for the US Fed. The mandate of the Fed is sometimes contrasted with that of the 
ECB,  because  it  comprises  not  only  a  goal  of  price  stability  but  also  the  goals  of  maximum 
employment and moderate long-term interest rates. Although the Fed’s mandate does not establish a 
hierarchy among these goals, the Fed has made clear on a number of occasions that it considers price 
stability  as  a  necessary  condition  for  and  the  best  contribution  of  monetary  policy  to  achieving  the 
highest level of welfare and sustainable economic growth. The track record of the Fed in controlling 
BIS Review 63/2006 
 3
inflation over the past decades speaks for itself. The successive Chairmen of the Fed have made clear 
that  the  Fed  considers  price  stability  not  only  as  a  goal  but  also  as  a  means  for  the  Fed  policy  to 
achieve its other statutory goals. This is very much in line with our own framework and thinking. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, it is an error to think that a choice needs to be made between price stability on the one 
hand, and sustainable economic growth and welfare on the other. Price stability is both a precondition 
for and a means to enhance durable economic growth and welfare.  
That  being  said,  we  should  all  be  aware  that,  if  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition,  it  is  not  a 
sufficient  condition  per  se  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and  job  creation.  As  I  have  pointed  out 
before,  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  economy  is  ultimately  determined  by  its  structural 
features. That is the reason why the ECB calls so often upon policy-makers to embark resolutely on 
the structural reforms of the Lisbon Strategy and on the full completion of the internal market. Both 
would elevate the ‘speed limit’ of the EU and the euro area economy.  
I am now ready to answer your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2006
