Toshihiko Fukui: New framework for the conduct of monetary policy - toward 
achieving sustainable economic growth with price stability 
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, to the Japan Chamber 
of Commerce and Industry, Tokyo,16 March 2006.  
 Introduction  
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on March 8 and 9, 2006, the Bank of Japan decided to 
terminate the quantitative easing policy, which had been maintained during the five years since March 
2001. The Bank shifted the operating target of money market operations from the outstanding balance 
of current accounts at the Bank to a short-term interest rate, namely, the uncollateralized overnight call 
rate. It also introduced a new framework for the monetary policy conduct, including clarification of its 
thinking on price stability.  
Today, I will focus on the background to the termination of the quantitative easing policy by looking 
back on economic and financial developments during the past few years, and explain the Bank's future 
monetary policy conduct.  
I. Embarking on a sustainable growth path  
Japan's economy continues to recover steadily. The current economic expansion started in January 
2002 and has lasted for more than four years, according to the Cabinet Office's reference dates of 
business cycles. The recent recovery is well balanced in terms of the balance between domestic and 
external demand, and also between the corporate and household sectors. Although the recovery is not 
accelerating, the foundation for economic growth is solid, and its resistance to various external shocks 
has been increasing. The present phase of the recovery is the third since the bursting of the economic 
bubble. Unlike the previous two phases, this time we may reasonably expect the current expansionary 
phase  to  last  longer  and  to  be  more  sustainable.  Japan's  economy  has,  at  last,  succeeded  in 
emerging  from  its  prolonged  adjustment  phase,  which  continued  for  more  than  a  decade,  and  has 
embarked on a sustainable growth path with price stability.  
Several factors support this view. In addition to external factors, such as the continuing expansion of 
overseas economies, on the domestic side structural reforms have made significant progress in both 
the business and financial sectors. Moreover, the positive effects of the recovery are spreading to the 
household sector. I will now discuss these contributing factors and then go into some detail regarding 
the sustainability of the current economic recovery.  
A. Progress in structural reforms  
The most important factor contributing to the achievement of sustained economic recovery has been 
the  elimination  of  the  burdens,  or  adjustment  pressures,  in  the  corporate  sector  and  the  financial 
system, which have hindered the Japanese economy's movement to a sustainable growth path ever 
since the bursting of the economic bubble.  
As a result of stringent corporate restructuring efforts that lasted for more than a decade, the excesses 
in debt, employment, and production capacity -- the so-called "three excesses" -- have for the most 
part  been  dispelled  and  resolved.  According  to  the  latest  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises in Japan), the number of firms perceiving their production capacity as excessive is almost 
equal to the number perceiving it as insufficient for the first time since the early 1990s. The number of 
firms  perceiving  their  holdings  of  labor  as  insufficient  has  already  exceeded  the  number  perceiving 
them as excessive, indicating that firms perceive a tightening of the labor market. This tightness is also 
evidenced  by  the  ratio  of  job  offers  to  applicants,  which  has  exceeded  1.00.  Turning  to  firms'  debt 
levels, the ratio of interest-bearing debt to sales peaked out around 1993, and is currently as low as 
that seen in the mid-1980s, before the bubble era.  
While taking measures to resolve the "three excesses," firms have been reviewing their business lines 
based  on  the  principle of "selection  and  concentration"  in  the  face  of  intensified  global competition. 
More specifically, firms have adopted an active management approach by concentrating on strategic 
BIS Review 20/2006 
 1
areas  of  business  and  establishing  business  tie-ups  to  improve  their  ability  to  generate  high-value-
added  products  and  services.  As  a  result,  firms  have  succeeded  in  substantially  improving  their 
profitability. Corporate profits have increased for the three consecutive years from fiscal 2002, and are 
expected to continue to increase in the current fiscal year. Firms' ratio of current profits to sales has 
already exceeded the peak marked during the bubble era. Using the high level of corporate profits, 
firms are actively investing in research and development and expanding production capacity in order 
to  boost  market  competitiveness.  These  activities  are  evident  in  increases  in  business  fixed 
investment, regardless of the type and size of firm.  
Improvements are also notable in the financial system. The nonperforming-loan (NPL) problem that 
has  plagued  Japan's  economy  for  so  long  has  by  and  large  been  resolved,  and  the  stability  of  the 
Japanese financial system has been restored. The lending attitude of financial institutions has become 
more active as a result of improvements in their profitability and capital adequacy ratios due to the 
decrease in the amount of NPLs. The amount outstanding of lending by private banks, which had long 
been  on  a  downward  trend,  finally  turned  upward  on  a  year-on-year  basis  in  August  2005  after  an 
adjustment for securitization of loans and loan write-offs. Since then, the pace of increase has been 
gradually  accelerating.  In  the  previous  two  recovery  phases,  weakness  in  the  financial  system 
hindered the economy from moving onto a sustainable growth path. At present, however, the financial 
system has recovered to a level of soundness sufficient to firmly support the achievement of sustained 
economic growth.  
B. Spread of improvement in the corporate sector to the household sector  
In order to realize a sustainable economic recovery, it is important for a virtuous cycle to operate in the 
economy,  wherein  the  improvement  in  income  of  the  corporate  sector  spreads  to  the  household 
sector,  and  this  in  turn  feeds  back  to  the  corporate  sector.  Unfortunately,  in  past  recovery  phases, 
such a virtuous cycle did not fully operate, as both the corporate sector and the financial system were 
subject  to  structural  adjustment  pressure.  In  contrast,  in  the  current  recovery  phase,  apparent 
improvement in the employment and income situation has been observed since the beginning of 2005, 
and a longer and more sustainable recovery is expected in the household sector.  
Firms have been increasing their numbers of employees, as the adjustment in excessive holdings of 
labor has progressed. Initially, they relied mainly on part-time workers in order to restrain labor costs, 
but firms have begun to gradually increase their numbers of regular employees, as the labor market 
has tightened. Wages per worker have also been rising, reflecting such conditions in the labor market. 
Specifically,  regular  payments  have  recently  begun  to  increase  in  addition  to  continuing  growth  in 
overtime payments and bonus payments. This improvement in the employment and income situation, 
coupled  with  a  rise  in  stock  prices  and  an  increase  in  dividend  income,  has  contributed  to  income 
growth in the household sector. With such income conditions, private consumption has been solid. It is 
expected to remain so, supported by the increase in household income. This development is expected 
to  accelerate  the  virtuous  cycle  further  as  the  firmness  in  private  consumption  feeds  back  to  the 
corporate sector.  
As seen from what I have described, Japan's economy continues its solid recovery, but this recovery 
is  often  said  to  not  apply  evenly  across  small  firms  and  regional  economies.  In  fact,  the  degree  of 
recovery still varies according to size of firm and region.  
The economic recovery has indeed been spreading steadily, with both domestic and external demand 
continuing to increase. The Tankan indicated that business conditions at not only large firms but also 
small  and  medium-sized  ones  have  been  improving.  The  Bank's  branches  conduct  research  and 
interviews so as to grasp the state of regional economies, and the results are presented at the meeting 
of general managers of the Bank's branches. The results show that, although there still is a difference 
in the degree of recovery, all regional economies are showing improvement. The Bank will continue to 
pay due attention to future developments in regional economies.  
II. Improvement in the environment for prices  
The environment for prices has become favorable reflecting the continuing economic recovery. The 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI,  excluding  fresh  food)  had  been 
negative since 1998, but returned to 0.0 percent in October 2005 and turned positive in November. 
According  to  the  figure  released  on  March  3,  2006,  it  rose  further  in  January  2006,  reaching  0.5 
percent. This was partly attributable to the dissipation of temporary factors such as the reduction of 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2006
telephone  charges  implemented  in  2005  and  also  to  high  crude  oil  prices,  but  more  importantly, 
fundamental  factors  that  affect  price  developments  clearly  began  to  improve  and  started  to  exert 
upward pressure on prices.  
First, the supply-demand balance is improving gradually and improvement is expected to continue, as 
the economy continues to recover at a pace slightly above its potential. Second, although unit labor 
costs continue to be driven down by the productivity increase, with wages beginning to rise, the rate of 
decline has been diminishing and this trend is expected to continue. And third, firms' and households' 
expectations of inflation have been gradually revised upward, as indicated by various surveys.  
All of this indicates that the environment for prices has changed dramatically from the past, when a 
substantial output gap exerted downward pressure on prices. As the economy is expected to continue 
to  recover  steadily  with  a  balance  being  maintained  between  domestic  and  external  demand  and 
between the corporate and household sectors, a positive trend in the year-on-year rate of change in 
consumer prices is projected to be established, albeit with some fluctuations.  
As  I  have  explained,  Japan's  economy  has  achieved  substantial  improvement,  in  terms  of  both 
economic activity and prices, and this implies that the Bank should respond to the improvement by 
changing its conduct of monetary policy.  
III. Effects of the quantitative easing policy  
The  Bank  displayed  its  resolve  in  continuing  the  quantitative  easing  policy  for  five  years  after 
introducing it in March 2001. At the time, Japan's economy was in a recessionary phase triggered by 
the collapse of the IT bubble around the globe. Financial institutions in Japan were also burdened by 
massive NPLs,  and  there was  a  high  level  of  public  anxiety  concerning  the stability  of  the financial 
system. In these circumstances, the economy faced a severe challenge, the potential risk of falling into 
a vicious cycle, or so-called deflationary spiral, in which a fall in demand reflecting deterioration of the 
economy causes a decline in prices and this in turn leads to a further fall in demand. To counter this 
situation,  the  Bank  acted  decisively  and  introduced  the  quantitative  easing  policy,  which  was 
unprecedented in the history of any central bank, with the aim of preventing a continuing fall in prices 
and establishing a foundation for achieving sustainable economic growth. I would like to elaborate on 
what the quantitative easing policy has contributed to Japan's economy over the past five years.  
The quantitative easing policy consisted of two pillars: provision by the Bank of ample liquidity to raise 
the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  above  the  amount  of  reserves  financial 
institutions are required to hold, namely, required reserves; and a commitment by the Bank to continue 
to  provide  ample  liquidity  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food) 
registered zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis.  
Provision  of  ample  liquidity  exceeding  required  reserves  reduced  very  short-term  interest  rates  to 
effectively zero percent and dispelled financial institutions' liquidity concern. After the introduction of 
the quantitative easing policy, there was no occurrence of any large-scale credit crunch, such as was 
observed  in  1997  and  1998,  and  stability  in  financial  markets  was  maintained  despite  the 
materialization of various shocks, including the terrorist attacks in the United States and the Iraq war 
as well  as  the  injection  of  public  funds  into  a  major  Japanese  bank  when  the  financial  system was 
fragile.  
The  Bank's  commitment  to  continue  the  quantitative  easing  policy  generated  expectations  that  the 
zero  interest  rate  environment  would  continue  for  a  certain  period  of  time  while  consumer  prices 
continued  to  decline.  This  is  referred  to  as  the  "duration  effect,"  that  is,  the  effect  of  the  Bank's 
commitment  regarding  the  duration  of  the  policy.  As  a  result  of  this  duration  effect,  the  Bank's 
commitment contributed to keeping short- to medium-term interest rates stable at low levels.  
The policy effects of dispelling the liquidity concern as well as keeping interest rates low and stable 
have created an accommodative environment not only in the money market and capital markets but 
also in corporate finance activities. Bank lending rates, for example, have continued to decline partly 
reflecting  the  decrease  in  the  credit  premium,  and  are  around  historically  low  levels,  despite  the 
ongoing economic recovery.  
As mentioned earlier, Japanese firms, after strenuous efforts, have tackled structural problems such 
as  the  "three  excesses,"  and  are  becoming  increasingly  active  in  undertaking  business  fixed 
investment. The accommodative financial environment created by the quantitative easing policy has 
been firmly supporting such developments. It could be said that the policy has contributed to improving 
BIS Review 20/2006 
 3
the rate of return on capital and to raising corporate profits, as it enabled lending rates to decline even 
while  the  economic  outlook was  gradually  brightening.  These  improvements  in  the corporate  sector 
have, with a certain lag, been exerting positive effects on the household sector, thereby supporting the 
continuing economic recovery and the favorable environment for price developments.  
The Bank's quantitative easing policy played a significant role in the recovery of Japan's economy and 
in  the  improvement  in  price  developments.  However,  amid  recent  economic  and  financial 
circumstances, both the effect of the quantity of liquidity to dispel liquidity concern and the duration 
effect through which the Bank's commitment influences interest rates are considered to have played 
themselves out. As the financial system has regained stability, liquidity demand at financial institutions 
has declined, reducing the need for the provision of funds at a level well over required reserves. In 
addition,  the  duration  effect  of  the  policy  commitment  has  been  gradually  diminishing  with  the 
shortening of the expected duration of the quantitative easing policy in line with the improvement in 
price developments. Ultimately, the duration effect ceases to exist when the criterion that the year-on-
year rate of change in the CPI is registering zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis is fulfilled. In 
short, the effects of the quantitative easing policy on economic activity and prices had already become 
essentially  equivalent  to  those  of  an  interest  rate  policy  targeting  a  short-term  interest  rate  of  zero 
percent prior to the termination of the quantitative easing policy.  
IV. Background to the termination of the quantitative easing policy  
In  this  situation,  the  Bank  decided  to  terminate  the  quantitative  easing  policy  at  the  MPM  held  on 
March 8 and 9, 2006. The Bank decided to change the operating target of money market operations 
from  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  to  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call 
rate, and to set the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period as follows: "The 
Bank  of  Japan  will  encourage  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  remain  at  effectively  zero 
percent."  
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has been registering zero percent or above for the four 
consecutive  months  since  October  2005,  and  a  positive  trend  in  the  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is 
projected  to  be  established.  Economic  developments  underlying  the  CPI  also  indicate  that  Japan's 
economy is likely to experience a sustained period of expansion with domestic and external demand 
well in balance. Based on these developments in economic activity and prices, the Bank judged that 
the  commitment  that  it  would  continue  the  quantitative  easing  policy  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in the CPI registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis had been fulfilled, and that it 
was therefore appropriate to terminate the unprecedented quantitative easing policy.  
It must be stressed that the termination of the quantitative easing policy does not signify a tightening of 
monetary policy. As I have explained, the policy effects of the quantitative easing policy have already 
become essentially equivalent to those of an interest rate policy targeting a short-term interest rate of 
zero  percent.  Since  the  Bank  will  encourage  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  remain  at 
effectively  zero  percent  based  on  the  new  guideline  for  money  market  operations,  there  will  be  no 
abrupt change in monetary policy in terms of the stimulative effects of the quantitative easing policy on 
economic activity and prices. The effects of short-term interest rates being at effectively zero percent 
have  increased  gradually with  the  upturn  in  economic  activity  and  prices, and  they  are expected  to 
become  stronger  while  the  current  guideline  is  maintained.  Although  the  level  of  interest  rates 
depends on developments in economic activity and prices as well as in financial markets, if it is judged 
that inflationary pressures are restrained as the economy follows a balanced and sustainable growth 
path,  then  the  accommodative  monetary  environment  ensuing  from  very  low  interest  rates  will 
probably be maintained for some time. The Bank will continue to offer firm support to the economy by 
maintaining accommodative monetary conditions.  
Some might question why the Bank should terminate the quantitative easing policy if the policy effects 
are equivalent to those of an interest rate policy targeting a short-term interest rate of zero percent. 
However, the Bank made a clear commitment when it introduced the quantitative easing policy that it 
would continue the policy until the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI registered zero percent or 
higher  on  a  sustainable  basis,  and  market  participants  have  been  conducting  transactions  on  this 
premise. The duration effect of the policy commitment could not have been achieved without market 
participants' confidence in the commitment. In this regard, the termination of the quantitative easing 
policy once the Bank judged the commitment to have been fulfilled contributes to enhancing monetary 
policy  transparency  and  in  turn  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  the  long  term.  Putting  this 
another way, if the Bank had continued to conduct monetary policy in line with an operating target that 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2006
had  already  essentially  lost  its  effectiveness,  this  could  well  have  caused  not  only  increased 
uncertainty in financial markets but also damage to the transparency of monetary policy.  
V. Conduct of money market operations for the immediate future  
In conducting money market operations in the immediate future, the Bank will reduce the outstanding 
balance  of  current  accounts  toward  a  level  in  line  with  required  reserves  according  to  the  new 
guideline  for  money  market  operations.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  as  financial 
institutions have managed liquidity against the backdrop of large amounts of current account balances 
and extensive funds-supplying operations by the Bank for a prolonged period under the quantitative 
easing policy, the functioning of the money market has been somewhat impaired. As a result, financial 
institutions may have difficulties carrying out smooth fund management. Given these circumstances, 
the  Bank's  reduction  of  the  current  account  balance  will  be  implemented  taking  full  account  of 
conditions  in  the  money  market.  How  long  it  will  take  for  the  Bank  to  reduce  the  current  account 
balance depends on the situation in the money market, but it is reasonable to expect the reduction to 
be carried out over a period of a few months. With respect to the complementary lending facility, which 
allows financial institutions to borrow short-term funds from the Bank at their request up to the amount 
of the collateral they pledged in advance, the Bank decided to keep the loan rate unchanged at 0.1 
percent,  its  level  prior  to  the  termination  of  the  quantitative  easing  policy.  This  means  that  the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate, which will be effectively zero percent in accordance with the new 
guideline for money market operations, will basically not exceed this ceiling of 0.1 percent even if it 
surges  temporarily.  Reduction  of  the  outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  will  be 
managed  through  short-term  money  market  operations.  With  respect  to  outright  purchases  of  long-
term Japanese government bonds, these will continue at the current amounts and frequency for some 
time, with due regard for the future condition of the Bank's balance sheet.  
VI. Introduction of a new framework for the conduct of monetary policy  
Following the latest MPM, the Bank announced the introduction of a new framework for the conduct of 
monetary policy, with a view to ensuring the transparency of its policy conduct given the shift from the 
quantitative easing policy to an interest rate policy.  
Under the quantitative easing policy, the Bank conducted monetary policy in line with a commitment 
based on the CPI. The commitment was unprecedented in that it linked the conduct of monetary policy 
directly to a specific economic indicator, namely, the CPI. With the aim of generating monetary easing 
effects in a situation where there was no room to further reduce short-term interest rates, the Bank 
introduced this unprecedented policy to affect the formation of interest rates, in spite of acknowledging 
the concomitant sacrifice in the flexibility with which it would be able to conduct monetary policy. Such 
a policy measure had never previously been adopted by any central bank, and it may safely be seen 
as  a  monetary  policy  innovation  designed  by  the  Bank  of  Japan.  As  I  explained  earlier,  the  Bank's 
commitment  regarding  the  duration  of  the  policy  had  significant  positive  effects  that  operated  by 
keeping short- to medium-term interest rates stable at low levels and maintaining an accommodative 
environment for corporate financing. However, at the same time, the policy to some extent undermined 
the pricing function of financial markets.  
With the prospects for sustainable economic growth with long-term price stability, monetary policy in 
general should be conducted in a forward-looking manner -- in other words, it should be implemented 
taking future developments in economic activity and prices fully into consideration -- and it should be 
both  flexible  and  timely.  In  the  current  situation  where  the  economy  is  emerging  from  a  prolonged 
period  of  structural  adjustment  and  moving  toward  a  path  of  sustainable  growth,  a  new  framework 
should  be  introduced  to  ensure  that  monetary  policy  is  conducted  both  appropriately  and  with 
sufficient  transparency.  Given  the  Bank's  thinking  about  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  market 
participants,  for  their  part,  should  have  their  own  views  on  interest  rate  developments  and  thereby 
make decisions on financial transactions, by forecasting the future course of monetary policy based on 
their assessment of economic activity and prices. Such a process will facilitate the proper functioning 
of  pricing  mechanisms  in  financial  markets  and  in  turn  generate  economic  dynamism  through  the 
efficient allocation of funds.  
Three elements underlie the new framework for the conduct of monetary policy.  
BIS Review 20/2006 
 5
First, the Bank has clarified its thinking on price stability, which is a stated objective of monetary policy. 
Specifically, the Bank has made public its basic thinking on price stability, and, as regards the conduct 
of monetary policy, it has disclosed a level of the inflation rate that its Policy Board members currently 
understand as price stability from a medium- to long-term viewpoint.  
Second, the Bank has explained the two perspectives from which it examines economic activity and 
prices in determining how to conduct monetary policy.  
Third,  the  Bank  has  decided  that,  after  deliberations  from  these  two  perspectives,  it  will  outline  its 
thinking  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  for  the  immediate  future,  and,  as  a  rule,  disclose  it 
periodically in the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report).  
Now I will elaborate on these three elements.  
A. Clarifying the Bank's thinking on price stability  
The  Bank  of  Japan  Law  stipulates  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  as  "contributing  to  the  sound 
development  of  the  national  economy"  "through  the  pursuit  of  price  stability."  In  accomplishing  this 
stated objective, it is thus very important for the Bank to clearly indicate to the public its thinking on 
price stability.  
Price  stability  can  be  defined  as  a  state  where  various  economic  agents  including  households  and 
firms are able to make decisions regarding economic activities such as consumption and investment 
without  being  concerned  about  fluctuation  in  the  general  price  level.  When  considering  what 
constitutes price stability for the purposes of conducting monetary policy, central banks should take full 
account of the distinctive features of their countries' economic structures and how these influence the 
public's  view  of  prices.  In  the  case  of  Japan,  one  noteworthy  feature  regards  the  average  rate  of 
inflation,  which,  over  the  last  a  few  decades,  has  been  lower  than  in  major  overseas  economies. 
Specifically, average inflation rates for major countries from 1985 to 2005, measured by the CPI, are 
as  follows:  3.2  percent  for  the  United  States,  2.9  percent  for  the  United  Kingdom,  1.8  percent  for 
Germany, and 0.6 percent for Japan. As the Japanese economy has had a protracted experience of 
low inflation since the 1990s, the rate of inflation at which households and firms perceive price stability 
seems  to  be  low,  and  economic  decisions  are  likely  to  be  made  on  the  premise  of  a  similarly  low-
inflation  environment.  These  features  should  be  taken  duly  into  consideration  when  conducting 
monetary policy.  
At the latest MPM, taking into account the points I have described, there was a discussion of the level 
of inflation that each Policy Board member, in conducting monetary policy, currently understands as 
price  stability  from  a  medium-  to  long-term  viewpoint.  Such  a  level  is  referred  to  as  a  member's 
"understanding of medium- to long-term price stability." There was a range of views among the Policy 
Board members, which seemed to reflect differences between their views on the Japanese economic 
structure,  as  well  as  differences  in  their  assessments  of  the  costs  of  inflation  and  deflation.  They 
concurred, however, that, in the current situation, the level in Japan was somewhat lower than in major 
overseas economies. They also agreed that, by making use of the rate of year-on-year change in the 
CPI to describe the understanding, an approximate range between zero and 2 percent was generally 
consistent  with  the  distribution  of  each  member's  understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price 
stability. Most Policy Board members' median figures fell on both sides of 1 percent. Given that the 
"understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" may change gradually, reflecting changes in 
the  economic  structure  such  as  further  progress  in globalization and  innovations  in  information  and 
communication technologies, as a rule, Policy Board members will review it annually.  
B. Examining economic activity and prices from two perspectives  
Having  clarified  its  thinking  on  price  stability,  the  Bank's  next  step  was  to  decide  how  to  examine 
economic  activity  and  prices  in  light  of  such  thinking,  and  then  to  devise  ways  to  incorporate  such 
analysis into its conduct of monetary policy. Although it is very important to clarify the Bank's thinking 
on  price  stability,  this  in  itself  is  not  sufficient  to  develop  an  actual  policy  guideline  for  conducting 
monetary  policy.  The  most  significant  issue  facing  any  central  bank,  regardless  of  whether  it  has 
adopted inflation targeting or not, is how to provide information that will make it easier for the public to 
predict the future course of monetary policy and so enhance its effectiveness. For instance, suppose a 
central  bank  conducts  policy  based  on  certain  mechanical  rules.  Although  such  rules  would  in 
themselves enhance the transparency of the policy, they would be incapable of coping flexibly with the 
various economic shocks hitting the economy. They would therefore fail to meet the original purpose 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2006
of  enhancing  transparency,  which  is  to  improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  To  date,  the 
Bank has released its assessment of the current state and outlook for economic activity and prices 
through the Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments and the Outlook Report. 
Henceforth,  the  Bank  has  decided  to  supplement  this  assessment  with  additional  examinations  of 
economic activity and prices from the following two perspectives, which are of particular relevance to 
the conduct of monetary policy, and then to release them.  
The first perspective involves examining, as regards economic activity and prices one to two years in 
the future, whether the outlook deemed most likely by the Bank follows a path of sustainable growth 
under price stability.  
It should be added that, in order to implement the appropriate policy for achieving sustainable growth 
and price stability, it is not sufficient merely to assess the economic and price situation according to 
the  first  perspective.  Needless  to  say,  any  forecast  entails  uncertainty.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the 
Bank's  Outlook  Report  contains  detailed  descriptions  with  regard  to  upward  and  downward  risks 
affecting the scenario deemed most likely by the Bank. Among risk factors, there are those that will 
have  a  significant  impact  on  economic  activity  and  prices  should  they  materialize,  even  though  the 
likelihood  of  materialization  is  low.  Such  risks  include  that  of  falling  into  a  deflationary  spiral,  or 
conversely, the risk of sparking inflation or generating an asset price bubble. In conducting monetary 
policy, the Bank needs to do its utmost to prevent the materialization of such potential risks.  
The economic projection described in the Outlook Report covers a period of about one and a half to 
two  years.  There  could,  however,  be  risk  factors  that  might  affect  economic  activity  and  price 
development in the medium to long term, beyond the Outlook Report's projection period. Experience 
inside  and  outside  Japan  shows  that  wide  swings  in  asset  prices  and  significant  changes  in  the 
financial environment, including those affecting the intermediation function of financial institutions, may 
impact  on  economic  activity  and  price  development  with  a  considerable  lag.  In  addition,  when  the 
public's longer-term expectations of inflation change, this can have a significant impact on the existing 
relationship between economic activity and prices.  
The second perspective, therefore, involves examining, over a longer horizon, the various risks that 
are  most  relevant  to  conducting  monetary  policy  aimed  at  realizing  sustainable  growth  under  price 
stability. Major central banks seem to share the opinion that to conduct monetary policy putting too 
much  emphasis  on  achieving  price  stability  in  the  short  term  results  in  large  swings  in  economic 
activity, and this in turn impedes long-term price stability and the sound development of the economy.  
C. Conduct of monetary policy for the immediate future  
Lastly, as the third element of the new framework for the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank will 
outline its current view on monetary policy in light of its deliberations from the two perspectives I have 
described, and disclose it periodically, as a rule in the Outlook Report. On the current occasion, the 
Bank  decided  to  release  the  results  of  its  deliberations  ahead  of  the  release  of  the  April  Outlook 
Report, to coincide with the timing of the termination of the quantitative easing policy.  
Looking  ahead,  in considering  the central  scenario  for economic activity  and prices,  there  is  a  high 
probability  of  realizing  sustainable  growth  under  price  stability.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  however, 
against  the  backdrop  of  improving  corporate  profitability  and  a  positive  turn  in  price  developments, 
there  is  a  possibility  that  the  monetary  policy  stimulus  to  economic  activity  and  prices  could  be 
amplified via, for example, a decline in real interest rates. If the stimulus becomes too strong, there is 
a risk that, even if current prices are stable, investment activity could become excessive, resulting in 
volatile  economic  fluctuations.  Moreover,  this  could  negatively  affect  the  prospects  for  sustainable 
economic growth with long-term price stability. In its conduct of monetary policy, the Bank should pay 
attention to this as well as other long-term risks.  
Bearing  this  in  mind,  I  would  now  like  to  touch  on  the  Bank's  thinking  regarding  the  future  path  of 
monetary policy. There will be a period in which the uncollateralized overnight call rate is at effectively 
zero  percent,  followed  by  a  gradual  adjustment  in  light  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and 
prices. In this process, if the risk I have described remains muted, in other words, if it is judged that 
inflationary pressures are restrained as the economy follows a balanced and sustainable growth path, 
an  accommodative  monetary  environment  ensuing  from  very  low  interest  rates  will  probably  be 
maintained for some time.  
This completes my explanation of the new framework for conducting monetary policy introduced last 
week. The Bank and other central banks make continuous efforts to clearly explain their thinking on 
BIS Review 20/2006 
 7
the conduct of monetary policy to market participants and the public. The specific method employed, 
however, differs according to their economic environment and institutional framework. At the Bank, in 
introducing a new framework we studied practices at other central banks and adopted the elements 
that were considered relevant, but most importantly we devised the most appropriate framework for 
clearly explaining the conduct of monetary policy in light of Japan's economic situation. Although the 
new  framework  is  different  from,  for  example,  inflation  targeting,  where  a  numerical  target  for  price 
stability  is  set  and  is  to  be  achieved  within  a  certain  time  frame,  nevertheless  the  new  framework 
improves the transparency of the Bank's monetary policy objective by indicating its thinking on what 
constitutes price stability. Taking this into account, the Bank will examine economic activity and prices 
from the two perspectives explained earlier, and will release its view on the conduct of monetary policy 
for the immediate future. For Japan's economy, which has emerged from a prolonged recession and is 
entering  a  new  phase,  the  Bank  believes  that  the  new  policy  framework  is  the  most  suitable  for 
enhancing  transparency  and  conducting  monetary  policy  appropriately.  This  new  framework  is  also 
expected  to  contribute  to  smooth  price  formation  in  financial  markets  where  participants  find 
themselves in uncharted territory with the termination of the unprecedented quantitative easing policy.  
Conclusion  
Today, I have elaborated on the current state of Japan's economy, which is entering a new phase, as 
well  as  providing  details  about  the  new  framework  for  conducting  monetary  policy  introduced  last 
week.  Under  the  new  framework,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  conduct  monetary  policy  appropriately, 
responding  flexibly  to  changes  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  to  contribute  to  sustainable 
economic growth and price stability.  
8 
 BIS Review 20/2006
