Axel A Weber: European financial integration and (its implications for) 
monetary policy  
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Annual General 
Meeting 2006 of the Foreign Bankers’ Association in the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 23 May 2006. 
 Introduction 
Mr Sawaya, ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to thank you for inviting me to your Annual General Meeting. Looking at the list 
of previous speakers, I certainly feel honoured to contribute to what has now become established as a 
major  forum  of  debate  on  European  issues.  I  should  like  to  use  this  opportunity  to  discuss  some 
aspects of ongoing financial integration in Europe and its implications for monetary policy. Finally, I will 
touch upon some issues of cross-border banking integration and banking supervision in Europe. 
Talking  about  financial  integration  at  a  foreign  bankers  ’  association  harbours  the  risk  of  “carrying 
coals  to  Newcastle”  –  managing  financial  integration  is,  after  all,  your  daily  business.  But,  for  that 
reason alone, it might be the right place to take stock of what we have achieved in Europe and to give 
you my assessment, from a monetary policy perspective, of the successes and future challenges in 
this rapidly evolving field.  
Financial integration: definition, importance, and benefits 
Meaning, benefits, and developments of financial integration 
Financial integration – adopting a commonly used definition – is an objective that is achieved when: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
all potential participants in a market for a given set of financial instruments or services are 
subject to a single set of rules, 
have equal access to this set of instruments and services, 
and are treated equally when they operate in the market.  
Financial  integration  in  this  sense  can  be  seen  as  the  absence  of  location-based  discrimination  in 
accessing the capital markets. 
Financial  integration  has,  in  general,  two  main  benefits:  Firstly,  increasing  the  potential  for  higher 
economic  growth:  owing  to  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  capital,  financial  integration  boosts  the 
efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  An  efficient  financial  system  has  a  positive  impact  on  (non-
inflationary)  economic  growth,  as  the  empirical  evidence  shows.  Secondly,  regionally  diversified 
investment alternatives lead to a better diversification of risks. 
In this sense, the integration of financial markets can be considered as making a positive contribution 
to financial stability since it helps to improve the capacity of economies to absorb shocks. It is thus 
clear  that  fostering  financial  integration  is  of  major  relevance  for  general  economic  and  specific 
monetary policy reasons. 
These  benefits  of  integrated  financial  markets  are  the  main  reason  for  the  global  phenomenon  of 
rapidly  growing  cross-border  linkages  of  financial  assets  and  liabilities.  On  a  global  scale,  financial 
integration has accelerated over the past ten to 15 years: In industrial countries, the average of foreign 
assets and liabilities to GDP has tripled since the mid-1990s. A similar process can be observed in 
emerging markets, although the cross-border linkages start at lower levels. 
Main drivers of financial integration? 
In general, three drivers of financial integration can be identified: market forces, collective action, and 
public action. These reflect the complementary role of private and public sector action in this process.  
BIS Review 45/2006 
 1
Market  forces  are  the  natural  origin  of  financial  integration,  mainly  through  economies  of  scale  and 
scope as well as technological progress. Collective and public action comes into play when market 
forces  alone  are  incapable  of  removing  inefficiencies  –  on  account  of  “network  externalities”,  for 
example  .  The  existence  of  network  externalities  has  two  implications:  Firstly,  national  financial 
infrastructures  have  developed  individually  over  a  period  of  decades.  Changing  these  structures  is 
often associated with switching costs – at least in the short run. Secondly, however, in the long run the 
positive  externalities  of  integrated  financial  markets  outweigh  the  costs  of  switching  from  one 
institutional arrangement to another, so collective or public action may be necessary to achieve more 
efficient outcomes.  
Moreover,  frequently  collective  action  is  crisis-driven  –  which  reflects  a  somewhat  pathological 
learning  on  the  part  of  market  participants.  Examples  of  this  are  collective  action  clauses  in 
international  bond  contracts  or  the  growing  importance  of  standards  and  codes  of  conduct  in  the 
aftermath of the Asian financial crisis (for instance, core principles of banking supervision). In this way, 
public authorities can play a role as a catalyst or a facilitator of collective action as well as being an 
originator of legislative or regulatory frameworks.  
While  not  denying  the  importance  of  market  driven  developments  in  the  process  of  financial 
integration, we should not forget that what lies behind the latest wave of integration is the deliberate 
political decision to liberalise the cross-border movement of capital. This is true not only of emerging 
markets  but  also  of  countries  in  Europe.  Economists  usually  explain  the  conceptual  background  to 
these difficult policy choices as solutions to the macroeconomic “trilemma” of striking the right balance 
between freedom of capital movements, monetary policy autonomy, and the exchange rate regime.  
European monetary union is a cornerstone solution to this trilemma. Elimination of national monetary 
policy, irrevocable fixing of the participating exchange rates, and the introduction of a new currency in 
order to reap the benefits of integrated financial markets in Europe. Thus, EMU is both the European 
response  to  globalisation  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  important  stimulus  to  European  financial 
market integration in history. 
What is the current state of financial integration in Europe?  
The current degree of financial integration in Europe varies between market segments. A simple, but 
useful quantitative measure of financial integration is to check the validity of the law of one price. It 
states that in a fully integrated market risk-adjusted prices should be equal irrespective of the place of 
transaction. 
Money markets 
Nearly  full  integration  in  this  sense  has  been  achieved  in  the  money  market.  This  comes  as  no 
surprise as it is a prerequisite for the functioning of the single monetary policy. The integration of the 
euro area money market has been supported by developments in the payment systems infrastructure, 
most  notably  the  establishment  of  the  Trans-European  Automated  Real-time  Gross  settlement 
Express  Transfer  (TARGET)  system.  TARGET  allows  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  settlement  of 
large-value cross-border payments. This also shows that one important field of financial integration, 
other than markets, is infrastructure. Although it is of major relevance in the current European context, 
I will not go into this issue in greater depth here. 
The unsecured segment of the money market was already almost perfectly integrated when monetary 
union  was  launched.  The  cross-country  standard  deviation  of  the  average  overnight  lending  rates 
among euro area countries fell from more than 100 base points at the beginning of 1998 to 3 base 
points at the beginning of 1999. This measure is now moving around 1 base point.  
Almost  perfect  integration  has  also  been  established  on  the  repo  market.  The  EUREPO  index  has 
shown  cross-country  standard  deviations  below  1.5  base  points  and  below  2.5  base  points  for  the 
one-month  and  the  12-month  maturities,  respectively,  since  its  launch  in  March  2002.  Another 
example of a perfectly integrated market is the overnight interest rate swap market, given a perfectly 
standardised product definition. 
The  less  integrated  money  market  segments  are,  accordingly,  those  where  standardisation  is 
underdeveloped  and  fragmentation  persists.  In  particular,  the  short-term  securities  market  is  still 
segmented in several market places, but the Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative, led by the 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2006
ACI  (Financial  Markets  Association)  and  supported  by  the  Eurosystem,  is  expected  to  reduce  the 
current fragmentation.  
Bond markets 
Government bonds  
The  bond  markets  are  nearly  as  integrated  as  the  money  markets.  This  is  largely  due  to  the 
elimination of exchange rate risks and the convergence of inflation expectations across the euro area. 
The  standard  deviations  of  government  bond  yield  spreads  have  declined  from  figures  above 
200 base points in the mid-1990s to close to zero. It should be borne in mind, however, that, owing to 
differences in credit risk, government bonds will never be perfectly homogenous products. But there is, 
of course, no contradiction between financial integration and country-risk-adjusted pricing.  
Corporate bonds 
This  is  equally  relevant  to  the  pricing  of  corporate  bonds  as  it  depends  on  a  large  number  of 
influencing  factors  –  the  country  of  issuance  being  just  one  possible  factor  amongst  others. 
Encouragingly, econometric studies of the corporate bond market show that the yield spreads have no 
systematic country component. The corporate bond market is thus also fairly integrated.  
Moreover, the European corporate bond market has witnessed exceptional growth since 1999 which 
has not been restricted to traditional financial instruments, but also includes alternative and innovative 
financing such as mezzanine capital and credit derivatives. 
Equity markets  
In contrast to money and bond markets, and in spite of the fact that “home bias” in the equity holdings 
of institutional investors has been reduced markedly, the equity markets of the euro area are still much 
more  fragmented.  For  example,  the  proportion  of  foreign  stock  and  bond  holdings  of  German 
investment funds increased from 15% in the mid-1990s to more than 50% after 1999. Notwithstanding 
increasingly  homogenous  reactions  of  stock  prices  to  euro-area-wide  factors  and  news,  particularly 
from monetary policy, country effects still have an important explanatory role for the variance of equity 
returns.  
Banking  
As  regards  the  integration  of  the  European  banking  markets,  there  has  been  some  progress,  but 
further integration is still desirable. The degree of integration varies across the various segments of 
banking  business.  Cross-border  activities  have  increased  significantly  in  inter-bank  and  wholesale 
business. The share of securities issued by non-monetary financial institutions of another euro area 
country which are held by euro area monetary financial institutions has more than doubled since 1997. 
Euro area cross-border loans between monetary financial institutions have increased from 15% of all 
loans among EU MFIs in 1997 to currently 23%.  
What is disappointing from my point of view is the small degree of integration achieved so far in the 
retail banking segment. The share of euro area cross-border MFI loans granted to non-MFI’s has risen 
from 2% of total loans in 1997 to 3.5% at present, which is still a very low level. The cross-country 
standard deviation of MFI interest rates on consumer credits has been fluctuating between 80 and 100 
base  points  in  recent  years,  and  the  corresponding  figure  for  house  purchase  credits  has  varied 
between 40 and 60 base points.  
Accordingly,  one  of  the  five  priorities  contained  in  the  European  Commission  White  Paper  on  EU 
financial services  policy  for  the  next  five  years  is  the  creation of  more competition  between  service 
providers, especially those active in retail markets. 
Financial system developments: “bank-based” versus “capital-market-based” systems 
Financial  markets  integration  implies  the  transformation  of  national  financial  systems.  Textbooks 
typically distinguish between two types of financial systems: bank-based systems and capital-market-
BIS Review 45/2006 
 3
based systems. Classical stereotypes of this dichotomy are the European bank-based system and the 
US financial system, which is dominated by capital markets. 
Actually, the reality in Europe is more like a continuum of characteristics. Comparing the countries of 
the European Union, one can see that domestic bank credits in relation to GDP vary markedly across 
EU  countries.  And  Germany,  often  regarded  as  the  archetypal  bank-based  financial  system,  has  a 
credit-to-GDP ratio that does not significantly exceed the EU(-25) average. The Netherlands has the 
largest proportion of domestic credits to GDP (almost 180%).  
Despite some variability from country to country, the euro area ’ s stock market capitalisation of nearly 
70% is still well below that of the US and the UK (2004). The UK’s stock market capitalisation was 
more than 127% of its national GDP in 2004. The corresponding figure for the US stock markets was 
nearly  140%  of  GDP  in  2004.  But  the  importance  of  capital  markets  in  the  euro  area  is  growing 
continuously. For comparison: euro area stock market capitalisation in relation to GDP was 19% on 
average in 1990-94. It grew to 50% in 2000-2004 (US: 1990-94: 69%, 2000-2004: 132%).  
Accordingly,  there  is  a  significant  trend  in  Europe  towards  financial  systems  that  are  more  capital-
market-based, but the disintermediation effects of this gradual shift towards a greater capital market 
orientation have not been as strong in Europe as they have been in the US. While it is true that the 
share of bank deposits in households ’ financial assets is on a declining trend in the euro area, the 
ratio of bank deposits to GDP is still growing in contrast to the developments in the US over the past 
15 years. In addition, the ratio of credit to GDP in the euro area has – from a higher base level than in 
the US – increased even more markedly than on the other side of the Atlantic. So, while shifts towards 
a more market-based financial system are clearly under way, continental Europe and the euro area, in 
particular, have – and will retain – a bank-dominated financial system for the foreseeable future.  
In  this  mostly  market-driven  process  of  gradual  system  transformation,  the  characteristics  of  bank-
based systems will lose some of their importance in the euro area in the years ahead. Most notably, 
relationship  lending  will  be  affected.  Relationship  lending  has  two  possible  major  positive  effects: 
reducing  debtor  moral  hazard  and  smoothing  interest  rates.  In  contrast  to  direct  capital  market 
financing or arm’s-length banking, customers that have a close and long-term relationship with their 
bank (Hausbank), have greater incentives to preserve mutual trust. Borrowers know that defaulting on 
a credit provided by a relationship lender would finish the relationship. Thus, relationship lending might 
prevent borrowers’ moral hazard in terms of inefficiently risky projects. Hausbanks usually have more 
detailed and timelier information on a firm than a comparable arm’s-length bank or the capital market. 
Such a close and long-term relationship as well as better knowledge of the firms assist interest rate 
smoothing.  
Implications for monetary policy 
And this is where monetary policy enters the scene. If capital-market-based financing becomes more 
important in relative terms, it will have an impact on the pass-through of monetary policy changes. In 
general, it can be said that, other things being equal, the higher the degree of financial integration is, 
the faster will be the transmission process of monetary policy. 
A further implication of the trend towards capital-market-based financing is the growing importance of 
asset prices. The Eurosystem does not target asset prices. The primary objective is to maintain price 
stability  in  the  euro  area  (HICP  inflation  below  but  close  to  2%  in  the  medium  term).  However,  the 
Eurosystem monitors asset price dynamics closely, because strong appreciation and subsequent rapid 
reversals in asset prices are associated with potentially high costs for the economy and thus for price 
stability. 
Moreover,  the  increasing  importance  of  the  capital  market  does  not  just  have  an  impact  on  the 
transmission  mechanism  and  the  role  of  asset  prices.  Extracting  signals  regarding  risks  to  price 
stability stemming from monetary developments becomes a more challenging task. One example of 
this  is  the  enhanced  short-run  monetary  dynamics  between  2001  and  2003  due  to  exceptional 
economic,  financial  and  geopolitical  uncertainties  that  led  to  portfolio  shifts  from  capital  markets  to 
money markets bloating the monetary aggregates and their growth rates. 
Finally,  more  integrated  financial  markets  and  asset  prices  affect  financial  stability,  too.  A  growing 
importance  of  capital  market  instruments  allows  banks  to  spread  risks  more  evenly,  thus  making  a 
positive contribution to financial stability. On the other hand, rapidly developing risk spreading tools 
like  Collateralised  Debt  Obligations  (CDOs)  or  credit  derivatives  necessitate  a  more  ambitious 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2006
monitoring  from  financial  stability  authorities  in  order  to  evaluate  the  effective  distribution  of  risks 
among financial institutions and markets.  
European banking markets and banking supervision 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  European  financial  systems  remain  bank-dominated.  At  the  same  time, 
European banking market activities are still not integrated to a great extent, most notably in the retail 
segment. Notwithstanding this, the ongoing pressures of competition and integration in the common 
market and EMU will certainly shape the future banking landscape in the euro area. 
And  it  is  not  only  EMU  that  is  responsible  for  these  developments.  Other  regulatory  steps  are  also 
exerting  pressures.  Well-known  examples  are  the  forthcoming  revision  of  international  capital 
adequacy rules – Basel II – and, in terms of the EU, the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD). CRD 
offers banks incentives to be more proactive in improving risk management techniques and customer 
selection,  and  it  is  expected  to  have  a  profound  impact  on  the  strategies  of  European  banks  and 
global competition.  
In this context, a broad trend towards more international and European structures and a greater capital 
market  orientation  will  have  implications  not  only  for  the  institutions  involved  but  also  for  the  public 
authorities. The possible consequences for monetary policy of a more market-based financial system 
have been already mentioned. The emergence of cross-border banking structures, on the other hand, 
also creates major challenges for supervisory bodies.  
Despite the somewhat disappointing state of banking integration in general, the common market and 
EMU have already initiated perceptible cross-border M&A activities. While it is true that overall M&As 
in the European banking sector have been declining since the cyclical peak at the end of the 1990s, 
the relative importance of cross-border deals within the EU has increased steadily over the past 15 
years  (EU  cross-border  M&A  in  relation  to  domestic  M&A:  1990-1994:  23.5%;  1995-1999:  31.6%; 
2000-2004: 42.4%). 
Although  we  have  witnessed  an  increasing  proportion  of  cross-border  M&A  activities  in  the  EU 
banking  sector  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  there  is  still  a  lack  of  pan-European  banks. 
Consolidation  in  the  banking  sector  is  mostly  domestic.  The  presence  of  pan-European  banking 
groups’  branches  or  subsidiaries  in  the  EU  countries  is  quite  limited  –  even  if  there  is  a  lot  of 
representation  of  it  in  this  conference  room  today.  The  average  share  of  foreign  branches  and 
subsidiaries accounts for approximately 25% of the EU banking market. Higher figures can be found in 
some smaller countries, such as the Benelux, and very high figures in many new member states with 
the  market  share  of  foreign-owned  banks  exceeding  95%  in  the  Czech  Republic,  Slovakia,  Estonia 
and Lithuania. 
The lack of retail market integration in banking, of course, reflects to some extent the fact that retail 
banking is a local business where proximity to clients and knowledge of cultural attitudes is of special 
importance.  But  it  might  also  mirror  possible  impediments  to  cross-border  M&As.  It  is  sometimes 
argued that the supervisory environment poses such an impediment. And some experiences over the 
past couple of months have certainly not dampened such fears. 
In  general,  public  policy  should  not  interfere  with  market-driven  cross-border  merger  processes  but 
remove potential supervisory obstacles. And, somewhat encouragingly, according to a recent (CEBS) 
survey  of  European  banks.  the  current  supervisory  framework  is  not  really  substantially  hindering 
European cross-border banking consolidation. 
It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  current  state  of  play  poses  a  number  of  real  challenges  for  banking 
supervisors.  Firstly,  as  long  as  we  do  not  see  pan-European  banks  on  a  larger  scale,  there  is  no 
justification for a pan-European supervisory body or what is known as a “lead supervisor”. Secondly, 
emerging  cross-border  structures  mean  that  the  legitimate  interests  of  home  and  host  country 
supervisory  authorities  have  to  be  balanced  without  burdening  the  involved  banks  too  heavily  with 
bureaucratic costs. 
In  striking  that  balance,  convergence  and  cooperation  in  supervisory  practices  are  inevitable.  And 
further  harmonisation  of  supervisory  rules  in  Europe  may  be  required  to  ease  the  cross-border 
activities of credit institutions. And there is indeed a lot of work going on in the relevant institutions, 
such as CEBS or BSC. Some examples may justify this claim: 
BIS Review 45/2006 
 5
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The implementation of the CRD, which I have mentioned, will strengthen the ties between 
home  and  host  country  supervisors  and  foster  the  coordinating  role  of  home-country 
supervisors. 
The  European  Commission  has  launched  an  initiative  to  eliminate  existing  barriers  to 
cross-border mergers with consequences for the supervisory approval process as well as 
home and host-country interactions. 
Finally,  reflecting  the  need  for  timely  cooperation  between  several  players  in  times  of 
stress,  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  involving  banking  supervisors,  central  banks, 
and finance ministries in the EU was signed in 2005.  
The details of some of these plans are not uncontroversial and will need further clarification, but the 
overarching  goal  is  unequivocally  positive:  to  improve  the  functioning  of  European  cross-border 
banking markets. Some of you may still argue that the current institutional setting is too complex and 
burdensome.  But,  given  the  current  European  banking  landscape,  it  is,  in  my  view,  an  appropriate 
institutional  configuration.  Nevertheless,  it  clearly  has  to  be  constantly  adapted  to  changes  in  the 
markets: 
The guiding principle should be that the structure of banking supervision follows the market structures. 
It should neither lead them nor lag behind them.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by summarising the main points. Financial integration is a mostly beneficial process 
which is driven by market forces as well as collective action and public action. The current state of 
financial integration varies across the various market segments, with integration being most advanced 
in  those  areas  where  the  relevant  market  is  closest  to  the  common  monetary  policy.  Thus,  a  large 
measure  of  integration  has  been  achieved  on  the  money  market  and  the  bond  markets.  A  lower 
degree of integration has been achieved on the equity markets and the banking markets. European 
cross-border banking is still underdeveloped; there is still a lack of pan-European banks.  
The banking business itself is under the pressure of a general trend towards a more market-based 
financial system, but the financial systems of the euro area countries will certainly stay bank-oriented 
for the foreseeable future. Loans will remain the dominant financial instrument for small and medium-
sized  enterprises,  but  capital  market  products  will  gain  a  more  important  supplementary  role  in 
corporate finance. Even those enterprises with no access to capital markets will be affected indirectly 
owing  to  the  emergence  of  credit  risk  securitisation  and  credit  derivatives.  Banks  will  become 
knowledge providers in the increasingly complex securities and financial markets. In such a symbiosis 
with the capital market, even relationship banking might gain new attractiveness.  
As regards the monetary policy implications of this process, it may be expected that the bank lending 
channel will have a diminishing role in the transmission process in favour of the interest channel, that 
asset  prices  will  have  a  growing  impact,  and  that  there  will  be  a  more  challenging  interpretation  of 
monetary developments. 
Finally,  banking  supervision  must  not  impede  European  cross-border  banking  consolidation.  The 
current cooperation-based supervisory system in Europe is more appropriate at the current juncture 
than more advanced concepts such as a “lead supervisor” or even a “central supervisor”. 
6 
 BIS Review 45/2006
