Eva Srejber: How the Riksbank's financial assets are managed 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Handelsbanken, 
Stockholm, 25 April 2006. 
References and diagrams to the speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank website, www.riksbank.com. 
 Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here and speak about the Riksbank’s financial 
asset management. The reason that I wish to take up this question is that, as you know, we recently 
changed the currency allocation in our foreign exchange reserve. This change is part of the general 
review  of  financial  asset  management  that  has  been  under  way  at  the  Riksbank  for  some  time.  In 
order  to  avoid  any  confusion  with  regard  to  what  lies  behind  overall  changes  in  our  financial  asset 
composition, it is important to explain the principles for our asset management. 
On  a  general  plane,  the  Riksbank  does  not  differ  from  other  asset  managers.  Like  them,  we 
endeavour to generate earnings for our owner, in our case the general government. It is instead the 
way our management is limited that makes the Riksbank, like other central banks, different. Central 
banks  exist  ultimately  to  carry  out  a  number  of  tasks  crucial  to  the  economy,  which  are  linked  to 
monetary and exchange rate policy and the functioning of the payment system. For us at the Riksbank 
it means that we are to ensure that inflation is low and to promote the safe and efficient functioning of 
the payment system. Both of these tasks make far-reaching demands on how our assets should be 
managed. 
In concrete terms, it means that I and my colleagues on the Executive Board must achieve a balance 
between the requirements our task place on asset management and the goal of generating earnings. 
In  this  balance  it  is  obvious  that  the  possibility  to  carry  out  our  statutory  tasks  takes  precedence. 
Earnings are only taken into account if they are attained without jeopardising the Riksbank’s central 
policy  functions.  The  result  of  this  balance  is  perhaps  most  easily  described  with  the  aid  of  the 
Riksbank’s balance sheet (see Figure 1). 
The Riksbank’s balance sheet 
Our financial assets are dominated by foreign government bonds1, which can be sold if necessary to 
intervene in the foreign exchange market. In other words, these assets have a direct link to our task 
concerning monetary and foreign exchange policy. Historically, the gold holding has been justified for 
similar reasons. However, nowadays it has become more common to regard gold as a financial asset 
like any other. This also applies to the Riksbank, whose gold holding partly is adapted according to its 
contribution  to  the  diversification  of  the  total  asset  portfolio2.  This  adjustment  is  made  within  the 
framework  of  an  agreement  with  other  central  banks3.  Other  important  assets  are  monetary  policy 
repos, which comprise a central part of the steering interest rate system4. For earnings reasons, part 
of the repo transactions has been extended by means of FX swaps5. 
The Riksbank  has  the  sole  right  to  issue  banknotes  and coins  in  kronor.  This  comprises  the  single 
largest item on the liability side of the balance sheet. The size of this item is governed entirely by the 
general public’s demand for cash.  
                                                      
1   The currency assets in the foreign exchange reserve are invested in foreign fixed-income securities. Just over 90 per cent of 
the capital is invested in government bonds and the remainder in US agencies.
2   For further reading on the role of the gold reserve, see Henriksson (2002).
3   With the aim of counteracting a fall in gold prices, 15 European central banks agreed in September 1999 that they would 
regulate the sale of their gold holdings during a five-year period. This agreement was renewed in 2004.
4   For a detailed survey of the Riksbank’s steering interest rate system, see Otz (2005).
5   This works by means of the Riksbank selling kronor for euro on the spot market and investing the euro on deposit. At the 
same time, a forward agreement is made to repurchase the kronor up to six months later. Forward agreements are signed 
to eliminate currency risks. The average duration in the swap portfolio should be three months.
BIS Review 33/2006 
 1
We  also  need  our  own  capital  in  order  to  cover  losses  that  may  arise  in  our  activities.  This  capital 
should  be  sufficiently  large  to  cover  losses  that  might  arise  if  the  Riksbank  needed  to  provide 
emergency  liquidity  assistance  in  connection  with  a  bank  crisis.  As  we,  like  most  other  financial 
institutions, regularly market value our financial assets, we also need to have capital to cover losses 
that may arise in the day-to-day management of these assets. Finally, we need capital that reflects 
assets,  whose  purpose  is  to  generate  income  to  pay  the  day-to-day  running  of  the  bank,  that  is, 
wages, property costs, etc6.  
This quick survey of the balance sheet shows that it is consideration of the Riksbank’s various tasks 
that  is  the  most  important  explanatory  factor  behind  the  focus  of  our  asset  management.  It  is  only 
when we have reasonably ensured that we can carry out these tasks that we take financial risks in 
order to generate earnings. In the following I shall describe in more detail how this balance is attained. 
In practice it is a question of the Riksbank’s exposure to three different types of risk; currency risk, 
interest rate risk and credit risk.  
Currency risk 
Currency risk is by far the largest risk in our balance sheet. It arises when the krona appreciates or 
depreciates  in  relation  to  the  currencies  in  the  foreign  exchange  reserve.  This  means  that  the 
Riksbank’s  profit  and  loss  account  and  balance  sheet  are  valued  in  kronor.  An  appreciation  of  the 
krona reduces the value of our foreign exchange reserve and a depreciation increases it. When the 
krona appreciates it is thus a negative event to the extent that it leads to exchange losses that are 
booked in the Riksbank’s balance sheet. If these losses are too large, there is a risk that they must be 
covered by the capital the Riksbank has allocated for use in potential financial crises and to cover the 
Bank’s day-to-day operations. There is therefore reason to limit the impact of a krona appreciation on 
the  Riksbank’s  results.  However,  the  possibility  to  do  so  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  we  must  have 
currency assets in order to intervene in the foreign exchange market.  
The  need  for  intervention  capacity  in  the  form  of  foreign  assets  is  determined  by  the  prevailing 
exchange rate regime. Under a fixed exchange rate regime the central bank may need to intervene 
relatively often, which means that the need for intervention assets is considerable. This need is usually 
much lower with a floating exchange rate regime7. However, according to law, the Riksbank must be 
able  to  implement  the  exchange  rate  regime  that  the  Government  has  stipulated  for  the  krona, 
regardless  of  whether  this  is  fixed  or  floating.  This  means  that  the  currency  holding  is  ultimately 
determined by the needs of a fixed exchange rate regime. At present, however, we have a floating 
exchange rate regime, which gives us scope to limit the currency risk. We do this by ensuring that our 
holdings of the important intervention currencies, i.e. euro and US dollar, are no larger than can be 
justified for reasons of intervention or diversification. Diversification is the possibility we have to reduce 
the  currency  risk.  The  assumption  of  the  diversification  is  that  the  covariation  between  individual 
assets’ price movements is not always perfectly positive. This means that a portfolio’s total movement, 
that is, volatility, will be less. In connection with large movements in the foreign exchange market, an 
overly narrow currency composition might lead to large declines in value, which could in turn lead to a 
heavy fall in capital.  
Given  this,  we  quite  simply  try  to  achieve  a  currency  allocation  that  will  minimise  the  currency  risk 
measured in Swedish kronor, given the currencies we can hold and given our intervention need. Our 
choice  is  based  on  a  quantitative  analysis  using  fundamental  and  standard  portfolio  theory8.  Our 
analysis  does  not  take  into  account  the  expected  earnings  in  currency,  but  merely  the  currencies’ 
estimated  volatility  and  mutual  correlations.  The  result  of  our  analysis  is  illustrated  in  the  following 
diagram (see Figure 2).  
                                                      
6   This and other questions regarding the Riksbank’s need to have its own capital are discussed in Ernhagen, Vesterlund & 
Viotti (2002).
7   For a more detailed discussion of the Riksbank’s intervention policy, see Heikensten & Borg (2002).
8   This  refers  to  what  is  known  as  the  mean-variance  analysis  that  was  originally  produced  by  Harry  M.  Markowitz  in  the 
1950s. Because of the sensitivity of this model, the analysis is supplemented by Value-at-Risk calculations, risk contribution 
analyses and stress tests. Value-at-Risk is an estimate of potential loss risk and is defined as the largest expected decline in 
value of an asset, or an asset portfolio, with a specific probability and over a specific period of time.
2 
 BIS Review 33/2006
As you can see, our largest holding is in euro. This is not surprising, as the relationship between the 
euro  and  the  krona  has  remained  relatively  stable.  Historically,  the  currency  risk  attributable  to  our 
euro holding has thus been less than that attributable to other currencies in the reserve. The dollar, on 
the  other  hand,  has  been  one  of  the  highest  risk  currencies.  The  fact  that  we  nevertheless  have  a 
relatively large dollar exposure is due to its importance as intervention currency.  
It is reasonable to wonder why we do not choose to convert some of the currency assets into Swedish 
assets as long as we have a floating exchange rate regime. In this way the currency risk on these 
assets  would  disappear  completely.  In  practice,  however,  this  is  not  so  easy  as  such  a  conversion 
would  mean  that  we  intervened  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  In  addition,  when  and  if  the 
Government  decides  that  the  krona  should  be  part  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  we  would  be 
forced to intervene again to build up the foreign exchange reserve. We would then sell kronor to buy 
currencies, which would mean that we acted in a way that weakened the krona prior to transition to a 
fixed exchange rate regime. This is not the way to proceed.  
Of course currency risk is a problem, but this applies mainly in the short term. We shall of course do 
what we can to limit this risk, but it should be remembered that our currency holding is long term and 
in this perspective currency exposure is probably a minor problem. As monetary policy in the countries 
whose currencies are included in the reserve is similar to that in Sweden, it is in principle only real 
economic  differences  that  lead  to  any  trend  changes  in  exchange  rates.  If  the  economies  of  these 
countries develop similarly, it is thus reasonable to assume that short-term fluctuations will offset one 
another over a longer period of time9. The diagram below shows that empiric evidence supports this 
reasoning (see Figure 3).  
At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  clear  advantage  to  keeping  these  assets  in  other  currencies  than  the 
krona. Namely that they provide us with an opportunity to manage our assets actively in an entirely 
different way than would be possible if they were invested in kronor. This is because changes in the 
holdings  could  be  perceived  as  monetary  policy signals  and  because  the size  of our  holding would 
mean that changes could upset the markets.  
Credit risk 
One purpose of the method we use to determine the currency allocation is to limit the need for very 
liquid assets, for earnings reasons. It is not possible to exclude these assets entirely. This is because 
we need very liquid assets in the important intervention currencies if we are to be able to intervene. A 
fairly  large  part  of  our  assets  must  therefore  consist  of  US  and  European  government  bonds.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, our need of this type of asset is limited under the current exchange rate regime. 
This gives us scope to invest some of our assets in securities with credit risks10, which provide higher 
interest.  Assuming  that  the  assets’  yield  does  not  covary  perfectly,  this  can  raise  the  risk-adjusted 
earnings11. However, the Riksbank’s possibilities to make use of this are limited, as we currently invest 
solely in fixed-income securities. The covariation between different fixed-income securities is relatively 
high, regardless of whether they contain different degrees of credit risk. It should also be emphasised 
that an investment in credit bonds makes considerable demands of risk management, analysis and 
capital adequacy, in addition to that captured in risk measures such as volatility calculated on historical 
earnings. It is therefore also important to maintain a high degree of diversification within the credit risk 
segment by spreading investment over several different issuers and sectors.  
Our internal regulations give us relatively large scope to choose between different fixed-income asset 
types.  Given  that  there  is  a  secure  legal  basis  and  good  risk  management,  we  may  invest  in  most 
types,  from  government  bonds  to  corporate  bonds.  However,  the  holdings  of  government  bonds 
should never be lower than 50 per cent of the total value of the assets. The upper limit for holding 
individual asset types with credit risks is also relatively low. For instance, corporate bonds should not 
comprise more than 10 per cent of the total asset value. Furthermore, our internal regulations make 
strict demands regarding credit rating.  
                                                      
9   See, for instance, Dimson, Marsh & Staunton (2005), who studied exchange rate effects over long time horizons.
10   In this respect, credit risk means the risk that the issuer will default on payment of the debt issued.
11   Risk-adjusted earnings here refer to the earnings on an investment in relation to its risks. Higher risk-adjusted earnings can 
thus  be  attained  either  through  the  earnings  increasing  while  maintaining  the  same  risk  or  by  the  risk  declining  while 
maintaining the same earnings.
BIS Review 33/2006 
 3
So  far,  however,  we have  used  the  opportunity  to increase credit  risk  very sparingly  by  investing a 
small part of the foreign exchange reserve in US agencies, that is, bonds issued by US institutions 
with direct and indirect links to the US government12.  
Interest rate risk 
As with credit risk, the Riksbank can use interest rate risk to increase the expected earnings on its 
assets. Interest rate risk arises through changes in the yield curve, which is comprised of market rates 
for different durations. An analysis of this curve usually focuses on three factors; parallel shift, slope 
and curvature13. A parallel shift entails the entire yield curve moving up or down in a parallel manner. 
As such shifts have historically explained the largest part of the variation in the yield curve, many asset 
managers’ choice of interest rate exposure focuses on different measures linked to these shifts. This 
includes  the  Riksbank,  which  on  a  strategic  level  governs  the  interest  rate  risk  with  the  aid  of  the 
modified duration measure14.  
The discussion of the choice of duration is often based on the assumption that the yield curve slopes 
upwards15.  The  interest  rate  is  thus  expected  to  increase  with  the  duration.  By  choosing  a  longer 
duration, investors can expect to obtain higher earnings on their investments. At the same time, the 
risk increases, as the volatility of the earnings usually increases with the length of the duration. This 
means  that  a  longer  duration  is  connected  with  larger  fluctuations  in  a  portfolio’s  market  value  and 
earnings.  
The choice of duration for a portfolio is simplified if the investor has a clear investment horizon. For 
instance, it is natural for pension funds and life assurance companies with long debt commitments to 
invest in bonds with a duration corresponding to their debt. In this way they try to immunise the market 
risk by allowing assets and liabilities to have the same sensitivity to interest rates. This means that a 
change  in  interest  rates  that  leads  to  the  debts  increasing  in  value  will  be  neutralised  by  a 
corresponding increase in the value of the assets. An investor that lacks this type of natural investment 
horizon must seek alternative points of departure when choosing duration. The relationship between 
risk and earnings then becomes a reasonable point of departure. This applies to the Riksbank, as we 
do not have any fixed-income liabilities.  
My colleagues and I must therefore consider how to achieve a balance between risk and earnings. If 
the purpose is to avoid negative effects on the results in all situations, it would be logical to base the 
duration  on  the  accounting  period,  which  in  our  case  is  one  year.  Then  the  actual  result  would  be 
close to the forecast result. However, this type of short-term investment strategy is at the cost of both 
increased reinvestment risk16 and lower expected earnings. As a public authority under parliament, we 
have  instead  assumed  that  the  general  government  prefers  long-term  good  earnings  at  the  cost  of 
larger, short-term fluctuations in the annual result.  
This  type  of  long-term  perspective  in  our  assets  enables  us  to  avoid  paying  the  extra  liquidity 
premiums that market agent appear willing to pay for fixed-income securities with a shorter duration. 
Given  this,  the  Executive  Board  has  decided  that  the  total  fixed-income  investment  should  have  a 
modified  duration  of  4.00.  This  choice  is  based  on  a  consideration  where  the  price  risk17  is  not 
assessed to offer a threat to the capital. 
                                                      
12   The Riksbank invests in the following institutions: Tennessee Valley Authority and the mortgage institutions Federal Home 
Loan Bank, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
13   Changes in the slope mean that the yield curve becomes steeper or flatter when the long or short end of the curve moves. 
Changes in curvature involve the long and short ends moving in the same direction, while the middle segment of the curve 
moves in the opposite direction or remains unchanged. For a detailed description of the yield curve, see for instance Golub 
& Tilman (2000).
14   Modified duration is a linear description of the relationship between a bond portfolio's market value and interest rates.
15   Although the yield curve normally slopes upwards, it would be risky to take this for granted. During different period of time, 
parts of the yield curve have been both horizontal and downward sloping.
16   Reinvestment risk arises when capital is to be invested over several periods, as the reinvestment interest rate during the 
later periods is not known now. By investing assets with the same duration as the accounting period, one is only exposed to 
reinvestment risk and the annual result will be known at the beginning of the year (this applies to assets without credit risk).
17   The  risk  of  interest  rates,  and  thereby  bond  prices,  developing  unfavourably  and  thereby  having  a  direct  impact  on  the 
results. This risk increases with the length of the average duration of the investments.
4 
 BIS Review 33/2006
Summary 
To summarise, the decisions I and my colleagues make regarding the focus of the Riksbank’s financial 
asset management ensure that the management complies with the Riksbank's statutory tasks as well 
as providing good earnings. These tasks require us to hold US and European government bonds to 
enable us to intervene in the foreign exchange market if necessary. However, we must also limit the 
financial  risk  in  order  to  protect  the  capital  allocated  to  cover  potential  losses  in  connection  with  a 
financial crisis. We try to limit currency risk, which is the entirely dominant financial risk, by choosing a 
currency allocation that keeps the fluctuations, as measured in Swedish kronor, low.  
We endeavour to meet the requirement to generate good earnings by taking credit and interest rate 
risks and making use of diversification effects in order to reduce any negative impact from these risks.  
By  investing  in  asset  types  with  credit  risk,  that  is,  other  fixed-income  securities  than  government 
bonds,  we  can  increase  the  risk-adjusted  earnings  on  our  investments.  This  is  partly  because  the 
actual earnings on assets with credit risk can be higher and partly because the earnings on different 
types of asset do not usually covary perfectly. When choosing the level of interest rate risk, we have 
given priority to long-term good earnings over small, annual negative effects on results. The fact that 
we have chosen to accept some interest rate risk and credit risk is because these are not of the same 
order  as  currency  risk  and  thereby  do  not  comprise  the  same  direct  threat  to  capital  as  currency 
exposure. 
All  in  all,  we are driven by  the  same  fundamental  endeavours  as  other asset managers,  namely  to 
generate  earnings  for  our  owners.  The  major  difference  concerns  the  limitations  that  our  statutory 
tasks entail for our asset management activities.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 33/2006 
 5
