David Dodge: The evolving international monetary order and the need for an 
evolving IMF 
Lecture  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Woodrow  Wilson  School  of 
Public and International Affairs, Princeton, 30 March 2006.  
 Yesterday, I was in New York City, where I had the opportunity to talk to the New York Association of 
Business Economics about global current account imbalances, and about the pressing need to allow 
market-based mechanisms to resolve these imbalances. Most of my remarks dealt with what policy-
makers  should  do  to  allow  market-based  mechanisms  to  work.  But  at  the  end  of  my  speech,  I 
mentioned  that  there  is  also  an  important  international  aspect  to  this  issue.  The  world  needs  an 
international  institution  to  promote  a  new  monetary  order—a  well-functioning,  market-based  global 
financial system. This will be the subject of my remarks today. 
Recently, Martin Wolf of the U.K. Financial Times used his column to pose an interesting question: If 
the International Monetary Fund did not exist, would we invent it?1 His answer, if I may oversimplify, 
was no, because today's world does not have the courage and vision to create powerful multilateral 
institutions. I'm not sure that I agree with his answer or with his reasoning for it. But I am sure that this 
is exactly the kind of fundamental question we need to be asking. 
Today, I'd like to take a slightly different approach to Wolf's question. Let me put it this way: If the IMF 
did not exist and we set out to create it from scratch, what would be its fundamental role in the global 
economy? What should an ideal IMF do, and what should it not do?  
Some  might suggest  that  these  very  questions  are being  asked and  answered  right  now within  the 
IMF, in the context of the internal strategic review initiated by Managing Director Rodrigo de Rato. Mr. 
de Rato is to be commended for taking on this task. The Executive Board of the IMF will discuss the 
internal review next week. But it seems to me that the review, while important and useful, has been 
focused on finding better ways for the existing institution to do what it already does. I want to approach 
this issue from a more basic level and ask what is required for the IMF to evolve into the best possible 
institution, designed for the global economy of the 21st century. For that evolution to take place, the 
key shareholders of the institution need to show leadership and vision. 
To set the stage for my remarks today, I will briefly review how and why the current IMF came into 
being, and then I will consider how the global economy has evolved since the founding of the IMF. I 
will next elaborate on what I see as the fundamental role for the IMF in today's global economy, and 
then discuss the changes that would need to take place in order for the institution of today to evolve 
into  the  "ideal"  IMF.  I  hope  that  my  remarks  will  then  lead  to  a  vigorous  discussion  in  the  time 
remaining. 
The rise and fall of Bretton Woods 
So  let  me  begin  by  going  back  60  years  to  the  original  United  Nations  Monetary  and  Financial 
Conference  at  Bretton  Woods,  New  Hampshire.  The  delegates—representing  45  nations—were 
nothing  if  not  ambitious.  They  ended  up  creating  two,  almost  three,  international  institutions.  There 
was  the  International  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and Development—now known  as  the World  Bank—
charged  with  providing  aid  for  the  rebuilding  of  Europe.  Delegates  also  came  close  to  creating  the 
International Trade Organization, which was to be dedicated to keeping protectionism in check and 
facilitating freer international trade in goods and services. This organization eventually came into being 
a couple of years later as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which subsequently morphed 
into the World Trade Organization. And, of course, the third institution was the International Monetary 
Fund.  
The IMF was meant to create an international monetary order that would allow trade to flourish again 
and post-war reconstruction to take place. The institution that these delegates created was very much 
                                                      
1   M. Wolf, "The World Needs a Tough and Independent Monetary Fund." U.K. Financial Times, (22 February 2006). 
BIS Review 26/2006 
 1
a  creature  of  its  time,  and  its  roles  and  responsibilities  reflected  the  experience  of  the  Great 
Depression. The great policy failure of the 1930s was the competitive "beggar-thy-neighbour" currency 
devaluations  to  which  nations  resorted.  The  Bretton  Woods  delegates  sought  to  prevent  countries 
from adopting such policies. The first of the Articles of Agreement that govern the IMF called on it "to 
promote  international  monetary  co-operation  through  a  permanent  institution  which  provides  the 
machinery  for  consultation  and  collaboration  on  international  monetary  problems."  Exchange  rates 
were  to  be  fixed,  and  were  to  be  adjusted  only  in  the  case  of  "fundamental  disequilibrium."  The 
delegates  also  correctly  identified  liberalized  trade  in  goods  and  services  and  the  development  of 
economic specialization as crucial for the creation of wealth.  
Permeating the Bretton Woods conference was a vital sense of co-operation, identified as the "spirit of 
internationalism"  by  Raghuram  Rajan,  the  current  Director  of  the  IMF's  Research  Department  in  a 
recent lecture.2 The Bretton Woods delegates were able to see how their own country's interest was 
clearly wrapped up in a collective interest. All represented nations understood that their own countries 
might  sometimes  need  to  shun  politically  expedient  policies  and,  instead,  "play  by  the  rules  of  the 
game,"  thus  promoting  the  common  good  of  a  well-functioning  international  monetary  and  financial 
order. Delegates also saw that the Fund could act as an impartial arbiter or umpire to call out countries 
that violated the rules by pursuing policies that impeded the free flow of goods and services. 
The  prime  focus  of  delegates  was  to  encourage  trade  flows,  rather  than  to  rebuild  or  develop 
international capital markets. This is understandable when you recall that as a legacy of World War II, 
governments controlled international capital flows tightly, and private capital flows were a tiny fraction 
of what they are today. Capital controls were symptomatic of the enormous faith that delegates had in 
the  power  of  the  state  to  direct  economic  activity  and  to  control  economic  variables,  including  the 
correct  exchange  rate  values  among  the  world's  major  currencies.  The  controls  were  also 
symptomatic of the fact that outside the United States, capital markets had either atrophied because of 
the war, or simply were not yet well developed. Because of the stresses brought on by the war, the 
allocation  of  capital  was  much  more  state  directed  than  market  directed.  These  controls  stayed  in 
place for some years after the war, persisting longer in Europe than they did in the United States or 
Canada. 
The Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates did not work all that smoothly, and its framework 
led  to  several  crises  along  the  way.  During  the  quarter  century  that  the  system  operated,  Canada 
developed a reputation as the "bad boy" of the international financial system when we "temporarily" 
opted out of Bretton Woods in 1950. By that time, strong capital inflows into our resource sector, as 
well as sharply higher commodity prices, led to upward pressure on the Canadian dollar. In addition, 
there  were  speculative  short-term  capital  inflows,  which  added  to  the  pressure  on  the  currency.  To 
maintain the fixed exchange rate, Canadian authorities first intervened on a massive scale. Foreign 
exchange reserves rose by 40 per cent in less than three months, and the money supply grew rapidly 
at  a  time  when  the  domestic  economy  was  already  operating  at  capacity.  Ultimately,  Canadian 
authorities decided that the best way to resolve these emerging imbalances was to let the Canadian 
dollar float. The alternative would have been higher inflation.3  
One  of  the  key  lessons  the  Canadian  authorities  learned  was  that  in  an  open  economy,  a  market-
based floating exchange rate was not at all incompatible with the goal of free international markets for 
goods and services. Indeed, we came to realize that allowing the relative price of the currency to be 
set  in  the  market  meant  that  we  could  concentrate  on  conducting  monetary  policy  in  our  own  best 
interest, rather than being preoccupied with aiming for balance in our external current account. In a 
rapidly changing global economy, it did not make sense to assume that the "correct" exchange rate 
could ever be known in advance. And even if the correct exchange rate could be identified at a point in 
time, the economic situation would soon change, and the level of the pegged exchange rate would no 
longer  be  appropriate.  A  market-based  exchange  rate  proved  to  be  useful  as  a  "shock  absorber," 
helping the economy react to shocks more efficiently than a fixed exchange rate.  
                                                      
2   R. Rajan, "The Ebbing Spirit of Internationalism and the International Monetary Fund." The 2006 Krasnoff Lecture, Stern 
School, New York University (New York, 8 March 2006). 
3   After repegging the Canadian dollar in 1962, Canada again chose to float its currency in 1970. For a thorough discussion of 
the  Canadian  dollar  through  the  Bretton  Woods  era,  see  J.  Powell,  A  History  of  the  Canadian  Dollar  (Ottawa:  Bank  of 
Canada, 2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2006
The evolution of the world economy and the role of the IMF 
In 1971, the Bretton Woods system collapsed. Domestic capital markets in many countries had been 
restored and modernized. As well, there was recognition by some major industrialized economies that 
the  Bretton  Woods  paradigm  wasn't  working.  But  the  alternative  was  not  yet  clear.  Just  as  central 
banks around the world spent much of the 1970s and 1980s searching for a monetary policy anchor, 
much  time  was  spent  searching  for  a  new  framework  for  the  international  financial  system.  By  the 
1990s, policy-makers—particularly in the OECD countries—started to come around to the idea that a 
framework of market-based policies was best both for national economies and for the global economy. 
This shift in paradigm, from the distrust of markets to the primacy of markets, set the stage for the rise 
of economic globalization. 
If we held a new Bretton Woods Conference today, it is clear that delegates would design a different 
IMF, because both attitudes and circumstances are fundamentally different than they were at the end 
of World War II. International trade flows now constitute a much greater share of most countries' GDP. 
The transfers of goods, services, and technology, and the existence of supply chains across national 
borders, have brought enormous benefits in terms of growth and efficiency. As well, financial markets 
have become vastly larger and deeper—in economists' words, more complete. Private capital flows 
are now dominant, dwarfing the size of official flows.  
Today, we need an international monetary order that does more than just facilitate trade. We need a 
system predicated on the idea that markets—not just for goods and services but also for capital—need 
to be free and open. And so let me now go back to my original question: What should the fundamental 
role of the IMF be in today's economy? The answer is that the role of the IMF must be to promote a 
well-functioning, market-based, international financial system. By "well-functioning," I mean a financial 
system  that  is  both  efficient  and  stable,  so  that  markets  can  do  their  job  in  allocating  savings  to 
investments  through  the  pricing  of  capital,  and  in  smoothing  economic  adjustments  through 
movements in relative prices. 
Sixty years after the original Bretton Woods conference, now is the time for policy-makers to agree 
once  again  on  the  fundamental  objective  of  the  IMF.  We  need  to  agree  that  its  role  should  be  to 
promote a well-functioning, market-based, international financial system. We need to agree that the 
IMF should be the forum where we as shareholders collectively develop the appropriate framework—
the rules of the game—to support the international financial system. And we need to agree that the 
IMF should be an independent, impartial umpire, ready to call out countries that are breaking the rules 
by imposing policies that distort trade flows, or policies that inhibit capital flows unnecessarily. 
What  does  this  mean  in  concrete  terms?  Before  getting  into  detail,  there  is  a  complication  that  we 
need to deal with. We live in a world where all industrialized economies now profess to accept the 
market-based paradigm for the international financial system. But today's global economy consists of 
more  than  just  the  industrialized  economies.  There  are  emerging-market  countries  that  are 
systemically important. These countries, particularly China, have the clout to influence the entire world 
economy. So, in developing the appropriate framework for the international financial system, in setting 
out  the  rules  of  the  game,  we  need  to  make  sure  that  everyone  is  at  the  table.  We  also  need  to 
recognize that some emerging-market countries are, and have, just that: markets that are emerging. 
And so while the principle of a market-based international financial system should be accepted by all, 
we need to recognize that some economies are in transition, and that until their markets fully develop, 
the  rules  of  the  game  need  to  take  this  into  account.  For  example,  the  removal  of  capital  controls 
needs to be done with proper sequencing. 
An ideal IMF: what would it do? 
So, if we were to create the IMF from scratch today, we would want it to have as its ultimate objective 
the promotion of a well-functioning, market-based international financial system. But how should we 
turn that objective into concrete action? What would this ideal IMF actually do? How would it operate? 
And  how  would  that  differ  from  what  the  IMF  does  now?  I  will  discuss  four  related  issues  here: 
surveillance, lending, representation, and governance. 
First, let me talk about how surveillance can support a market-based international financial system. 
There are several points to be made here. 
It is absolutely critical that surveillance take into account the growing interdependence of the global 
economy in order to maintain the stability of the international financial system. When policy errors in 
BIS Review 26/2006 
 3
one country can lead to a financial crisis halfway around the world, we need to better understand the 
linkages  between  countries.  Therefore,  the  IMF  should  use  its  surveillance,  not  just  nationally  but 
internationally,  to  identify  externalities  and  potential  policy  spillovers.  This  would  be  invaluable  in 
helping policy-makers to understand the implications of their actions. I am pleased to see that there 
has  been  progress  in  this  area.  Indeed,  IMF  staff  have  been  working  to  develop  GEM—the  Global 
Economic  Model—that  can  help  to  model  spillover  effects  in  the  global  economy.  This  work  is 
tremendously valuable in that it provides authorities with a broader, multilateral perspective on their 
own  policies.  Policy-makers  can  see  how  their  actions  affect  the  global  economy  and,  in  turn,  how 
these global repercussions will be felt back at home. This is a good start. But it is critical that greater 
emphasis be placed on this type of work in the future, to help us better identify spillovers. 
A few minutes ago, I said that the IMF should be the forum where shareholders gather to collectively 
develop  the  appropriate  rules  of  the  game.  I  also  said  that  it  should  be  an  independent,  impartial 
umpire,  ready  to  call  out  countries  that  break  the  rules.  In  other  words,  the  IMF  should  have  a 
secretariat  function  and  an  umpire  function.  IMF  surveillance  can,  and  must,  do  a  better  job  of 
supporting both of these functions. 
Let  me  start  with  the  so-called  umpire  role.  This  is  one  area  where  the  IMF  has  consistently  fallen 
short  of  the  mark.  Too  often,  surveillance  has  shied  away  from  the  "ruthless  truth-telling"  that 
Keynes—one of the main architects of Bretton Woods—called for.4 Instead of making the tough calls 
about  the  rules  of  the  game,  the  IMF  has  sat  in  the  umpire's  chair  and  simply  asked  the  players 
whether they thought that their shot was in or out. This needs to change. The IMF needs to be able to 
make calls impartially about whether countries are playing by market-based rules of the game. This 
would help policy-makers sitting around the table to decide what actions should come next. It would 
also help the market to apply the appropriate discipline to a country not playing by the rules.  
Like any good umpire, the IMF should apply the same judgment to all players in the global economy. 
Much  has  been  said  about  the  way  China  and  other  countries  continue  to  operate  with  a  fixed 
exchange rate. I have previously argued that while greater exchange rate flexibility would be good for 
China, its citizens, and the global economy, the Chinese authorities must be allowed to choose the 
exchange  rate  regime  they  feel  is  best  for  them.  But  what  the  authorities  should  not do  is  frustrate 
market forces by thwarting the adjustment of real exchange rates through sterilization of their foreign 
exchange  interventions.  By  "sterilization,"  I  mean  offsetting  the  effect  of  those  interventions  on  the 
domestic money supply. Last month, U.S. Treasury Undersecretary Tim Adams called on the IMF to 
put  more  emphasis  on  exchange  rates  in  its  surveillance  activities.5  I  certainly  agree  that  the  IMF 
needs  to  put  greater  emphasis  on  the  interdependencies  in  the  system,  and  exchange  rates  are 
clearly a part of those interdependencies. 
But we have also seen examples of industrialized economies choosing to break the rules of the game. 
As  I  said  yesterday  in  New  York  in  the  context  of  global  imbalances,  we  now  see  examples  of 
industrialized  countries  following  policies  that  impede  market  forces—for  example,  restrictive  labour 
policies  in  Europe.  We  have  also  seen  unsustainable  fiscal  policies  here  in  the  United  States.  In 
Canada, we still have restrictions on foreign ownership of firms in certain sectors. And recently, we 
have seen legislators in the United States and Europe propose new restrictions on foreign investment 
flows. Again, the IMF as umpire should not shy away from making tough calls whenever they see the 
rules  being  violated,  be  it  with  respect  to  trade,  capital  flows,  or  other  policies  that  distort  financial 
markets. Making these calls loudly and forcefully could, as I said, help IMF members apply pressure 
for policy reform, and could certainly help the market to apply its own pressure, thus maximizing the 
chances that welfare-enhancing, market-based policies would be adopted. 
In a world where stability can be easily threatened by capital flows, we need to have a better sense of 
national  balance  sheets,  a  point  that  Bank  of  England  Governor  Mervyn  King  recently  made.6 
Surveillance needs to answer questions such as: What is a country's net foreign asset position? How 
is it being financed? What are the currency and maturity mismatches? The goal is to better integrate 
financial  sector  surveillance  into  country  reviews  so  that  potential  risks  are  identified  earlier.  This 
                                                      
4   Quoted by M. King, "Reform of the International Monetary Fund." Speech to Indian Council for Research on International 
Economic Relations, New Delhi, India (20 February 2006). 
5   T. Adams, "Working with the IMF to Strengthen Exchange Rate Surveillance." Speech to the American Enterprise Institute, 
Washington, D.C. (2 February 2006). 
6   M. King, op. cit. 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2006
would also help the IMF in its secretariat role, allow national authorities to address problems early on, 
and give capital markets more information to help them price risk appropriately. 
Earlier,  I  spoke  about  the  need  for  capital  markets  in  emerging-market  economies  to  fully  emerge. 
Ultimately, we hope that all countries will develop capital markets and the infrastructure to allow them 
access to global private investment flows. But in the transition period, we need to bear in mind that 
these markets work imperfectly at best, and are susceptible to overshooting and sudden reversals of 
capital flows. The IMF, therefore, has a role to play in furthering financial market development through 
its  surveillance,  through  its  advice  and  technical  assistance,  and  through  appropriately  structured 
lending activities. I'll return to this point in a minute. 
Let me make one more point about surveillance. We all know that markets work less efficiently, and 
can even fail, in the absence of the right policy framework. Markets can fail when they are impeded by 
information asymmetries or by a lack of proper transparency. The IMF has an important role here in 
helping to support markets so they can work at peak efficiency. The talented staff of the IMF certainly 
have a long history of expertise in this area from years of conducting surveillance, and this expertise 
should  be  used  to  maximum  potential.  Currently,  it  is  not.  The  IMF  could  be  a  key  supplier  of  an 
important  public  good:  reliable  information  on,  and  judgment  about,  the  performance  of  national 
economies. In addition, as I said, the IMF has a very important role to play in providing analysis of 
spillovers and interdependencies. The IMF has taken a good step in this direction through its Financial 
Sector Assessment Program and its Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes. But it needs 
to do more—not to duplicate what markets provide, but to supplement it.  
Having discussed surveillance, I will now turn to the second issue, which is lending. In a world where 
countries  have  unprecedented  access  to  international  capital  flows,  and  where  those  who  have 
borrowed from the IMF are doing everything they can to repay their loans early, some have argued 
that an ideal IMF should do no lending whatsoever. I certainly agree that the prime purpose of the IMF 
is  not  to  make  loans.  In  particular,  long-term  lending  for  development  clearly  falls  outside  of  its 
mandate. Until such time as all countries can develop their own capital markets, it is the World Bank 
that  should  play  this  role,  just  as  the  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development  recently 
helped many Eastern European countries make the transition to market economies.  
However, as I mentioned earlier, a number of emerging markets do not have robust financial systems. 
And  so  there  may  still  be  a  role  for  the  IMF  to  maintain  stability  by  providing  temporary  liquidity  in 
extreme  cases.  But  this  very  limited  lending  must  take  place  only  when  it  can  be  shown  that  the 
borrower is illiquid but not insolvent. And I would stress that there must be clear rules as to when this 
liquidity can be accessed, as well as clear lending limits that are known by all parties in advance.7  
In terms of "emergency" lending, it would be far preferable to have the IMF focus on helping countries 
avoid problems in the first place, rather than lending funds to help them resolve balance-of-payments 
problems. The IMF could best support a market-based international financial system by working with 
countries to put mechanisms in place that help resolve problems before they turn into crises. In this 
regard, the institution has taken some steps in the right direction by stressing the use of collective-
action clauses and encouraging parties to adhere to basic principles during debt restructurings.8  
By  restricting  its  lending  role,  the  IMF  can  make  a  much  greater  contribution  to  a  market-based 
financial system. Too often in recent years, Fund lending has impeded the very same market-based 
adjustments that the IMF should be encouraging. There are three important points to be made here. 
First,  a  lack  of  clear  rules  about  when  the  IMF  would  lend—and  in  what  amounts—has  caused 
uncertainty  and  unnecessary  delay,  thus  making  the  timely  and  efficient  resolution  of  crises  more 
difficult. Second, there is nothing inherently wrong with the IMF providing financing which, if it occurred 
in the private sector, would be called "debtor in possession" financing. In those circumstances, the IMF 
can  expect  to  be  treated  as  a  "preferred  creditor,"  standing  at  the  head  of  the  line  with  respect  to 
subsequent debt servicing. However, as in the private sector, this should only occur when this action 
would preserve or increase the value of outstanding claims. This brings me to my third point. Too often 
in  the  past,  assistance  was  provided  to  countries  that  were  assumed  to  be  suffering  only  from 
                                                      
7   See A. Haldane and M. Kruger, "The Resolution of International Financial Crises: Private Finance and Public Funds." Bank 
of Canada Working Paper 2001-20, published jointly with the Bank of England. 
8   See Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring in Emerging Markets. (Washington, D.C.: Institute of 
International Finance, 2005). 
BIS Review 26/2006 
 5
temporary illiquidity, but which later proved to be insolvent. IMF lending in these cases simply added to 
an already unsustainable debt burden, placing additional costs on both debtors and creditors. As I said 
before,  emerging-market  economies  may  occasionally  face  problems  for  which  timely  financial 
assistance from the Fund would help. But this lending needs to be clearly delineated and constrained 
if it is to do more good than harm. All of this is to say that we need a fundamental review of the IMF's 
lending activities. Lending should not be the major focus of the IMF's mandate. Instead, it should play 
only a supporting role. 
Next, let me talk about representation. For the IMF to successfully promote a well-functioning, market-
based international financial system, it must be an effective forum, where global economic issues are 
discussed and solutions are found.9 The IMF should be the place where national authorities gather 
around the table for a frank exchange on policy issues common to all. We need to rekindle the "spirit 
of  internationalism"  seen  at  Bretton  Woods  60  years  ago,  and  also  seen  at  the  OECD  during  the 
1960s and 1970s, as that organization did its part to build a liberal economic order and a framework 
for freer trade. But it is difficult to build a shared sense of trust and responsibility if key players feel that 
they don't have an adequate voice. In this respect, it is clear that the IMF needs to give a larger voice 
to China and some other emerging-market economies, as they become more systemically important. 
But  as  my  colleague  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,  Deputy  Governor  Tiff Macklem,  said  recently,  "with  a 
larger voice comes greater responsibility."10 Membership in the IMF carries with it a responsibility for 
supporting  the  goals  of  the  institution.  Members  must  have  a  shared  understanding  of  how  the 
international financial system should function, and of the IMF's role in supporting that system. So it 
seems  to  me  that  there  really  is  no  point  for  countries  to  demand,  and  receive,  greater  quota  and 
voting  power  unless  they  believe  in,  and  actively  support,  a  market-based  international  financial 
system. It is absolutely true that Asian nations need to have greater quota and voting power to make 
the institution more legitimate in their eyes. But this should happen only if it will lead to an increased 
willingness among all countries to respect the rules of the game that are developed.  
Having  discussed  surveillance,  lending,  and  representation,  the  final  issue  I  want  to  talk  about  is 
governance.  Good  governance  begins  with  clear  objectives.  So,  after  establishing  the  IMF's 
fundamental objectives, the institution must improve its governance structures.  
The IMF must ensure that it has clear lines of responsibility internally, and that it is transparent with 
respect to the reasons for its decisions. In other words, the IMF needs a governance structure that 
helps  it  achieve  its  goals  and  that  holds  its  officials  accountable.  Currently,  decision-making 
responsibilities are divided among the Board of Governors, the Executive Board, and the Managing 
Director and staff. But in practice, the division of responsibilities among these groups is not always 
clearly defined. Accountability is dispersed, and decision making lacks transparency. The IMF would 
be  more  effective  if  the  Executive  Board  focused  on  setting  strategic  direction,  and  ensured  that 
policies are sound and that objectives are met, rather than focusing on the day-to-day business of the 
institution. The Managing Director would be accountable for the secretariat and surveillance functions 
and  be  responsible  for  policy  implementation.  This  framework  would  help  to  clarify  that  the 
responsibility  for  policy  formulation  rests  with  the  Executive  Board,  and  that  the  responsibility  for 
implementation rests with the Managing Director. Towards this end, Mervyn King recently suggested 
establishing a non-resident Executive Board that meets periodically, rather than almost continuously, 
and that focuses on strategic direction and oversight.11 This suggestion certainly merits consideration. 
We also need to consider how to enhance the vital role of the IMFC—the International Monetary and 
Financial  Committee—within  the  institution.  As  well,  we  should  think  about  whether  there  could  be 
some useful role for various working committees to deal with specific issues as they arise. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. I've argued today that there is a role for the IMF in today's 
global economy. We need an institution to promote a market-based international financial system that 
                                                      
9   D.  Dodge,  "Reflections  on  the  International  Economic  and  Monetary  Order."  Speech  to  la  Conférence  de  Montréal, 
Montréal, Quebec (30 May 2005). 
10   T.  Macklem,  "Renewing  the  IMF:  Some  Lessons  from  Modern  Central  Banking."  Speech  to  the  Global  Interdependence 
Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (9 March 2006). 
11   M. King, op. cit. 
6 
 BIS Review 26/2006
works efficiently and is stable. This ideal IMF would have a sharper focus and a more international 
aspect to its surveillance, with clear rules governing a greatly reduced lending role. It would also be 
more representative than the current IMF, and would have an overhauled governance structure. 
The prescription I have outlined today may sound radical. But we cannot afford to be put off by the 
size of the task. Progress may come only over time, but it does need to happen. The first and most 
important  step  on  the  path  is  to  have  all  players  in  the  global  economy  agree  on  the  fundamental 
objective  of  the  IMF.  As  IMF  members  gather  next  month  in  Washington  for  the  institution's  spring 
meetings, my great hope is that we will have a real discussion of these fundamental issues. 
Let me close by recalling Martin Wolf's column in the Financial Times. Ultimately, Wolf agreed that the 
world needs to create a tough and independent IMF. But Wolf said it could not be done. It is up to us 
to prove him wrong. It is up to us to show that we do have the courage and the vision to build this 
important institution.  
BIS Review 26/2006 
 7
