Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The way ahead for central banking in East 
Africa 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  Bank of  Uganda, at  the  opening  of  the 
16th East African Central Banking Course, Entebbe, 3 July 2006. 
 the  challenges  of  globalisation  and  economic 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On behalf of Bank of Uganda which is hosting the course and also on behalf of my fellow Governors in 
the East African central banks under whose authority the course is held, I wish to welcome you all to 
Uganda. I hope you had a comfortable journey to the Pearl of Africa. 
The East African Central Banking Course that you are about to embark on has a long history. The first 
one  was  held  in  1970  at  Makerere  University  following  a  decision  in  1968  by  the  Governors  of  the 
three Central Banks to introduce a joint training course to be held bi-annual and hosted on a rotational 
basis by the three central banks. 
They  took  that  decision  because,  among  other  reasons,  they  wanted  to  create  a  forum  for  middle 
managers  to  interact,  exchange  ideas,  enable  them  to  gain  more  understanding  of  central  banking 
particularly monetary and fiscal policies and prepare them for higher responsibilities. 
I  am  happy  that  the  programme  has  been  running  on  schedule  since  then  save  for  the  temporary 
suspension  between  1978  and  1982  following  the  collapse  of  the  East  African  Community.  It  was, 
however, resumed in 1984. 
Though the rationale for the central banking course is as noble today as it was at its inception, the 
concerns are more critical now than they were then. 
I believe that as Central Bankers, you are aware that in a world that is increasingly becoming more 
dynamic, complex and uncertain, countries that continue to operate individually will certainly be faced 
with more serious challenges than those that operate in regional economic groupings. A case in point 
are 
Information 
Communication Technology. 
The  gravity  of  this  matter  can  best  be  appreciated  if  we  assess  the  global  economic  panorama.  It 
should be instructive to us to note that if developed countries in Europe have seen it fit to operate in 
union, developing countries like ours have no option but to do likewise. 
Under the Treaty of the East African Community, signed on 30 November 1999, the Presidents of the 
East  African  countries  undertook  to  fast  track  the  establishment  of  a  customs  union,  which  will  be 
followed  by  a  common  market,  a  monetary  union  and,  ultimately,  a  political  federation.  Progress 
towards  these  arrangements  requires  close  co-ordination  in  the  process  of  evolving  the  required 
institutional and policy frameworks. In this endeavour, the onus is on the East African central banks to 
ensure  we  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  a  monetary  union  within  the  stipulated  timeframe.  We 
have to play our role in terms of monetary policy formulation and management through contributing to 
the East African regional economic harmonisation and convergence programmes. 
It is in this context that the 16th East African Central Banking Course, which Bank of Uganda is happy 
to host, has been organised. I am confident that the programme provides you a unique opportunity to 
gain a more comprehensive understanding of central banking. You should be able to appreciate better 
the  role  of  our  central  .banks  in  terms  of  fostering  price  stability  and  a  sound  financial  system  that 
enables macroeconomic stability, economic growth and poverty eradication in our region. A case in 
point is coverage of various financial markets and payment systems which should go a long way in 
enabling  you  to  appreciate  the  role  our  central  banks  play  in  investment  and  trade  on  which  our 
Governments have placed emphasis. 
The programme also provides you an opportunity to interact and exchange ideas, not only while on 
the course but also when you return to your respective offices. This networking is extremely important 
in the development process in our region. We expect you to advance it further. 
It  is  also  important  for  you  to  note  that  you  are  being  prepared  for  higher  responsibilities  in  your 
respective  central  banks  and  also  at  the  regional  level  as  far  as  enhancing  monetary  policy 
harmonisation  and  convergence  are  concerned.  You  must  appreciate  that  the  Monetary  Union,  on 
facilitated  by 
liberalisation 
BIS Review 66/2006 
 1
which we are targeting, will be a joint effort of managers like you who have been specially prepared for 
the task. 
I  urge  you  to  seize  the  opportunity  to  learn  and  be  better  prepared  to  give  quality  service  to  your 
respective  institutions,  your  countries  and  the  wider  East  African  sub-region.  I  further  urge  you  to 
share  experiences,  learn  from  one  another  and  acquaint  yourselves  with  the  socio-economic 
opportunities that exist in the country. 
There is no doubt in my mind that you will accord the course the seriousness it deserves for the good 
of our region. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, with those few remarks, it is my sincere honour and pleasure to declare the 
course officially open. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2006
