Paul Jenkins: Weathering economic shocks – the importance of flexibility 
Remarks by Mr Paul Jenkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Vancouver Board 
of Trade, Vancouver, BC, 13 September 2006. 
 Today, I would like to talk about the importance of flexibility to economic adjustment and, hence, about 
the need to adopt economic policies that promote flexibility in markets for goods, services, capital, and 
labour. I am particularly pleased to be discussing this issue here in British Columbia where adjustment 
to  changing  global  and  domestic  economic  developments  has  been  front  and  centre  in  the 
management of your economy. 
First, I should explain what I mean by flexibility. As most of you are surely aware, the Bank of Canada 
has  been  openly  discussing  the  importance  of  promoting  policies  that  support  economic  efficiency, 
including financial system efficiency. Efficiency refers to the allocation of scarce economic resources 
to the most productive uses, in a cost-effective way. Flexibility refers to the ability of an economy to 
adjust  to  changing  circumstances.  When  economic  conditions  change,  this  typically  causes 
movements in relative prices that send important signals to markets. A flexible economy is one that 
adjusts to these signals and returns to its production potential as quickly, and with as little cost, as 
possible. Economic flexibility is what I wish to focus on today. 
Why flexibility is so important 
Over the past several years, economic expansion in Canada and around the world has been robust. 
And, as we look ahead, prospects remain generally upbeat. 
In  some  respects,  what  we  have  witnessed  in  terms  of  economic  performance  is  unprecedented, 
especially since it has been attained in the face of major global and country-specific shocks that, in the 
past, would have caused great difficulty and threatened to derail the expansion. 
This  was  certainly  the  case  in  Canada  before  the  mid-1990s  when  the  economy  had  a  hard  time 
dealing  with  economic  and  financial  shocks.  The  boom-bust  cycles  of  the  1970s,  1980s,  and  early 
1990s stand out as clear evidence that we did not have our domestic house in order. The final straw 
was  the  extent  to  which  the  Canadian  economy  got  caught  up  in  the  backwash  of  the  1994-95 
Mexican peso crisis because of our high and unsustainable levels of public debt at that time. 
Indeed,  the  year  1995  proved  to  be  a  watershed.  By  then,  the  Bank  had  succeeded  in  reducing 
inflation and anchoring short-term inflation expectations to the 2 per cent target. The federal budget 
deficit began to shrink significantly in 1995, and by the 1997/98 fiscal year, it had moved into a surplus 
position.  Other  structural  policies,  including  tax  reform  and  free  trade,  were  also  beginning  to  pay 
dividends. 
Canada's economic record over the past decade stands in stark contrast to this earlier period. Output 
and  employment  have  continued  to  grow  steadily  since  the  mid-1990s,  even  as  our  economy  has 
been buffeted by a series of significant shocks. 
Let me recall some of those shocks. 
They started with the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, which then spread to Russia and Latin America. 
This  series  of  events  in  emerging-market  economies  led  to  a  sharp  decline  in  world  demand  and 
commodity  prices  and,  hence,  to  a  marked  depreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar.  Next  came  the 
worldwide collapse of the high-tech bubble. It, too, depressed foreign demand for Canadian goods and 
services, as did the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United States. On a relatively smaller scale, since the 
beginning of this century, the Canadian economy has had to contend with other domestic calamities 
that also had an international dimension to them. I'm referring, of course, to SARS and BSE. More 
recently,  we have  had  to face  intensified  competition  from major  new  global players,  notably  China 
and India. And, since 2003, we have experienced a sharp appreciation of our currency, which primarily 
reflects strong world demand and high prices for the energy and other commodities we produce. 
What have been some of the key characteristics of these shocks? 
BIS Review 83/2006 
 1
The  Asian  crisis  of  1997-98  and  the  circumstances  we  have  been  experiencing  since  2003  have 
involved large movements in relative prices. By this I mean sharp movements in the prices of energy 
and non-energy commodities (relative to the prices of other goods we produce) and in the exchange 
rate  for  the Canadian dollar.  These  movements have  triggered  important  shifts  in  economic  activity 
and reallocations of production resources across sectors and regions of our economy. Following the 
Asian  crisis,  we  saw  a  shift  out  of  commodities  and  into  manufacturing.  Now  we  see  a  shift  in  the 
opposite direction. And the current intense competition from Asia is clearly evident in reduced prices 
for manufactured consumer goods. 
Adjusting to these shocks has not been easy – indeed, for many firms and their workers it has been 
downright painful. Still, as I said earlier, total output and employment have continued to grow at a good 
clip over the past decade - averaging 3 and 2 per cent a year, respectively. Furthermore, during the 
current  episode  of  marked  movements  in  relative  prices,  there  has  been  broad-based  economic 
growth across all Canadian regions.  
Canada is not the only economy that has coped better with recent shocks. To varying degrees, other 
countries have as well - which partly explains why world economic growth has held up better this time 
around. 
Clearly,  many  national  economies  have  been  able  to  respond  more  flexibly  than  in  the  past  to 
unexpected  developments.  And  this  has  helped  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  shocks,  advance  the 
adjustment, and support continued strong economic performance.  
This increased flexibility has been the product of economic policies and structural reforms that many 
countries, including Canada, have undertaken over the years to strengthen their economies and make 
them more resilient to shocks.  
But this does not mean that we have nothing to worry about as we look ahead. We live in an era of 
rapid change, and we operate in a global environment that is constantly shifting. Uncertainty, risks, 
and shocks are a constant feature of the economic landscape. For Canada, this is particularly relevant 
given how open our economy is to international trade and capital flows. 
At the Bank of Canada, we believe that world economic prospects remain favourable as we look out 
over the medium term. But while this reflects our central expectation of how the world will unfold, there 
are  important  upside  and  downside  risks  around  this  scenario.  On  the  downside,  persistent  global 
imbalances immediately come to mind, as does the lack of success in the Doha round of trade talks. 
These risks could result in significantly slower global economic growth. At the same time, we cannot 
rule out the possibility of stronger growth, especially in Asia. 
Of course, we know that events can turn out very differently from our expectations today. So we must 
plan  accordingly.  In  terms  of  potential  risks  and  sudden  developments,  the  best  approach  is  to 
constantly ask ourselves what steps we can take to make our economy and domestic markets more 
flexible and thus better able to adapt. And we need to recognize that the pursuit of such an approach 
is a shared responsibility among firms, workers, and policy-makers. 
Firms and their workers need to be able to respond quickly to technological advances and to various 
shocks  that  require  significant  changes  in  the  way  they  conduct  business,  the  type  of  goods  and 
services  they  produce,  and  the  markets  they  choose  to  develop.  A  well-functioning  market-based 
economy and clear relative price signals are critical in this context. At the same time, policy-makers 
need  to  be  wary  of  barriers  to  adjustment,  such  as  labour  regulations  that  inhibit  the  movement  of 
workers  from  one  type  of  job,  or  from  one  sector  or  region,  to  another.  Some  of  these  issues  are 
particularly relevant in a Canadian context, and I will return to them later.  
The  key  point  I  want  to  make  here  is  that  economic  policies  and  structural  reforms  that  enhance 
flexibility  make  it  easier  to  withstand  shocks  and  to  make  adjustments.  And  this  helps  to  maintain 
output at the economy's production potential. Put differently, strong, well-functioning domestic markets 
for goods, services, capital, and labour are essential to the economic well-being of Canadians.  
In addition, with national economies so closely connected these days, actions by individual countries 
to increase flexibility translate into an even greater cumulative benefit for the world economy. Indeed, 
the greater the number of economies that are flexible enough to adapt to changing circumstances, the 
stronger and more sustainable world economic growth will be. 
So  what  are  the  policies  that  promote  flexibility  and  thus  position  us  to  take  advantage  of  the 
opportunities offered by globalization and to cope with unforeseen shocks that are sure to come our 
way? 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2006
Policies that promote economic flexibility  
In Canada – and in many other countries – better macroeconomic management has been instrumental 
to the good economic performance of recent years.  
Specifically, a monetary policy focused on low, stable, and predictable inflation has helped Canadian 
businesses  read  price  signals  more  clearly,  respond  to  relative  price  changes  more  promptly,  and 
generally allocate production resources more efficiently. And this, together with the Bank of Canada's 
symmetric response to deviations from the 2 per cent inflation target has contributed to solid and more 
stable economic growth over the past decade. 
A floating exchange rate - which is the other key component of our monetary policy framework – has 
also  provided  an  important  stabilization  mechanism  for  the  Canadian  economy.  Movements  of  the 
exchange rate provide clear price signals that help speed up adjustment to shocks with lower overall 
economic costs than if the exchange rate did not move. With a fixed exchange rate, it takes longer for 
price signals to be recognized, and the adjustment primarily takes place through changes in domestic 
prices and wages, at the cost of significant variability in output and employment. 
It is also important to recognize that it is simply not possible for a central bank to successfully control 
both the domestic and external values of its currency at the same time. We have only one instrument – 
our policy interest rate – and so we can have only one target. Thus, with inflation as our target, we 
naturally operate with a floating currency. 
A sound fiscal policy, focused on reducing public sector debt levels relative to the size of the economy, 
has also contributed significantly to economic stabilization. It gives governments flexibility to respond 
to evolving circumstances and unexpected developments. They can do this by letting automatic fiscal 
stabilizers work to help sustain the overall level of demand when the economy is weak or to relieve 
demand pressures when the economy is booming. 
We also know from bitter experience, especially through the late 1980s, that economic outcomes are 
better  and  adjustments  less  costly  when  macroeconomic  policies  are  working  in  tandem.  In  this 
regard,  given  the  current  strength  of  domestic  demand  in  Canada  and  the  high  level  of  resource 
utilization, governments need to guard against adding to any excess demand pressures. 
Despite considerable progress in Canada and elsewhere in maintaining macroeconomic stability, the 
growing  integration  of  the  world  economy  has  made  it  clear  that  this  is  not  enough.  To  enhance 
flexibility,  raise  the  economy's  growth  potential,  and  increase  resilience  to  shocks,  we  also  need 
structural reforms. 
For  Canada,  structural  reform  has  a  broad  context,  with  many  priorities  across  a  number  of 
jurisdictions. I'll mention a couple that I consider to be particularly relevant. 
The financial system, with its vital role in supporting a healthy modern economy, has been and will 
continue  to  be  a  top  priority.  Here,  the  ultimate  goal  should  be  an  innovative,  efficient,  and  sound 
financial  system  that  can  provide  specialized  financing  services  competitively.  Such  a  system 
enhances  overall  economic  flexibility  by  helping  to  redirect  capital  and  resources  to  the  most 
productive uses, in a cost-effective way, following a shock. 
Removing  internal  barriers  to  the  free  movement  of  goods,  services,  and  labour  is  another  priority. 
This  is  an  area  that  is  rightly  attracting  renewed  attention,  as  differences  in  regional  economic 
performance  and  shortages  of  skilled  labour  are  becoming  more  pronounced,  and  as  demographic 
challenges begin to intensify. 
A  number  of  initiatives  to  remove  internal  barriers  have  been  undertaken  over  the  years  -  but  with 
mixed  and  generally  modest  results.  Here,  I'm  thinking  of  the  "Red  Seal"  program,  which  was 
introduced  45  years  ago  to  help  standardize  and  recognize  workers'  trade  qualifications.  I'm  also 
thinking of the Agreement on Internal Trade (AIT), which was signed by First Ministers in 1994 and 
was aimed at reducing barriers to the movement of goods, services, investment, and labour.  
More  recently,  we  have  seen  some  progress  in  areas  such  as  procurement practices,  enforcement 
and  dispute  resolution,  and  licensing  and  residency  requirements  for  employment.  One  recent 
example  is  the  accord  reached  this  past  April  between  British  Columbia  and  Alberta  to  strengthen 
enforcement  and  dispute  resolution,  and  to  harmonize  labour  credentials  and  business  regulations 
and standards by early 2009. Another example is the agreement, earlier this year, between Ontario 
and Quebec to allow some further, albeit limited, movement of construction workers between the two 
provinces. Earlier this month, two temporary "foreign-worker units" started operating in Vancouver and 
BIS Review 83/2006 
 3
Calgary to facilitate the entry of skilled foreign workers into Canada. And just last week, the Committee 
of Ministers Responsible for Internal Trade agreed on an action plan that embraces efforts across a 
range of internal trade issues.  
All  this  is  encouraging  because  considerably  more  needs  to  be  done  to  enhance  the  flexibility  and 
functioning of our internal markets from coast to coast. Business regulations and standards, including 
those  for  the  financial  sector,  need  to  be  harmonized  across  Canada.  Dispute  resolution  and 
enforcement under the AIT need to be strengthened. And, to make our labour markets more flexible, 
trades and professional designations should be recognized and fully transferable across the country. 
Based  on  a  recent  survey,  more  than  one-third  of  all  workers  and  about  half  of  all  foreign-trained 
workers still have problems getting their credentials recognized across Canadian jurisdictions.1  
How flexible is the Canadian economy? 
The  good  news  is  that,  despite  the challenges  that  we  still  face,  overall, our economy  fares well  in 
international  comparisons  of  flexibility  and  adaptability.  In  a  2005  study,  the  International  Monetary 
Fund  (IMF)  concluded  that  "Canada  is  characterized  by  a  relatively  high  degree  of  flexibility,  of  a 
magnitude comparable if not larger than many other industrialized countries, with the likely exception 
of the United States."2  
For purposes of this study, the IMF looked at different indicators of economic flexibility – with uniform 
results. For example, the reallocation of production resources across sectors, in response to changing 
economic conditions over the 1980-2000 period, was quite high in Canada compared with other major 
industrialized  countries  (except  the  United  States)  -  indicating  a  high  degree  of  economic  flexibility. 
The IMF also compared rates of firm turnover, and of job creation and destruction, across countries. 
Both of these measures were relatively high for Canada - again suggesting a high degree of flexibility.  
Other measures of the way in which our economy responds to macroeconomic disturbances also point 
in the same direction. As of the first quarter of 2006, interprovincial migration has shown a marked 
increase over the past two years to 333,000 individuals, representing over one per cent of the total 
Canadian population. Not surprisingly, the two provinces with a net positive inflow over this period are 
Alberta and British Columbia. And a more recent study by the IMF that focused on Canadian labour 
markets concluded that, overall, they are relatively flexible.3  
So Canada does seem to rate high according to some measures of flexibility. But the challenge is to 
continue to promote flexibility in all of our domestic markets - for goods, services, capital, and labour. 
Continuous improvement is essential. Given the openness of the Canadian economy, we cannot be 
complacent. 
Recent economic and financial developments 
Before concluding, let me summarize the Bank's current thinking on the economy, as we laid it out last 
week  in  the  press  release  announcing  our  decision  to  leave  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate 
unchanged at 4 1/4 per cent.  
Basically, we noted that the global economy has continued to expand solidly, with some moderation in 
U.S.  economic  growth  but  with  some  further  strengthening  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  Against  this 
backdrop, commodity prices have remained firm. 
In  Canada,  the  level  of  economic  activity  in  the  second  quarter  of  2006  was  somewhat  below  the 
Bank's expectations, primarily because of weaker exports. Total and core CPI inflation came in slightly 
higher than expected in July, mainly because of price strength in the housing and services sectors. 
Nevertheless, all things considered - and here I would include the most recent labour force numbers - 
                                                      
1   Forum of Labour Market Ministers. 2005. "Report of Survey Results: Inter-provincial labour mobility in Canada 2004/05." 
2   See  IMF  (2005)  "How  Flexible  Is  the  Canadian  Economy?  An  International  Comparison,"  in  Canada:  Selected  Issues 
(Article IV Consultation): 92-100. 
3   See T. Bayoumi, B. Sutton, and A. Swiston, "Shocking Aspects of Canadian Labor Markets" (IMF Working Paper No. 83, 
March 2006). 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2006
the underlying trends in the economy appear to be in line with the broad thrust of our projection for 
output and inflation in the July Monetary Policy Report Update. 
We continue to expect that the economy will operate at about capacity through 2008, with total CPI 
inflation returning to the 2 per cent inflation target in the second half of 2007. In line with this outlook, 
the  current  level  of  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate  is  judged  at  this  time  to  be  consistent  with 
achieving the inflation target over the medium term. 
The key risks to the Canadian outlook for output and inflation over the next few quarters remain those 
set out in our July Report: on the upside, they relate primarily to the momentum in household spending 
and housing prices; on the downside, U.S. household demand could slow more rapidly than expected, 
thus reducing demand for Canadian exports. While both these risks appear to be a little greater than 
they were in July, we continue to judge that, overall, risks are roughly balanced. We will provide a full 
analysis of economic developments, trends, and risks in our next Monetary Policy Report, which will 
be published on 19 October 2006. 
Concluding thoughts  
Let me now conclude. As a nation, we are clearly learning from experience and adapting to change. 
Over the past decade, we have done much to implement sound macroeconomic policies and structural 
reforms  that  have  helped  our  economy  become  more  flexible  and  thus  more  adaptable  to  change. 
Canada's strong economic performance in the face of major disturbances over this period attests to 
the importance of flexibility. 
However, our success to date does not mean that we can rest on our oars. Uncertainty, risks, and 
shocks will be as much a part of tomorrow's economic picture as they have been of yesterday's and 
today's.  We  all  have  a  role  to  play  in  moving  the  Canadian  economy  to  the  forefront,  in  terms  of 
flexibility and adaptability. The Bank of Canada is committed to doing its part.  
BIS Review 83/2006 
 5
