Tiff Macklem: Renewing the IMF - some lessons from modern central banking 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Global Interdependence 
Center, Philadelphia, 9 March 2006. 
 I'm very pleased to be here in Philadelphia, and I'm grateful for the opportunity to speak to the Global 
Interdependence  Center.  Your  group  aims  to  foster  dialogue  "on  the  challenges  and  opportunities 
arising from our increasingly interdependent global civilization." The globalized economy has indeed 
generated  tremendous  opportunities  to  create  wealth  and  to  raise  living  standards.  But  as 
opportunities have arisen, so too have challenges. As economies have become more interconnected 
through trade and financial flows in a truly global marketplace, economic developments in one location 
can  quickly  have  repercussions  on  the  other side  of  the  globe.  In  1997, what  began as  a currency 
devaluation  in  Thailand  became  a  crisis  with  repercussions  not  just  in  Asia,  but  in  countries  as  far 
away as Russia, Brazil, and Canada. So, the challenge we face is to find the best ways to reap the 
economic benefits of globalization while minimizing the risks of disruption. 
Today,  I'd  like  to  discuss  how  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  can  do  its  part  to  meet  this 
challenge. The IMF was created some 60 years ago to oversee the global monetary system in an era 
of fixed exchange rates. But the world has changed dramatically in 60 years. Most major currencies 
have been allowed to float. Financial markets are much larger, much more sophisticated, and vastly 
more  integrated  than  they  were  20  years  ago,  let  alone  in  the  1940s.  Trade  has  expanded 
enormously, and major new players have entered the global trading network. 
The IMF has responded to new challenges with professionalism. It's taken on new responsibilities and 
developed new expertise. Yet concerns have arisen that the Fund has not kept pace with the changes 
in the global economy. After 60 years, it's time to take a fundamental look at the role of the Fund in the 
global economy. Under Managing Director Rodrigo de Rato, the IMF has launched a strategic review 
of its role and activities. This is the opportunity to consider what kind of a Fund we need to meet the 
challenges of the global economy in the 21st century. But to do this right, we must be ambitious. 
I'm also pleased to be part of your "Central Banking Series" of speakers, because central banks can 
bring  a  valuable  perspective  to  the  discussion.  Central  banks  have  a  large  stake  in  a  sound 
international monetary order, and thus have a profound interest in the IMF. And central banks have 
had to adapt to the same forces in the global economy that have affected the IMF: the collapse of 
fixed exchange rates, the expansion of private capital flows, the evolution of financial markets, and so 
on.  
What I propose to do today is discuss how the Bank of Canada and other central banks have evolved 
in  response  to  these  changing  circumstances.  Then  I'll  outline  how  the  lessons  central  banks  have 
learned can be distilled into four key principles. I'll conclude by offering some thoughts on how these 
same principles could prove useful as we consider the IMF of the future.  
The principles of modern central banking 
For  good  reasons,  Canada  returned  to  a  floating  exchange  rate  in  1970.1  With  the  collapse  of  the 
Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates shortly thereafter, other major industrialized countries 
followed  Canada's  lead.  Unfortunately,  the  Bank  of  Canada,  like  many  other  central  banks,  did  not 
take full advantage of the monetary independence that comes with having a flexible exchange rate. 
Without the anchor of a fixed exchange rate, and with no other monetary anchor in its place, Canada, 
like  many  other  countries,  suffered  the  effects  of  high  inflation  in  the  1970s.  Inflation  reduced  the 
ability of the price system to allocate economic resources efficiently; savings and investment decisions 
were distorted; and the economy went through boom and bust cycles.  
Central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  struggled  with  this  problem,  and  from  this  bitter 
experience  came  a  search  for  the  right  anchor.  We,  and  others,  experimented  with  monetary 
aggregates as intermediate targets. But deregulation and financial innovation weakened the reliability 
                                                      
1   The  floating  exchange  rate  has  served  Canada's  open  economy  well.  Canada  first  adopted  a  floating  exchange  rate  in 
1950. In 1962, it returned to a fixed regime, but since 1970, it has allowed the dollar to float. 
BIS Review 17/2006 
 1
of money measures, and the relationship between money growth and inflation proved to be unstable. 
By  the  end  of  the  1980s,  it  became  clear  that  price  stability  should  be  the  Bank  of  Canada's  pre-
eminent objective, and that we should aim more directly at achieving it.  
In 1991, Canada took the bold step of formalizing this objective with an explicit inflation target. Our 
inflation-target  objective,  which  is  established  jointly  with  the  Government  of  Canada,  aims  to  keep 
inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. The target has proven to be a very 
effective anchor. Inflation has been low and stable, and we've experienced solid growth in output and 
employment.  
Canada was the second major country to adopt an inflation target. Today more than 20 countries have 
such targets. In other words, there's a good deal of international experience with inflation targeting. As 
in Canada, this experience has been very positive: inflation targeting, working in tandem with a floating 
exchange rate, has generally resulted in low inflation and sustained economic growth.  
Stepping back, and looking beyond these positive results, we can distinguish four key characteristics 
of a credible and effective monetary policy framework: clear objectives and effective tools; legitimacy; 
the effective use of markets; and transparency and accountability. 
Let me say a few words about each of these in turn. 
First,  clear  objectives  and  effective  tools.  The  Bank  of  Canada's  monetary  policy  has  one  clear 
objective-to keep inflation at 2 per cent. And it has one instrument with which to get the job done-the 
target for the overnight interest rate.  
Second,  legitimacy.  The  inflation  target  is  not  just  the  Bank  of  Canada's  target,  but  also  the 
government's.  This  adds  legitimacy  to  the  monetary  policy  objective,  thereby  strengthening  it.  But 
legitimacy  also  comes  from  our  experience  of  low  inflation  and  good  economic  outcomes,  with  the 
result  that  there  is  now  broad  support  among  Canadians  for  anchoring  monetary  policy  to  a  low 
inflation target.  
Third, monetary policy works best when it is market based. We learned some valuable lessons in the 
1970s. We learned that direct controls on wages and prices do not work beyond the short run, and 
that they introduce a myriad of distortions, which reduce market efficiency. We also learned that direct 
controls on credit expansion are difficult to calibrate and enforce. They also reduce the efficiency of 
the financial system as it allocates resources in the economy. Today, monetary policy is implemented 
entirely through financial markets. By controlling the overnight interest rate, monetary policy influences 
interest rates along the yield curve, as well as other asset prices. These, in turn, influence spending, 
and,  ultimately,  inflation.  We  have  found  that  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  works  most 
effectively  when  the  central  bank  implements  policy  through  markets,  when  it  maintains  a  credible 
policy goal, and when it communicates its objectives and actions clearly. 
This leads me naturally to the fourth characteristic - transparency and accountability. One of the most 
important things we have learned with inflation targeting is that monetary policy works best when it is 
well  understood.  The  explicit  inflation  target  is  the  centrepiece  of  our  communications  on  monetary 
policy - it helps to anchor inflation expectations, and it makes it easier for us to explain our actions, 
and for people to judge our performance. It provides a strong incentive for us to meet the objective 
and to be accountable.  
Taken together, these are the characteristics of effective, modern central banking. But I think that one 
can go further and say that these characteristics are useful principles that apply to the broader realm 
of public policy making. Let me now turn to the topic of IMF renewal, and talk about how these same 
principles can be applied to the task at hand.  
Principle-based renewal at the IMF 
The place to start is clear objectives and effective tools for achieving those objectives. The IMF's first 
Article  of  Agreement  states  that  it  should  "promote  international  monetary  co-operation  through  a 
permanent institution which provides the machinery for consultation and collaboration on international 
monetary problems." In the globalized, market economy of the 21st century, what this really means is 
the promotion of global financial stability by supporting a market-based international monetary order. I 
hope that there's a broad consensus that this should be the objective of the IMF. I view the challenge 
facing the Fund as being how best to fulfill this objective.  
2 
 BIS Review 17/2006
The  main  tool  is  surveillance.  But  surveillance  needs  to  be  more  effective.  This  means  two  things. 
First,  surveillance  should  be  more  multilateral,  putting  greater  emphasis  on  the  linkages  between 
members, the spillover of one country's policy choices on other countries, and the joint risks that this 
implies. The reality is that in an increasingly globalized economy, our understanding of these linkages 
and spillovers is not as good as it should be. The Fund staff is an enormously talented group of men 
and women. We have to ensure that they undertake the research and analysis needed to understand 
the changing nature of global linkages. But understanding these linkages is not enough. We need a 
forum  where  risks  are  debated  openly,  frankly,  and  comprehensively  by  national  policy-makers.  In 
turn, this implies less emphasis on bilateral communication between the IMF and a given country and 
more multilateral discussions among countries, supported by the IMF. 
Making surveillance more effective also means strengthening the analysis of the linkages between the 
financial sector and the real economy. In recent years, the Fund has devoted considerable energy to 
developing  sound  standards  and  codes  for  assessing  the  financial  infrastructure  of  its  member 
countries.  This  financial  sector  surveillance  needs  to  be  better  integrated  into  IMF  country  reviews. 
This  will  allow  potential  risks  to  be  identified  earlier  so  that  authorities  can  address  any  problems, 
rather  than  calling  on  the  Fund  for  financial  assistance  in  the  midst  of  a  crisis.  Achieving  this 
integration  may  require  re-thinking  the  Fund's  internal  structure  to  ensure  that  all  facets  of  its  work 
feed  effectively  into  its  surveillance  and  provide  sound  analysis  of  the  interaction  of  economic  and 
financial developments and risks, both within and between countries. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  key  principle  -  legitimacy.  The  Fund's  effectiveness,  and  hence  its 
ability to promote global financial stability, is what ultimately gives it legitimacy and credibility. At the 
same time, its effectiveness depends on its legitimacy as a truly global institution, and on a shared 
sense of trust and responsibility among its members. Global issues can't be effectively addressed if 
key players feel that they don't have an adequate voice as IMF members. In this respect, it is clear 
that important aspects of the Fund's governance arrangements have not kept pace with changes in 
the  global  economy.  In  particular,  quotas  and  voting  power  at  the  Fund  need  to  better  reflect  the 
growing power of Asian and other emerging-market economies. 
The issue of quota and voting power is complex and will persist for years to come, since Asia is likely 
to  continue  to  grow  faster  than  other  major  regions.  This  suggests  the  need  for  a  comprehensive 
solution, and we should work towards this end. But we also need to be pragmatic. We need to make 
concrete  progress  on  the  quota  issue  in  the  short  term  to  show  that  members  are  serious  about 
aligning  the  representation  of  Asian  members  with  their  economic  weight.  Of  course,  with  a  larger 
voice comes greater  responsibility.  So  let's  be  clear:  a  larger stake  for  Asian members  implies  that 
they should be prepared to shoulder their fair share of the responsibility for promoting global financial 
stability as part of the international monetary order.  
This brings me to the third principle - effective use of markets. As I have already highlighted, the role 
of the Fund in the 21st century should be to promote financial stability by supporting a market-based 
international  monetary  order.  This  means  that  the  IMF  must  work  to  ensure  that  the  international 
financial  infrastructure  is  sound,  that  countries  pursue  sustainable  policies,  and  that  incentives 
encourage the appropriate pricing of risk and the efficient allocation of resources. It also means that 
the IMF should play a more active role in establishing the "rules of the game," clear rules that support 
a market-based international monetary order. Consider exchange rates, for example. Tim Adams, the 
U.S. Treasury's Under Secretary for International Affairs, recently called on the IMF to demonstrate 
"strong  leadership  on  multilateral  exchange  rate  surveillance."  Specifically,  he  called  on  the  IMF  to 
"improve its tools and advocacy to persuade countries to exit unsustainable exchange regimes early 
on, rather than waiting for perfect circumstances that never come." More broadly, I would suggest that 
the IMF needs to bring pressure to bear on national public policies that thwart adjustment. Delaying 
adjustment  does  not  make  the  need  for  adjustment  go  away.  It  simply  increases  the  risk  that  the 
adjustment - when it comes - will be abrupt and disorderly. 
A highly visible example of this risk is the issue of "global imbalances," which is shorthand for the large 
U.S. current account deficit that is mirrored by large surpluses in Asia and, increasingly, in major oil-
exporting countries. If these imbalances are to be resolved in a way that is consistent with maximizing 
global  growth,  significant  adjustments  are  required.  Markets  can  lead  these  adjustments,  but  they 
need to be allowed to work effectively. This means letting real exchange rates adjust in countries with 
large current account surpluses, like China; reducing unsustainable fiscal deficits in the United States; 
and making labour markets more flexible in Europe. The IMF should play a lead role in bringing the 
right  players  together,  facilitating  discussion,  and  relying  on  markets  to  achieve  the  necessary 
adjustments. 
BIS Review 17/2006 
 3
Markets should also play a greater role in crisis resolution. The Fund has been accused of doing too 
much "exceptional lending." Indeed, in some cases, this lending has delayed the needed actions and 
adjustments. Essentially, both sovereign borrowers and creditors wait to see if the Fund will put new 
money on the table. Strict implementation of exceptional access limits - that is, clear rules of the game 
for the Fund's own activities - would reduce the uncertainty associated with Fund lending and create 
incentives for creditors and lenders to negotiate when negative economic shocks render debt levels 
unsustainable. 
The Fund could facilitate these negotiations by offering its good offices to promote a timely, orderly 
restructuring of private claims. The Fund's effectiveness in this capacity depends critically, however, 
on its perceived independence. It will not be viewed as a disinterested adjudicator if it is also a major 
creditor. The Fund can reduce some of the uncertainty that impedes debt restructurings by providing 
independent  analysis  of  the  future  growth  prospects  of  the  country  concerned,  advice  on  possible 
adjustment  measures,  and  an  assessment  of  the  global  economic  and  financial  outlook.  With  this 
information at hand, creditors and debtors can then seek market-based solutions.  
The fourth and final characteristic is transparency and accountability. I said earlier that the Fund needs 
to be clear about its main objectives and its policy framework. The IMF must also ensure that clear 
lines of responsibility within the organization support the framework. And it must be transparent about 
the  reasons  for  its  decisions.  In  other  words,  the  Fund  needs  a  governance  structure  that  helps  it 
achieve  its  goals  and  holds  individuals  accountable.  Currently,  decision-making  responsibilities  are 
divided among the Board of Governors, the Executive Board of Directors, and the Managing Director 
and  staff.  But  the  division  of  responsibilities  among  these  groups  is  not,  in  practice,  always  clearly 
defined. Accountability is dispersed, and decision-making lacks transparency.  
The IMF would be more effective if the Executive Board focused on setting strategic direction, as well 
as ensuring that policies are sound and that objectives are met. The Managing Director would then be 
responsible for policy implementation, and be accountable to the Board. This framework would help to 
ensure  that  the  responsibility  for  policy  formulation  and  implementation  was  clear  and  borne 
appropriately by the members of the Board and the Managing Director, respectively. Toward this end, 
Bank of England Governor Mervyn King has recently suggested establishing a non-resident Executive 
Board that meets periodically, rather than almost continuously, and that focuses on strategic direction 
and  oversight.  Accountability  and  transparency  of  the  Board's  decision-making  would  also  be 
enhanced with more frequent and more timely reporting. Finally, and very importantly, surveillance and 
analysis must be, and seen to be, independent of political influence. 
Conclusion 
I'd like to conclude by underscoring a key point. The progress made by central banks in furthering the 
economic well-being of their citizens has largely been the result of determining the most appropriate 
objective  -  low  and  stable  inflation  -  and  determining  how  best  to  achieve  it  in  a  transparent  and 
accountable fashion. For many central banks, this has meant inflation targeting. I've suggested that 
there are lessons here for the International Monetary Fund. 
A more effective IMF really does matter. In a world of floating exchange rates, large private capital 
flows,  and  liberalized  trade,  we  need  an  effective  forum  in  which  the  issues  that  shape  the  global 
economy can be discussed with candour and good will, and in which problems can be resolved. The 
IMF could be that forum. But it needs to become more legitimate, that is, more representative of an 
international economic community where all members share responsibility for promoting the common 
good  of  international  financial  stability.  The  IMF  needs  to  operate  with  clear  objectives;  effective, 
market-based  tools  to  achieve  these  objectives;  and  a  governance  framework  that  supports  sound 
decision-making and accountability.  
The need for change is pressing. As the risks associated with global imbalances grow in importance, 
the IMF will be tested. I very much hope that a significantly more effective institution will emerge from 
the strategic review currently under way. If we can get it right, a more effective IMF will be central to 
maximizing the benefits of globalization.  
Indeed,  the  renewal  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  is  tremendously  important,  not  just  for 
Americans and Canadians, but for all nations in this increasingly interdependent world. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2006
