Zhou Xiaochuan: Strengthen communication and cooperation between the 
Mainland and Hong Kong and promote the development of financial 
infrastructures 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Seminar on Financial 
Infrastructures, co-sponsored by the People’s Bank of China and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, 
Beijing, 6 June 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentleman, Dear guests, 
Good morning. 
I am glad to join in the Seminar on Financial Infrastructures cosponsored by the PBC and HKMA. I 
wish the Seminar a great success. In recent years, the economic ties between the Mainland and Hong 
Kong have become more and more closer. Promoted jointly by the PBC and HKMA, personal RMB 
business  has  achieved  healthy  development  in  Hong  Kong,  and  the  financial  infrastructure 
cooperation between the two sides has progressed smoothly. To further enhance such cooperation, 
the  PBC  and  HKMA  established  a  financial  infrastructure  cooperation  liaison  group  and  a  special 
working group in 2006. The Seminar was part of the cooperation program between the Mainland and 
Hong Kong.  
Today,  many  experts  and  senior  managements  of  financial  institutions,  including  banks,  securities 
companies  and  insurance  companies  and  financial  regulatory  authorities  attended  the  Seminar. 
Taking  this  opportunity,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  views  on  the  topics  of  establishing  and 
developing financial infrastructures in Mainland, cooperation between the Mainland and Hong Kong in 
financial  core  infrastructures,  i.e.  payment  &  settlement  system  and  research  on  changes  of 
international payment  & settlement  system  and  the promotion  of modernized payment  & settlement 
system as well.  
Noticeably, there are many different interpretations of financial infrastructure. In this Seminar, financial 
infrastructure would possibly focus on payment & settlement system. But broadly speaking, financial 
infrastructure contains much more meanings, such as market infrastructure. I would like to focus on 
the development of payment & settlement system in line with the main contents of the Seminar. 
Development of payment & settlement system vs. the role of central bank 
I. 
It  is  well  known  that  payment  &  settlement  system  is  one  of  the  most  important  financial 
infrastructures. The 11th Five-Year program clearly indicates efforts to improve payment & settlement 
system,  enhance  payment  &  settlement  efficiency  and  develop  sound  financial  market  registration, 
custody,  trade  and  settlement  system.  In  a  new  economic  and  financial  environment,  the  efficiency 
and safety of a payment & settlement system will not only affect public confidence on money and its 
transmission  mechanism,  but  also  play  a  crucial  role  by  the  central  bank  in  monetary  policy 
implementation,  financial market  development  and maintaining  financial  stability.  As  a  payment  and 
settlement service provider, supervisor and operator of a modern payment and settlement system, the 
PBC  has  made  great  efforts  in  guiding  and  promoting  the  modernization  of  China’s  payment  and 
settlement  system.  As  an  important  component  of  financial  infrastructures,  the  payment  system 
demands  the  participation  and  cooperation  of  commercial  banks  and  other  financial  institutions, 
despite their different roles in financial service in terms of establishment, development and operation.  
The  Mainland  initiated  the  construction  of  payment  system  later  than  Hong  Kong  did.  In  Mainland, 
computer  network  and  communication  infrastructures  indispensable  to  financial  infrastructure  are  at 
different  levels  due  to regional  economic  imbalances,  given  China  has  a  large population  and  wide 
territory. Therefore, the Mainland must consider various elements such as business, technology and 
regional  economic  situation  when  constructing  financial  infrastructure.  Currently,  we  focused  on  the 
construction of a payment system. The large value payment system has been extended nationwide in 
June  2005,  and  the  layout  of  a  modern  payment  system  will  be  adjusted  in  accordance  with 
technology advancement, the  development  of commercial banking  business  and  data concentration 
level. The retail payment system is under construction and will be extended nationwide at end-June, 
BIS Review 67/2006 
 1
2006. At current stage, our priority is still on constructing a disaster back-up system, optimizing system 
functions and building a bill exchange system nationwide based on image technology.  
II.  
Closer economic and trade ties between the Mainland and Hong Kong will provide 
much broader room for cooperation in financial infrastructure, especially the payment 
and settlement system. 
The Mainland and Hong Kong have maintained good cooperation in economic and financial field for a 
long  period  of  time.  Particularly,  after  Hong  Kong  returned  to  the  motherland  in  1997,  the  first 
important cooperation was to face with the Asian Financial Turmoil. In recent years, with the increase 
in  commercial,  trade,  investment  and  personal  exchange  between  the  Mainland  and  Hong  Kong, 
cooperation became much smoother. The launch of CEPA not only produced zero tariff and facilitated 
commodity trade and transportation, but also promoted the fast development of service trade, such as 
the acceptance of professional certificates.  
Cooperation in financial field between the Mainland and Hong Kong has also achieved great progress 
in recent years. In November 2003, with the authorization of the State Council, the PBC announced to 
provide settlement arrangement for personal RMB business of Hong Kong banks. Many new financial 
instruments were introduced in 2004, such as the RMB bankcards with Unionpay logo were accepted 
in  Hong  Kong  from  January  2004.  In  February  2004,  participating  banks  in  Hong  Kong  started  to 
conduct RMB deposits, exchange and remittance business. From April 2004, RMB bankcards issued 
by Hong Kong banks were accepted in the Mainland. In November 2005, with approval of the State 
Council,  the  PBC  extended  the  scope  of  the  RMB  business  position  squaring  and  settlement 
arrangement for Hong Kong banks including raising the upper limits of some business and allowing 
Hong Kong residents to pay their consumption expenditures with checks in RMB denomination. After 
the national social security funds being allowed to invest in Hong Kong and other overseas markets, 
with approval of the State Council, several policies were soon extended to facilitate different economic 
entities to invest in Hong Kong and other overseas market, including wealth management on behalf of 
clients,  portfolio  investment  and  insurance  companies’  overseas  investments.  In  recent  two  years, 
Bank  of  Communications,  China  Construction  Bank  and  Bank  of  China  were  listed  in  the  H  share 
market of Hong Kong respectively. 
Strengthened connection in commodity and service trade, investment and financial cooperation has 
brought many new demands for the payment system and FX market. The growth momentum of such 
demands  is  fairly  evident.  At  the  same  time,  both  sides’  attention  on  the  establishment  of  financial 
infrastructure  could  ensure  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  financial  services.  For  example,  people  had 
various concerns before the launch of personal RMB business, but it worked out smoothly since all 
relevant  parties  made  sufficient  preparations.  The  practice  also  proved  that.  These  all  indicated  a 
promising trend. 
Turning  to  the  Mainland,  QFII  was  introduced  into  the  Mainland  in  recent  years,  and  in  this  year, 
policies  aimed  at  differentiating  domestic  investors  investing  in  overseas  financial  products  were 
issued. At the same time, efforts were made to develop the FX market by providing more risk-control 
tools and introduce market makers and OTC transaction mode. Therefore, the construction of financial 
infrastructure  will  face  higher  demands,  such  as  how  to  prevent  settlement  risks  and  increase 
settlement efficiency to meet changing demands of the market. 
Financial service is similar as goods trade in certain aspects. A country could import goods or attract 
foreign capitals to produce it in its homeland when it could not make it by itself. As to financial service, 
sometimes  a  country  is  not  able  to  provide  all  services  or  make  every  service  good.  So  financial 
service, including infrastructure service can also be provided by others. The Mainland is now on the 
stage of improving the large-value payment system and establishing the retail payment system and 
disaster back-up system, therefore, Hong Kong is a good example for us to learn from its successful 
experiences in foreign exchange clearing and settlement. Additionally, Hong Kong is developing HK 
dollar vs. RMB settlement system as well. Such financial services can be learned and taken by both 
sides. Developing financial infrastructure cooperation between the Mainland and Hong Kong is also 
one of the results.  
Of course, in terms of the strategy of financial infrastructure, the Mainland is aimed at establishing an 
integrated sound and effective payment system, which is a dynamic process that will develop a long 
time  and  with  competition  and  cooperation.  When  taking  advantages  of  Hong  Kong  financial 
infrastructures, we have to bear in mind that the Mainland still exerts control on RMB transactions in 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2006
several aspects. The 5th Plenum of the 16th CPC central committee reclaimed the direction of RMB 
reform is to realize full convertibility, but it will be a gradual process. While RMB was not a convertible 
currency, practices in RMB settlement and foreign exchange clearing and settlement should abide by 
relevant rules and regulations. 
III.  
International payment & settlement system development trends and noticeable 
changes 
A  payment  &  settlement  system  develops  in  a  complicated  and  sustainable  dynamic  manner. 
Technology  advancement,  financial  market  integration,  legal  framework  and  market  competition,  in 
particular the demands of financial market for payment & settlement efficiency and safety, are always 
the main factors that promote the development and changes of a payment & settlement system. Due 
to those factors, new trends have emerged in the global payment & settlement system and deserved 
close attention: 
First concerning the arrangement and design of a payment & settlement system. Along with the aim of 
controlling legal, operation and financial risks of participants, a payment & settlement system should 
provide financial institutions with low-cost settlement credits and better liquidity saving mechanism so 
as to increase benefits in addition to providing infrastructure services.  
Second,  technology  advancement,  mainly  computer  network  and  electronic  communication  system 
development, propels the payment instruments innovation, payment process restructuring and reform. 
Internet and mobile payment tools, developed fast in recent years, have enlarged the services scope 
traditionally  only  provided  by  banks.  Technology  advancement  leads  payment  process  restructuring 
and reform, particularly continued strengthening of the compatibility, connection and resilience among 
the internal infrastructures of securities, foreign exchange, telecommunication and banks.  
Third,  a  highly  efficient,  stable  and  organized  market  system  should  be  developed  in  terms  of 
payments  services  providing  and  pricing.  Balance  should  be  stricken  between  market  innovation 
encouragement and fair competition as well as healthy market development in respect to regulation 
framework  on  market  organization,  behavior  and  coordination  between  main  stakeholders  and 
relevant  service  design,  pricing  and  market  arrangement  concerning  rules  and  practices.  It  will 
demand high supervision level on payment and settlement system. 
Key issues in the development of payment & settlement system of the Mainland 
IV.  
The abovementioned trends have also reflected development and reform of the payment & settlement 
system  in  China  in  recent  years.  Especially  in  the  past  5  years,  we  have  made  noticeable 
achievements in the construction and development of the payment & settlement system. For instance, 
we  established  the  RTGS  large-value  payment  system  nationwide  and  launched  automatic  pledge-
based financing in May 2006 to facilitate the liquidity management of participants. Currently, the large-
value payment system has realized interactive links among money market, bond market and foreign 
exchange market. DVP settlement was realized in bond trading and the open market operations of the 
central bank. At the same time, the payment system provided settlement channels for RMB settlement 
in  foreign  exchange  trading,  inter-bank  business  and  bond  issuance  to  reduce  payment  risks  while 
enhancing  payment  efficiency.  Administration  of  payment  services  market  has  been  improved 
gradually,  and  financial  institutions  and  market  have  provided  increasingly  many  good  innovative 
products along with the improved supervision on payment & settlement system.  
However we should notice that, development of the payment & settlement system is a sustained and 
complicated process that deserves in-depth research on many issues. We have only established part 
of the system and thus need to develop and improve other parts. At the same time, commercial banks 
also  made  efforts  to  develop  more  advanced  system  to  better  meet  market  demands.  We  should 
follow  the  new  trend  and  adopt  new  technologies.  A  unique  economic  science,  called  Payment 
Economics, which focuses on money exchange mechanism is emerging abroad. Concerning the fast 
changing financial environment, payment & settlement system as the core of financial infrastructures 
has abundant contents for us to research and explore. I would like to share with you my ideas as the 
following: 
First, the influence of highly efficient large-value payment system on commercial banks’ liquidities and 
central bank’s monetary policy warrants high attention. 
BIS Review 67/2006 
 3
Second, there are rooms for improvement in legal aspect of the payment & settlement system. A safe 
and efficient national payment & settlement system requires a transparent, comprehensive and sound 
legal  framework.  With  development  of  the  payment  &  settlement  system,  some  flaws  in  payment 
regulations  gradually  attracted  people’s  concerns.  For  example,  payment  effectiveness  of  market 
participants under bankruptcy and settlement finality of the payment system needs to be clarified by 
law.  Law  on  Negotiable  Instruments  and  Rules  on  Payment  and  Settlement  demands  further 
amendment  and  improvement  to  adapt  to  the  new  economic  situation.  Some  products  innovations 
such  as  Internet  payment,  mobile  payment  and  other  electronic  payments  may  face  risks  without 
prudent  regulation.  Institutional  arrangement  on  the  payment  service  market  and  supervision  over 
market behaviors requires further clarification and coordination.  
Third, increasingly more cross-border financial activities set high demands for an efficient functioning 
of and supervision on the payment & settlement system. Economic globalization has caused increased 
cross-border  financial  activities,  which  requires  more  multi-currency  cross-border  payments,  so  the 
traditional payment system focusing on providing settlement services for domestic financial institutions 
have  evolved  along  such  changes,  for  example  the  upgrading  of  European  cross-border  payment 
system (TARGET), multi-currency foreign exchange trading settlement services provided by the CLS, 
the settlement arrangement for US Dollar and the Euro in Hong Kong market etc. In particular, the 
foreign exchange payment system of Hong Kong did not settle in central bank money but realized real-
time ultimate settlement through commercial banks’ accounts based on clear settlement rules, which 
has great significance to the settlement arrangement in Mainland financial market. 
Fourth  is  relevant  to  the  coordinated  development  between  large-value  payment  system  and  the 
securities settlement system. The latest research of the BIS concluded that, the large-value payment 
system  of  a  country  should  develop  harmoniously  with  the  securities  settlement  system  to  ensure 
safety  and  efficiency  of  a  financial  system.  One  important  reason  behind  it  stems  from  the 
interdependent  relations  between  the  large-value  payment  system  and  the  securities  settlement 
system.  Specifically,  capital  settlement  in  a  securities  system  could  realize  DVP  through  the  large-
value  payment  system  so  as  to  prevent  payment  risks.  At  the  same  time,  the  large-value  payment 
system provides liquidities for participants according to their pledges to reduce liquidity risks, which 
needs the support of securities system in return. Turning to the current situation in China, the CBGS 
has built interface with the large-value payment system, while the securities settlement system of the 
Stock Exchange are under study for how to connect due to many factors. It is important to tackle the 
coordinated  development  between  the  large-value  payment  system  and  the  securities  settlement 
system. 
Fifth,  in  order  to  promote  the  long  and  coordinated  development  of  all  components  of  a  country’s 
payment  system,  some  economies  have  established  special  payment  and  settlement  development 
committees  comprised  of  different  members  either  all  from  the  central  banks,  or  from  the  central 
banks,  relevant  regulatory  authorities  and  commercial  institutions.  The  mode  of  establishing  the 
payment  &  settlement  system  development  committee  could  be  explored  to  examine  whether  it  is 
suitable to China’s practice. 
In short, the Mainland needs to further improve the local currency payment system since we depend 
on telecommunication and computer network in such a wide territory. Hong Kong has its advantage on 
foreign exchange clearing and settlement and providing payment services for capital market and FX 
market.  Both  sides  are  complementary  to  each  other  in  financial  infrastructures  with  different 
comparative advantages, and could have more rooms of cooperation. Moreover, development of the 
national  payment  &  settlement  system  relies  on  joint  endeavors  of  the  central  bank,  regulatory 
authorities  and  various  financial  institutions.  I  believe,  with  our  strong  confidence  and  unremitting 
efforts,  payment  &  settlement  system,  either  in  the  Mainland  or  Hong  Kong,  will  have  promising 
perspectives. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 67/2006
