Ben S Bernanke: Order of the Palmetto 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the presentation of the Order of the Palmetto, Dillon, South Carolina, 1 September 2006. 
 I am very pleased to have the opportunity to come back to Dillon and very grateful for the honor you 
have done me today. Thank you all very much for your thoughtfulness and your efforts to prepare for 
this event. It is good to see so many people that I remember, as well as their children and maybe even 
a few grandchildren. 
My family’s connection with Dillon goes back about sixty years. My grandfather Jonas Bernanke and 
his wife, Lina, moved here in the 1940s when Jonas purchased a local drugstore. Jonas named the 
store with his own initials - hence Jay Bee Drugs. Jonas’s sons - my dad and my uncle - bought the 
store from their father and ran it as partners for many years. The original store was on Main Street, but 
when  the  chain  stores  entered  the  local  market,  my  dad  and  uncle  built  a  new,  larger,  and  more 
modern store a block off Main. They competed by offering personal, first-name service, by delivering 
prescriptions without charge, and by coming down to the store at any time, nights or Sundays, to fill an 
emergency prescription. Dillon had very few doctors at the time, and lots of people came to my dad 
and  uncle  for  advice  on  basic  health  matters.  My  mother,  who  gave  up  a  job  teaching  elementary 
school when I was born, often helped out in the store. As a child, I was supposed to help out as well, 
but I usually ended up in the store’s comic book section. 
Our family moved to Dillon when I was very small, and all my childhood memories are here. I went to 
East Elementary, J.V. Martin Junior High, and Dillon High School. Quite a few friends were classmates 
for all twelve grades. I made many other friends playing saxophone in the high-school marching band. 
My family and I attended Dillon’s small synagogue, Ohav Shalom, which is unfortunately no longer in 
existence. 
As a teenager, like many other teenagers, I itched to get away from the small town in which I was 
raised to see the bright lights of the big city. I got my wish, leaving when I was seventeen to attend 
college  and  graduate  school  in  Boston.  I  met  my  wife  in  Boston,  and  we  have  lived  in  Palo  Alto, 
California; Princeton, New Jersey; and now Washington. We have two children, a son and a daughter, 
now  in  graduate  school  and  college,  respectively.  My  wife  is  a  teacher  and  is  meeting  her  classes 
today in a public charter high school in Washington. 
Although the idea of leaving Dillon to attend college was exciting for me, I realize now that I learned a 
lot  from  living  here  for  seventeen  years.  I  learned,  among  many  other  lessons,  a  few  things  about 
work. I saw the long hours and persistent effort my parents put in to make their independent small 
business successful. After I graduated from high school I spent the summer as a construction worker 
helping to build Dillon’s Saint Eugene hospital, and during the summers of my college years, I waited 
tables six days a week at the South of the Border. I took two lessons from those experiences: First, in 
small towns like Dillon and in communities all across the United States, people work very hard every 
day to support themselves and their families. I remember that, on the first day I came home from the 
construction site that summer, I was too tired to eat and I fell asleep in my chair.  
The  second  thing  I  learned  in  Dillon  is  that  Americans  are  economically  ambitious;  they  seek 
opportunity  and  advancement.  I  remember  the  fellow  construction  worker  who  wanted  to  become 
foreman  someday  and  a  waitress  who  was  saving  to  go  to  college.  I  was  impressed  by  these 
experiences,  and  I  think  they  were  an  important  reason  I  went  into  economics,  which  a  great 
economist once called the study of people in the ordinary business of life. 
Now I am an economic policy maker, and I sit in a nice office in Washington looking at reports and 
tables of data and following the fluctuations of the financial markets. However, I try not to forget what 
underlies all those data: millions of Americans working hard, trying to better themselves economically, 
struggling to manage their family finances, and worrying about the price of gas and college tuition. I 
take my work extremely seriously because I know that, if my colleagues at the Federal Reserve and I 
do our jobs right, we will help our economy prosper and give more people the economic opportunities 
they seek. 
Let me thank you all again for inviting me back to Dillon and for sharing this morning with me. 
BIS Review 80/2006 
 1
