Toshihiko Fukui: The outlook for Japan's economy and the conduct of 
monetary policy  
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Naigai  Josei 
Chousa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 15 May 2006. 
 Introduction 
Japan's economy has been recovering for more than four years since the trough in January 2002. The 
Bank of Japan projected in its Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) 
released  on  April  28,  2006  that  from  fiscal  2006  through  fiscal  2007  the  economy  was  likely  to 
experience  a  sustained  period  of  expansion,  with  domestic  and  external  demand  and  also  the 
corporate and household sectors well in balance. 
Today, I will focus on the Bank's view concerning future developments in economic activity and prices 
given the projection in the Outlook Report, and I will explain its future monetary policy conduct. 
I. Developments in the world economy 
I  will  first  touch  on  developments  in  the  world  economy,  which  underlie  developments  in  Japan's 
economy.  The  world  economy  has  been  expanding  steadily  since  2003,  recording  a  growth  rate  of 
around 5 percent in 2005, and is projected to maintain high growth into the future. At the G-7 meeting 
held in Washington, D.C., in April 2006, finance ministers and central bank governors agreed that the 
outlook for the world economy remained favorable, although risks remained from factors such as oil 
market  developments  and  global  imbalances.  They  also  agreed  that  inflation  remained  contained 
despite high oil prices and that global trade growth was buoyant. 
Economic  developments  among  Japan's  main  trading  partners  indicate  that  the  U.S.  economy 
continues to expand steadily, at a pace around its potential growth rate, led mainly by business fixed 
investment  and  household  spending,  although  there  are  signs  of  a  slowdown  in  some  parts  of  the 
economy, specifically in the housing market. The Chinese economy continues to expand strongly as a 
whole despite some imbalance in the pace of growth between industries and regions. The NIEs and 
ASEAN  economies  continue  to  expand  at  a  moderate  pace  on  the  whole,  although  the  negative 
effects of high energy prices can be seen in some areas of economic activity. 
II. Current situation and outlook for Japan's economy 
Turning to Japan, the economy continues to recover steadily. One of the characteristics of the current 
economic  situation  is  that  domestic  and  external  demand  and  also  the  corporate  and  household 
sectors  are  well  in  balance.  Exports  continue  to  increase  against  the  backdrop  of  global  economic 
expansion  and  trade  expansion  resulting  from  further  progress  in  international  division  of  the 
production process. As for domestic private demand, corporate performance continues to be strong. 
The Bank's Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) indicates that corporate 
profits increased for the fourth consecutive fiscal year, and firms expect their sales and profits to rise in 
fiscal 2006. Business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2006 are relatively strong. As for the household 
sector, the employment and wage situation has been improving and private consumption has been on 
an increasing trend. Japan's economy is likely to continue to show balanced growth. 
Another  characteristic  is  that  the  sustained  economic  recovery  has  resulted  in  a  higher  level  of 
utilization of resources such as capital and labor. The current recovery has already lasted for over four 
years, and if it continues much longer, in October 2006 it will equal the Izanagi boom (1965-70), which 
is the longest postwar economic expansion to date. As a result of the sustained recovery, according to 
the Tankan, for the first time in more than a decade firms are no longer perceiving excess capacity but 
have started to feel more strongly that their labor holdings are insufficient. The ratio of job offers to 
applicants,  below  1.00  from  1992  until  recently,  has  now  exceeded  1.00  since  the  end  of  2005. 
Furthermore,  the  conditions  of  persistent  oversupply  have  been  dispersed  and  the  output  gap,  the 
difference  between  actual  and  potential  output,  which  had  long  been  negative,  seems  now  to  have 
closed. This indicates that demand and supply capacity in the economy are well balanced. 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 1
Given these characteristics of the current economic situation, the following are considered to be the 
three core elements of the most likely projection for economic activity and prices two years into the 
future. 
The  first  element  is  that  the  household  sector  is  expected  to  be  the  main  driving  force  behind  firm 
domestic private demand. 
Strong corporate performance has been benefiting the household sector, and this positive influence is 
likely to become more evident from now on. Employment and wages have been improving against the 
background  of  favorable  corporate  profits  and  rises  in  labor  shortages.  The  number  of  part-time 
employees  and  bonus  payments  are  rising,  and  the  number  of  full-time  employees  and  regular 
payments  are  also  on  an  uptrend.  These  developments  suggest  that  households  can  expect  the 
increase  in  their  income  to  be  more  permanent,  and  this  has  contributed  to  the  improvement  in 
consumer  sentiment.  Households'  average  propensity  to  consume  is  likely  to  remain  at  its  current 
elevated level, and private consumption is expected to follow an increasing trend. Housing investment 
is likely to continue to trend moderately upward, supported by the improvement in household income 
and  the  view  that  interest  rates  will  only  rise  from  current  levels,  as  land  prices  are  starting  to  rise 
particularly  in  major  metropolitan  areas.  Increases  in  household  spending  will  feed  back  to  the 
corporate sector via increases in sales and profits, and thus, a virtuous circle between the household 
and corporate sectors is likely to keep operating. 
The second element is that there is likely to be a cyclical slowdown in the economic growth rate as the 
recovery has already lasted for over four years and is likely to mature. 
Given  the  high  level  of  corporate  profits  and  the  expansion  in  domestic  and  external  demand,  the 
momentum  driving  increases  in  business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  be  maintained.  However, 
considering that there is a stable relationship in the long term between the capital stock and aggregate 
demand,  the  pace  of  increase  in  business  fixed  investment  will  probably  slow  eventually.  Business 
fixed investment has steadily increased for the third consecutive year since fiscal 2003, and this has 
resulted  in  high  growth  in the  capital stock  relative  to  the  projected  increase  in  aggregate  demand. 
Therefore,  unless  firms  can  make  stronger  forecasts  for  the  economic  growth  rate  and  the  rate  of 
return  on  investment,  it  is  becoming  unlikely  that  they  will  keep  up  the  current  pace  of  increase  in 
business fixed investment. In this situation, the growth rate of Japan's economy is likely to slow toward 
the potential growth rate, which the Bank estimates to be in the 1.5-2 percent range. The forecast is 
around 2.5 percent for fiscal 2006 and around 2 percent for fiscal 2007. 
The third element is that, as the economic recovery matures, a slowdown in the growth in productivity 
and upward pressure on wages are expected to exert upward pressure on prices. 
At  an  early  stage  of  economic  recovery,  firms  usually  retain  surplus  labor  and  capacity  and  are 
therefore able to increase productivity by raising their rate of resource utilization. With the maturing of 
the economic recovery, however, firms have less scope to increase productivity in this way. As I have 
already explained, the output gap has closed, and as the economy is likely to continue expanding at a 
pace above its potential through fiscal 2007, the output gap is likely to become positive and then to 
widen moderately. 
Moreover, in a situation of improving labor market conditions and with labor shortages being observed 
in  a  relatively  wide  range  of  industries,  wages  are  likely  to  continue  rising  moderately.  The  rise  in 
wages and the slowdown in the growth in productivity will together put upward pressure on unit labor 
costs (labor costs per unit of output). Through fiscal 2007, unit labor costs are likely to show smaller 
declines, and to start increasing slightly at some point. 
One of the factors holding back upward pressures on prices during the economic recovery phase has 
been declining unit labor costs. As the effect of this factor diminishes, prices will be more inclined to 
rise than before. As for the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding 
fresh food), which has been positive since November 2005, we estimate that this will gradually rise to 
around  the  middle  of  the  range  between  zero  and  1  percent  in  fiscal  2006  and  to  slightly  below  1 
percent in fiscal 2007. 
III. Upside and downside risks to the outlook for economic activity 
In  the  above  sections,  I  have  outlined  the  core  elements  of  the  most  likely  projection  for  economic 
activity and prices. However, the economy constantly faces various risks and it should be noted that, 
should particular risks materialize, economic activity and prices may deviate from this projection. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2006
As  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity,  the  April  2006  Outlook  Report  raises  the 
following  factors:  slowdown  in  the  growth  of  the  world  economy;  and  inventory  adjustments,  for 
example, in IT-related sectors. As for the first risk factor, developments in crude oil prices, which have 
been rising, and their impact on the world economy warrant attention. In relation to this, there is also a 
risk  of  a  change  in  the  situation  where  stable  financial  conditions  are  durable  and  inflationary 
pressures  generally  subdued  which  has  been  supporting  the  ongoing  global  economic  expansion. 
With  regard  to  the  second  factor,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  inventory  adjustments  may  be 
triggered as  the  economic  recovery  matures.  Even  if  inventory  adjustment occurs,  it  is  unlikely  that 
inventory adjustment carried out in some industries would seriously affect overall economic activity, 
since  Japanese  firms  as  a  whole  have  completed  adjustments  in  various  excesses  and  their 
profitability has been recovering. 
As an upside risk to the outlook for economic activity, there is a possibility of further acceleration of 
business fixed investment. If firms accelerate investment, there may be a positive impact on overall 
growth. On the other hand, such acceleration may lead to an excessive build-up of the capital stock 
relative to the level of expected growth in demand, which may precipitate an economic slowdown via 
adjustments. Given that the output gap has already closed, if economic activity accelerates further and 
as  a  result  the  positive  output  gap  widens  rapidly,  this  will  increase  the  risk  of  a  subsequent 
compensatory  correction.  However,  large  economic  swings  can  be  avoided,  thereby  realizing 
sustainable economic expansion, if firms' investment stance does not become too aggressive. 
On  this  point,  firms  so  far  continue  to  increase  business  fixed  investment  based  on  favorable 
projections for sales and profits. However, overall, the value of fixed investment is being kept within 
the  amount  of  firms'  cash  flow,  and  this  suggests  that  they  remain  relatively  cautious  about 
accelerating fixed investment. The outlook for economic activity described earlier assumes that firms 
will maintain this cautious stance regarding investment. 
However,  the  current  conditions  point  to  further  acceleration  in  investment  by  firms.  Looking  at 
corporate finances, firms' risk-taking capacity has increased as a result of the reduction of their debt 
excesses and the strengthening of their capital bases. Levels of return on assets are comparable to 
those recorded during the bubble era of the late 1980s. Since interest rates are extremely low, this 
favorable financial environment is likely to stimulate firms' investment. A turnaround in land prices in 
major  metropolitan  areas  and  a  rise  in  stock  prices  may  also  accelerate  firms'  investment  partly 
through increases in household spending boosted by the wealth effect. 
If firms were to further accelerate investment in this situation, overall economic growth would increase 
for a while, although this would generate the risk of a subsequent correction. 
IV. Upside and downside risks to the outlook for prices 
The following are considered to be key upside and downside risks to the outlook for prices: the path of 
international commodity prices including crude oil prices; and the degree of sensitivity of the rate of 
increase in the CPI to economic developments, that is, changes in the output gap. 
The April outlook does not assume that the rate of increase in the CPI will accelerate noticeably even 
when the output gap becomes positive, i.e., actual output exceeds potential output. This takes account 
of the weaker sensitivity of the rate of increase in the CPI to changes in the output gap, which is a 
tendency  that  has  been  observed  in  recent  years  not  only  in  Japan  but  also  worldwide.  This  is 
because prices of goods and services as well as wages have been under downward pressure due to 
industrialization of emerging economies as well as to firms in industrial countries shifting production 
facilities to overseas locations. Upward pressure on overall prices seems to have been restrained by 
increased  productivity  and  intense  competition  both  as  a  result  of  deregulation  and  advances  in 
information and telecommunication technology. Additionally, in Japan unit labor costs have been able 
to fall considerably due to the relatively low rate of resource utilization. However, unit labor costs are 
expected to start increasing. Furthermore, as the output gap becomes positive, the sensitivity of prices 
to changes in economic activity may increase at some point, reflecting changes in firms' price-setting 
stance  and  higher  inflationary  expectations  among  the  public,  and  thus  prices  may  increase  faster 
than anticipated. 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 3
V. The impact of an increase in the potential growth rate 
I have thus far outlined the Bank's outlook for economic activity and prices for the next two years. I will 
next explain in more detail a point touched on in the projection described earlier, namely, the impact of 
the change in the potential growth rate on the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
The  potential  growth  rate  seems  to  have  been  increasing  recently,  as  a  result  of  firms'  efforts  in 
reducing excesses in production capacity and employment and their reallocation of capital and labor to 
areas  likely  to  generate  higher  profitability  and  growth  in  demand.  The  Bank  estimates  that  the 
potential growth rate has recovered to the 1.5-2 percent range recently, from its previous estimate of 
approximately 1 percent. 
When considering the impact of a rise in the potential growth rate on the conduct of monetary policy, 
the  important  point  is  to  assess  how  such  a  rise  affects  aggregate  supply  and  demand  and  hence 
prices. On the supply side, an increase in the potential growth rate gives rise to downward pressure on 
prices. More concretely, a rise in the potential growth rate acts to increase the supply capacity of the 
economy  and  thus  exerts  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Furthermore,  since  a  rise  in  the  potential 
growth rate tends to be accompanied by an increase in productivity, downward pressure may also be 
exerted  on  prices  by  the  decrease  in  unit  labor  costs  that  can  occur  if  wage  rises  lag  behind  the 
increase in productivity. 
On the demand side, however, a rise in the potential growth rate acts to boost aggregate demand. 
Therefore, a rise in the potential growth rate does not necessarily exert downward pressure on prices. 
The recent rise in the potential growth rate stems from firms' efforts to reallocate their resources to 
areas likely to generate higher profitability and growth in demand, and this implies an improvement in 
the  overall  economy's  ability  not  only  to  produce  goods  but  also  to  increase  profits  and  income  by 
selling those goods. Such real economic improvements brighten firms' and households' expectations 
regarding future income, and this brighter outlook, together with the wealth effect stemming from the 
rise in stock prices, is likely to stimulate aggregate demand by bolstering their spending. Moreover, 
since  the  expected  rate  of  return  on  investment  increases  when  the  potential  growth  rate  is  rising, 
monetary easing effects become stronger at any given level of the real interest rate. The result is to 
further increase investment demand, triggering upward pressure on prices. 
In terms of the time frame, a rise in the potential growth rate often causes an increase in production 
capacity in the relatively short term, while in the longer term it seems to bring about an increase in 
demand and to strengthen monetary easing effects. Such a picture, however, is inevitably attended by 
uncertainty,  since  individual  economic  agents  may  increase  demand  in  advance,  taking  account  of 
increases in their expected future income and in response to the wealth effect. Whatever the case, a 
rise in the potential growth rate warrants close attention as it may give an expansionary push to the 
economy  not  only  from  the  supply  side  but  also  from  the  demand  side,  and  because  its  effect  on 
prices can be both upward and downward. 
VI. Conduct of monetary policy 
I  would  now  like  to  talk  about  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  based  on  the  outlook  for 
economic activity and prices. 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  March  8  and  9,  2006,  the  Bank  decided  to  terminate  the 
quantitative  easing  policy,  which  had  been  maintained  during  the  five  years  since  March  2001.  It 
decided to change the operating target of money market operations from the outstanding balance of 
current  accounts  at  the  Bank  to  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate.  The  new  target  for  the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate was set at effectively zero percent. 
Under  the  new  guideline  for  money  market  operations,  the  volume  of  short-term  funds-supplying 
operations  by  the  Bank  has  been  decreasing.  Accordingly,  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
accounts at the Bank has now declined to around 16 trillion yen. So far, the short-term money market 
remains stable and there is gradually more activity being seen in the interbank market. The Bank will 
continue  to  closely  monitor  conditions  in  the  short-term  money  market  in  reducing  the  outstanding 
balance of current accounts at the Bank. As long as the short-term money market remains stable, the 
reduction in the outstanding balance will be completed in line with the projection the Bank made when 
it  terminated  the  quantitative  easing  policy  in  March.  However,  completing  the  reduction  of  the 
outstanding  balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  and  raising  the  target  interest  rate,  which  is 
effectively  zero  percent,  are  two  different  issues.  While  the  reduction  in  the  outstanding  balance  of 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2006
current accounts at the Bank is carried out taking full account of conditions in the short-term money 
market, the level of the target interest rate is to be set based on the Bank's assessment of economic 
activity and price developments. 
With  regard  to  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy  based  on  the  new  operating  target  of  money 
market  operations,  namely,  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new 
framework. The Bank announced that, under this framework, it would assess economic activity and 
prices  from  two  perspectives,  taking  account  of  the  "understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price 
stability," which is expressed as an approximate range between zero and 2 percent in terms of the rate 
of year-on-year change in the CPI. In light of this assessment, it would outline and release its current 
view on monetary policy. The April Outlook Report was compiled under the new framework. 
In  the  Outlook  Report,  the  Bank  examined,  from  the  first  perspective,  whether  the  outlook  deemed 
most likely by the Bank for economic activity and prices two years into the future is that the economy 
will follow a path of sustainable growth under price stability. The Bank judged that Japan's economy is 
likely to achieve sustainable growth under price stability as long as the economy develops in line with 
the outlook described earlier. 
From  the  second  perspective,  the  Bank  examined  the  risks  that  are  most  relevant  to  conducting 
monetary policy, looking over a longer time horizon. 
As  a  result,  the  Bank  came  to  the  conclusion  that,  as  an  upside  risk,  it  should  pay  attention  in  the 
medium to long term to larger economic swings, resulting in large fluctuations in the rate of inflation, 
mainly  due  to  acceleration  of  business  fixed  investment  reflecting  the  accommodative  financial 
conditions. 
As for downside risks, the Bank examined the possibility of economic activity and the rate of inflation 
deviating downward from its projection due to various factors. The Bank's judgment was that even if 
economic  activity  is  less robust  and  the  inflation rate  lower  than expected,  the  risk  of  the economy 
falling into a vicious circle of declining prices and deteriorating economic activity has become smaller, 
since  the  Japanese  financial  system  has  regained  stability  and  the  economy  has  now  cast  off 
excesses in production capacity, employment, and debt. 
With regard to the future course of monetary policy, based on the assessment of economic activity and 
prices  from  the  two  perspectives,  it  seems  probable  that  the  accommodative  financial  conditions 
ensuing from very low interest rates will be maintained for some time following a period in which the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate is at effectively zero percent. Through and beyond this stage, the 
Bank will adjust the level of the target interest rate gradually in the light of developments in economic 
activity and prices. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  support  the  economy  so  as  to  achieve  sustainable  growth  under  price 
stability through the appropriate conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 40/2006 
 5
