Alan Bollard: Can New Zealand expect to carry out independent monetary 
policy? 
Excerpt from an address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the 
Association of Superannuation Funds of New Zealand, Auckland, 13 July 2006. 
 Reserve  Bank  Governor  Alan  Bollard  says  New  Zealand  can  still  expect  to  carry  out  its  own 
independent monetary policy effectively, even though it occasionally has had to work against strong 
global crosswinds that can delay its impact. In a speech today to the Association of Superannuation 
Funds of New Zealand, Dr Bollard said New Zealand had just been through such a period, but now 
monetary policies are more aligned globally, enhancing the effectiveness of New Zealand's policy. The 
following is an excerpt from that address. 
"Since 1999 New Zealand has been through a longer growth phase than any since the 1960s/1970s. It 
has been a stronger period of growth than in Australia, the US or the UK. This growth has partly been 
driven  by  strong  commodity  prices  and  population  changes,  but  partly  also  by  strong  household 
spending, fuelled by growth in house prices, and a readiness to take on increasing amounts of debt. 
"The  Reserve  Bank  did  not  feel  it  could  just  ignore  this  build-up  in  asset  prices.  To  us  it  signalled 
growing  pressures  through  the  economy.  New  Zealanders,  feeling  wealthier  from  owning  more 
valuable houses, were actively looking for ways to spend that wealth.  
"As far back as 2004 the Reserve Bank was forecasting growing inflation, correctly as it has turned out 
(though  that  was  not  always  the  view  of  market  commentators).  Consequently  in  January  2004  it 
started tightening policy, taking the first step in what proved to be nine tightenings. 
"This tightening cycle took place against an unusual international backdrop, and one that proved to be 
more than usually influential.  
"Back at the turn of the millennium, US interest rates were for a while very close to New Zealand's. 
Then came the 9/11 crisis, the end of the `tech boom' and also some unusual deflationary influences.  
"As  the  economies  of  China  and  other  emerging  market  economies  got  more  connected  to  the 
developed world, we saw a flow of very cheap manufactured goods that helped depress prices; a flow 
of labour into the services sector; and very cheap capital produced by East Asian saving. The crash in 
technology-based equities resulted in a collapse in investment in the US and Europe and opened up 
significant excess capacity. 
"For the first time for many years the central banks of the big developed countries were faced with a 
prospect of deflation and capital inflows. They reacted strongly by cutting interest rates radically. The 
US Federal Reserve, for example, slashed rates from 6.5 per cent (the New Zealand rate) in 2001 to 
only 1 per cent in 2003. (In New Zealand we were much more cautious, only cutting rates to 5 per 
cent.) 
"New Zealand has never in recent years had to run monetary policy in an environment where the G-3 
economies - the US, Japan and Europe - were running such loose monetary policy of their own.  
"The problem was exacerbated because the New Zealand business cycle was running well ahead of 
those  in  the  big  economies:  while  they  were  still  worried  about  deflation,  we  could  see  inflation 
pressures mounting. Demand was  very  strong  in many  domestic  industries, capacity  utilisation  was 
reaching record high levels and skill shortages were becoming acute. 
"New  Zealand  started  raising  rates  in  January  2004,  just  ahead  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve's  long 
climb back towards neutral real rates. Initially as we put up the Official Cash Rate, New Zealand short-
term market rates rose as expected, but the long end remained stubbornly low, anchored to US rates 
expectations.  
"We  were  experiencing  another  outcome  of  financial  globalisation:  long-term  rates  in  New  Zealand 
have over the last decade started to become very closely correlated with US long rates. 
"In New Zealand the floating mortgage rate rose quickly. Households increasingly switched to cheaper 
fixed-rate  mortgages.  The  banks  could  readily  provide  these  due  to  the  cheap  New  Zealand  dollar 
funding offered by overseas investors through instruments such as Uridashis and Eurokiwis. In 2003, 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 1
less than 60 per cent of all mortgages were fixed, by 2006 it was more than 80 per cent. Competition 
between the mortgage lenders also acted to keep fixed rates low as bank margins were reduced to 
historically low levels.  
"The Reserve Bank kept pushing up the Official Cash Rate to slow demand. The effective mortgage 
rate, the main transmission mechanism for monetary policy in New Zealand, rose, but to only half the 
extent  of  the  Official  Cash  Rate  increase.  Monetary  policy  was  working,  but  more  slowly  than  the 
Reserve Bank would have liked.  
"We could see that the full effects would eventually flow through on to mortgages, but in the meantime 
homeowners  seemed  to  be  borrowing  on  the  expectation  that  rates  would  stay  low.  In  doing  so, 
households were skewing their balance sheets further towards low-yielding housing assets. Holdings 
of financial assets now look very low compared to what we see in other countries.  
"Overall gearing was not substantially increased. Households were apparently not worried about their 
greater indebtedness, about low rental returns, or about saving all their eggs in one basket. 
"By  2005  New  Zealand's  normal  short-term  interest  rates  were  looking  high  by  OECD  standards 
(though  not,  despite  some  media  confusion,  the  highest).  The  difference  in  yields  was  attractive  to 
some investors, and that is one of the factors that contributed to the persistently strong New Zealand 
dollar. (Another key reason, we should not forget, was the strong terms of trade.) 
"This was certainly a factor weighing on the Reserve Bank's mind over the last couple of years, and a 
reason  why  tightening  took  place  gradually  and  moderately.  (As  an  aside,  although  some  export 
industries came under significant pressure as the exchange rate rose, the sector as a whole appears 
to have managed the strong Kiwi dollar better than in previous cycles.) 
"The beginning of 2006 marked something of a turning point. The Reserve Bank finished its tightening 
cycle. New Zealand's terms of trade started to soften. Other OECD monetary policies started to catch 
up. And the trade weighted index fell by around 18 per cent between December 2005 and June 2006. 
At the same time the `pipeline effects' of the Official Cash Rate on fixed mortgages are continuing to 
come through.  
"This  marks  a  rebalancing  of  economic  growth  from  domestic  sector-driven  to  export-driven.  In  this 
stage of the cycle our monetary policy has become a more effective brake on domestic spending. 
"Even  during  the  best  of  times,  monetary  policy  affects  activity  and  inflation  with  a  significant  lag. 
However, as we look back on 2004/05, we see a `spongier' monetary policy than would be the case 
normally. Applying the brake took longer to slow things down. This is similar to a two-year period in the 
mid-90s, when our domestic/international interest rate differential was quite marked.  
"Clearly, this could occur again at some stage in the future. It becomes more of a problem when New 
Zealand's business cycle is significantly out of step with the OECD's, or when the latter have focused 
their monetary policy on a quite different issue. Arguably, we have also had times at the opposite end 
of the cycle, when it has been harder than we might have wished to stimulate consumption.  
"The  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Treasury  now  have  a  work  programme  focused  on  whether  there  are 
ways to reduce the likelihood of finding our economy out of sync again; or on handling it differently if 
we do. 
"What  is  clear  is  that  in  a  globalised  world  most  of  the  Government's  economic  policies,  including 
fiscal,  industry  and  immigration  policies,  are  all  constrained  by  other  countries'  policies  and  by 
international  pressures  on  them.  With  financial  markets  so  interconnected,  any  small  country's 
domestic monetary policy also now needs to be seen in an international setting. 
"Nevertheless, there is no question that we can run an independent monetary policy. We have control 
of our ship. If global winds are not behind us or our economy is out of sync with influential economies, 
then our progress becomes more difficult, and things can get uncomfortable. We may have to modify 
our chosen course.  
"But with major economies now raising their interest rates, global conditions are becoming aligned to 
containing inflation. In these conditions, New Zealand monetary policy is increasingly effective. Indeed 
in some respects we are in a more comfortable position than some other countries, having already 
raised interest rates. 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2006
"In  the  meantime,  we  are  starting  to  see  some  other  countries,  especially  small  open  commodity 
economies, realising this too as they start to face the same pressures. They have been following the 
New Zealand experience with interest." 
BIS Review 68/2006 
 3
