European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 3 August 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  this  press 
conference to report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council. The meeting was 
also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
At  today’s  meeting,  we  decided  to  increase  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  This 
decision  reflects  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  that  we  have  identified 
through  both  our  economic  and  monetary  analyses.  It  will  contribute  to  ensuring  that  medium  to 
longer-term inflation expectations in the euro area remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with 
price stability. As stressed on previous occasions, such anchoring is a prerequisite for monetary policy 
to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting  economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro 
area.  Also  after  today’s  increase,  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  remain  low  in  both  real  and  nominal 
terms, money and credit growth remain strong, and liquidity in the euro area is ample by all plausible 
measures.  Our  monetary  policy  therefore  continues  to  be  accommodative.  If  our  assumptions  and 
baseline  scenario  are  confirmed,  a  progressive  withdrawal  of  monetary  accommodation  will  be 
warranted. Against this background, we will continue to monitor very closely all developments so as to 
ensure price stability over the medium and longer term.  
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
The main indicators of economic activity that have become available since the July press conference 
have tended to confirm our baseline scenario for economic growth in the euro area. Eurostat’s second 
release verified that, in the first quarter of 2006, real GDP grew by 0.6% on a quarter-on-quarter basis. 
Economic activity is also becoming more broadly based on domestic demand. Moreover, the currently 
available information on economic activity in the second quarter – such as various confidence surveys 
and monthly indicators – supports the view that economic growth has continued at a sustained pace. 
The survey information so far available for the third quarter is also in line with our baseline scenario.  
Looking further ahead, the conditions are in place for real GDP in the euro area to grow at around its 
potential rate, as projected by Eurosystem staff in June. Growth in the economies of the euro area’s 
main  trading  partners  is  providing  ongoing  support  for  euro  area  exports.  Investment  growth  is 
expected  to  continue  benefiting  from  favourable  financing  conditions,  corporate  balance  sheet 
restructuring,  and  improvements  in  earnings  and  business  efficiency.  Consumption  growth  should 
continue to strengthen gradually over time, in line with developments in employment growth and hence 
real disposable income. This generally favourable outlook for economic activity in the euro area is also 
reflected in forecasts by international organisations and private sector institutions. 
Risks to the outlook for economic growth are broadly balanced over the shorter term, although recent 
geopolitical tensions and their impact on markets are a timely reminder of the uncertainties that we 
face. Medium to longer-term risks lie on the downside and relate in particular to the potential for further 
oil price rises, a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances and protectionist pressures, especially after 
the suspension of the Doha Round of trade talks. 
Turning to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.5% 
in  July  2006,  unchanged  from  June  and  May.  In  the  second  half  of  2006  and  on  average  in  2007, 
inflation rates are likely to remain above 2%, the precise levels depending very much on future energy 
price  developments.  While  the  moderate  evolution  of  labour  costs  in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to 
continue  in  2007  –  also  reflecting  ongoing  global  competitive  pressures,  particularly  in  the 
manufacturing sector – indirect effects of past oil price increases and already announced changes in 
indirect taxes are expected to exert a significant upward effect on inflation in the course of next year. 
Against this background, it is crucial that the social partners continue to meet their responsibilities. 
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  price  developments  have  augmented  and  include  further  increases  in  oil 
prices, a stronger pass-through of past oil price rises into consumer prices than currently anticipated, 
additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, and – more fundamentally – stronger 
than expected wage and price developments owing to second-round effects of past oil price increases 
at a time of gradually improving labour markets.  
BIS Review 71/2006 
 1
Regarding prospects for inflation over medium to longer horizons, our assessment that upside risks to 
price stability prevail is confirmed by the monetary analysis. While the data for June 2006 show some 
moderation  in  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3,  these  latest  developments  remain  consistent  with  a 
persistent upward trend in the underlying rate of monetary expansion since mid-2004. The stimulative 
impact  of  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  has  been  an  important  factor  behind  the 
tendency for money and credit growth to strengthen over recent quarters.  
Looking at the counterparts of M3, the expansion of credit to the private sector remains the main driver 
of monetary dynamics. On an annual basis, loans to the private sector as a whole have continued to 
increase  at  double-digit  rates  over  recent  months,  with  borrowing  both  by  households  and  by  non-
financial corporations rising rapidly. Ongoing strong lending to households continues to be explained, 
in  particular,  by  borrowing  for  house  purchases.  The  dynamic  growth  of  money  and  credit,  in  an 
environment of already ample liquidity, points to increased upside risks to price stability at medium to 
longer horizons. Monetary developments therefore require careful monitoring, particularly in the light of 
strong dynamics in housing markets.  
To sum up, annual inflation rates are expected to remain elevated, at above 2% on average, in 2006 
and  2007,  with  risks  to  this  outlook  on  the  upside.  Given  strong  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  a 
context  of  ample  liquidity,  a  cross-check  of  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the 
monetary analysis confirms that upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium term. A further 
adjustment  of  interest  rates  was  therefore  warranted.  By  acting  today  in  a  timely  fashion,  the 
Governing  Council  is  helping  to  anchor  medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  at  levels 
consistent with price stability, thereby making an ongoing contribution to sustainable economic growth 
and job creation. Looking ahead, given that our monetary policy continues to be accommodative, a 
progressive withdrawal of monetary accommodation will be warranted if our assumptions and baseline 
scenario are confirmed. The Governing Council will continue to monitor very closely all developments 
so as to ensure that risks to price stability do not materialise. 
Concerning fiscal policies, given the outlook for economic growth, it is of crucial importance that euro 
area  governments  avoid  pro-cyclical  policies  and  step  up  the  pace  of  fiscal  consolidation.  As 
budgetary  targets  for  the  current  year  are  not  particularly  ambitious,  a  rigorous  implementation  of 
plans on the expenditure side is especially warranted, and any additional windfall revenues are best 
used for deficit reduction. Beyond the implementation of such prudent policies in the remainder of this 
year,  the  medium-term  focus  of  fiscal  policies  should  be  on  correcting  the  underlying  sources  of 
imbalances in public finances. Euro area governments, many of which are now finalising their budget 
plans for 2007, should take full advantage of the economic environment to bring forward the structural 
adjustment necessary for the durable correction of excessive deficits, so as to reach their medium-
term  budgetary  objectives  at  an  early  stage  and  thereby  prepare  public  finances  for  the  acute 
demographic challenges they must cope with.  
As  regards  structural  reforms,  it  is  essential,  for  Europe’s  future,  to  ensure  that  it  has  a  fully 
operational  Internal  Market,  allowing  a  free  flow  of  labour  and  capital  and  free  trade  in  goods  and 
services.  Removing  the  remaining  barriers  within  the  EU  will  be  a  powerful  means  to  promote  the 
efficient allocation of factors of production as well as deeper economic and financial integration. This in 
turn would allow the EU to realise its substantial potential for stronger output and employment growth 
and to increase its resilience to shocks. Exploiting the opportunities of the Single Market will help to 
safeguard the prosperity of the citizens of Europe. For those Member States which have fulfilled the 
convergence  criteria  laid  down  by  the  Treaty  and  participate  in  the  euro  area,  the  considerable 
benefits  of  the  Internal  Market  are  further  enhanced  by  the  single  currency,  which  offers  them  a 
credible  framework  for  monetary  policy  and  price  stability  in  an  environment  characterised  by  the 
absence of exchange rate uncertainty within the euro area, low long-term interest rates, price and cost 
transparency,  reduced  transaction  and  information  costs  and  stronger  insurance  against  economic 
and financial instability.  
In this respect, the further enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2007 with the entry of Slovenia 
will  be  a  new  historical  landmark.  In  order  to  fully  reap  the  advantages  of  the  euro  and  to  allow 
adjustment mechanisms to operate efficiently within the enlarged currency area, it will be necessary to 
fully integrate Slovenia into Economic and Monetary Union, which calls for all remaining barriers to be 
removed, including those related to labour mobility. Indeed, open, competitive and flexible markets are 
of particular importance for the functioning of the euro area economy and the smooth conduct of the 
single  monetary  policy.  For  its  part,  the  Governing  Council  has  undertaken  all  the  necessary 
preparations to make Banka Slovenije an integral part of the Eurosystem. We are now at your disposal 
for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2006
