Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Yediot Ahronot 
Interview  of  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  by  Sefy 
Hendler, Yediot Ahronot, on 31 March 2006, published 11 April 2006. 
The publication of the interview was authorized by Yediot Ahronot. 
 Is there a trade-off between price stability and growth?  
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  “Price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  to  ensure  sustainable  growth  and  job 
creation. Otherwise, we would not have the positive financial environment that would allow a sufficient 
and  ongoing  level  of  growth  to  be  maintained.  I  believe  that  governments  and  public  opinion  are 
understanding this more and more worldwide, certainly in the euro area too. I do, therefore, believe 
that we are in an environment where public opinion understands that when price stability is maintained 
– which our fellow citizens are strongly calling for – one is also contributing to sustainable growth.” 
Do you think that when politicians criticise you (when the ECB raises interest rates), they are 
doing their job?  
Jean-Claude Trichet: “I think that, not only in Europe but also at a global level, it has been more and 
more clearly understood that price stability is better ensured and, therefore, by way of consequence, 
sustainable growth and job creation better achieved when the credibility of central banks is very strong 
and solid. In this perspective, remarks weakening the credibility of monetary policy are globally much 
less frequently observed.” 
Does  the  European  Central  Bank’s  President  understand  that  the  currency  he  manages  has 
acquired the image of an excessively strong currency, making prices for visitors to the euro 
area more expensive?  
“No”, replies Trichet without hesitation. “We have, indeed, maintained price stability. We are credible in 
the eyes of investors and savers worldwide as far as our ability to maintain that stability is concerned. 
Our currency is credible and inspires confidence.” 
Trichet prefers to see the stunning success of the euro, which almost overnight has become a credible 
currency trusted by the financial markets. “There were many sceptics concerning the euro, concerning 
the  euro  area  or  generally  concerning  the  ability  to  create  the  euro  and  sustain  it  as  a  credible 
currency”, he says, and adds with satisfaction “The facts have demonstrated that those sceptics were 
wrong”. 
And  still,  what  appears  to  be  the  most  problematic  aspect  of  the  monetary  union  you  are 
heading is its political unity. In recent years we have witnessed the European leaders’ inability 
to lead a uniform foreign policy for all the Union’s countries. The Union’s citizens for their part 
said “no” to a more unified Europe (in two referenda in France and the Netherlands). Can the 
currency bloc exist in the long term without political unity behind it?  
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  “Economic  and  Monetary  Union  was  decided  on  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  (of 
which Trichet was one of the architects S.H.). The treaty has an internal logic, especially since it dealt 
with the question of budgetary policy by way of an agreement between the Member States concerning 
stability and growth (the Stability and Growth Pact, which inter alia limits deficits to 3% of the budget 
S.H.). We have a coherent bloc of the economic and monetary union. As far as decisions on political 
union  are  concerned,  Europeans  can  make  do  with  the  present  Union  and  also  go  further  or  even 
further still. This is an open question. It is the people of Europe who will decide on this.” At the same 
time,  Trichet  wishes  to  stress  that  within  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  EMU,  there  is  a  built-in 
element  of  political  union.  “After  all,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  political  union  in  the  decision  to  place 
budgetary  policy  under  the  surveillance  of  peers.  This  is  the  very  heart  of  politics,  voting  on  the 
budget. As a citizen, I have preferences as far as Europe’s future is concerned. Everybody knows that 
I am in favour of more significant political union, but this is a personal view. As President of the ECB, I 
consider the present Economic and Monetary Union fully consistent and coherent.”  
And yet, can the European Union exist in the long term without all of its Member States being 
part of the single currency?  
BIS Review 31/2006 
 1
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  “Of  the  25  current  Member  States  of  the  European  Union,  only  two  have  a 
clause that confers on them the right not to be part of the single currency, the United Kingdom and 
Denmark – and Denmark is following the monetary policy of the ECB. All the other Member States are 
supposed  in  principle  to  enter  the  euro  bloc  when  they  meet  the  criteria  (today,  only  the  12  stable 
economies are part of the monetary union S.H.). Either way, we already have 313 million citizens in 
the euro bloc.”  
The UK economy is nevertheless one of the leading economies in the European Union. If such 
a significant component of the unified Europe continues using a clause that allows it to remain 
outside the euro bloc, will this not hamper the Union in the short and medium term? Is this not 
an ongoing problem for those 313 million citizens of the euro bloc?  
Jean-Claude Trichet: “I would draw your attention to the fact that 313 million citizens, even without the 
United Kingdom, is still a little bit more than the United States. Personally, I am convinced that the 
United Kingdom will one day join the Economic and Monetary Union because it is in its interests to do 
so. Of course, the decision will be taken by the people of the United Kingdom themselves, by way of a 
referendum. I am convinced of the sincerity of the UK Prime Minister, who did not conceal the fact 
that, in his opinion, it would be in the United Kingdom’s interests to enter the Economic and Monetary 
Union when the time comes.” 
Is the First Employment Contract a necessity for France?  
Jean-Claude Trichet:  “We  do  not  make  judgements on  individual  measures.  I  can say  that  from  an 
economic perspective and from that of the fight against mass unemployment, it is clear that moving 
towards greater flexibility is moving in the right direction.” 
There are those who ask themselves whether France is capable of change at all and capable of 
implementing any reforms.  
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  “I  certainly  believe  that  France,  like  all  European  countries,  can  implement 
reforms.  It  has  changed  profoundly  in  the  last  20  years.  But  I  also  think  that  France,  like  others  in 
Europe, is implementing reforms too slowly, and reform at a slow rate has an associated price. In the 
world we live in today this has a heavy price. The world nowadays changes very, very, very fast given 
the challenges of science, technology and globalisation.” 
Is the wish to see rapid change in France no more than a utopia bearing in mind the current 
situation?  
Jean-Claude Trichet: “I think that the characteristics of each and every country are of course linked to 
its history. What characterises France historically is slow change over long periods of time, alongside 
very  rapid changes  in  relatively  short  periods  of  time.  If  we  look  at  the  euro area as  a whole,  then 
clearly that situation would also be much better if it were to embark on the reforms more quickly.” 
Do you think that the Israeli economy is attractive enough for the Europeans today?  
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  “I  believe  that  the  Israeli  economy  is  definitely  a  significant  one,  thanks  in 
particular to its specialisation in the fields of science and technology and in goods and services with 
high  added  value.  This  is  an  economy  that  does  of  course  have  its  difficulties  and  challenges,  but 
does, at the same time, have very, very notable characteristics. This is one of the economies with the 
greatest expertise in hi-tech products that can be found today.” 
Is this an economy that could one day be part of the euro area?  
Trichet smiles: “We’ll see. We’ll see. First, Israel would have to become part of the European Union.” 
On  the  very  political  and  controversial  topic  of  the  possible  entry  of  Israel  into  the  Union  the  ECB 
President refrains, of course, from expressing an opinion. “The geographical boundaries of Europe at 
the end of its progressive construction will be decided by the people of the European Union”, he says, 
without further comment. 
Is Europe likely to pay the price of the large US deficits?  
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  “We  have  our  problems  and  strong  points  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  The 
United  States  has  a  very  important  asset,  which  is  the  flexibility  of  its  economy.  It  also  has  an 
important liability, which is its lack of savings, together with the associated external current account 
deficit. The euro area has no lack of savings and a balanced external current account. But the euro 
area has a problem: too many rigidities in the functioning of all its markets. We all have our homework 
to do.” 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2006
The American giant is stretching out in the West, with the Chinese giant doing likewise in the 
East. Is Europe paying the price for the bulimia of the Chinese economy, which is waking up to 
oil?  
“The entire world has witnessed an extremely significant increase in oil prices. This has happened in 
part  because  the  emerging  countries,  and  not  only  China,  have  developed  very  quickly  and  their 
demand for oil and other commodities has increased accordingly. These partially demand-driven oil 
price increases are a global phenomenon and not a European one. And I fully support the consensus 
of the international community concerning the means of coping with them: more transparency in the 
market  as  regards  both  supply  and  demand,  energy  savings,  and  investment  in  alternative  energy 
sources.” 
BIS Review 31/2006 
 3
