Erkki Liikanen: Internal migration in Europe 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Conference by the Economic 
Council of Finland and the European Economic and Social Committee, Helsinki, 4-5 September 2006.  
 Monetary policy has no direct connection to labour mobility, whether occupational or geographical, but 
important  links  can  be  found.  According  to  the  so-called  'optimal  currency  area'  theory,  factors  of 
production – labour included – should in principle move flexibly within the euro area.  
This  is  not  the  case,  even  though  there  are  no  formal  limits  on  migration  within  the  euro  area. 
Rigidities of mobility manifest themselves in varying degrees of unemployment in EU countries.  
When talking about internal migration in Europe, and especially within the EU, it is important to bear in 
mind that it is a part of a much greater, global reallocation of labour and capital.  
Following the opening up of the international economy, developed countries have been compelled to 
confront the strong expansion of a proportion of labour in the world economy. Work is flowing even 
from the new member states to countries where wages are lower. Labour is also moving to countries 
where wages are higher.  
Following  these  changes,  productivity  in  the  world  economy  will  improve,  and  wages  and  prices 
increases  slow  down  in  developed  countries.  This  development  has  supported  low  level  of  interest 
rates.  
The enlargement of the EU has resulted in a higher proportional increase in labour than in capital in 
the EU. Yet, compared to the global change, the shift in the EU's internal production factors has been 
very small.  
Although internal migration of labour and capital within the EU has attracted a great deal of attention – 
at  times  passionate  one  –  its  advantages  and  disadvantages  seem  to  remain  much  weaker  than 
initially  thought.  A  massive  flow  of  migration  from  the  new  member  states  to  the  old  has  not 
materialised.  
Although  Europe's  internal  migration  of  labour  and  capital  shares  common  features  with  global 
problems, important differences can also be found.  
As to intra-European migration, a positive difference relative to the global situation is the fact that the 
general level of education in both old and new member states is more or less the same. This naturally 
facilitates  and  speeds  up  integration  of  economies  significantly  and  is  likely  to  reduce  the  need  for 
labour migration.  
The high level of education in new member states has accelerated the shifting of functions requiring 
highly  qualified  personnel,  such  as  IT  functions,  to  new  member  states.  The  level  of  pay  of  highly 
educated labour has increased in new member states, while in the old member states the growth rate 
of comparable salaries has slowed down. The purchasing-power-adjusted difference in the standard of 
living has narrowed down.  
In some professional groups, however, such as doctors and nurses – who in earlier communist times 
were notoriously badly paid – emigration has been wide, causing substantial problems to the countries 
which have been drained of employees in these professional groups.  
It is nevertheless evident that the majority of people prefer to remain in their home lands. The need for 
labour to migrate will decrease if capital moves towards labour. This has, in fact, happened broadly 
throughout Europe.  
Differences  between  global  developments  and  the  EU's  internal  development  can  also  be  found  in 
capital flows. Developments within the EU have followed the 'normal theory', investment has flowed 
from wealthy economies to economies with a low capital stock. In contrast, global developments have 
taken  the  opposite  direction:  investment  has  flowed  from  developed  and  from  not  so  developed 
economies with surplus to the United States. This has been the cause of a major debate.  
Investment  flows  to  new  member  states  are  generally  reflected  in  large  current  account  deficits  in 
these economies. These imbalances in financing conditions must be taken into account in economic 
policies and at central banks. A large current account deficit is often a serious problem, but not always. 
BIS Review 82/2006 
 1
If  the  deficit  is  financed  through  a  stable  and  long-term  arrangement  and  the  funds  are  directed  in 
effective  real  investment,  a  large  current  account  deficit  is  an  indication  of  the  strength  of  the 
economy, rather than of its weakness.  
By  and  large,  deficit  financing  in  the  new  member  states  is  quite  reliable.  Arrangements  such  as 
internal financing in international corporations have already been experienced.  
Yet, the rate of indebtedness of some countries raises certain doubts.  
It can be taken as a positive development that the primary reason for the transfer of investment capital 
does  not  seem  to  be  only  the  member  states'  cheaper  labour,  but  largely  companies'  desire  to 
establish their presence in new member states' rapidly growing markets and to diversify their supply 
chain.  
Although capital flows in the EU are free from currency regulation, flexible movement of capital even 
within the euro area is not fully effective. European financial market integration is still not complete. 
Many surveys show that higher depth and liquidity and improving the efficiency of payment transfers 
and the securities markets would make a substantial contribution to transforming the structures of the 
economy.   
Movement of labour is complicated by a number of problems. It is difficult for individual people with 
poor language skills to move to a foreign country and take up jobs that are below their qualifications. 
Countries  that  lose  labour,  are  deprived  of  an  active  labour  force,  and  pressures  can  aggravate 
differences in salaries. In the receiving countries, in contrast, employees often reject newcomers as 
competitors that are willing to work for considerably lower pay.  
Long-term advantages may nevertheless greatly benefit all parties. Economic growth in the receiving 
country accelerates and over time, the salary levels of old employees in the competed sectors also 
increase.  
An important factor in the present migration movement is also that the emigrants are more likely to 
return  home  than  earlier.  Recent  evaluations  show  that  nowadays  most  emigrants  will  eventually 
return  home,  bringing  with  them  improved  skills  and  accumulated  wealth,  with  which  they  facilitate 
economic development in their home region.  
It is evident that a broad migration in both directions will significantly contribute to improvements in 
productivity and economic activity within the EU. It will improve the level of education, the transfer of 
know-how from country to country and networking. These matters must be taken seriously and must 
be emphasised, even when faced with the problems associated with migration.  
For the sake of balance it is, of course, important to aim at relatively modest net migration flows. It is 
evident, for example, that population ageing will affect all EU countries; it is unlikely that any of them 
will be able to handle the challenge primarily by attracting young population from other EU countries.   
Migration is – and of course has to be – primarily market-driven. To the extent that changes in the 
production structure seem unavoidable, they should not be retarded through economic policy; rather, 
support  should  be  provided  in  the  event  of  problems  caused  by  these  changes.  Problems  in  the 
transition period must also be acknowledged, but the advantages generated as a result of the changes 
should be emphasised.  
Member  states  and  the  European  Commission  have  already  provided  wide  support  to  the  free 
movement of labour by removing obstacles that limit migration and introducing active measures that 
facilitate migration. Support should be channelled to workers rather than work places. Re-education as 
well  as  occupational  and  geographical  support  and  security  in  connection  with  migration  are  key 
measures that governments should take in order to facilitate the reallocation of labour force.  
The ECB and other central banks within the EU can enhance the regional and professional allocation 
of labour force by improving the integration and efficiency of financing markets and payment systems 
throughout the area. This development work must naturally be shared by governments.  
To conclude, there still remains much to be done to improve the situation.  
2 
 BIS Review 82/2006
