Jean-Pierre Roth: No news, good news - transparency and communication in 
monetary policy 
Address by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank and 
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Annual Meeting of 
the European Business Press, Zurich, 16 June 2006. 
This paper was prepared with the support of Martin Brown, International Research and Technical Assistance Section, Swiss 
National Bank. 
 Introductory remarks 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  a  great  pleasure  to  address  you  here,  on  the  occasion  of  your  annual 
meeting. I would like to take this unique opportunity to talk about an issue which, in recent years, has 
strongly affected my job as a central bank's President and your work as journalists: transparency and 
communication in monetary policy.  
Over  the  past  two  decades,  central  banks,  especially  in  Europe,  have  undoubtedly  be-come  more 
transparent. Central bankers now regularly communicate their assessment of inflationary pressures to 
the public and go to great lengths to explain their monetary policy stance. Gone are the days when 
central banks argued that secrecy was an essential ingredient of an effective monetary policy. As a 
consequence, monetary policy decisions are no longer taken at irregular intervals or at weekends, in 
order to surprise markets on Monday mornings. This, of course, is fortunate for business journalists. 
You no longer need to spend your weekends worrying that you might have to suddenly start writing 
about a surprise policy intervention.  
As you may have guessed though, the main reason for central bank transparency is not to make your 
weekends  more  relaxing.  Central  bankers  today  pursue  a  policy  of  broad  information  because  we 
believe that transparency helps us fulfil our mandate. We are convinced that monetary policy is most 
effective and least disruptive if it is predictable: no news on monetary policy is good news.  
In the following, I would like to discuss why, today, central bankers think transparency is crucial for a 
successful  monetary  policy  and  how  the  Swiss  National  Bank  attempts  to  achieve  transparency  in 
practice. I shall then debate the limitations of what transparency Finally, I would like to reflect upon 
how transparency in monetary policy may affect the relationship between you, the journalists, and us, 
the central bankers.  
The case for transparency  
1.  
At the Swiss National Bank we see three main reasons to be transparent about our monetary policy.  
The  first  reason  is  that  we  count  on  transparency  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  our  monetary 
policy. In the public eye, central banks may be viewed as almighty. The plain reality is, however, that 
our open market operations only have a direct influence on current short-term interest rates. Economic 
activity  and  thus  future  price  developments  are,  however,  determined  primarily  by  the  shape  of  the 
yield  curve,  i.e.  by  the  expectation  of  future  monetary  actions.  Transparency  about  how  we  judge 
future  inflationary  pressures  enables  us  to  guide  expectations  about  future  short-term  interest  rates 
and thus also long-term interest rates.  
The  second  reason  is  that  transparency  reduces  the  inevitable  uncertainties  related  to  monetary 
policy implementation. If markets know how we judge future inflationary pressures and how we may 
react to these, they can better predict our future monetary policy. Improved predictability of monetary 
policy  leads  to  fewer  painful  surprises  in  the  economy.  Moreover,  less  uncertainty  about  monetary 
policy reduces both risk premiums in financial markets, and financing costs.  
The third rationale for central bank transparency is public and political accountability. Central banks 
are  mandated  to  act  in  the  interest  of  their  country,  usually  by  maintaining  price  stability.  This  can 
imply unpopular decisions, which is essentially the reason for central bank independence. . Central 
banks should thus be free from public and political pressure. But it is obvious that some mechanism 
must  be  set  in  place  to  ensure  accountability  of  independent  central  banks.  Transparency  about 
monetary policy is essential to central bank ensure accountability. However, transparency in itself is 
BIS Review 55/2006 
 1
not enough. The statements made by central bankers must be accessible to the public and must be 
subject to scrutiny. Here, a critical press has a very important role to play.  
Communication of monetary policy by the Swiss National Bank  
2.  
In order to improve monetary policy effectiveness and enable public accountability the Swiss National 
Bank started to regularly explain its monetary policy decisions to the public already in the 1970's. Our 
first  press  conference  was  conducted  in  November  1974,  shortly  after  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton-
Woods fixed exchange rate regime. Moreover, from 1975 onwards we published yearly goals for the 
growth of monetary aggregates in order to guide market expectations of interest rates and inflation.  
With  the  introduction  of  our  new  monetary  policy  concept  six  years  ago,  we  took  three  specific 
measures in order to further enhance our transparency:  
• 
First, we have defined consumer price inflation of less than 2% as our quantitative goal for 
price  stability.  This  step  has  enhanced  the  predictability  of  our  monetary  policy  because 
market participants know exactly what we want to achieve. They can expect monetary policy 
to be tightened if we believe that inflation could exceed 2%.  
As  a  second  step,  we  now  regularly  publish  a  medium-term  inflation  forecast.  This 
forecast  helps  market  participants  to  predict  future monetary  policy  because  they  not  only 
know our goal for inflation, but also how we judge future inflationary pressures.  
Our  third  step  towards  more  transparency  has  been  to  explicitly  communicate  our 
operational target. We announce our target as a 1% band on short-term interest rates, that 
is,  on  the  three-month  Libor.  We  thus  regularly  offer  market  participants  a  quantitative 
indicator of changes in our monetary policy stance.  
  Our experience with the systematic communication of our monetary policy during the past six years 
has been very positive. Market predictions of monetary policy measures have been accurate, leading 
to lower volatility in financial markets and improving the effectiveness of our policy measures A prime 
example of this is the most recent increase in our operational target in March 2006. An analysis of 
interest  rate  movements  shows  that  the  increase  of  our  operational  target  by  25  basis  points  was 
almost  fully  anticipated  by  financial  markets  prior  to  the  announcement.  Contrary  to  what  many 
believe,  a  central  bank  does  not  lose  any  prestige  in  seeing  its  policy  correctly  anticipated  by  the 
markets. It is just proof of a well-understood monetary strategy.  
Credibility - words are not enough  
3.  
In Switzerland, the systematic communication of monetary policy has had the desired effect of getting 
market participants to adapt their expectations well before actual policy interventions are made. Does 
this mean that the Swiss National Bank now only has to indicate its intentions in order to influence 
interest rates? Or as some academics and practitioners have posed the question: can central bankers 
now replace open market operations with "open mouth" interventions?  
Considering the recent tightening of monetary policy in Switzerland, one might be tempted to agree 
that open mouth operations are sufficient to move interest rates. After all, short-term interest rates rose 
long  before  an  increase  in  the  operational  target  was  announced  or  before  we  raised  the  actual 
interest rates on repo transactions. However, this interpretation of the data ignores one crucial issue. 
Interest rates moved upwards before the Swiss National Bank adapted its operational target or its repo 
rate because financial markets trusted that we would increase interest rates. Given our objectives and 
our  previous  track  record,  it  was  credible  that  we  would  hike  interest  rates  in  the  given  economic 
environment. 
Central  bank  transparency  can  only  improve  monetary  policy  effectiveness  if  it  increases  the 
predictability of future monetary measures. I would like to emphasise that predictability relies not just 
on  information  and  the communication of  intentions,  but  also  on whether  the public  trusts a  central 
bank  to  realise  these  intentions.  Central  bankers  can  thus  only  benefit  from  transparency  if  their 
statements  about  future  monetary  policy  are  credible.  Ultimately,  we  know  that  our  words  must  be 
matched by our actions. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2006
Transparency and press coverage of monetary policy  
4.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  central  bank  transparency  yields  economic  benefits  because  it  enhances 
monetary  policy  effectiveness  and  reduces  uncertainties.  Moreover,  in  a  de-mocratic  state, 
transparency is essential if independent central banks are to be held accountable by the public. I am 
therefore convinced that central banks around the world will continue to pursue a policy of openness 
for  a  long  time  to  come.  This  leads  me  to  an  important  question  for  all  of  us  here:  how  will 
transparency about monetary policy affect future relations between the press and central banks.  
Does  central  bank  transparency  mean  that  future  monetary  policy  will  be  boring,  and  that  press 
coverage of central bank interventions will become obsolete? Looking at your coverage of our policy 
one might be inclined to think so. Between 2001 and 2005, for example, the Swiss National Bank was 
mentioned three times less in the Financial Times than in the period 1996 to 2000. However, let me 
emphasise  that  more  transparency  does  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  will  always  be  simple  to 
predict.  Remember  that  the  inflation  forecasts  published  by  central  banks  are  always  based  on 
expectations of future economic developments. Hopefully, these expectations will be accurate most of 
the  time.  However,  during  certain  periods  of  the  economic  cycle,  particularly  at  turning  points,  our 
expectations will be prone to correction. I am therefore confident that, despite transparency, there will 
remain some news to report about monetary policy.  
I  do  believe,  however,  that  central  bank  transparency  may  change  the  nature  of  media  reports  on 
monetary  policy.  In  the  old  days  of  secrecy  and  unexpected  monetary  interventions,  journalists 
obviously debated the objectives of central bankers and what this meant for the future. With increased 
transparency,  such  discussions  have  become  obsolete,  as  objectives  seem  to  be  clear  and  future 
policy is easier to predict. In return, central bank transparency now gives journalists the opportunity to 
question the consistency of our monetary policy decisions with our stated objectives. This leads me to 
believe  that,  in  future,  media  coverage  of  monetary  policy  may  concentrate  on  scrutinising  the 
congruency of our actions with our goals, rather than debating about what central banks are trying to 
achieve. As a central bank governor, I would certainly welcome such a development.  
After all, the credibility of our monetary policy ultimately depends on whether the public believes that 
we match our words with our actions.  
BIS Review 55/2006 
 3
