Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual monetary policy report to the Congress 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of  Representatives,  Washington 
DC, 15 February 2006.  
Chairman  Bernanke  presented  identical  testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and 
Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, on February 16, 2006 
 Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to present the Federal 
Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. I look forward to working closely with the members 
of  this  Committee  on  issues  of  monetary  policy  as  well  as  on  matters  regarding  the  other 
responsibilities with which the Congress has charged the Federal Reserve System.  
The U.S. economy performed impressively in 2005. Real gross domestic product (GDP) increased a 
bit  more  than  3  percent,  building  on  the  sustained  expansion  that  gained  traction  in  the  middle  of 
2003.  Payroll  employment  rose  2  million  in  2005,  and  the  unemployment  rate  fell  below  5  percent. 
Productivity continued to advance briskly.  
The  economy  achieved  these  gains  despite  some  significant  obstacles.  Energy  prices  rose 
substantially  yet  again,  in  response  to  increasing  global  demand,  hurricane-related  disruptions  to 
production, and concerns about the adequacy and reliability of supply. The Gulf Coast region suffered 
through  severe  hurricanes  that  inflicted  a  terrible  loss  of  life;  destroyed  homes,  personal  property, 
businesses,  and  infrastructure  on  a  massive  scale;  and  displaced  more  than  a  million  people.  The 
storms also damaged facilities and disrupted production in many industries, with substantial effects on 
the energy and petrochemical sectors and on the region's ports. Full recovery in the affected areas is 
likely to be slow. The hurricanes left an imprint on aggregate economic activity as well, seen, in part, in 
the  marked  deceleration  of  real  GDP  in  the  fourth  quarter.  However,  the  most  recent  evidence--
including indicators of production, the flow of new orders to businesses, weekly data on initial claims 
for  unemployment  insurance,  and  the  payroll  employment  and  retail  sales  figures  for  January--
suggests that the economic expansion remains on track.  
Inflation pressures increased in 2005. Steeply rising energy prices pushed up overall inflation, raised 
business costs, and squeezed household budgets. Nevertheless, the increase in prices for personal 
consumption expenditures excluding  food  and  energy,  at  just below  2  percent, remained  moderate, 
and longer-term inflation expectations appear to have been contained.  
With the economy expanding at a solid pace, resource utilization rising, cost pressures increasing, and 
short-term  interest  rates  still  relatively  low,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  over  the 
course of 2005 continued the process of removing monetary policy accommodation, raising the federal 
funds rate 2 percentage points in eight increments of 25 basis points each. At its meeting on January 
31 of this year, the FOMC raised the federal funds rate another 1/4 percentage point, bringing its level 
to 4-1/2 percent.  
At that meeting¸ monetary policymakers also discussed the economic outlook for the next two years. 
The central tendency of the forecasts of members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of 
Federal Reserve Banks is for real GDP to increase about 3-1/2 percent in 2006 and 3 percent to 3-1/2 
percent in 2007. The civilian unemployment rate is expected to finish both 2006 and 2007 at a level 
between  4-3/4  percent  and  5  percent.  Inflation,  as  measured  by  the  price  index  for  personal 
consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, is predicted to be about 2 percent this year and 
1-3/4 percent to 2 percent next year. While considerable uncertainty surrounds any economic forecast 
extending nearly two years, I am comfortable with these projections.  
In  the  announcement  following  the  January  31  meeting,  the  Federal  Reserve  pointed  to  risks  that 
could add to inflation pressures. Among those risks is the possibility that, to an extent greater than we 
now  anticipate,  higher  energy  prices  may  pass  through  into  the  prices  of  non-energy  goods  and 
services or have a persistent effect on inflation expectations. Another factor bearing on the inflation 
outlook  is  that  the  economy  now  appears  to  be  operating  at  a  relatively  high  level  of  resource 
utilization. Gauging the economy's sustainable potential is difficult, and the Federal Reserve will keep 
a close eye on all the relevant evidence and be flexible in making those judgments. Nevertheless, the 
risk exists that, with aggregate demand exhibiting considerable momentum, output could overshoot its 
BIS Review 13/2006 
 1
sustainable path, leading ultimately--in the absence of countervailing monetary policy action--to further 
upward pressure on inflation. In these circumstances, the FOMC judged that some further firming of 
monetary policy may be necessary, an assessment with which I concur.  
Not all of the risks to the economy concern inflation. For example, a number of indicators point to a 
slowing in the housing market. Some cooling of the housing market is to be expected and would not 
be inconsistent with continued solid growth of overall economic activity. However, given the substantial 
gains in house prices and the high levels of home construction activity over the past several years, 
prices and construction could decelerate more rapidly than currently seems likely. Slower growth in 
home equity, in turn, might lead households to boost their saving and trim their spending relative to 
current  income  by  more  than  is  now  anticipated.  The  possibility  of  significant  further  increases  in 
energy prices represents an additional risk to the economy; besides affecting inflation, such increases 
might  also  hurt  consumer  confidence  and  thereby  reduce  spending  on  non-energy  goods  and 
services.  
Although the outlook contains significant uncertainties, it is clear that substantial progress has been 
made in removing monetary policy accommodation. As a consequence, in coming quarters the FOMC 
will  have  to  make  ongoing,  provisional  judgments  about  the  risks  to  both  inflation  and  growth,  and 
monetary policy actions will be increasingly dependent on incoming data.  
In assessing the prospects for the economy, some appreciation of recent circumstances is essential, 
so let me now review key developments of 2005 and discuss their implications for the outlook. The 
household sector was a mainstay of the economic expansion again last year, and household spending 
is  likely  to  remain  an  important  source  of  growth  in  aggregate  demand  in  2006.  The  growth  in 
household spending last year was supported by rising employment and moderate increases in wages. 
Expenditures  were  buoyed  as  well  by  significant  gains  in  household  wealth  that  reflected  further 
increases  in home  values  and  in  broad  equity  prices. However,  sharply  rising  bills  for  gasoline  and 
heating reduced the amount of income available for spending on other consumer goods and services.  
Residential investment also expanded considerably in 2005, supported by a strong real estate market. 
However,  as  I  have  already  noted,  some  signs  of  slowing  in  the  housing  market  have  appeared  in 
recent months: Home sales have softened, the inventory of unsold homes has risen, and indicators of 
homebuilder and homebuyer sentiment have turned down. Anecdotal information suggests that homes 
typically are on the market somewhat longer than they were a year or so ago, and the frequency of 
contract offers above asking prices reportedly has diminished. Financial market conditions seem to be 
consistent with some moderation in housing activity. Interest rates on thirty-year, fixed-rate mortgages, 
which were around 5-3/4 percent over much of 2005, rose noticeably in the final months of the year to 
their  current  level  of  around  6-1/4  percent.  Rates  on  adjustable-rate  mortgages  have  climbed  more 
considerably. Still, despite the recent increases, mortgage rates remain relatively low. Low mortgage 
rates,  together  with  expanding  payrolls  and  incomes  and  the  need  to  rebuild  after  the  hurricanes, 
should continue to support the housing market. Thus, at this point, a leveling out or a modest softening 
of housing activity seems more likely than a sharp contraction, although significant uncertainty attends 
the  outlook  for  home  prices  and  construction.  In  any  case,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to 
monitor this sector closely.  
Overall, the financial health of households appears reasonably good. Largely reflecting the growth in 
home  mortgages,  total  household  debt  continued  to  expand  rapidly  in  2005.  But  the  value  of 
household assets also continued to climb strongly, driven by gains in home prices and equity shares. 
To some extent, sizable increases in household wealth, as well as low interest rates, have contributed 
in recent years to the low level of personal saving. Saving last year was probably further depressed by 
the rise in households' energy bills. Over the next few years, saving relative to income is likely to rise 
somewhat from its recent low level.  
In the business sector, profits continued to rise last year at a solid pace, boosted in part by continuing 
advances  in  productivity.  Strong  corporate  balance  sheets  combined  with  expanding  sales  and 
favorable  conditions  in  financial  markets  fostered  a  solid  increase  in  spending  on  equipment  and 
software  last  year.  Investment  in  high-tech  equipment  rebounded,  its  increase  spurred  by  further 
declines  in  the  prices  of  high-tech  goods.  Expenditures  for  communications  equipment,  which  had 
fallen  off  earlier  this  decade,  showed  particular  strength  for  the  year  as  a  whole.  In  contrast, 
nonresidential construction activity remained soft.  
Although  the  financial  condition  of  the  business  sector  is  generally  quite  strong,  several  areas  of 
structural  weakness  are  evident,  notably  in  the  automobile  and  airline  industries.  Despite  these 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2006
problems,  however,  favorable  conditions  in  the  business  sector  as  a  whole  should  encourage 
continued expansion of capital investment.  
For the most part, the financial situation of state and local governments has improved noticeably over 
the past couple of years. Rising personal and business incomes have buoyed tax revenues, affording 
some scope for increases in state and local government expenditures. At the federal level, the budget 
deficit  narrowed  appreciably  in  fiscal  2005.  Outlays  rose  rapidly,  but  receipts  climbed  even  more 
sharply as the economy expanded. However, defense expenditures, hurricane relief, and increasing 
entitlement costs seem likely to worsen the deficit in fiscal 2006.  
Outside  the  United  States,  economic  activity  strengthened  last  year,  and  at  present  global  growth 
seems to be on a good track. The economies of our North American neighbors, Canada and Mexico, 
appear to be expanding at a solid pace. Especially significant have been signs that Japan could be 
emerging from its protracted slump and its battle with deflation. In the euro area, expansion has been 
somewhat  modest  by  global  standards,  but  recent  indicators  suggest  that  growth  could  be 
strengthening  there  as  well.  Economies  in  emerging  Asia  generally  continue  to  expand  strongly.  In 
particular, growth in China remained vigorous in 2005.  
Expanding foreign economic activity helped drive a vigorous advance in U.S. exports in 2005, while 
the growth of real imports slowed. Nonetheless, the nominal U.S. trade deficit increased further last 
year, exacerbated in part by a jump in the value of imported petroleum products that almost wholly 
reflected the sharply rising price of crude oil.  
Surging  energy  prices  also  were  the  dominant  factor  influencing  U.S.  inflation  last  year.  For  the 
second  year  in  a  row,  overall  consumer  prices,  as  measured  by  the  chain-type  index  for  personal 
consumption expenditures, rose about 3 percent. Prices of consumer energy products jumped more 
than  20  percent,  with  large  increases  in  prices  of  natural  gas,  gasoline,  and  fuel  oil.  Food  prices, 
however, rose only modestly. And core consumer prices (that is, excluding food and energy) increased 
a moderate 1.9 percent.  
The relatively benign performance of core inflation despite the steep increases in energy prices can be 
attributed to several factors. Over the past few decades, the U.S. economy has become significantly 
less energy intensive. Also, rapid advances in productivity as well as increases in nominal wages and 
salaries that, on balance, have been moderate have restrained unit labor costs in recent years.  
Another  key  factor  in  keeping  core  inflation  low  has  been  confidence  on  the  part  of  the  public  and 
investors in the prospects for price stability. Maintaining expectations of low and stable inflation is an 
essential element in the Federal Reserve's effort to promote price stability. And, thus far, the news has 
been good: Survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations have responded only a little to the 
larger fluctuations in energy prices that we have experienced, and for the most part, they were low and 
stable last year. Inflation compensation for the period five to ten years ahead, derived from spreads 
between nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities, has remained well anchored.  
Restrained  inflation  expectations  have  also  been  an  important  reason  that  long-term  interest  rates 
have  remained  relatively  low.  At  roughly  4-1/2  percent  at  year-end,  yields  on  ten-year  nominal 
Treasury  issues  increased  only  slightly  on  balance  over  2005  even  as  short-term  rates  rose  2 
percentage  points.  As  previous  reports  and  testimonies  from  the  Federal  Reserve  indicated,  a 
decomposition of long-term nominal yields into spot and forward rates suggests that it is primarily the 
far-forward  components  that  account  for  the  low  level  of  long  rates.  The  premiums  that  investors 
demand as compensation for the risk of unforeseen changes in real interest rates and inflation appear 
to  have  declined  significantly  over  the  past  decade  or  so.  Given  the  more  stable  macroeconomic 
climate  in  the  United  States  and  in  the  global  economy  since  the  mid-1980s,  some  decline  in  risk 
premiums is not surprising. In addition, though, investors seem to expect real interest rates to remain 
relatively low. Such a view is consistent with a hypothesis I offered last year-that, in recent years, an 
excess  of  desired  global  saving  over  the  quantity  of  global  investment  opportunities  that  pay 
historically normal returns has forced down the real interest rate prevailing in global capital markets.  
Inflation prospects are important, not just because price stability is in itself desirable and part of the 
Federal Reserve's mandate from the Congress, but also because price stability is essential for strong 
and stable growth of output and employment. Stable prices promote long-term economic growth by 
allowing households and firms to make economic decisions and undertake productive activities with 
fewer concerns about large or unanticipated changes in the price level and their attendant financial 
consequences.  Experience  shows  that  low  and  stable  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  are  also 
associated with greater short-term stability in output and employment, perhaps in part because they 
BIS Review 13/2006 
 3
give the central bank greater latitude to counter transitory disturbances to the economy. Similarly, the 
attainment of the statutory goal of moderate long-term interest rates requires price stability, because 
only then are the inflation premiums that investors demand for holding long-term instruments kept to a 
minimum. In sum, achieving price stability is not only important in itself; it is also central to attaining the 
Federal  Reserve's  other  mandated  objectives  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  and  moderate 
long-term interest rates.  
As always, however, translating the Federal Reserve's general economic objectives into operational 
decisions about the stance of monetary policy poses many challenges. Over the past few decades, 
policymakers have learned that no single economic or financial indicator, or even a small set of such 
indicators, can provide reliable guidance for the setting of monetary policy.  
Rather, the Federal Reserve, together with all modern central banks, has found that the successful 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  requires  painstaking  examination  of  a  broad  range  of  economic  and 
financial data, careful consideration of the implications of those data for the likely path of the economy 
and  inflation,  and  prudent  judgment  regarding  the  effects  of  alternative  courses  of  policy  action  on 
prospects for achieving our macroeconomic objectives. In that process, economic models can provide 
valuable  guidance  to  policymakers,  and  over  the  years  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in 
developing formal models and forecasting techniques. But any model is by necessity a simplification of 
the real world, and sufficient data are seldom available to measure even the basic relationships with 
precision.  Monetary  policymakers  must  therefore  strike  a  difficult  balance--conducting  rigorous 
analysis  informed  by  sound  economic  theory  and  empirical  methods  while  keeping  an  open  mind 
about the many factors, including myriad global influences, at play in a dynamic modern economy like 
that  of  the  United  States.  Amid  significant  uncertainty,  we  must  formulate  a  view  of  the  most  likely 
course of the economy under a given policy approach while giving due weight to the potential risks 
and associated costs to the economy should those judgments turn out to be wrong.  
During the nearly three years that I previously spent as a member of the Board of Governors and of 
the  Federal Open  Market  Committee, the  approach  to  policy  that  I  have  just outlined  was standard 
operating procedure under the highly successful leadership of Chairman Greenspan. As I indicated to 
the Congress during my confirmation hearing, my intention is to maintain continuity with this and the 
other practices of the Federal Reserve in the Greenspan era. I believe that, with this approach, the 
Federal Reserve will continue to contribute to the sound performance of the U.S. economy in the years 
to come.  
4 
 BIS Review 13/2006
