Ardian Fullani: Prevent rather than recover 
Greeting  speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  a  technical  seminar  on 
surveillance systems to assess and monitor economic and financial stability, Tirana, 24 July 2006. 
 Honourable participants,  
I  would  like  to  thank  you  all  for  your  participation  in  this  very  important  seminar.  Allow  me  first  to 
welcome  Ms.  Alvarez-Plata  and  Mr.  Kholodilin,  two  experts  representing  the  distinguished  German 
Institute  for  Economic  Research  DIW,  who  will  be  holding  presentations  over  these  two  days  and 
discuss the introduction and implementation of early warning systems for the financial markets and the 
exchange rate stability. 
Over  the  recent  years,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  working  closely  with  prominent  international 
partners, such as the GTZ, in various projects, which aim at enhancing and further consolidating the 
work  of  the  Bank  in  achieving  our  main  objectives.  I  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  thank  Prof. 
Bolle, who has been coordinating our cooperation with the GTZ and Ms. Guda, local GTZ coordinator, 
for  making  this  seminar  possible,  as  a  series  of  activities  we  have  been  organizing  jointly  with  the 
GTZ.  
Today’s  seminar  focuses  on  an  issue  we  have  already  begun  working  on.  Last  year  in  April,  we 
organized  a  regional  seminar  in  Tirana  with  the  topic  “Stress-Testing”,  wherein  were  discussed  the 
ways of identifying timely the financial system weaknesses, which may jeopardize the maintenance of 
its stability in case macro and microeconomic conditions are unexpectedly aggravated.  
Today’s  seminar  focuses  on  similar  issues,  but  it  provides  more  progressive  approaches  as  far  as 
early  warning  systems  are  concerned.  Such  approaches  and  discussions  bear  a  high  level  of 
technique,  however,  allow  me  to  explain  briefly  and  somehow  simply  the  purpose  of  their 
implementation.  
Last week, the Bank of Albania changed its core interest rate. As you may have already been informed 
of from our statements, the increase in the interest rate came as a consequence of future expectations 
effect and of a variety of factors which relate to inflation. What is important to the policies we conduct 
is  the  anticipation  and prevention  of  destabilizing  pressures  in  advance,  rather  than  their correction 
after they have already occurred. Waiting to take the proper measures after the signals have become 
a fact may be costly in two aspects. First, the maintenance of stability is not stable, as long as the 
measures  are 
the  macroeconomic  situation.  Second, 
post-destabilization measures generally have their effects after a time lag of over one year – therefore, 
they  are  not  only  incapable  of  mitigating  the  current  situation,  but  they  may  also  bring  about 
unwarranted aggravating effects in the future, when the economy will have actually recovered to its 
normal situation.  
The  concept  of  providing  financial  stability  does  not  differ  a  lot  from  the  logic  of  maintaining 
macroeconomic stability. In such a case, the saying “prevent rather than recover” bears a significant 
importance,  considering  the  high  costs  accompanying  the  financial  crisis.  The  rapid  lending  and 
financial activity expansion of the banking system over the recent years, despite its positive aspect of 
boosting the economic growth, has also increased the pressure of being more alert in monitoring and 
maintaining  the  financial  stability.  Regardless  of  the  rigorous  implementation  of  the  best  monitoring 
practices,  the  rapid  growth  and  expansion  are  always  characterized  by  elements  of  risk,  which  in 
normal situations are inclined to be underestimated or pass unobserved, in particular in a system level. 
Therefore, the methodologies to be discussed over these two days will come to help the identification 
of such risks and take the proper measures timely.  
The  methods  to  be  introduced  and  discussed  in  this  seminar  are  numerous,  varying  from 
non-parametrical to sophisticated modelling and econometric methods. Despite their complexity, each 
of  them  is  presented  with  their  own  pros  and  cons.  Our  purpose  is  to  establish  and  apply  a  wide 
packet of warning instruments, so as to minimize the errors deriving from the assumptions and various 
methodologies used. This packet will be a complement to the wide measures that we are considering 
to implement in the further enhancement of supervision, in order to anticipate the situations relating to 
the maintenance and consolidation of the financial stability.  
the  aggravation  of 
taken  upon 
BIS Review 71/2006 
 1
Wishing you good proceedings, 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2006
