Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Launch of AmIslamic Bank Berhad 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Official Launch of 
AmIslamic Bank Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 18 May 2006. 
 It is my pleasure to be here this morning on the occasion of the launch of AmIslamic Bank Berhad. 
This  strategic  move  to  establish  the  Islamic  banking  subsidiary  that  will  operate  under  the  more 
universal Islamic Banking Act will increase further the potential avenues for business expansion. It will 
also increase the potential to benefit from the rapid growth of Islamic banking and finance both in the 
domestic and international environment. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On the domestic front, all sectors within the Islamic financial services industry, which includes Islamic 
banking, takaful and the capital and money markets, continue to register strong performance. To date, 
the Islamic banking assets amount to RM113.5 billion and the takaful assets stand at RM5.9 billion. 
The amount of approved Islamic bonds in 2005 exceed RM40 billion, while the Islamic money market 
has recorded sizeable monthly turnovers of RM135.2 billion. Similar progress has been achieved on 
the  international  front.  There  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  the  number  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions  that  have  been  established  in  the  global  financial  system,  and  the  funds  seeking  for 
Shariah-compliant investment avenues have also increased dramatically.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
For more than two decades, our efforts have been directed to put in place the pre-requisites for the 
development of an effective and competitive Islamic financial system. With the strategic components 
and domestic financial infrastructure in place, steps have now been taken to liberalise our domestic 
Islamic financial system - this has aimed to strengthen further our international financial and economic 
linkages. The liberalisation is evident on several fronts. This has diversified the players in our financial 
system  with  the  issue  of  new  licences  to  foreign  players  and  the  increase  in  the  allowable  foreign 
equity  participation  up  to  49%  in  both  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  industry.  This  initiative  has  also 
created a more competitive environment, thereby driving further progress in the development of the 
Islamic financial system. In addition, it has promoted innovation, increasing the range of products and 
services being offered. Efforts to develop the domestic bond market have been intensified to diversify 
the  structure  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  This  has  allowed  greater  flexibility  by  investors  in  the 
management of their funds while the ability of foreign corporations to raise ringgit-denominated papers 
in  our  domestic  bond  market  has  contributed  towards  enhancing  its  depth  and  breadth.  With  these 
developments, this has positioned Malaysia to evolve as an international financial centre for Islamic 
finance. In this regard, Islamic financial institutions have a significant role to play.  
The investment in research and development would strengthen the capability for greater innovation by 
Islamic financial institutions. This would increase the potential for a more diverse range of products 
and services to meet the changing requirements in corporate, retail and investment activities.  
Given  the  universal  nature  of  the  Islamic  banking  licence,  the  attention  given  to  the  capacity  for 
innovation will become an important defining factor in the progress of Islamic finance.  
With  the  rapid  progress  on  the  issuance  of  prudential  and  supervisory  standards  by  the  Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  Islamic  finance  is  now  governed  by  its  own  international  best 
practices. The establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board in 2002 was part of the efforts to 
strengthen the international Islamic financial architecture. Thus far, two standards have been issued, 
namely  the  standards  for  Capital  Adequacy  and  the  Guiding  Principles  for  Risk  Management  for 
Islamic  financial  institutions.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  be  implementing  these  IFSB  standards  for 
adoption  by  Malaysian  Islamic  banking  institutions.  The  harmonisation  of  the  prudential  standards 
across borders will also enhance the process of global financial integration in Islamic finance. 
The Islamic financial institutions are also able to benefit from maximising their balance sheet structure, 
by  leveraging  on  the  Profit  Sharing  Investment  Accounts  in addition  to  their own capital. Under  the 
IFSB  Capital  Adequacy  Standard,  the  total  risk  weighted  assets  funded  by  the  Profit  Sharing 
Investment Accounts will be deducted in the determination of the overall Risk Weighted Capital Ratio 
of the institutions. Apart from the Core Capital and Tier-2 Capital, Bank Negara Malaysia will consider 
the Profit Sharing Investment Accounts to be part of the overall Islamic banking capital fund for the 
purpose of determining the single customer limit. 
BIS Review 43/2006 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thus  far,  there  are  7  Islamic  banking  window  arrangements  that  have  been  transformed  into 
subsidiaries.  Six  have  now  commenced  operations.  Together  with  two  full  fledged  Islamic  banking 
institutions  and  the  3  new  foreign  Islamic  banking  players,  Malaysia  now  has  12  Islamic  banking 
institutions operating under the Islamic Banking Act. There are also 9 takaful operators, including the 4 
new takaful operators that will commence business later this year. With this diversity of players and 
the  larger  number  of  institutions  that  has  been  established  in  the  Islamic  financial  system,  it  is 
envisaged  that  the  development  of  the  sector  will  gain  further  momentum  with  new  areas,  such  as 
fund  and  wealth  management,  also  gaining  increased  significance.  In  the  more  recent  period, 
domestic Islamic financial institutions have ventured on business opportunities beyond the domestic 
shores  to  tap  the  tremendous  potential  markets  abroad,  particularly,  in  the  Asian  region.  Banking 
institutions  therefore,  need  to  build  their  capacity  to  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  these  potential 
markets that are still relatively untapped.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Against the backdrop of the rapid expansion of the Islamic finance sector, there is also the need to 
intensify  efforts  to  provide  adequate  training  at  all  levels  -  technical  and  frontline  staff,  middle 
management and senior management levels. This is important to ensure a sustained supply of human 
talent to support the long-term growth of Islamic finance. To meet this requirement, a complete training 
infrastructure has been established. Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM), which is 
an  industry-owned  training  institute,  will  now  focus  on  providing  technical  programmes  in  Islamic 
finance.  The  recently  launched  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF)  will 
provide  professional  certification  as  well  as  postgraduate  programmes.  The  INCEIF  flagship 
programme, the Certified Islamic Finance Professional certification programme, is scheduled to begin 
on 1 June 2006. 
For leadership development programmes, ICLIF will play its role in developing leaders to serve the 
industry, providing facilities for education in Islamic finance to not only support the development of the 
domestic  Islamic  financial  system,  but  to  also  position  Malaysia  as  an  international  centre  for 
education in Islamic finance. And in so doing, this will contribute towards the global development of 
Islamic  finance.  Industry  players  therefore  have  the  opportunity  to  assist  their  staff  to  acquire  the 
necessary  skills  at  these  institutions.  The  Islamic  financial  institutions  also  require  forward-looking 
leaders to steer the industry in the more demanding and challenging environment. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  huge  potential  in  Islamic  finance  can  only  be  realised  if  sufficient  resources  and  drive  are 
accorded to it. In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to congratulate the AmBank Group on the 
initiative  to  establish  its  own  Islamic  banking  subsidiary  and  provide  the  necessary  resources  and 
support  to  ensure  its  success.  It  is  our  hope  that  AmIslamic  Bank  would  be  able  to  contribute 
effectively in the development of the Islamic financial system. I wish AmIslamic Bank Berhad every 
success in its endeavours.  
Dengan lafaz Bismillahirrahmanirrahim, saya dengan sukacitanya merasmikan pelancaran AmIslamic 
Bank Berhad. 
Terima kasih. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2006
