European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt 
am Main, 4 May 2006. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  welcome  you  to  our  press conference  and  report  on  the  outcome  of 
today’s meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council. The meeting was also attended by Commissioner 
Almunia.  
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analyses, we have decided to leave the key ECB 
interest rates unchanged. Overall, the information which has become available since our last meeting 
broadly confirms our earlier assessment of the outlook for price developments and economic activity in 
the euro area, and that monetary and credit growth remains very dynamic. Against this background, 
the Governing Council will exercise strong vigilance in order to ensure that risks to price stability over 
the  medium  term  do  not  materialise.  Such  vigilance  is  particularly  warranted  in  a  context  of  ample 
liquidity and still very low levels of nominal and real interest rates across the whole maturity spectrum, 
implying an overall accommodative monetary policy stance. For monetary policy to make an ongoing 
contribution towards supporting growth and employment in the euro area, inflation expectations must 
be firmly anchored.  
Let me now explain our assessment in more detail, turning first to the economic analysis. 
The data that have become available since the start of the year point to a re-acceleration of economic 
growth in the first quarter of 2006, following the moderation observed in the last quarter of 2005. In 
addition, the latest indicators and survey information point to continued growth in the second quarter 
and  lend  support  to  the  scenario  of  a  gradual  broadening  in  economic  activity  as  embodied  in  the 
March  2006  ECB  staff  projections.  Business  confidence  is  particularly  buoyant,  which,  in  principle, 
bodes  well  for  investment,  and  the  recovery  in  consumption  and  employment  appears  to  be 
proceeding, albeit still gradually. 
Looking further ahead, the conditions remain in place for continued growth over the coming quarters. 
Activity in the world economy is expected to remain strong, providing continued support for euro area 
exports.  Investment  growth  should  benefit  from  an  extended  period  of  very  favourable  financing 
conditions, balance sheet restructuring, and gains in earnings and business efficiency. Consumption 
growth should also strengthen over time, in line with developments in real disposable income, as the 
labour market situation continues to improve. This favourable outlook for economic growth is broadly 
in line with available forecasts from international organisations and the private sector. 
Considering the information available, risks to this scenario appear broadly balanced over the shorter 
term, although recently oil prices have again demonstrated high volatility and their potential for posing 
downside risks to growth. This underlines the need for further improvement in the transparency of oil 
markets and further investment in this sector. Concerns about global imbalances continue to prevail 
over longer horizons, as do risks relating to protectionism. 
With regard to price developments, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 
2.4%  in  April  2006,  compared  with  2.2%  in  March and 2.3%  in February.  In the  short  term,  annual 
inflation  rates  are  likely  to  remain  above  2%,  with  the  month-to-month  profile  largely  dependent  on 
developments in oil prices and the strength of their pass-through to other prices along the production 
chain. Beyond the short term, changes in administered prices and indirect taxes are expected to affect 
inflation  significantly  in  2007  and  a  further  upward  impact  may  also  be  expected  from  the  indirect 
effects of past oil price increases. At the same time, wage dynamics in the euro area have remained 
moderate in recent quarters and wage growth is expected to remain contained, partly reflecting global 
competitive pressures, particularly in the manufacturing sector. Recent wage moderation has helped 
to dampen domestic inflationary pressures. Looking ahead, it is equally crucial that the social partners 
continue  to  meet  their  responsibilities  in  this  regard,  not  least  with  a  view  to  fostering  employment 
growth. 
Risks to the outlook for price developments remain on the upside and include further increases in oil 
prices,  a  stronger  pass-through  of  oil  price  rises  into  consumer  prices  than  currently  anticipated, 
additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, and – more fundamentally – stronger 
BIS Review 36/2006 
 1
wage developments than expected at present, possibly due to second-round effects stemming from 
past oil price increases. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, in a context of ample liquidity in the euro area, monetary and credit 
growth remains very dynamic. In particular, the annual growth rate of loans to the private sector has 
continued to increase over recent months and has now reached double-digit levels. Credit growth has 
also become more broadly based across sectors, with borrowing both by households – especially for 
house  purchase  –  and  by  non-financial  corporations  growing  more  strongly.  Monetary  growth 
continues  to  be  driven  mainly  by  the  expansion  of  its  most  liquid  components.  Thus  the  latest 
developments  confirm  that  the  stimulative  impact  of  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  remains  the 
dominant factor behind the current high trend rate of monetary expansion. Overall, further acceleration 
of monetary and credit growth in this environment continues to point to upside risks to price stability 
over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  Monetary  developments,  therefore,  require  careful  monitoring, 
especially in the light of the strengthening of economic activity and, in particular, of strong asset price 
dynamics, especially in housing markets. 
To sum up, annual inflation rates are projected to remain elevated in 2006 and 2007 and the economic 
analysis  confirms  that  the  risks  to  price  stability  continue  to  lie  on  the  upside.  Some  of  these  risks 
appear to have increased in view of the renewed strength of oil prices. Given strong money and credit 
growth in a context of already ample liquidity, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis 
with that of the monetary analysis supports the assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail 
over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  It  therefore  remains  crucial  to  ensure  that  medium  to  long-term 
inflation expectations in the euro area are kept solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability 
– a prerequisite for monetary policy to make an ongoing contribution to sustainable economic growth 
and  job  creation.  Accordingly,  particular  vigilance  is  of  the  essence  in  order  to  ensure  that  risks  to 
price stability do not materialise. 
With  respect  to  fiscal  policies,  there  are  some  signs  that  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact and commitment to the rules have improved since last year’s revision. However, fiscal 
targets  in  a  number  of  cases  are  rather  lenient  and  their  attainment  is  still  subject  to  considerable 
risks.  The  Governing  Council  therefore  supports  any  further  reinforcement  of  fiscal  consolidation 
efforts  that  also  takes  full  advantage  of  a  more  favourable  economic  environment.  Appropriately 
ambitious fiscal targets as part of a comprehensive structural reform programme would bring deficit 
and  debt  ratios  down  more  rapidly.  This  is  decisive  in  order  to  secure  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances. Such strategies would also boost confidence in the economic prospects of the euro area. 
As regards structural reforms, the Governing Council again stresses the importance of undertaking 
comprehensive reforms to ensure open, competitive and well-functioning labour and product markets, 
including the promotion of wage and price flexibility and the fostering of an attractive environment for 
investment and innovation. The need for such reforms has again been highlighted by recent oil price 
developments,  as  they would  enhance  the  resilience  of  the euro  area  economy  to  external  shocks. 
There is a broad and firm consensus that openness and flexibility are beneficial in promoting growth 
and employment and it is now essential to turn the agreed reform plans into actions and to strengthen 
them where necessary. By pushing forward with ambitious structural reforms, euro area countries will 
also lend support to the ongoing economic recovery. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2006
