Baboo R Gujadhur: The value of derivatives markets to Mauritius 
Speech by Mr Baboo R Gujadhur, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on the occasion of 
the  Workshop  on  Derivatives  by  the  Financial  Markets  Association  of  Mauritius,  Port  Louis, 
22 March 2006. 
 President & Members of the Association 
Distinguished Guests 
I  am  pleased  to  be  with  you  this  morning  on  the  occasion  of  the  opening  of  the  Workshop  on 
Derivatives. I must in the same breath congratulate the Financial Markets Association of Mauritius for 
the initiative taken to bring up a Workshop on derivatives for the benefit of its members in Mauritius. I 
have also the pleasure to welcome Peter Skerritt in our midst who I understand will share with you his 
expert knowledge of the derivatives market over the coming days. 
As most of you should be knowing, the derivative market is a market for measuring and estimating the 
volatility of price movements and permitting investors to determine the price they are willing to pay to 
reduce  the  amount  of  volatility  which  they  face.  Although  derivatives  have  become  prominent  on 
market places in the recent past, they have actually existed in various forms over thousands of years. 
The  difference  today  is  that  they  are  more  extensively  employed  on  the  global  markets  in  modern 
times  with  the  basic  underlying  principle  of  using  another  level  of  instruments  to  protect  against 
primary risk. 
At  end  December  2003,  the  global  OTC  derivatives  market  accounted  for  outstanding  trades 
amounting  to  US$197  trillion.  As  at  end  June  2005,  the  figure climbed up  to US$  270  trillion.  Daily 
turnover  is  US$2.4  trillion  on  this  market  as  regards  foreign  exchange  and  interest  rate  related 
products only. 
Other than banks, exchanges and financial institutions, funds, hedge funds and asset managers are 
also  actively  engaged  on  derivative  markets,  which  goes  to  explain  the  phenomenal  rate  at  which 
these markets have been growing. In Mauritius, a few banks started of late to offer a few derivative 
products, including currency options, but we have remained essentially outside of this massive global 
market growth over a long number of years. 
There may be several reasons why derivative trading has been eluding us for such a long time. One of 
them could be our relative distance from the mainstream markets where these products, are actively 
traded, notably in Europe, America and Asia. There is also not much active risk management based 
on  derivative  products  in  the  countries  of  our  region.  South  Africa  could  be  an  exception  in  this 
respect.  Derivative  trading  requires  the  build-up  of  reliable  exchange  platforms  based  on  a  pool  of 
available skills targeting diverse products. I am informed that our bank treasurers are not wanting in 
those skills but then they do not have the demand on which to exercise their talents on the markets. 
Further, it is a precondition for the sound and sustained development of an active derivative market 
that the underlying markets should be deep and liquid. For some reason, active interbank trading of 
forex has been absent from our markets. This situation is likely to persist if individual banks continue to 
hoard  their  holdings  of  foreign  exchange  to  themselves  without  engaging  in  interbank  trading  with 
them. This lack of engagement has been observed to be the case whether the balance of payments is 
in good or less good shape. 
Individual  banks  could,  however,  consider  the  added  scope  that  would  be  created  to  develop  a 
derivative market over here if they were willing to relinquish a strong attachment to short term profit 
maximization from spot only and a few sparse forward forex dealings. The liquidity factor imparted by 
departure from the established pattern could then increase the depth of the market with time. I would 
say that it is never too late to go for an earnest sharing of forex resources among players to be able to 
deliver  the  necessary  wider  scope  to  the  local  forex  market.  Obviously,  players  will  develop  more 
confidence in each other if there was continuous two -way traffic with individual banks coming to the 
market as both buyers and sellers of foreign exchange from time to time. 
Geography  should  not  be  seen  as  an  impeding  factor  today,  given  the  vast  advances  made  by 
technology  interconnecting  the  markets.  The  cost  of  communications  is  also  a  matter  that  can  be 
addressed if it is an obstacle in the way of market development. So, the real issue remains that of 
BIS Review 65/2006 
 1
substance. Markets are formed on the basis of demand and supply : sometimes, there is a chicken-
and-egg puzzle when deciding which of these two should come first in order to create market activity 
of  a  reasonable  scale.  My  answer  to  this  would  be  that  in  undeveloped  market  conditions, 
development can be triggered if there is a driving initiative. Hence, since banks and other operators 
are  potential  suppliers  of  derivative  products  to  the  market,  they  are  in  a  position  to  trigger  latent 
demand by innovating and bringing the products at the doorstep of clients. By so doing, they may add 
to the market yet another layer of activity that has been absent for quite some time. In this manner, 
futures trading can become a reality in Mauritius and take concrete shape gradually. We would thus be 
positioning  ourselves  a  notch or  two  higher  on  global  financial  markets  and  bringing  to  ourselves  a 
share of the total incomes generated by the 270 trillion dollar global derivatives market. 
In  addition  to  the  scope  that  may  thus  be  given  to  our  financial  market  by  fetching  international 
derivative trades to our shores, we will be gradually building up, among business operators, core skills 
that accompany the development of the derivatives market in general. This is the context in which this 
Workshop and others that will follow it assume a relevance of their own in defining a more diversified 
future  profile  of  our  financial  market.  I  can  then  look  forward  to  a  strong  spirit  of  innovation  in 
developing  financial  market  instruments  in  this context.  This  process will no doubt  be  reinforced  by 
continuous  training  and  the  experience  gained  by  our  operators  through  actual  operation  on  the 
markets. 
Having encouraged you thus to engage in derivative trading to give greater scope to financial business 
undertaken from Mauritius, we can consider the positive spinoffs this will result in as we progress in 
this  area  in  the  future.  Let  us  stop  and  take  a  look  at  the  challenges  of  persevering  in  this  line  of 
action.  It  is  generally  acknowledged  that  derivative  markets  have  a  positive  fallout  on  underlying 
markets  in  so  far  as  they  help  to  redistribute  risk  and  increase  market  efficiency  and  liquidity. 
Derivatives have become an indispensable part of a modern financial system and will so remain so 
long  as  uncertainties  will  have  to  be  provided  for.  In  the  context  of  new  capital  standards  being 
introduced currently for banks, credit derivatives are seen as risk mitigating factors against portfolio 
risk to the extent they serve to lower capital charges of banks. Healthy financial sector development is 
thus  supported  by  this  activity  if  only  by  increasing  the  scope  for  risk  management.  The  resulting 
control over volatility in portfolios of financial institutions has, in turn, the effect of improving the risk 
appetite of market participants for a higher volume of business. 
In  one  of  Shakespeare’s  plays,  it  was  said  that  “Security  is  mortals’  chiefest  enemy”  The  size  and 
speed with which derivative markets have grown in the recent past to overcome uncertainties have 
also  given  rise  to  certain  apprehensions  surrounding  derivatives  themselves.  Given  also  the  totally 
liberalized markets of today, allegations have been made that derivatives would, in fact, be adding to 
market volatility. This has not been tested and proved. It is therefore not advisable to press down the 
growth  and  development  of  derivative  markets  and  thus  risk  stifling  their  development  due  to  such 
fears. As a regulator, the Bank of Mauritius will no doubt oversee the workings of this market to ensure 
that risks are properly controlled, that banks have adequate capital to support the risks taken and that 
there is adequate transparency regarding the size and nature of the derivates market as it unfolds in 
the future. 
I am personally hopeful that operators will put in place adequate systems for measuring, managing 
and  controlling  on-going  risks  being  taken  on  board.  Most  people  would  have  learnt  the  necessary 
lessons from the collapse of Barings. But other types of risks associated with derivative trading can 
crop  up  and  it  would  be  necessary  to  put  in  place  an  adequate  number  of  safeguards  against 
unexpected  market  movements  to  ensure  prudent  and  sound  management  of  the  banking 
environment. Derivatives are seen in this context as a vital tool for risk management provided they are 
carefully handled and there is sufficient capital to support unexpected losses. 
I  am  confident  that  the  additional  dimension  that  can  be  given  to  our  financial  sector  activity  by 
embarking  on  the  derivatives  market  will  enhance  the  market  environment  and  increase  the  job 
satisfaction of our qualified treasurers by putting into their hands a wider range of tools to work with. I 
am  sure  that  the  Workshop  will  help  to  reinforce  your  confidence  in  your  ability  to  deliver  on  the 
products, given the extensive experience of your main presenter at the Workshop. 
May I wish you successful deliberations so that all of you come out better equipped by the end of this 
Workshop. 
Thank you 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2006
