Christian Noyer: Central bankers’ dilemmas under uncertainty  
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at a seminar in Buenos Aires, 5 June 
2006. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
• 
Thank you for inviting me to this seminar. It is a great pleasure to address such a challenging 
theme, namely “Central Bankers’ dilemmas under uncertainty”.  
In the first part of my address, I will recall the nature of uncertainty and its importance for the 
central banker; in the second part, I will sum up proposals for addressing uncertainty. 
 The nature of uncertainty 
I 
Uncertainty arises in many forms. It is crucial to central bankers in general (I/1) and maybe even more 
to the Eurosystem (I/2). 
The importance of uncertainty for the central banker 
1)  
The relevance of risks and uncertainty for economic analysis was suggested in 1921, by Frank Knight 
(Risk,  Uncertainty  and  Profit).  “Risk”  refers  to  situations  where  the  decision-maker  can  assign 
probabilities to the randomness that he is faced with; “uncertainty” to situations where this randomness 
cannot be expressed in terms of probabilities. 
Uncertainty  is  crucial  to  central  bankers:  according  to  Alan  Greenspan,  “Uncertainty  is  not  just  an 
important  feature  of  monetary  policy;  it  is  the  defining  characteristic  of  that  landscape”.  Thus,  I  will 
focus  on  monetary  policy,  although  the  topic  is  also  relevant  for  financial  stability,  which  is  another 
important issue for central banks. 
2)  
• 
   The Eurosystem faces general but also specific sources of uncertainty 
As regards the general sources of uncertainty, one can mention uncertainties related to: 
- 
macroeconomic  data,  which  may  be  unobservable  (output  gap)  or  subject  to 
revisions (GDP); 
the  nature  and  the  persistence  of  shocks:  e.g.  oil  and  commodities  shocks,  the 
degree of pass-through to prices, etc.; 
the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy,  since  Milton  Friedman 
showed that “monetary policy works with long and variable lags”; 
the potential asset prices misalignments and wealth effects. 
- 
But uncertainty may be more pronounced in the case of the euro area: 
- 
- 
- 
the available time series are short; 
the euro area has potentially experienced a regime shift à la Lucas; 
the euro is a catalyst for structural changes. 
How to deal with uncertainty? 
II 
The economic literature has proposed some monetary policy guidelines (II/1) and approaches (II/2) to 
address uncertainty. 
BIS Review 63/2006 
 1
1) 
a. 
• 
 b.  
• 
   Monetary policy guidelines 
 Disregard uncertainty
If the uncertainty is related to data or shocks (the so called “additive” uncertainty), it may be 
optimal to take decisions as if there were no uncertainty at all. 
In these cases, the “certainty equivalence principle” (Poole, 1970) calls for policy to respond 
to  the  best  estimate  of  variables  in  the  same  way  that  it  would  to  perfectly  measured 
variables, were they to be observable. 
Be cautious
This  is  an  approach  popularised  by  Brainard:  “parametric”  uncertainty  gives  grounds  for 
addressing  economic  disturbances  cautiously,  supporting  a  gradualist  approach  (Brainard, 
1967).  Furthermore,  transmission  uncertainty  related  to  the  fact  that,  according  to  Milton 
Friedman,  “monetary  policy  works  with  long  and  variable  lags”,  cautions  against  trying  to 
“fine-tune” the economy through monetary policy intervention.  
Moreover, a central bank should not adjust policy simply because the market expects it1:  
- 
- 
the behaviour of financial markets is mimetic whilst central banks are very cautious; 
markets  are  sensitive  to  speculative  bubbles  while  central  bankers  focus  on 
fundamentals; 
markets are short-term oriented whereas central banks are medium- to long-term 
oriented. 
 However, erroneous decisions may be made in private markets if monetary policy does not 
match the policy anticipated. This requires the central bank to be intertemporally consistent. 
A usual policy guideline in this context is to gradually adjust the policy rate. 
Thus, from a practical point of view, gradualism has many advantages: 
- 
- 
- 
it reduces the risk of having to quickly reverse policy decisions; 
it reduces the probability of financial market disruptions; 
it is particularly beneficial in the face of major risks.  
Debate on the difference of behavior between the Eurosystem and the Fed.  
• 
Less aggressive interest rate cuts in the euro area than in the US after 2001 and prolonged 
period of stable policy rates between 2003 and 2005 raised the question: is the Eurosystem 
“too passive”? 
Activism and gradualism refer to the number and magnitude of changes in the policy rate 
over a given period.  
Research recently conducted on the basis of an estimated model for the euro area and the 
US over the last two decades has yielded three findings: 2 
- 
the monetary policy strategies pursued by the Eurosystem and the Fed do exhibit 
some differences;  
the  degree  of  interest  rate  smoothing,  taken  as  an  indicator  of  monetary  policy 
gradualism,  is quite similar in the euro area and the US; 
the  differences  in  patterns  can  be  ascribed  to  differences  in  size  and  nature  of 
shocks. Most of the differences are due to demand shocks, which were larger in 
the United States. 
                                                           
1  
2  
A. Blinder (1998) 
Motto and Rostagno (2005) and Sahuc and Smets (2006) 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2006
Monetary policy and asset prices. 
• 
 Caution is also an answer to the following question: should monetary policy systematically 
react to perceived asset prices misalignments?  Three factors of uncertainty come into the 
picture:   
- 
first, there is by essence a high degree of uncertainty surrounding the assessment 
of  misalignments,  related  to  their  equilibrium  prices  and  the  channels  of 
transmission to the real economy; 
second,  central  banks  have  to  keep  in  mind  the  balance  of  risks  facing  the 
economy: a monetary policy action that would reduce the risk of a large loss in the 
future might be very costly for the economy in the short run; 
third, the effects of monetary policy decisions on asset prices are very uncertain. 
- 
The  announcement  of  a  systematic  reaction  could  therefore  lead  to  moral  hazard  and 
undermine  the  central  bank’s  anti-inflationist  credibility,  which  is  its  most  precious  asset. 
Moreover,  the  single  interest  rate  policy  cannot  be  geared  simultaneously  towards  two 
potentially conflicting objectives. 
Be aggressive or experiment
c. 
There may be two cases where gradualism is not the systematic guideline. 
• 
Worst-case  outcomes  may  best  be  prevented  by  following  policy  rules  that  are  rather 
aggressive in responding to inflation deviations from target.  
A  more  aggressive  policy  rule  may  generate  more  information,  which  would  improve  the 
learning of the central bank and thereby future policy performance. But the learning process 
might be costly since it could generate increased volatility. 
Some approaches to address uncertainty 
Rely on monetary policy rules
Simple  monetary  policy  rules  (like  the  Taylor  rule)  may  perform  well  in  many  different 
models.  Another  advantage  of  a  rule-based  approach  is  that  policy  becomes  more 
predictable, which can facilitate the formation of expectations.  
However,  followed  as  a  systematic  process,  a  rule  will  sometimes  ignore  information  that 
may be relevant for predicting future risks to price stability. A drawback of too parsimonious 
rules is their inability to provide a real solution to the policy problem. 
Pay attention to “tail” events
Maintaining  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  containing  the  systemic  risk  that  may 
arise in financial markets is central to a central bank’s mission. In a market-based system, 
sound risk management by all market participants is essential to protect against the risk that 
a  low-probability  (or  “tail”)  event  could  cause  a  financial  crisis.  Such  practices  enhance 
financial stability without increasing moral hazard. Market participants familiar with the risk 
metrics, the stress-test methodologies (and the associated market scenarios) would be more 
likely  to  continue  to  provide  access  to  credit  during  periods  of  systemic  and  institutional 
stress.  
Stress  tests  employ  either  historical  data  from  asset  price  distributions  or  hypothetical 
scenarios  that  would  provide  insights  into  the  downside  financial  risks  associated  with 
investments and hedging strategies. Focusing market participants on the structure of stress 
might assist in limiting the affects of a highly infrequent but significantly costly tail event. 
Let me conclude by explaining why I think that the Eurosystem is very well equipped with its strategic 
framework to deal with uncertainty. 
• 
First, the Eurosystem takes the uncertainty related to transmission uncertainty into account 
with the medium-term horizon of the definition of price stability. It introduces flexibility in the 
decision-making  process  and  avoids  focusing  on  short-term  developments.  The  medium-
BIS Review 63/2006 
 3
  2. 
a.  
• 
 b.  
• 
 term  horizon  is  also  a  way  to  reconcile  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability-related 
considerations, enabling the central bank to “look through the bubble”. 
Second, the Eurosystem does not rely on a single model. The two-pillar approach based on 
economic  and  monetary  analyses  contains  complementary  information  on  the  short  to 
medium-term  horizon  (economic  analysis)  and  the  long-term  horizon  (monetary  analysis). 
The economic analysis relies on indicators on  the one hand (hard data related to the real 
economy and soft data) and forecasts on the other hand (Eurosystem’s staff macroeconomic 
projection  exercises  evaluated  together  with  the  forecasts  of  other  institutions).  The 
monetary  analysis  is  based  on  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  liquidity  and  credit 
conditions. These two analyses can be cross-checked to give an overall assessment of the 
risks  for  price  stability.  Alternative  models  of  the  inflationary  process  justify  the  full-
information approach adopted by the Eurosystem in order to overcome uncertainty. In a way, 
the  two-pillar  approach  rests  on  the  same  principles  as  the  Bayesian  model  averaging, 
although it is less formal. 
Third, the higher the uncertainty, the greater the need for transparency and more important 
the  credibility.  The  Eurosystem  has  been  successful  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations 
remarkably close to its objective, showing a high level of credibility: in spite of very high and 
increasing oil prices, break-even rates have been stable around 2% since the beginning of 
2006. By anchoring inflation expectations, credibility helps to reduce uncertainty about future 
developments  and  to  stabilise  the  economy.  This  makes  the economic  agents  understand 
more  easily  the  interest  rate  decisions  in  the  short  term  and  the  central  bank  reaction 
function in the long-term. 
BIS Review 63/2006
  4 
 