Krzysztof Rybiński: How to use globalization to improve Poles’ living 
standards? 
Address  by  Mr  Krzysztof  Rybiński,  Deputy  President  of  the  National  Bank  of  Poland,  at  the  panel 
session: Globalization and Poland’s development, 4th Congress of the Polish Lisbon Strategy Forum, 
Warsaw, 13 October 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In my today's speech, I should like to achieve two goals: 
• 
• 
First of all, I would like to outline major economic changes effected by globalization.1 
Second, I would like to point out to such areas in Poland's economic strategy that call for 
profound changes necessary if we want to reap the benefits of globalization while avoiding 
its pitfalls. 
At the same time, I would like to emphasize, as I usually do, that the opinions presented in this speech 
reflect my personal views and by no means are an official stance taken by any institution I used to be 
or I am presently professionally involved with. 
 (1)  
What major changes in the global economy and in national economies have been 
induced by globalization? 
Globalization may be defined in various ways, and I believe that its essence is best captured when we 
define  it  as  free  movement  of  goods,  services,  labour,  capital  and  knowledge  between  countries. 
Before I proceed with the presentation of the most important effects of globalization, it is well worth 
recalling the demographic trends that are going to strongly influence the global economy. According to 
UN  estimates2,  by  2050  Europe's  population  will  have  shrunk  by  more  than  70  million,  that  is  by 
around 10%. In the same period, Asia's and Africa's population will have grown by 1,300 million and 
more than one billion respectively. This means that we should expect a gradual shift in the centre of 
gravity  of  the  economic  activity  from  the  US  and  Europe  to  Asia  and  Africa.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
numerous estimates have shown that in 2050 the Chinese economy will be 40% larger than that of the 
US, while India's economy will be similar to the US in terms of GDP measured at purchasing power 
parity3. These trends are also reflected in studies assessing what companies in developing markets 
will  challenge  the  current  global  giants  based  mainly  in  the  US,  Europe  and  Japan.  According  to 
Boston Consulting Group, the 100 ‘global challengers’ include 44 Chinese, 21 Indian and 12 Brazilian 
companies. There are no Polish companies on this list, even though it includes a few companies from 
Egypt and Turkey4, among other countries. 
In the future, demographic trends will be of greater significance than they used to be in the past, for 
several reasons. First of all, the population is aging faster in the developed world, yet China will also 
be affected by this problem due to its one-child policy. Second, the past 20 years have seen the global 
labour  market  emerge  as  a  result  of  dramatic  progress  in  information  and  communication 
technologies,  lower  transportation  costs  and  reforms  launched  in  many  countries.  For  instance, 
Richard Freeman from Harvard University estimates that with the integration of the former Soviet Bloc 
                                                      
1   This part of the speech is based upon a draft book on globalization written by K Rybiński and entitled Globalizacja w trzech 
odsłonach, published at www.rybinski.eu. 
2   Estimates available at http://esa.un.org/unpp/. 
3   See e.g. J Hawksworth The World in 2050, PricewaterhouseCoopers, March 2006. 
4   M Aguiar et al., The New Global Challengers. How 100 Top Companies from Rapidly Developing Economies Are Changing 
the World, Boston Consulting Group, May 2006. 
BIS Review 97/2006 
 1
economies, China and India into the global labour market, the number of workers available globally 
jumped from 1.46 billion to 2.93 billion people, which Freeman calls “the great doubling”5. 
The  first  major  change  caused  by  globalization  is  therefore  the  emergence  of  the  global  labour 
market in the 21st century. This has already brought about changes both in businesses’ operating 
strategies and employees’ behaviour. The global labour market shifts jobs to places with the highest 
effectiveness and lowest cost of manufacturing. For Poland, this means a large inflow of foreign direct 
investment  despite  a  halt  in  privatization.  In  the  global  labour  market,  employees  move  to  places 
where they are better paid for their skills. According to various estimates, about 5% people at working 
age have already left Poland. For Estonia, this figure stands at as much as 10%. 
In the global economy of the 21st century, technological progress and lower transportation costs have 
allowed  for  the  business  processes  or  their  parts  to  be  easily  moved  between  countries 
(a phenomenon  frequently  described  as  business  process  offshoring).  The  relative  role  of  crucial 
factors behind long-term development prospects is thus changing. In the 21st century, the key factor 
conducive  to  economic  growth  will  be  knowledge  –  broadly  understood  as  a  country’s 
intellectual capital – and this country’s ability to drive innovation. If businesses in a given country 
fail  to  change  their  product  and  service  profiles  to  achieve  greater  value  added,  they  will  find 
themselves pushed out of the market by companies from countries with low manufacturing costs. This 
applies  to  a  number  of  markets,  products  and  services  only  recently  considered  as  subject  to  the 
international competition, one glaring example being the off-shoring of services offered by radiologists 
from the US to India6. China has already become the world’s leading exporter of computers and their 
components or telecommunications equipment7. I believe that it is just a matter of less than twenty 
years  for  China  to  achieve  a  similar  position  in  the  automotive  industry,  mainly  because  Chinese 
companies have mastered network-based cooperation. 
Hence,  if  a  given  European  country  fails  to  reach  an  adequate  ability  to  drive  innovation  despite 
having sound public finances, liberal labour market and low taxes, it cannot stand the competition on 
the part of countries with low manufacturing costs. This may lead to lost markets, falling output and 
growing unemployment, and in consequence public finance deterioration. 
It  was  as  early  as  in  late  1980s  that  a  well-known  economist,  Paul  Romer8,  wrote  that  a  country’s 
success would be determined by knowledge and ability to drive innovation. When set against labour 
and capital, knowledge and innovation are infinite, with a number of people able to simultaneously use 
the  same  knowledge  or  innovation.  Labour  and  capital  are  in  turn  ascribed  to  a  specific  place.  By 
saying that I do not only mean such great innovations as the light bulb, mobile phone or Wal Mart’s 
business model, which have improved the living standard of millions or billions of people. What I have 
in mind are also thousands or even millions of small innovations, for instance those aimed to improve 
the efficiency of a given business process. Today, we can add yet another factor to Romer’s model, 
namely  the  relationship  capital.  Now,  it  is  common  knowledge  that  innovation  is  fostered  by 
cooperation between experts in various countries, cooperation between manufacturers and customers, 
local market expertise, cooperation between higher education establishments and businesses. In the 
long term, successful countries and businesses will be those that knowingly invest in the relationship 
capital. Here, China’s informed policy of supporting poor Asian and African countries is definitely worth 
mentioning.  
Perhaps  some  of  you  think  that  China  and  India  are  far  countries,  and  for  that  reason  pose  no 
challenge for us. This is far from being true, as technological progress and lower transportation costs 
have in many instances rendered distance immaterial, with many economists speaking of ‘the death of 
                                                      
5   R Freeman, The Great Doubling: labor in the new global economy, Georgia State University, Usery lecture in labor policy, 
2005. 
6   Examples can be found in a book written by T Friedman and entitled The World is Flat. A Brief History of the Twenty-First 
Century,  Farrar,  Straus  and  Giroux,  Nowy  Jork,  2005.  The  analysis  of  services  that  may  be  subjected  to  the  global 
competition  can  be  found  inter  alia  in  a  paper  by  B  Jensen,  L  Kletzer  Tradable  Services:  Understanding  the  Scope  and 
Impact of Services Offshoring:, Institute for International Economics working paper 05-9, September 2005. 
7   See  the  European  Commission’s  paper  Globalisation:  Trends,  Issues  and  Macro  Implications  for  the  EU,  EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION, DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL AFFAIRS ECONOMIC PAPERS, No 254, 
July 2006. 
8   P Romer, Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth, Journal of Political Economy, October 1986; P Romer, Endogenous 
Technological Change, Journal of Political Economy, October 1990. 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2006
distance’. This can be exemplified by the United States, where one-third of the import measured by 
value takes place by air, as is the case with 25% of export value of Africa9. 
(2)  
What areas of Poland’s economic strategy call for changes in order that globalization 
can lead to a visible improvement in Poles’ living standard? 
Globalization is not a zero-sum game where some people gain, however at other people’s expense. 
Globalization  has  already  enabled  billions  of  consumers  across  the  globe  to  enjoy  enhanced  living 
standard, as can be exemplified by lower prices, enhanced quality and increasingly diversified product 
and  service  offerings.  Millions  of  Polish  consumers  also  experience  these  benefits.  Simultaneously, 
more  than  one  million  of  Poles,  the  so-called  euro  300-gross-pay  generation,  have  obtained  better 
paid  jobs  in  other  EU  countries,  following  Poland’s  accession  to  the  EU.  New  jobs  are  created  in 
Poland thanks to foreign direct investment and investment projects implemented by Polish companies 
that increase export production. Consumer optimism continues to grow, whereas fears related to the 
labour market subside. Poles enjoy an enhanced living standard and voice fewer concerns about their 
future. Undoubtedly, after our accession to the EU, Poland has achieved great success in the global 
economy.  Does  this  mean  that  we  can  rest  on  our  laurels  and  there  is  no  need  for  rapid  and  far-
reaching changes? It is not quite right, however, as there are a number of areas where Poland ranks 
the very last. Failure to make progress in these areas may sizably reduce the economic growth in the 
years to come. 
These  areas  include,  but  are  by  no  means  limited  to  road  infrastructure,  volume  and  quality  of 
spending on research and development or business environment in Poland, as can be exemplified by 
an average of three years that it takes to claim one’s rights before courts in disputes between business 
entities. These weaknesses of the Polish economy are well known and it is also common knowledge 
what  should  be  done  to  eliminate  them.  It  is  however  not  the  weaknesses  that  I  intend  to  discuss 
today,  as  I  believe  that  there  are  other  and  much  more  serious  areas  of  concern  that  significantly 
reduce Poland’s economic potential. Lack of reform in these areas may deprive Poland of the benefits 
brought by globalization. Today, I would like to outline two such problems: 
• 
First, for many years there has been no common vision of Poland and no leadership that 
could inspire Poles to pursue this vision. 
Second,  we  may  boast  our  world’s  best  IT  specialists,  but we are  still well backward  in 
terms of e-government – according to the Capgemini survey from June 2006 Poland ranks 
third from the bottom in the European Union10. 
 Why do I believe the lack of vision, lack of leadership and Poland’s backwardness in e-government to 
be  major  weaknesses  that  diminish  Poland’s  possibility  to  capture  the  opportunities  offered  by  the 
global  economy?  Just  imagine  a  company  that  has  no  long-term  strategy  and  experiences 
management  reshuffles  every  few  years,  including  board  members,  department  directors  and  often 
unit  heads.  Every  department  within  this  company  has  its  own  budget,  sets  its  own  priorities  and 
pursues its own often obscure goals (so as to maximize the available budget), which are frequently 
inconsistent  with  the  overall  purpose  of  the  company.  Can  such  a  company  compete  in  the  global 
economy  against  companies  with  clear  and  consistent  vision  and  strategy,  companies  where  all 
departments’  activities  are  subject  to  this  vision?  This  is  a  rhetorical  question,  as  after  using  up  all 
simple  reserves  of  growth,  such  company  would  be  doomed  to  bankruptcy  unless  it  changed.  The 
same applies to entire countries. While others continue to paint and fulfil daring visions, for example 
iN201511 (Intelligent Nation 2015) in Singapore, we are still unable to join our efforts and are stuck in a 
business model where each department silos keeps pursuing its own goals. 
The  ability  to  capitalize  on  knowledge  will  be  crucial  to  Poland’s  success  in  the  21st  century.  The 
country’s economic strength will be built with the power of mind, not muscle or machinery. For 
the  time  being,  we  have  lost  a  million  of  minds  that  have  increased  the  growth  potential  of  other 
                                                      
9   A Venables, Shifts in economic geography and their causes, paper presented at an annual symposium of Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City in Jackson Hole on 25 August 2006. 
10   Capgemini  Survey  entitled  Online  Availability  of  Public  Services:  How  Is  Europe  Progressing?  Web  Based  Survey  on 
Electronic Public Services. Report of the 6th Measurement, June 2006. 
11    www.iN2015.sg
BIS Review 97/2006 
 3
countries.  Many  people  who  left  Poland  will  achieve  success,  and  set  up  prosperous  companies. 
Some  of  these  companies  may  become  global  challengers.  Simultaneously,  Poland  has  gained  a 
million ambassadors abroad. For the time being, we are only lamenting. Have we yet done anything to 
use  this  huge  Polish  intellectual  potential  located  in  other  countries  in  order  to  pursue  joint  efforts 
aimed at improving the standard of living for Poles, both at home and abroad. Have we got a vision 
that would for example indicate mechanisms for creating a diaspora with millions of Poles in the EU or 
across  the  globe,  a  diaspora  that  could  effectively  care  for  Poles’  and  Poland’s  interest?  Actual 
examples of these include the Chinese and Mexican diaspora in the US, the Jewish diaspora across 
countries, the Portuguese diaspora in France or Global Scott Network, and many other. 
In  the  global  economy,  greater  progress  is  made  thanks  to  increasing  use  of  information  and 
communication  technologies  (ICT),  also  in  public  services.  Firstly,  it  allows  to  leave  unilateral 
communication  channels  for  interactive  two-way  communication,  which  in  turn  enables  citizens  and 
entrepreneurs  to  be  more  active,  and  allows  to  offer  public  services  better  tailored  to  the  needs  of 
individuals and businesses. Secondly, ICT development leads to innovation growth in public services 
worldwide,  which  means  that  changes  in  public  administration’s  activities  increasingly  rarer  show 
features of reproduction, and the public administration becomes ever more often a leader in the field of 
innovative services. In consequence, methods of a country’s actions and fulfilment of its functions are 
irrevocably  directed  at  using  such  technologies,  and  adopt  the  form  of  e-strategy,  e-policy,  e-
regulations and e-services. 
With  just  a  few  exceptions,  public  administration  in  Poland  has  not  contributed  to  increasing 
innovativeness  and  effectiveness  of  the  private  sector,  but  has  been  rather  ball  and  chain. 
Communication between citizens, entrepreneurs and an authority takes place mainly on paper, and it 
is necessary to come in person, bring a form, sign a document, while in other countries, e-government 
bodies are available via a mobile phone. For example, would it not be easier and more cost-efficient 
for an entrepreneur, if such sufficed, to participate in a tender by submitting only a factual offer, and 
other documents would be automatically collected through communication between various public and 
private registers (such as the National Court Register, Social Insurance Institution, Central Statistical 
Office,  the  revenue  or  credit  database  etc.).  There  are  countless  examples  where  public 
administration’s activities might sizably increase the economy’s efficiency. 
In  many  countries,  including  some  European  and  in  particular  Asian  states,  we  can  observe  an 
effective pursuit of a vision leading to success in the global economy and determination of the public 
administration to develop a country’s ability to drive innovation, that is to develop a factor determining 
the country’s success in the global economy of the 21st century. Examples may be found in a recent 
edition of The Economist, where the article entitled The Search for Talent names a number of activities 
pursued by public administration in many countries in order to attract well-educated foreigners. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the 21st century has witnessed not only ‘the death of distance’ but also ‘the 
death  of  time’.  Innovation  is  driven,  efficiency  is  improving  and  value  is  created  by  companies  for 
clients  and  by  public  administration  for  citizens  at  a  significantly  faster  pace.  In  order  to  win  in  an 
increasingly  competitive  economy,  it  is  not  only  necessary  to  move  ahead,  but  to  move  ahead 
increasingly  faster.  And  in  the  two  areas  I  discussed,  that  is  lack  of  vision  and  leadership  and 
backwardness  in  e-government,  we  have  to  run,  as  the  race  has  already  begun,  and  we  are  still 
pondering whether we should start moving the left or right leg first. 
Poles  are  hardworking,  talented  and  have  entrepreneurial  spirit.  We  are  sufficiently  predisposed  to 
achieve  success  in  the  global  economy.  As  citizens,  we  have  every  right  to  demand  that  decision-
makers,  regardless  how  they  differ  in  their  assessment  of  the  past,  create  and  support  a  common 
vision of strong and competitive Poland in the global economy of the 21st century as fast as possible. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2006
