David Dodge: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa ,19 October 2006.  
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with  this  committee,  usually  twice  a  year  following  the  release  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  We 
were  not  able  to  meet  last  spring,  so  it  has  been  a  year  since  Paul  and  I  were  last  before  this 
committee. We believe that these meetings help us keep Members of Parliament and, through you, all 
Canadians,  informed  about  the  Bank's  views  on  the  economy  and  about  the  objective  of  monetary 
policy and the actions we take to achieve it. 
When Paul and I appeared before the Finance Committee last October, we noted at that time, that the 
global  and  Canadian  economies  were  continuing  to  grow  at  a  solid  pace  and  that  our  economy 
appeared to be operating at full production capacity. 
In  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report,  which  we  released  this  morning,  we  judge  that  the  Canadian 
economy is currently operating just above capacity. While global economic growth is expected to be a 
little higher than previously anticipated, a weaker near-term outlook for the U.S. economy has curbed 
the near-term prospects for Canadian exports and growth.  
The  Bank's  outlook  for  growth  in  the  Canadian  economy  has  been  revised  down  slightly  from  that 
outlined  in  July's  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update.  The  Bank's  base-case  projection  now  calls  for 
average annual GDP growth of 2.8 per cent in 2006, 2.5 per cent in 2007, and a return to 2.8 per cent 
in 2008. Weakness in labour productivity growth has led the Bank to lower its assumption for potential 
growth to 2.8 per cent for the 2006-08 period. Together, these factors imply that the small amount of 
excess demand now in the economy will be eliminated by mid-2007. 
Core inflation is expected to move a bit above 2 per cent in the coming months but return to the 2 per 
cent target by the middle of 2007 and remain there through to the end of 2008. Lower energy prices 
have led to a downward revision of the near-term projection for total CPI inflation. Total inflation (which 
includes the temporary impact of the GST reduction) will likely average about 1 1/2 per cent through 
the second quarter of 2007, before returning to the 2 per cent target and remaining there through to 
the end of 2008. 
As we noted at the time of our 6 September interest rate announcement, the risks around the base-
case projection are judged to be a little greater than at the time of the July Update. The main upside 
risk relates to the momentum in household spending and housing prices, while the main downside risk 
is that the U.S. economy could slow more sharply than expected, leading to lower Canadian exports. 
The Bank judges that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced. 
On 17 October, we left our key policy rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent. The current level is judged, at 
this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term. We at the Bank will 
continue  to  pay  close  attention  to  the  evolution  of  risks,  as  well  as  to  economic  and  financial 
developments in the Canadian and global economies. 
BIS Review 98/2006 
 1
