Jean-Pierre Roth: Seventy years after – the final collapse of the gold standard 
in September 1936 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  on  the 
occasion  of  the  Conference  “Seventy  Years  After:  The  Final  Collapse  of  the  Gold  Standard  in 
September 1936”, University of Zurich, 15 December 2006. 
These remarks have been prepared with the help of Mathias Zurlinden, Economic Analysis unit, Swiss National Bank. 
 I  am  pleased  and  honoured  to  open  this  conference  on  the  final  collapse  of  the  gold  standard  in 
September 1936. This event, 70 years ago, marks one key date in the history of the Swiss National 
Bank. 
From  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  gold  played  a  pivotal  role  in  Switzerland's  monetary 
regime. It was central, as the foundation of the international monetary system and the anchor of the 
Swiss franc. And what is more, people took it for granted that the gold-based system would prevail. A 
hundred years later, after the Second World War, its role began to fade, although a gold parity of the 
franc continued to exist until 2000. 
When the Swiss National Bank was created, in 1907, the international gold standard stood as a potent 
symbol  of  a  world  characterised  by  free  markets  and  free  movement  of  capital  and  labour.  In  the 
memorable words of Keynes “The inhabitant of London could secure forthwith, if he wished it, cheap 
and comfortable means of transit to any country or climate without passport or other formality, could 
despatch his servant to the neighbouring office of a bank for such supply of the precious metals as 
might seem convenient, and could then proceed abroad to foreign quarters, …, bearing coined wealth 
upon his person …. But, most important of all, he regarded this state of affairs as normal, certain, and 
permanent,  except  in  the  direction  of  further  improvement,  and  any  deviation  from  it  as  aberrant, 
scandalous, and avoidable.”1
When Keynes wrote these words in 1919, the First World War had destroyed the old economic order. 
The international monetary system was in shambles, international trade was disrupted, and social and 
political unrest was making it hard to achieve any progress on economic issues. At the beginning of 
the war, Switzerland, like most other countries, had suspended the convertibility of its currency. Such 
a suspension, in a wartime emergency, was in line with gold standard thinking, as long as convertibility 
was resumed once the emergency had passed. After the end of the war, however, misalignments in 
price  levels  made  it  necessary  to  leave  flexible  exchange  rates  in  place  for  the  time  being.  Later, 
Switzerland was one of the countries to restore pre-war parity. In 1924, the SNB moved the exchange 
rate towards that goal, finally achieving it by the end of the year. Thus Switzerland was part of the 
gold-exchange standard that constituted the international monetary system from about 1925 to 1931. 
In  1929,  legislation  was  adopted  to  prepare  the  ground  for  a  return  to  a  pure  gold  standard,  with 
convertibility  of  notes  into  gold  coins.  While  this  pure  standard  never  actually  came  about,  it 
demonstrates that Switzerland regarded gold as the natural foundation of its monetary regime. 
The gold standard in the Great Depression 
In  1929,  at  the  outset  of  the  worldwide  economic  downturn  that  led  to  the  Great  Depression,  the 
dominant  view  in  the  Swiss  government,  and  certainly  in  the  SNB,  was  that  depressions  were 
unavoidable. A downturn must run its course until good times returned, as they inevitably would. But 
as the depression worsened, a hands-off policy of this kind became increasingly difficult to pursue. By 
1931, the situation in Switzerland was aggravated by the decision of a large number of countries to 
come  off  gold.  The  British  suspension  of  convertibility  in  the  summer  of  1931  was  followed  by  the 
countries of  the  Empire  and  the  Scandinavian  states.  Then,  in 1933,  the United  States  allowed  the 
dollar to float, before stabilising it again one year later at a vastly lower rate. 
                                                      
1   John  Maynard  Keynes,  "The  Economic  Consequences  of  the  Peace",  Harcourt  Brace  Jovanovich,  1920  (reprinted  by 
Penguin Books, 1988). 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 1
With the Swiss franc greatly overvalued against key currencies, the options were either deflation or 
devaluation. As the Swiss later realised, it would have been better to follow the British example. In 
1931  and  1933,  however,  that  option  was  not  seen  as  the  appropriate  response.  The  SNB  saw 
Britain’s  suspension  of  convertibility  in  1931  as  a  regrettable  step  that  could  not  last.  Empirical 
evidence  showing  that  Britain  and  others  had  fared  better  after  devaluing  their  currencies  was 
routinely dismissed with the argument that the structure of the Swiss economy was different, since it 
was highly dependent on imports. It seemed to both the SNB and the Swiss government that gold was 
the only stable element in a turbulent world, and that the only way to restore the competitiveness of 
the Swiss economy, therefore, was reducing domestic costs and prices. 
As it turned out, the advocates of deflation miscalculated on several accounts. For one, they did not 
foresee that deflation would make very little progress over the coming years. Deflation policies were 
strongly opposed by labour and other special interest groups. Backed by the threat of referendum, this 
undermined the willingness of government and parliament to take an uncompromising stance. As a 
consequence, state interventionism was on the rise, self regulation of markets was hampered and rigid 
price and cost structures protracted the depression. At the same time, it appears that the advocates of 
deflation policies overestimated the inflationary consequences of devaluation in the countries that did 
devalue. The SNB repeatedly warned of the inflationary effects of devaluation, yet price increases in 
the  UK  and  the  US  were  moderate  and  –  until  World  War  Two  –  neither  country  regained  pre-
depression CPI levels. As a result, the Swiss franc remained overvalued right through to 1936, with 
the extent of the overvaluation changing little throughout this period. 
From a modern-day perspective, it may appear surprising that markets largely considered the Swiss 
government capable of staying the course, despite these difficulties. Most indicators suggest that the 
credibility of Switzerland’s commitment to the gold standard was still intact after 1933. Its gold stocks 
had  risen  –  modestly  at  first  in  1929  and  1930,  and  then  more  dramatically  in  1931,  when  many 
currencies  had  come  under  pressure  and  had  to  come  off  gold.  Between  1933  and  1935  stocks 
decreased significantly but were still considerably larger at the time of the devaluation in September 
1936 than they had been before 1931. The movement in forward premiums on the foreign exchange 
market suggests the same interpretation. The premium for the British pound against the Swiss franc 
was modest even at the time Belgium was forced to devalue in 1935, as well as during the spring and 
summer of 1936. Thus the likelihood of a devaluation of the Swiss franc was seen as relatively small. 
Nineteen thirty-six 
The  devaluation,  when  it  came  in  September  1936,  was  widely  regarded  in  Switzerland  as  an 
externally  imposed  step.  To  many,  it  came  as  a  shock,  since  over  the  course  of  many  years  the 
Federal  Council  and  the  SNB  had  been  constantly  emphasising  their  view  that  devaluation  was  no 
remedy. The decision to devalue by about 30 percent was taken in the early afternoon of September 
26, a Saturday, shortly after the devaluation of the French franc. This was followed the next day by a 
radio address to the nation, given by the President of the Confederation in order to reassure the Swiss 
people.  His  famous  sentence,  "One  franc  remains  one  franc,"  was  intended  to  boost  the  public's 
confidence  in  the  value  of  money.  In  the  following  week,  on  the  Monday  and  the  Wednesday, 
respectively, the two chambers of parliament endorsed the decision of the federal government. After 
some heated debate in the parliamentary groups, voting on the issue had been by and large along 
party lines. 
It is interesting to note how the policy reversal was explained to the public. The trigger, of course, was 
the French devaluation. Attention was drawn to a number of consequences of the French decision. 
First, the devaluation of the French franc was a further blow for the export industry and for tourism. 
Second, an unchanged Swiss franc parity would increase the risk of speculative attacks. Although the 
gold reserves were regarded as sufficiently large to hold out for some time, it could be assumed that 
speculation against the Swiss franc would begin right away. It was better, therefore, not to use up the 
gold reserves in a struggle that in all probability could not be won. The authorities conceded that the 
policy  of  the  preceding  years  had  not  succeeded  in  restoring  the  competitiveness  of  the  economy 
vis-à-vis  the  countries  which  had  already  devalued.  Finally,  they  pointed  out  that  the  Tripartite 
Agreement  between  the  American,  British  and  French  governments  opened  up  the  way  for  a  new 
beginning and a more cooperative international framework. Surprisingly, perhaps, this argument was 
put forward as a crucial one in the early statements. However, it rapidly became clear that the hopes 
placed in the Tripartite Agreement might have been excessive. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2006
With  the  devaluation  of  the  Swiss  franc,  Switzerland’s  monetary  authorities  had  reneged  on  a 
fundamental commitment. But in most other ways the monetary standard remained unchanged. The 
currency continued to be gold-backed, and the gold parity continued to be essential. The operating 
procedures had not changed and, in contrast to some other countries in that period, the relationship 
between government and central bank was not altered at the expense of the central bank. Thus, the 
devaluation was seen as a painful setback in Switzerland's monetary history, but not as the dawn of a 
new era. 
Fixed exchange rates, of course, were carried over to the Bretton Woods system in the post-World 
War  II  world.  And  although  Bretton  Woods  differed  in  many  ways  from  the  interwar  gold-exchange 
standard, a central banker of the 1930s would have adapted without major difficulties to the world of 
the 1960s. The collapse of the Bretton Woods system and the subsequent move to flexible exchange 
rates in 1973 were far more important events in the SNB’s 100-year history than the devaluation of 
1936.  Indeed,  the  crisis  of  the  international  monetary  system  in  the  early  1970s  essentially 
transformed the SNB’s task and scope for action. Switzerland gained full control of its money supply, 
price stability became the primary objective of monetary policy and the legal framework of the SNB 
was gradually amended accordingly. 
Beyond the gold standard 
As I said at the outset, the role of gold has faded over the years. But gold had an afterlife long after it 
ceased to be relevant in any form for the conduct of monetary policy. First and foremost, the legal link 
between the Swiss franc and gold continued to exist until very recently. The constitutional changes 
that  severed  this  link  took  effect  in  2000,  followed,  within  the  same  year,  by  the  corresponding 
changes in the relevant law. The new law no longer includes an obligation on the part of the SNB to 
redeem banknotes for gold – an obligation which – in practice – had been suspended for decades. 
Moreover, it has abolished the minimum gold coverage of the banknotes in circulation and the gold 
parity of the Swiss franc. With these changes, gold finally became a normal and marketable asset for 
the SNB. In May 2000, the SNB began to sell part of its gold stock. About 50 percent of the gold once 
owned by the SNB has now been sold. I should emphasise that the SNB will continue to hold gold as 
a monetary reserve, but the legal relics of the gold standard era no longer immobilize the gold stock as 
they did for decades. 
A second aspect of the afterlife of the gold standard is its presence in discussions on domestic and 
international  monetary  standards.  In  the  1970s  and  1980s,  when  inflation  was  high  and  exchange 
rates  volatile,  a  small  but  vocal  group  endorsed  the  gold  standard  as  an  alternative  to  the  paper 
standard  of  the  post-Bretton  Woods  era.  Judged  by  practice,  they  were  on  the  losing  side.  There 
appears to be a widespread consensus – both among economists and central bankers – that a gold 
standard  generates  few  positive  things  that  cannot  be  provided  by  other  means.  For  one,  the  gold 
standard has all the drawbacks of fixed exchange rates. That is, monetary policy cannot be used to 
achieve domestic goals and the parities are vulnerable to speculative attacks. Also, the gold standard 
has all the disadvantages of a commodity standard. In other words, the system is not only expensive 
to maintain, it also allows the supply and demand conditions for the commodity in question to affect 
the general price level. 
Some advocates of the gold standard did not propose the gold standard as an international system but 
promoted it as a tool for solving domestic problems. In particular, they argued that the link to gold, by 
providing a credible anchor, would keep inflation under control. This argument is valid as far as it goes, 
but  ignores  the  fact  that  a  gold  standard  has  its  own  credibility  problems.  If  countries  can  tie  their 
currencies to gold, they can also untie their currencies from gold. This is what happened in the 1930s. 
The markets know that and form their expectations accordingly. 
For  this  reason,  most  countries  preferred  to  go  other  ways.  In  recent  years,  many  of  them  have 
adopted clear mandates for their central banks which specify price stability as the primary goal. They 
then try to achieve this goal with some form of inflation target – be it implicit or explicit. Results have 
been good so far, although not all can be attributed to improved policy making. Some have argued 
that  globalisation  and  the  move  towards  more  competitive  markets  have  reduced  inflationary 
pressures,  thus  making  inflation  targets  easier  to  reach.  But  whatever  the  reasons,  the  results  in 
recent  years  have  been  encouraging.  I  believe  that  as  long  as  this  continues,  and  central  banks 
succeed in keeping inflation under control, the appeal of the gold standard will remain limited. But I 
have no illusions that commodity money will be discussed again as an alternative should central banks 
fail to achieve their goals and inflation rise to high levels. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 3
In concluding, let me re-emphasise the fact that the devaluation of the franc was a major event in our 
monetary history. But although this devaluation was considered to be of great importance, it was not 
seen to herald the end of the gold-backed system. It took about 40 years – and many other difficulties 
– before flexible exchange rates were regarded as a feasible option, and more than 60 years before 
the gold parity of the franc was removed. 
Today  the  1936  devaluation  remains  vivid  in  the  memory  of  the  general  public.  The  Swiss  like  to 
remember that their currency has only been devalued once since its creation in 1850. With or without 
the gold standard, the history of the Swiss National Bank has been marked by a continuous search for 
a stable anchor. In order to protect the purchasing power of money and the price competitiveness of a 
country largely dependent on exports, monetary stability has been the overriding target of SNB policy 
throughout its one hundred year history. Of course, seen from a modern-day perspective, mistakes 
have been made and decisions taken too late – the 1936 devaluation can be seen as an example of 
this – but the fact that we can still use the set of coins introduced in 1850, when the franc was created, 
shows that Switzerland, thanks to prudent policy, has succeeded in avoiding the monetary disorders 
that have plagued so many European countries since the nineteenth century. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2006
