Rachel Lomax: International monetary stability – can the IMF make a 
difference? 
The  Gam  Gilbert  de  Botton  Award  lecture  delivered  by  Ms  Rachel  Lomax,  Deputy  Governor  of  the 
Bank of England, at Somerset House, London, 1 November 2006.  
I am grateful to Phil Evans, Gregor Irwin and Gareth Ramsay for their help in preparing this lecture. I would also like to thank 
Katie Farrant, Andrew Hauser, Jens Larsen, Chris Salmon and Misa Tanaka for their very helpful contributions. 
 Next month will be the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Smithsonian Agreement – hailed at the time by 
President Nixon as ‘the most significant monetary agreement in the history of the world’. Today it is 
remembered, if at all, as a stage in the collapse of the Bretton Woods system of pegged exchange 
rates. But it also inaugurated a period of intense debate about the future of the international monetary 
system and the role of the International Monetary Fund, which culminated in the Second Amendment 
to the Fund’s Articles in 1976. 
Thirty years on, the Fund’s role in promoting international monetary stability is again under scrutiny. 
The  world  economy  and  the  international  monetary  system  have  been  transformed  since  the  late 
1970s. The Fund has evolved to deal with new situations and fresh crises. But much more change is 
needed if it is to meet the challenges of the 21st century. That much is common ground. 
Proposals to reinvigorate the Fund’s oversight of the international monetary system – surveillance – lie 
at the heart of the Medium Term Strategy endorsed at this year’s Spring Meeting of the IMF. Together 
with the more widely publicised, and politically charged, commitment to reform the Fund’s governance, 
by  rebalancing  the  quotas  that  determine  member countries’  voting  rights,  they  represent  a  serious 
attempt, in the words of the Fund’s Managing Director Rodrigo de Rato, to ‘meet the challenges posed 
by globalisation.’ 
The main purpose of my lecture tonight will be to explain the role which a refocused Fund could and 
should be playing in promoting international monetary stability, and to outline some steps to build on 
the  agreements  reached  at  the  Fund’s  Annual  meetings  in  Singapore  in  September.  The  next  six 
months will be critical. It is important that we use them to think hard about what the Fund does, as well 
as to push forward the second stage of the governance agenda. 
The changing role of the IMF 
The IMF was originally set up at the end of the Second World War ‘to promote international monetary 
cooperation  through  a  permanent  institution  which  provides  the  machinery  for  consultation  and 
collaboration  on  international  monetary  problems’.  The  collapse  of  the  system  of  pegged  exchange 
rates in the early 1970s precipitated a lengthy debate between those, led by the French, who favoured 
a  return  to  managed  exchange  rates,  and  others,  led  by  the  Americans,  who  favoured  floating 
exchange rates. When a compromise was eventually reached, the Fund’s Articles were amended to 
allow Member countries to choose between fixed, floating or managed exchange rate regimes, as long 
as they fulfilled certain commitments. 
Members agreed to collaborate with the Fund and other countries to assure external stability through 
‘orderly  exchange  arrangements  and  …  a  stable  system  of  exchange  rates’.  They  also  assumed 
specific obligations relating to their domestic and external policies. They agreed to avoid manipulating 
exchange rates to prevent effective balance of payments adjustment or to gain an unfair competitive 
advantage. And they agreed to direct their domestic policies toward fostering orderly economic growth 
and price stability. 
The Fund’s role was also redefined. It was required: first ‘to oversee the international monetary system 
in order to ensure its effective operation’, and second to ‘exercise firm surveillance over the exchange 
rate  policies  of  its  members  and  to  adopt  specific  principles  for  the  guidance  of  all  members  with 
respect  to  these  policies’.  These  principles  were  subsequently  spelt  out  in  a  1977  Surveillance 
Decision, which focussed narrowly on exchange rate policies. 
Surveillance duly became one of the Fund’s core activities, alongside lending and providing technical 
assistance. But over the years, the focus of surveillance drifted away from exchange rate issues, as 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 1
the  Fund’s  central  role  in  promoting  international  monetary  cooperation  went  into  eclipse.  Its  public 
profile  was  dominated  by  its  frequently  controversial  role  as  a  provider  of  financial  assistance  to 
countries  facing  external  payments  crises.  International  monetary  policy  coordination,  on  the  few 
occasions when it was actively attempted, became the preserve of small inter-governmental groups of 
leading industrialised countries, the G5/7 – most famously in the Plaza and Louvre Accords in the mid 
1980s. 
Over time, the international monetary system has evolved into a patchwork of different approaches to 
policy, in contrast to the uniformity of the Bretton Woods system. Many large developed countries with 
open  capital  markets  now  pursue  independent  monetary  polices  and  let  their  exchange  rates  float 
freely, while smaller and less developed countries tend to peg or heavily manage their exchange rates, 
effectively surrendering control over domestic inflation. There are regional monetary unions – notably 
the euro zone. And some emerging and developing economies still combine managed exchange rates 
with restrictions on capital flows, in an attempt to retain a degree of monetary independence. 
How has the world economy changed? 
The backdrop to these developments has been a transformation in the world economy over the past 
thirty years. For the present purposes, there are two major aspects to what is commonly known as 
‘globalisation’. 
First,  there  has  been  a  very  rapid  integration  of  the  world  economy.  Trade  liberalisation,  new 
technology,  falling  communication  costs,  and  the  resulting  globalisation  of  supply  chains  have 
contributed to a great opening in national markets. Since 1970, trade openness – defined as the ratio 
of exports and imports to GDP – has risen from around 25% to over 40% for industrialised countries, 
and  from  15%  to  60%  for  emerging  markets.  The  growth  and  integration  of  financial  and  capital 
markets  has been even  more spectacular,  especially  over  the  past  20  years. Financial openness – 
defined as the ratio of external assets and liabilities to GDP - has risen seven-fold for both groups of 
countries. 
Second,  the  dramatic  rise  of  new  economic  powers  has  been  simultaneously  adding  to  global 
productive capacity, and changing the balance of world trade and economic activity. 
The entry of China, India and Eastern Europe into the global market economy has effectively doubled 
the world’s supply of labour. The sheer scale and speed of economic development in China alone has 
been quite without precedent. After 25 years of double-digit growth, it is now the world’s fourth largest 
economy, having overtaken the UK this year. Its share of world trade has more than doubled over the 
past decade, making it the third largest trading country behind the US and Germany. 
Increasingly, a small group of industrialised countries will no longer dominate the world economy in the 
way they did 30 years ago. Measured at market exchange rates, the G7 still accounts for 60% of world 
output. But if current growth differentials persist, this share will fall to 40% within the next 20 years. 
And  if  output  is  measured  using  purchasing  power  parities  –  to  give  a  higher,  and  arguably  more 
accurate,  weight  to  relatively  cheap  non-traded  goods  and  services  in  emerging  markets  -  the  G7 
world share has already fallen to that level. 
Emerging markets are already a major force in the world economy. Together they make up 80% of the 
world’s population, use half the world’s energy and produce over 40% of the world’s exports. And over 
the last five years they have accounted for well over half of total world growth. 
Implications for policy 
Taken  together,  these  developments  have  profound  implications  for  policy-makers.  The  linkages 
between one economy and another are now wider, deeper and more complex than ever before. One 
country’s  policy  is  more  likely  to  have  ‘spill  over’  effects  on  other  countries.  The  interpretation  of 
economic developments has become more challenging. And the rapid emergence of new economic 
superpowers is creating a new generation of policy issues. 
For example, the addition of large supplies of low cost labour to the world market is affecting global 
relative  prices,  especially  of  manufactured  goods  and  natural  resources,  as  well  as  intensifying 
competition  in  labour  and  product  markets.  This  seems  to  be  affecting  wage  and  price  setting 
behaviour in developed countries, as well as their terms of trade. Domestic policy-makers have been 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2006
left struggling to comprehend how globalisation is changing the behaviour of their own economies, and 
thus the likely impact of their own policy actions. 
From  a  global  perspective,  the  coexistence,  in  recent  years,  of  low  long-term  real  interest  rates, 
massive, and rising, US current account deficits and the build up of huge foreign exchange reserves in 
Asia has been a source of particular puzzlement and some concern to policy-makers. 
How confident can we really be that the international monetary system can cope with the stresses and 
strains of a fast integrating global economy? Deep and liquid financial markets have made it possible 
to  finance  huge  global  imbalances,  and  may  have  helped  to  stabilise  the  world  economy  in  recent 
years. But there must be a risk, even if it is fairly remote, that imbalances will unwind in an abrupt or 
disorderly way which could damage growth and push up inflation. 
Globalisation  is  raising  the  stakes  for  policymakers.  Closer  collaboration  should  help  them  to  take 
better informed decisions. It can deepen their understanding of the impact of global developments and 
policy spillovers, and give them insights into the likely responses of other policy-makers to different 
scenarios. In a more closely integrated world economy, there is a greater shared interest in identifying 
the risks to international monetary stability and in discussing the policy responses that might help to 
mitigate them. 
The Fund and international monetary co-operation – the issues 
But  even  if  we  accept  the  case  for  intensified  international  monetary  collaboration  in  today’s  highly 
inter-connected world, does the Fund still have a central role to play? And if so, what is it? 
There are two main reasons why, in my view, it does. 
First, there is an important role for a permanent institution as a provider of internationally consistent 
information,  impartial expert  analysis, assessment  and  advice.  Today’s world economy  is no  longer 
dominated by a small group of like-minded industrialised countries at similar stages of development; 
tomorrow’s  will  be  even  less  so.  A  shared  knowledge  base  will  facilitate  effective  consultation  and 
collaboration on complex and politically charged issues. This is essentially a public good. And while it 
is possible to envisage alternative arrangements for supplying it, a permanent international institution 
is likely to offer clear practical advantages. 
Second, the Fund already exists. It has the reach and experience to respond flexibly to the changing 
structure  of  the  world  economy.  It  has  nearly  universal  membership,  (now  totalling  184  sovereign 
nations), an agreed legal framework, extensive relevant institutional capacity and a reputation built up 
over sixty years. Given the costs of acquiring such unique capacity from scratch in the modern world, 
the benefits of starting again would need to be very substantial indeed. 
This adds up to a strong pragmatic case for working with what we have. 
So what role should the Fund be playing? Mervyn King, in his speech in Delhi earlier this year, likened 
the role of the IMF to an umpire in cricket, ‘warning the players not to attack each other verbally and 
making it clear publicly when they believe the players are not abiding with the spirit of the game’. 
While  I  would  be  the  last  person  to  argue  with  Mervyn,  at  least  about  cricket,  I  initially  found  this 
analogy  rather  unconvincing.  In  my  mind,  the  term  umpire  conjures  up  a  portly  old  gentleman  in  a 
white  coat  and  straw  boater.  Surely  the  modern  IMF  should  have  a  more  dynamic  and  up  to  date 
image? But it turns out that even cricket has moved on. I am not referring to the recent abandonment 
of the England Pakistan match, for the first time ever, after a heated disagreement between an umpire 
and players. No, what I have in mind is the advanced computer technology which I gather now exists, 
aptly named Hawk-Eye, which could assist umpires in making the most difficult calls – those about 
which the players of the game are most likely to disagree. 
So we should think of the IMF as the cricket umpire of the future, with Hawk-Eye in her toolkit – where 
the Fund’s Hawk-Eye will be its impartial analysis, assessment and advice, enabling it to dissect the 
most difficult policy issues in the global economy. 
Reforming the Fund’s surveillance 
If that is the vision, the relevant questions are whether the Fund’s current surveillance activities are 
well designed to meet the need; and if not, what can be done to improve matters? 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 3
The answer to the first question is clearly no. Despite many reviews, the underpinning Surveillance 
Decision, agreed three decades ago, has never been revised. And over that time Fund surveillance 
has drifted a long way from its original – narrowly defined – purpose. Fortunately, there is now broad 
agreement about the main problems that need addressing. 
First, the Fund does not devote enough time and effort to overseeing the system as a whole, through 
assessing  global  economic  prospects  and  analysing  international  economic  linkages  and  policy 
spillovers  (so-called  multilateral  surveillance).  Instead,  the  great  bulk  of  the  Fund’s  effort  has  been 
devoted to producing reports on individual member countries (so-called bilateral surveillance). 
Second, these individual country assessments have often lacked focus. The subjects covered have 
ranged widely, reflecting the preoccupations of the day, including much detail on so called ‘structural’ 
issues.  Nor  has  bilateral  surveillance  been  good  at  picking  up  multilateral  issues  -  areas  where  a 
country’s policies might have wider effects, or where it might be particularly exposed to global risks. 
The Fund’s analysis needs to be better focussed on the big global issues, including financial issues 
and on the interactions between different regions and countries. This means devoting more effort to 
analysing  multilateral  issues  and  to  integrating  bilateral  and  multilateral  surveillance;  and  it  means 
being  ruthlessly  selective  in  dealing  with  structural  issues,  by  testing  their  relevance  to  external 
stability.  It  also  means  putting  more  emphasis  on  the  surveillance  of  those  countries  with  the  most 
potential to create waves in the international monetary system. 
Finally, the relatively puny effort devoted to multilateral surveillance is not having enough influence on 
members’ policies. According to the Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) report published earlier this 
year, there is ‘too much weight on providing information on economic developments and too little on 
analysing  economic  policy  linkages  and  identifying  scope  for  collective  action’.  The  Fund  needs  to 
make more of its presence at inter-governmental groups such as the G7 and the G20. And it needs to 
experiment with more flexible ways of exploring key policy issues with relevant groups of members, to 
add depth to the formal exchanges typical of large set-piece international gatherings. 
After  a  couple  of  years  debate,  the  prospects  for  achieving  meaningful  reform  now  look  promising, 
following the Fund’s Annual meetings in Singapore. The agenda for reforming surveillance includes a 
new focus on multilateral issues, including global financial issues and a new procedure for multilateral 
surveillance. The Managing Director has launched a first round of multilateral consultations on global 
imbalances. These are a potentially important innovation in the way the Fund interacts with key policy-
makers, but as they are still under way, I shall not comment further. 
Instead I want to focus on the other key area for reform, where there are some important outstanding 
issues. This is the work now in hand to clarify and update the operational guidance on surveillance, 
through a thorough review of the 1977 Decision and by designing a new annual remit for surveillance. 
This  is  aiming  to  provide  a  clear,  up-to-date  set  of  guiding  principles,  and  a  firmer  operational 
foundation for surveillance. 
This matters because the Fund can only be effective in encouraging countries to fulfil their obligations 
if there is a clear and shared view of what those commitments are, and a coherent and transparent 
operational  framework  for  assessing  compliance.  There  also  needs  to  be  greater  clarity  about  the 
Fund’s obligations, and how it is to be held to account for fulfilling them. 
A new Surveillance Decision 
The  1977  Surveillance  Decision  needs  to  be  replaced  by  a  coherent  and  comprehensive  set  of 
principles  covering  all  aspects  of  the  Fund’s  surveillance.  A  new  Decision  should  start  from  the 
overarching objective to promote external stability. Consistent with this, it should shift the emphasis 
toward multilateral surveillance and the analysis of policy spillovers. And, unlike the 1977 Decision, it 
should cover  both  exchange  rate  policies  and domestic  policies  insofar  as  they  may  affect external 
stability, rather than exchange rate policies, per se. 
This is a key area where the consensus has moved on since the late 1970s. 
It  is  now  well  recognised  that  exchange  rate  policies  cannot  be  divorced  from  domestic  policies. 
Where exchange rates are allowed to float freely, the paths they take will be affected by a wide range 
of domestic factors, including both monetary and fiscal policies. These policies can have significant 
foreign exchange and spill-over effects even when they are not implemented for an explicit balance of 
payments purpose. But even where nominal exchange rates are pegged, competitiveness and hence 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2006
trade flows depend crucially on relative inflation rates, which reflect domestic monetary and financial 
policies.  So  both  the  effects  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  and  questions  about  whether  such  a  peg  is 
sustainable at a given level, depend fundamentally on other domestic policies. 
In  short,  what  is  now  needed  is  a  new  decision  which  will  provide  a  comprehensive  framework  for 
surveillance;  which  will  approach  members’  obligations  explicitly  from  the  perspective  of  external 
stability; and which will do so in terms which can readily be made operational. And it must be written in 
clear and unambiguous language. 
This is a tall order I know – so here are some suggestions. 
One very simple way of keeping surveillance focused would be to include a ‘selectivity principle’ in a 
new  Decision.  This  would  say  that  the  scope  of  all  surveillance  activities  should  be  based  on  their 
relevance to external stability: and that what matters is how a member’s policies could affect the rest 
of the world. 
The  most  difficult  challenge  will  be  to  state  members’  commitments  in  terms  that  are  both  general 
enough to take account of their very different economic circumstances, and specific enough to provide 
a  clear  focus  for  IMF  surveillance.  Striking  the  right  balance  is  essential  if  a  new  framework  is  to 
provide  a  useful  basis  for  assessing  industrialised  countries,  emerging  markets,  and  developing 
countries alike in a way that will be accepted as even handed. 
A good way of meeting this challenge would be to ground surveillance in a more structured analysis of 
the  policy  frameworks  which  countries  themselves  choose  to  adopt.  The  Fund  could  then  focus  on 
identifying  areas  where  a  member’s  policy  frameworks  might  be  unsustainable  or  inconsistent  with 
external stability, and then offer policy recommendations tailored to the circumstances of the country 
or countries concerned. 
How might this work in practice? 
Member countries would each provide a systematic description of their chosen policy frameworks in 
key areas - relating to monetary, fiscal, financial, and exchange rate policies. For these purposes, a 
policy framework is just a more or less formal description of a country’s policy objectives and the policy 
instruments that have been assigned to meet them, including any policy rules, targets or strategies 
that may be used as a guide to decision-taking. 
This  approach  would  exploit  the  Fund’s  already  significant  access  to  information  about  members’ 
policy frameworks, and if necessary its power to request more. And it would also avoid prescription 
and explicitly recognise members’ undoubted right to choose their own policy frameworks, providing 
that they are consistent with their commitments under the Articles. 
Given this starting point, Fund surveillance could then focus on two key sets of issues. 
First,  is  an  individual  country’s  set  of  monetary,  fiscal,  financial,  and  exchange  rate  frameworks 
internally consistent? 
The key questions would be: is this a sustainable approach to policy? And is policy being implemented 
in  a  way  which  is  consistent  with  the  stated  framework?  Taken  together  are  the  policy  frameworks 
adopted by a member consistent with its obligations under the Fund’s Articles, including the member’s 
overarching commitment to collaborate with the Fund and other members to assure external stability? 
The Asian crisis of the late 1990s illustrates the problems that can develop from internally inconsistent 
financial  and  exchange  rate  policies.  There  were  fundamental  inconsistencies  between  rapidly-
liberalised capital accounts, still under-developed financial systems, and pegged exchange rates. This 
led to excessive investment through financial intermediaries, and the accumulation of a great deal of 
foreign-currency debt, much of which was un-hedged. When the full extent of this vulnerability became 
apparent, there were full-blown currency and financial sector crises. 
Second, are different countries’ policy frameworks consistent with one another?  
If  different  members’  policy  frameworks  are  inconsistent,  this  could  inhibit  external  adjustment,  and 
pose a potential threat to external stability. So the key area for multilateral surveillance would be to 
identify where different countries’ policy frameworks might conflict with one another and to propose 
remedies before this threatened the stability of the international monetary system. 
You  can  argue  that  inconsistent  policy  frameworks  lay  at  the  root  of  the  European  Exchange  Rate 
Mechanism crisis in 1992. German monetary policy successfully targeted domestic price stability. The 
UK was pegging its exchange rate to the DM in order to import this stability. But when the Germans 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 5
adopted a new approach to fiscal policy, running a structural deficit to finance infrastructure investment 
in the east – essentially adopting a new fiscal policy framework - German interest rates had to rise to 
keep domestic inflation in check. But keeping UK interest rates high enough to maintain the exchange 
rate  would  have  been  very  contractionary.  Arguably,  the  UK  and  German  policy  frameworks  had 
become incompatible. Something had to give – in this case sterling’s membership of the ERM. 
This  analysis  of  policy  frameworks  would  help  to  focus  bilateral  surveillance,  and  provide  a  better 
basis for multilateral surveillance, and for integrating the two. It should throw up issues that could be 
pursued either with individual members or broader groups as appropriate. 
An annual remit 
Better  guidance  for  Fund  surveillance  should  be  buttressed  by  strengthened  accountability  for 
performance.  For  this,  we  need  a  clearer  definition  of  what  the  Fund’s  surveillance  is  expected  to 
deliver. A good way of doing this would be to set an annual surveillance remit for the Fund’s Managing 
Director - an idea endorsed by the IMFC last April. 
There  are  a  number  of  overlapping  mechanisms  for  setting  priorities  and  assessing  performance 
which  now  operate  across  the  broad  range  of  the  Fund’s  work  programme,  through  the  Executive 
Board.  But  a  surveillance  remit  would  provide  a  sharper  means  for  holding Fund  management  and 
staff to account for their performance on this key aspect of their work. 
Of course, it would need to work with the grain of the Fund’s overall governance arrangements. This 
throws  up  two  tricky  issues.  First,  who  sets  the  remit  and  how?  And  second,  how  is  the  Fund’s 
performance to be evaluated, and by whom? These issues require detailed consideration, but let me 
offer a few thoughts. 
First, the process for setting the remit probably needs to involve both the Fund’s Executive Board and 
the IMFC: the Board, because it is the body formally charged under the Articles with the oversight of 
surveillance; and the IMFC, because of its heavyweight political composition. The involvement of the 
most  senior  policy-makers  matters,  because  by  endorsing  the  remit  they  are  effectively  giving  the 
Fund  a  license  to  discuss  their  policies.  This  is  empowering  to  the  Fund.  One  way  for  this  to  work 
might be for the Board to present a draft to the IMFC for discussion at the spring meeting each year, 
taking its cue from the IMFC communiqué issued the previous autumn.  
Second,  one  obstacle  to  relying  exclusively  on  the  Executive  Board  to  evaluate  the  Fund’s 
performance arises from the position of the Managing Director, who is both Chair of the Board and 
Head  of  the  Fund  Staff.  But  the  MD’s  position  is  embedded  in  the  Articles  and  raises  much  wider 
issues of governance. In the short term at least, this argues for giving a significant role to the IMFC. 
Third,  the  technical  challenges  in  assessing  the  effectiveness  of  surveillance  are  formidable.  This 
points to giving an important role to the IEO which, since its foundation in 2001, has been building up 
relevant expertise in assessing various aspects of the Fund’s work. 
How much difference can IMF surveillance really make? 
This brings me to the crux of the matter: can IMF surveillance really make much difference, even if it is 
reformed in the way I have described? 
It is important to recognise that surveillance - especially multilateral surveillance - is a very different 
kind  of  activity  from  the  monitoring  of  reform  programmes  that  may  be  linked  to  Fund  financial 
assistance  packages.  Lending  programmes  have  exerted  considerable  apparent  leverage  over 
countries’ behaviour at least in the short term, through so called ‘conditionality’. In recent years the 
Fund’s lending activities have gone into steep, and possibly irreversible, decline. But leverage of this 
kind has never been available to force policy change on countries who do not borrow from the Fund, a 
category which for the past 25 years has included all large industrialised countries. 
The  ‘traction’  of  surveillance  depends  critically  on  the  Fund’s  ability  to  influence  the  policies  that 
countries choose to pursue. But is it realistic to suppose that the Fund can any have real influence 
over the countries whose policies matter most? 
The Fund’s constitution is cast in terms of the obligations that members owe to each other and to the 
Fund. Such obligations are not without legal content, still less without value. But the effectiveness of 
6 
 BIS Review 103/2006
surveillance cannot rest on the strength or otherwise of any treaty-based sanctions that might be used 
against members who fail to meet their obligations. 
The Fund’s chief weapon is persuasion, exerted through a combination of channels: private advice, 
peer pressure, and public debate. But is this enough? 
Excellent analysis can frame the issues that policy makers focus on; and it can shape and inform the 
public debate, domestic and international, that leads to action. Ideas and analysis, widely and well-
communicated, can be very powerful in the modern world, especially in the largest democracies. As 
Keynes reportedly remarked ‘Ideas shape the course of history’. 
The Fund can also facilitate dialogue between countries on issues where unilateral or even bilateral 
decision-making may not be the best way forward. On the biggest global issues, policies need to be 
designed with some depth of understanding about how others will act. 
But ultimately much turns on members’ confidence and trust in the Fund, and on the depth of their 
continuing  commitment  to  its  original  first  purpose:  ‘to  promote  international  monetary  co  operation 
through a permanent institution’. The support and commitment of those countries whose policies have 
the greatest impact on the world economy is clearly critical. 
So the Fund’s ability to shape and facilitate the debate is intimately bound up with its legitimacy. All 
countries need to feel they have a real stake in the governance of the Fund and an effective voice in 
shaping its activities and the decisions taken by its Board. This is why the governance agenda is so 
important  and  why  there  is  a  close  link  between  the  surveillance  agenda  and  the  second  stage  of 
quota reform. 
The broader point is that everyone needs to have confidence that the Fund is fair and impartial in the 
way  it  goes  about  its  work.  Surveillance  needs  to  be  free  from  any  perception  of  bias  if  it  is  to  be 
credible. This is sensitive territory. Members are prohibited from attempting to influence staff as they 
discharge their functions. But present arrangements offer plenty of scope for misperceptions. There is 
a  fuzzy  boundary  between  legitimate  concern  for  the  quality  and  relevance  of  surveillance  and 
improper  pressure  on  staff  to  fudge  difficult  issues  or  water  down  unpalatable  conclusions.  A 
surveillance  remit  would  clarify  the  boundaries  between  staff  and  members  without  sacrificing 
accountability. 
The role  and  performance  of  the  Executive  Board  is clearly  a critical  issue.  Putting  to  one  side  the 
long-running  debate  about  the  case  for  shifting  to  a  non-resident  Board,  there  is  ample  room  for 
modernisation  and  improvement.  Could  the  conflicts  inherent  in  the  MD’s  dual  role  be  more 
transparently  managed?  And  could  the  Board  refocus  it  own  efforts  to  better  support  the  wider 
surveillance  agenda?  Last  year,  for  example,  it  spent  just  5%  of  its  time  mulling  over  multilateral 
surveillance issues – at a time when global imbalances and energy prices were headline news. 
Finally,  reform  is  a  process  not  an  event.  The  structure,  processes,  incentives  and  culture  of  an 
organisation whose core activity is surveillance are likely to be significantly different from one whose 
primary  focus  is  on  lending  to  countries  confronting  financial  crises.  Like  many  other  organisations 
facing major change in its core business, the Fund will need to be sure that everything it values and 
rewards is tuned to support its new priorities. 
Conclusion 
Over the past fifteen years, the Great Inflation that followed the end of the Bretton Woods system has 
been replaced by the Great Stability. Globalisation has brought great benefits, but it is creating major 
challenges for policy makers. 
How will such issues be handled in future? 
The  Fund  certainly  has  the  potential  to  act  as  an  authoritative  medium  for  international  monetary 
collaboration, providing its surveillance activities are re-focused on external stability and the big global 
issues.  The  Managing  Director’s  current  reform  agenda  is  on  the  right  lines.  But  the  Fund’s 
effectiveness in promoting international monetary stability will depend critically on the organisation’s 
stature as a trusted and respected source of dispassionate analysis and impartial advice. And it will 
rest above all on the willingness of its members – large as well as small - to use it as their instrument 
to improve the quality of their own policy making. 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 7
Equipping the Fund with its own version of Hawk-Eye will not be enough. In the end it will be down to 
them – or more accurately, us. 
References 
International Monetary Fund, "The Managing Director’s Report on Implementing the Fund’s Medium- 
Term Strategy", April 2006, Washington DC, available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2006/040506.pdf
Mervyn King, "Reform of the International Monetary Fund", speech at the Indian Council for Research 
on International Economic Relations in New Delhi, India, February 2006, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2006/speech267.pdf
Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF, "An Evaluation of the IMF's Multilateral Surveillance", 
February 2006, Washington DC, available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/ieo/2006/ms/eng/pdf/report.pdf
International Monetary Fund, “World Economic Outlook”, September 2006 and others, available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/02/index.htm
8 
 BIS Review 103/2006
