Toshihiko Fukui: The outlook for Japan's economy and the conduct of 
monetary policy  
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Kisaragi-kai 
meeting, Tokyo, 7 November 2006. 
 Introduction 
At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meetings  at  the  end  of  April  and  October,  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan approves the text of the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, or the Outlook Report as we 
call it for short, and makes it public. Today, I would like to discuss the Bank's view on the current state 
of  and  outlook  for  the  domestic  economy  and  overseas  economies  as  well  as  the  Bank's  thinking 
behind its conduct of monetary policy, with reference to the October 2006 Outlook Report, which was 
released last week. 
Developments in overseas economies 
I.  
Let me first touch upon recent developments in the global economy. 
In the United States, deceleration in the pace of economic expansion is becoming clearer, as seen, for 
example, in the decrease in housing investment. However, business fixed investment and production 
continue to increase, and the pace of deceleration in private consumption has been moderate so far. 
Meanwhile,  in  the  euro  area,  the  momentum  of  economic  recovery  is  becoming  more  evident.  The 
increases in production and the recovery in corporate profits observed so far have contributed to an 
improvement in the employment situation and increases in business fixed investment. In China, strong 
expansion  in  both  domestic  and  external  demand  is  continuing.  The  rate  of  growth  in  fixed  asset 
investment  remains  high,  although  the  pace  of  growth  has  been  slowing  slightly  as  a  result  of 
measures  taken  by  the  Chinese  government  and  the  People's  Bank  of  China  to  contain  the 
overheating of the economy. Oil-producing countries, such as those of the Middle East, continue to 
experience an economic boom supported partly by the significant improvement in the external balance 
resulting from the rises in crude oil prices. Other emerging economies also continue to expand. Thus, 
the  global  economy  as  a  whole  continues  to  expand  strongly,  with  the  slowing  growth  in  the  U.S. 
economy being offset by high growth in other economies. The global economy is expected to continue 
expanding steadily across a broader range of regions. 
According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the global economy has registered high growth 
rates of around 5 percent for two consecutive years: 5.3 percent in 2004 and 4.9 percent in 2005. The 
global economy is expected to continue expanding at around the same pace, at 5.1 percent in 2006 
and  4.9  percent  in  2007.  This  is  the  first  time  since  the  early  1970s  that  the  global  economy  has 
registered and is expected to continue to register high growth of around 5 percent over a period of 
some years. Looking at the growth rates of individual countries, the developed economies have not 
necessarily been growing faster than in the past; rather, the countries contributing to the current high 
growth are the emerging economies that have taken off, one after another, as economic globalization 
progressed. These countries have increased their overall presence in the global economy and have 
contributed  greatly  to  the  high  global  growth  rate.  Asian  emerging  economies  in  particular  have 
enjoyed high growth rates for many years, and their share in the global economy has increased so 
much  that  they  have  become  an  engine  of  global  economic  growth.  This  is  evident  from  the  IMF's 
latest projection of world economic growth, which was revised in September. Based on a substantial 
upward revision of the growth projection for Asian emerging economies, the projected growth rate of 
the world economy has been pushed up despite the downward revision of the growth projection for the 
U.S. economy. 
The current state of the Japanese economy 
II.  
I would now like to turn to the current state of the Japanese economy. 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 1
The current phase of economic recovery began in January 2002. In November, it will have lasted for 
four years and ten months, exceeding the Izanagi boom, the longest postwar economic expansion (57 
months during 1965-70). 
Looking  at  recent  economic  developments,  exports  have  continued  to  increase  against  the 
background  of  the  expansion  of  overseas  economies,  which  I  have  just  outlined.  By  destination, 
exports  to  the  United  States  have  maintained  their  steady  growth  as  a  whole,  although  growth  in 
automobile-related  goods  has  slowed  somewhat.  Exports  to  Europe  and  East  Asia  have  continued 
their  solid  increases,  and  those  to  other  regions,  particularly  the  oil-producing  countries,  have 
registered high growth. 
Corporate profits have been high despite the surge in prices of raw materials such as crude oil. Large 
manufacturing firms in particular have made successive upward revisions to their profit estimates due 
to  the  increase  in  exports  coupled  with  the  depreciation  of  the  yen.  In  this  situation,  business 
sentiment  remains  favorable  and  business  fixed  investment continues  to  increase.  According  to  the 
September Tankan (Short-term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) conducted by the Bank's 
Research and Statistics Department, if firms' business plans for fiscal 2006 are realized, current profits 
will  register  growth  for  the  fifth  consecutive  year  (since  2002),  and  business  fixed  investment  will 
record an increase for the fourth consecutive year (since 2003). 
The  current  strong  business  fixed  investment  continues  to  be  led  by  the  manufacturing  sector, 
although nonmanufacturers as well as small firms have started to step up their fixed investment. The 
acceleration  in  business  fixed  investment  reflects  the  fact  that  firms  are  seeking  to  reinforce  their 
capacity to supply goods and services by increasing capital equipment as they look to capture profit 
opportunities  in  overseas  markets.  In  the  1990s,  when  Japan  was  undergoing  severe  adjustments 
after  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  economy,  there  was  a  view  that  the  increasing  supply  capacity  of 
emerging  economies  was  a  threat  that  would  deprive  Japanese  workers  of  job  opportunities.  This 
view,  however,  is  one-sided,  and  the  rapid  development  of  emerging  economies  has  in  fact  been 
playing  a  significant  role  in  establishing  the  foundation  of  Japan's  economic  development  toward  a 
new  era.  It  is  very  beneficial  to  the  development  of  Japan's  economy  that  Japan  and  emerging 
economies - especially strongly growing Asian emerging economies - have established a new system 
of  international  division  of  the  production  process  and  interdependent  relations  in  a  constructive 
manner.  
For  example,  goods  requiring  a  relatively  high  degree of  processing,  such  as  IT-related  machinery, 
have been gradually increasing their share in Japan's imports from other Asian economies, replacing 
labor-intensive goods, such as clothing and other light manufactured goods. This is mainly because 
Japan's direct investment in other Asian economies has been increasing as Japanese firms optimize 
their  production  processes.  As  a  result  of  the  creation  of  production  bases  and  employment 
opportunities  with  the  increased  direct  investment,  Asian  economies  have  been  increasing  their 
presence  in  the  global  economy,  not  only  as  global  suppliers but  also  as  markets with  high  growth 
potential. Asian economies are becoming one of the driving forces of the ongoing expansion of the 
global economy, and this in turn is spurring Japan's exports.  
One  of  the  notable  characteristics  of  the  current  recovery  phase  of  Japan's  economy  is  that  many 
Japanese firms continue to scrutinize investment profitability. They are not only increasing investment 
to boost production capacity but also accelerating the replacement of obsolete capital equipment to 
improve  efficiency.  Such  corporate  behavior  can  be  interpreted  as  reflecting  the  fact  that  the 
management of firms, amid intensifying global competition and greater exposure to the discipline of 
the capital market, is becoming more attentive to increasing corporate value.  
The positive influence of the strength in the corporate sector has fed steadily through to the household 
sector, albeit at a moderate pace. Labor market conditions have been tightening as the ratio of job 
offers to applicants has increased and the unemployment rate has been on a downtrend. The number 
of employees has been increasing steadily, partly due to the recovery in the hiring of new graduates. 
Yet,  even  in  this  situation,  wage  increases  have  remained  moderate  so  far.  We  believe  that  this  is 
because, while employers continue to restrain labor costs, employees, having experienced a severe 
employment situation, continue to prefer stable employment to a wage increase.  
However, further tightening of labor market conditions seems inevitable if the number of employees 
continues to increase when growth in the labor force levels off. For example, wages of part-time and 
temporary  workers  have  already  started  to  increase  and  large  firms  are  planning  to  increase 
significantly the number of employees, including regular employees. In this environment, the pattern of 
behavior of employers and employees is likely to change gradually, and upward pressure on wages, 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2006
including  regular  payments,  is  expected  to  strengthen  accordingly.  Sales  at  department  stores  and 
supermarkets  were  relatively  sluggish  from  spring  to  around  July,  partly  due  to  the  unfavorable 
weather conditions, but picked up in August and September. Sales of electrical appliances and outlays 
for  services  have  continued  to  be  favorable.  Given  that  changes  in  regular  payments  are  usually 
considered to constitute changes in permanent income, an increase in regular payments is likely to 
ensure a sustainable rise in private consumption, especially spending on durable goods and services. 
In sum, Japan's economy has been expanding moderately with a virtuous circle of production, income, 
and spending in operation. The current recovery has certainly been driven strongly by expansion in 
external demand, but it is not accurate to say that the recovery has been brought about by external 
demand alone.  
Against this background of the ongoing economic expansion, the environment surrounding prices has 
been gradually changing. First, the utilization of resources such as production capacity and labor has 
been  rising.  According  to  the  Tankan,  the  perception  among  firms  of  having  excess  production 
capacity has dissipated for the first time in more than a decade. In terms of employment, firms are 
increasingly feeling a shortage of labor due to improving labor market conditions. An estimate of the 
output  gap,  which  represents  the  difference  between  aggregate  demand  and  potential  aggregate 
output in the economy, suggests that the conditions of persistent excess supply have been dispersed 
and the output gap seems to have become positive. Second, wages are rising, albeit moderately, as 
labor  market  conditions  are  improving  and  firms  are  feeling  a  shortage  of  labor  in  a  relatively  wide 
range of industries. In contrast, unit labor costs, that is, the labor costs incurred to produce one unit of 
product, are still decreasing due to the increase in productivity, but the pace of decrease has clearly 
slowed, reflecting the moderate uptrend in wages. And third, as suggested by various survey results, 
inflation expectations of firms and households are shifting up. The September Tankan showed that an 
increasing number of firms in a wide range of industries answered that their output prices had risen 
compared with three months ago. Retailers are considered to have a strong influence on consumer 
prices, and the number of retailers expecting a rise in output prices exceeded the number expecting a 
fall.  According  to  the  most  recent  issue  of  the  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public's  Views  and 
Behavior,  which  is  conducted  by  the  Bank's  Public  Relations  Department  and  covers  a  nationwide 
sample of 4,000 individuals, about 60 percent of respondents felt that prices had risen from a year 
earlier, and about 80 percent of respondents expected prices to rise in the one-year period ahead.  
The Bank's outlook for economic activity and prices 
III.  
In  the  April  Outlook  Report,  the  Bank  presented  the  projection  that,  from  fiscal  2006  through  fiscal 
2007,  Japan's  economy  was  likely  to  experience a  sustained  period  of  expansion,  with  the  positive 
influence  of  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector  feeding  through  into  the  household  sector  and  the 
corporate  and  household  sectors  well  in  balance.  Comparing  the  recent  developments  in  economic 
activity and prices to the April projection, developments in the corporate sector have been somewhat 
stronger,  as  evidenced  in  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment,  while  those  in  the 
household sector have been somewhat weaker, as evidenced in wages and private consumption. On 
the whole, however, economic developments have generally been in line with the April projection.  
Given  these  developments,  the  Bank,  in  the  October  Outlook  Report,  projected  that  economic 
developments in the near future are likely to follow in general the path projected in the April Outlook 
Report.  That  is,  from  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2006  through  fiscal  2007,  the  economy  is  likely  to 
experience a sustained period of expansion, with domestic and external demand increasing and the 
positive influence of the strength in the corporate sector feeding through into the household sector. As 
the  economic  expansion  lengthens  and  matures,  growth  in  business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to 
moderate. As a result, the economic growth rate is likely to slow gradually from around 2.5 percent for 
fiscal 2006 to around 2 percent for fiscal 2007, approaching the potential growth rate. 
On the price front, the domestic corporate goods price index has been exceeding the April projection, 
mainly reflecting the rises in crude oil and other international commodity prices. The index is likely to 
continue to be on an uptrend, although the projection is subject to developments in crude oil and other 
commodity prices and foreign exchange rates. The year-on-year increase in the consumer price index 
(CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) is likely to gradually rise from the 0.0-0.5 percent 
range in fiscal 2006 to around 0.5 percent in fiscal 2007.  
The CPI was rebased in August 2006, with the base year being changed to 2005 from 2000, and year-
on-year figures as far back as January 2006 were revised retroactively. Accordingly, the Bank used 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 3
the 2005-base CPI in the October Outlook Report while it used the 2000-base CPI in the April Outlook 
Report.  At  the  time  of  the  April  Outlook  Report,  the  Bank  estimated  that  the  extent  of  the  negative 
divergence  caused  by  the  rebasing  was  likely  to  be  slightly  less  than  0.3  percentage  point, 
approximately the same as that at the previous rebasing of the CPI from the 1995 base to the 2000 
base.  In  fact,  the  negative  divergence  turned  out  to  be  greater,  around  0.5  percentage  point  on 
average during January and July 2006, but this was due to the effects of changes in the calculation of 
indices  for  existing  items  in  the  CPI  basket,  such  as  mobile  telephone  charges.  Since  such  effects 
disappear after the first year, the divergence is likely to be reduced. Thus, the basic view on the CPI in 
the current projection remains the same as that in the April projection, which used the 2000-base CPI, 
and the Bank's projection that the year-on-year increase in the CPI is likely to gradually rise continues 
to be valid as the Bank's main scenario.  
Factors causing positive and negative deviations in economic activity 
IV.  
Economic  activity  has  so  far  been  generally  in  line  with  the  April  projection.  However,  any  kind  of 
projection is subject to upside and downside risks. It should be noted that the following factors could 
cause positive and negative deviations from the baseline projection of economic activity. 
The first risk concerns the growth path of the global economy. 
The latest outlook is based on the following environment surrounding exports: although the pace of 
expansion in the U.S. economy has been decelerating recently, the economy is likely to realize a soft 
landing  and  to  move  toward  sustainable  growth;  and  overseas  economies  as  a  whole  are  likely  to 
keep expanding across a broader range of regions. These views are generally comparable with the 
IMF's World Economic Outlook and forecasts by other international organizations and private research 
institutes. Global economic growth is likely to remain robust even with a modest slowdown in the U.S. 
economy,  as  the  growth  of  emerging  economies  has  increasingly  become  self-sustained.  Recent 
developments  in  Japan's  exports  show  that  goods,  particularly  capital  goods  and  automobiles,  in 
which  Japanese  firms  have  a  competitive  edge,  are  being  exported  to  an  increasing  number  of 
countries.  According  to  the  September  Tankan,  firms  perceived  overseas  demand  for  Japanese 
products as exceeding supply in the current period and continuing to do so in the future. This implies 
that at this point firms do not feel that the slowdown in U.S. economic growth will substantially affect 
overseas demand for Japanese products. 
However,  if  a  greater-than-expected  downward  adjustment  in  housing  prices  occurs  in  the  United 
States,  it  may  lead  to  lower  growth  rates  in  the  U.S.  economy  via,  for  example,  a  deceleration  of 
growth  in  private  consumption.  If  the  pace  of  U.S.  economic  growth  decelerates  unexpectedly, 
adjustment pressure may build up in the IT-related sector. Global demand for IT-related goods has so 
far been on a steady uptrend due partly to the rapid growth in emerging economies, such as the BRIC 
economies (Brazil, Russia, India, and China). However, the pace of global increase in the supply of IT-
related  goods  has  also  been  rapid,  and  thus  if  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  of  the  U.S.  economy 
materialize,  the  balance  between  supply  and  demand  of  IT-related  goods  may  be  disturbed.  In 
addition, inflation expectations may rise, if the U.S. economy does not slow considerably in a situation 
where  resource  utilization,  namely  in  production  capacity  and  labor,  is  high.  One  of  the  factors 
supporting the sustained expansion of the global economy is the continuing stable financial conditions 
and  generally  subdued  inflationary  pressures  due  at  least  in  part  to  the  appropriate  conduct  of 
monetary policy in countries around the world. Any changes to the picture may adversely affect the 
global economy, and be accompanied by shifts in international capital flows and repricing in financial 
markets. With the fall in crude oil prices, it is becoming increasingly likely that inflation pressures in the 
United States will gradually ease as economic growth decelerates moderately. However, risks in the 
United States of a slowdown in economic growth or an acceleration in the inflation rate still require 
attention because if either occurs, the impact on the global economy will be large. 
In the euro area, the European Central Bank has been raising its policy interest rate amid appreciation 
of the euro, and the sustainability of economic recovery should be watched carefully. In Germany, full-
scale  fiscal  consolidation  has  started;  for  example,  the  value-added  tax  rate  will  be  raised  from 
January  1,  2007,  and  such  measures  may  place  downward  pressure  on  the  economy  in  the  short 
term. In China, the economy continues to expand strongly, and there is a possibility that this growth 
will accelerate during the projection period, influenced by developments in fixed asset investments and 
exports. Even though administrative measures will probably help to contain the rise in the growth rate 
of  investment  for  some  time,  the  risk  of  a  further  acceleration  of  the  economy  and  subsequent 
repercussions cannot be ruled out, since the financial environment continues to be accommodative. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2006
the  economy  continuing 
Global  economic  developments  may  also  be  influenced  by  international  commodity  prices,  such  as 
crude oil prices, depending on their future movements. 
The second risk is a further acceleration of business fixed investment. 
Although firms, especially manufacturers, have been stepping up their business fixed investment, an 
excessive build-up of capital stock has not so far been observed in the economy overall. Since firms 
are  very  careful  in  choosing  their  investment  projects,  business  fixed  investment  as  a  whole  has, 
despite recent acceleration, generally been kept within cash flow and the pace of increase in capital 
stock is moderate. In evaluating whether the growth in capital stock is excessive or not, developments 
not  only  in  the  moderately  growing  domestic  market  but  also  in  strongly  growing  overseas  markets 
need to be taken into account. 
With 
financial  conditions  remain  extremely 
accommodative. Short-term interest rates have been very low relative to the state of economic activity 
and  prices.  The  yen  has  been  depreciating  against  other  major  currencies.  The  real  effective 
exchange rate is currently as low as that recorded in the period immediately after the conclusion of the 
Plaza  Accord  in  1985.  Given  such  extremely  accommodative  financial  conditions,  firms  may  further 
accelerate  investment  based  on  optimistic  assumptions  of  future  profitability,  such  as  favorable 
expectations  regarding  the  growth  rate,  financing  costs,  and  foreign  exchange  rates.  Such 
acceleration may push up overall growth in the short run, but may lead in turn to an excessive build-up 
of capital stock that could precipitate an economic slowdown. 
The upturn in land prices, particularly in major cities, is becoming more broad-based. Such a recovery 
in land prices basically indicates that people's view on future economic activity has improved and they 
are  increasingly  expecting  higher  returns  from  investment  in  real  estate  projects.  There  seems  no 
need  at  present  to  be  concerned  about  possible  excessive  rises  in  land  prices,  but  a  rise  in  asset 
prices is likely to push up private demand. 
to  expand  moderately, 
Factors causing positive and negative deviations in prices 
V.  
Regarding the outlook for prices, attention needs to be paid to factors that may cause prices to deviate 
either  upward  or  downward  from  the  projection.  Developments  in  the  prices  of  crude  oil  and  other 
commodities  are  an  example  of  such  factors.  Another  important  factor  is  to  what  extent  consumer 
prices will change in response to economic developments, especially changes in the output gap. 
Turning  to  the  outlook  for  the  CPI,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  is  expected  to  rise  gradually, 
reflecting increasing upward pressure on wages and the moderate widening expected in the positive 
output  gap.  This  outlook,  however,  assumes  that  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  will  not  noticeably 
accelerate, since it takes into account the possibility that prices may be less sensitive to changes in 
the output gap than in the past. 
This decline in sensitivity is attributable to deregulation, advances in information and communication 
technology, the robust global economic growth, and economic globalization reflecting such growth. For 
example,  if  competition  between  domestic  goods  and  imported  goods  from  emerging  economies 
intensifies, upward pressure on prices may be contained even when the domestic output gap turns 
positive. Likewise, if intensifying global competition is pushing firms to raise corporate value, upward 
pressure on prices may be contained as firms try to increase wage restraint despite tight labor market 
conditions and to raise productivity. 
The sensitivity of prices to changes in the output gap, however, may be subject to substantial variation 
as  it  differs  depending  on  how  it  is  influenced  by  deregulation,  advances  in  information  and 
communication technology, and economic globalization. If sensitivity to the output gap is not as weak 
as  assumed,  prices  may  rise  more  than  expected.  Similarly,  even  if  prices  are  less  sensitive  to 
changes in the output gap in the short term, the rate of wage and price increases might accelerate at 
some point accompanied by an increase in inflation expectations. On the other hand, if the sensitivity 
of prices to the output gap is weaker than assumed, prices will not respond even if economic activity is 
stronger  than  expected.  Our  projection  assumes  that  as  the  economic  expansion  lengthens, 
productivity  increases  will  slow  and  wages  will  rise.  However,  if  the  pattern  of  employers'  and 
employees' behavior that I mentioned - firms maintain their restraint on labor costs, while employees 
continue to prefer stable employment to a wage increase - persists for longer than expected and rises 
in wages lag behind, upward pressure on prices may continue to be contained. 
BIS Review 105/2006 
 5
Changes  in  prices  of  international  commodities,  such  as  crude  oil,  also  affect  price  developments. 
Crude oil prices had declined after posting a record high in the summer, but they are still at a high 
level.  They  may  either  surge  or  plunge  in  the  future  depending  on,  for  example,  developments  in 
geopolitical risks. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
VI.  
I would now like to turn to the Bank's conduct of monetary policy, based on the outlook for economic 
activity and prices. 
In March 2006, when the quantitative monetary policy implemented in 2001 was terminated, the Bank 
introduced  the  "New  Framework  for  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy,"  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  the 
transparency of monetary policy from a relatively long-term viewpoint. In line with the new framework, 
the  Bank  assesses  economic  activity  and  prices  from  two  perspectives,  taking  account  of  the 
"understanding of medium- to long-term price stability," which is expressed as approximately 0 to 2 
percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, and outlines and makes public its view 
on the future course of monetary policy. 
The Bank's assessment from the first perspective, which is the outlook that it deems most likely for 
economic  activity  and  prices  through  fiscal  2007,  is  that  Japan's  economy  is  likely  to  continue 
expanding with domestic and external demand increasing and that the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the CPI (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) is expected to rise gradually through fiscal 2007, 
as the level of excess demand in the economy (the positive output gap) is increasing at a moderate 
pace and downward pressure from declining unit labor costs is weakening. In sum, Japan's economy 
is likely to achieve sustainable growth under price stability. This outlook is based on the assumption 
that market participants and firms have, to some extent, factored future changes in monetary policy 
into  their  decisions.  Therefore,  for  economic  activity  and  prices  to  develop  in  line  with  the  above 
outlook, adjustment in the level of the policy interest rate seems necessary. 
The assessment from the second perspective - in which the Bank assesses the risks considered most 
relevant to conducting monetary policy, looking over a longer time horizon and taking account of the 
cost incurred should risks materialize, however improbable they might be - is that although at present 
there seem to be no signs of overinvestment, the stimulative effect of monetary policy on economic 
activity and prices may be amplified with corporate profitability high and prices on a positive trend. For 
instance, if the expectation takes hold that interest rates will remain low for a long time regardless of 
economic activity and prices, there is a risk in the medium to long term of larger economic swings, 
resulting in large fluctuations in the rate of inflation, channeled, for example, via financial behavior and 
investment activity.  
Meanwhile, depending on future developments, the economic expansion and rising prices may stall. 
However,  Japan's  economy  seems  more  resilient  to  such  shocks,  since  the  financial  system  has 
regained stability and the economy has now cast off excesses in production capacity, employment, 
and  debt.  In  fact,  the  economy  recovered  its  momentum  shortly  after  entering  a  soft  patch  due  to 
adjustments in IT-related industries in the summer of 2004. Unlike in the past, the risk of the economy 
falling into a vicious circle of declining prices and deteriorating economic activity seems small, even if 
the economic expansion and rising prices stall.  
With regard to the future course of monetary policy, as a result of the assessment of economic activity 
and  prices  from  the  two  perspectives,  it  seems  appropriate  to  adjust  the  level  of  interest  rates 
gradually  in  the  light  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  while  maintaining  the 
accommodative financial conditions ensuing from very low interest rates for some time. 
Such an adjustment in the policy interest rate, in our view, will contribute to ensuring price stability and 
achieving sustainable economic growth in the medium to long term. Should a large disturbance in the 
price  and  economic  situation  occur,  a  drastic  policy  change  may  become  necessary,  which  would 
potentially carry the danger of causing large economic swings. In order to avoid this happening, it is 
important  for  the  Bank  to  take  a  forward-looking  approach  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Such 
forward-looking policy is not intended to stifle growth potential, but rather to steer the economy toward 
a  sustained  period  of  expansion.  As  I  have  emphasized  repeatedly,  the  Bank  does  not  have  a 
predetermined  view  regarding  a  future  increase  in  the  policy  interest  rate.  The  Bank  will  adjust  the 
level of interest rates gradually, carefully assessing economic activity and prices. 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2006
Conclusion 
Under  the  new  framework  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  it  is  very  important  for  the  Bank  to 
carefully  explain  its  assessment  of  the  state  of  the  economy  and  financial  developments  and  its 
thinking regarding the conduct of monetary policy. The Bank has been communicating with the public 
through,  for  example,  the  Outlook  Report,  the  minutes  of  Monetary  Policy  Meetings,  the  Monthly 
Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments, press conferences and speeches, and by 
enriching the content of its web site. In July this year when the Bank brought the zero interest rate 
environment to an end after five years, financial markets remained calm, a fact that has been lauded 
by overseas central banks and international organizations. The calm response of financial markets can 
be regarded as evidence that the Bank's message to market participants was well understood and the 
new framework for the conduct of monetary policy functioned effectively in communicating with market 
participants. Ensuring  transparency with  the  new  framework  is  important  not  only  in  terms  of  better 
communication with market participants, but also in terms of increasing the effectiveness of monetary 
policy. The Bank will continue to conduct monetary policy appropriately and to contribute to achieving 
sustainable economic growth under price stability.  
BIS Review 105/2006 
 7
