David Dodge: Monetary Policy Report – introductory statement 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 19 October 2006.  
 Today,  we  released  the  October  Monetary  Policy  Report,  which  discusses  current  economic  and 
financial trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
The  Canadian  economy  is  judged  to  be  operating  just  above  its  production  capacity.  While  global 
economic  growth  is  expected  to  be  a  little  higher  than  previously  anticipated,  a  weaker  near-term 
outlook for the U.S. economy has curbed the near-term prospects for Canadian exports and growth. 
The  Bank's  outlook  for  growth  in  the  Canadian  economy  has  been  revised  down  slightly  from  that 
outlined  in  July's  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update.  The  Bank's  base-case  projection  now  calls  for 
average annual GDP growth of 2.8 per cent in 2006, 2.5 per cent in 2007, and a return to 2.8 per cent 
in 2008. Weakness in labour productivity growth has led the Bank to lower its assumption for potential 
growth to 2.8 per cent for the 2006-08 period. Together, these factors imply that the small amount of 
excess demand now in the economy will be eliminated by mid-2007. 
Core inflation is expected to move a bit above 2 per cent in the coming months but return to the 2 per 
cent target by the middle of 2007 and remain there through 2008. Lower energy prices have led to a 
downward revision to the near-term projection for total CPI inflation. Total inflation (which includes the 
temporary impact of the GST reduction) will likely average about 1 1/2 per cent through the second 
quarter of 2007, before returning to the 2 per cent target and remaining there through to the end of 
2008. 
As we noted at the time of our 6 September interest rate announcement, the risks around the base-
case projection are judged to be a little greater than at the time of the July Update. The main upside 
risk relates to the momentum in household spending and housing prices, while the main downside risk 
is that the U.S. economy could slow more sharply than expected, leading to lower Canadian exports. 
The Bank judges that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced. 
On 17 October, we left our key policy rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent. The current level is judged, at 
this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term. We at the Bank will 
continue  to  pay  close  attention  to  the  evolution  of  risks  as  well  as  to  economic  and  financial 
developments in the Canadian and global economies. 
BIS Review 98/2006 
 1
