Shyamala Gopinath: Inclusive growth – role of financial education 
Special  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at 
BANCON 2006, Hyderabad, 4 November 2006. 
I thank the Indian Banks Association and hosts Andhra Bank for inviting me for this Conference.  
 I am aware you have had illustrious speakers and expert sessions on various issues reverberating in 
policy  conundrums  of  'financial  inclusion'  and  financially  inclusive  growth.  Why  I  term  these  as 
conundrums is for the reason that on the one hand, everyone accepts that a broad based access to 
formal  financial  services  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  the  aspiration  of  growth  in  GDP  and  economic 
development at large to be fulfilled; while on the other, the initiatives emerging in this direction have at 
best been confined to small pockets. The problem is not specific to India and many countries have 
been groping for the inflexion point in finding solutions to this problem. At the macro level, it is perhaps 
only  in  the  recent  past  that  this  area  is  witnessing  the  academic  rigour  of  the  scale  seen  in  the 
mainstream finance. It could be due to inherent nature of the issues we are grappling with. Most of the 
initiatives  have  been  'within  the  framework'  solutions,  which  have  inherent  limitations.  This  point 
comes out  all  the  more starkly  in  the context  of  the  explosion  in  financial  innovations and  products 
witnessed in mainstream finance. 
To elaborate this point, it would be interesting to look at the evolution of the discipline of finance in 
general and banking in particular. Till a few decades back, the field of finance itself was, in a sense, 
second  cousin  to  the  domain  of  'economics'  and  it  was  only  the  revolutionary  ideas  and  theories 
relating  to  asset  pricing,  particularly  traded  stocks  to  begin  with,  that  changed  the  landscape.  The 
subsequent academic contributions in the area of option pricing triggered the revolution in derivatives 
which  has,  in  effect,  commoditised  the  financing  needs  as  well  as  options  available  to  a  certain 
segment of the corporate and retail sector. The above advances in the field of finance have evolved in 
response to a given set of circumstances in the industrial economies and the applications designed 
around these were aimed at a particular target group. Most of the principles have gradually found wide 
acceptance  and  have  been  imbibed  across  the  globe,  including  India.  We  now  need  a  similar 
revolution in fostering financially inclusive growth. 
However, the needs of a complex country like India are very different and finding universal solutions to 
these could be really challenging, particularly in fostering a 'financially inclusive growth'.  
Financially  inclusive  growth  straddles  a  lot  of  issues  which  have  been  deliberated  upon  at  length 
during  the  previous  sessions.  I  intend  to  confine  my  address  to  one  of  the  important  facets  of  this 
challenge - the challenge of financial education.  
Financial education - the concept 
Financial  education  can  be  comprehensively  defined  as  "the  process  by  which 
financial 
consumers/investors  improve  their  understanding  of  financial  products,  concepts  and  risks  and, 
through information, instruction and/or objective advice, develop the skills and confidence to become 
more aware of financial risks and opportunities, to make informed choices, to know where to go for 
help, and to take other effective actions to improve their financial well-being". Financial education thus 
goes beyond the provision of financial information and advice. The focus of any discussion on financial 
education is primarily on the individual, who usually has limited resources and skills to appreciate the 
complexities of financial dealings with financial intermediaries on matters relating to personal finance 
on a day to day basis.  
Role of financial education vis-a-vis financial inclusion 
In  the  context  of  'financial  inclusion',  the  scope  of  financial  education  is  relatively  broader  and  it 
acquires greater significance since it could be an important factor in the very access of such excluded 
groups  to  finance.  Further,  the  process  of  educating  may  invariably  involve  addressing  deep 
entrenched  behavioural  and  psychological  factors  that  could  be  major  barriers.  However,  the 
complementary  relationship  between  microfinance  and  financial  education  is  obvious  and  financial 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 1
literacy can increase the decision making power and prepare them to cope with the financial demands 
of daily life.  
In  countries  with  diverse  social  and  economic  profile  like  India,  financial  education  is  particularly 
relevant  for  people  who  are  resource  poor  and  who  operate  at  the  margin  and  are  vulnerable  to 
persistent  downward  financial  pressures.  With  no  established  banking  relationship,  the  un-banked 
poor  are  pushed  towards  expensive  alternatives.  The  challenges  of  household  cash  management 
under difficult circumstances with few resources to fall back on could be accentuated by the lack of 
skills  or  knowledge  to  make  well  informed  financial  decisions.  Financial  education  can  help  them 
prepare ahead of time for life cycle needs and deal with unexpected emergencies without assuming 
unnecessary debt.  
As per an OECD study, the provision of education programmes for the un/underbanked groups can 
play important roles:  
• 
they  can  encourage  un/underbanked  consumers  to  enter  into  or  make  better  use  of  the 
financial mainstream,  
they can help to retain them as successful account holders in the short term and  
they can contribute to keeping them as savers for the long-term.  
they can contribute to asset building among households  
 Challenges in devising a financial education program  
Devising  financial  education  initiatives for  the  un/underbanked has  to  take  into  account  the  existing 
financial landscape, the social economic realities of this class and the fact that invariably, such groups 
are beset with low literacy levels.  
The main difference in the financial planning for the poor families is that they have fewer resources 
and opportunities. When people are struggling to make ends meet on a day-to-day basis, good money 
management  becomes  a  daily  challenge.  While  they  use  many  creative  ingenuous  strategies  to 
manage  their  money,  these  often  develop  through  trial  and  error  rather  than  by  design.  Financial 
education  has  a  role  in  'building  the  capacity  of  the  poor  to  gain  control,  become  proactive,  use 
information  and  resources  to  enhance  their  economic  security  and  more  effectively  use  financial 
services'.  When  better-informed  clients  become  better  consumers  of  financial  services,  financial 
institutions benefit.  
Further,  as  already  mentioned,  the  process  of  educating  may  invariably  involve  addressing  deep 
entrenched behavioural and psychological factors that could be major barriers. For example, in case of 
many  of  the  microfinance  initiatives  operating  on  the  'group  liability'  concept  it  could  be  a  great 
challenge to drive home the very basic rationale for such an arrangement, starting from inculcating the 
habit of small savings to appreciation of the concept of 'collective responsibility'. 
A study regarding Mexican experience has highlighted that the social and cultural factors embedded in 
the financial landscape greatly influence the ability of individuals to use financial services effectively. 
Results  indicate  that  in  addition  to  material  resources,  the  inherent  nature  of  social  relations  and 
community  links  played  a  crucial  role  in  improving  access  to  and  use  of  financial  services.  The 
transformation of financial information, knowledge, experience, attitudes and social relationships into 
financial education and sophistication constituted a cognitive resource to reducing vulnerability. This 
leads  us  to  suggest  that  a  culture  of  finance  is  an  important  catalyst  for  individuals’  change  and 
development.  
It is also important to note that financial education may contribute to behavior modification, but many 
factors  lend  to  influence  a  person’s  financial  behavior.  Contrary  to  common  belief,  motivation  is 
cultivated  internally  and  rarely  can  be  cultivated  -  sustainably,  at  least  -  by  an  external  factor.  The 
biggest obstacle to financial education is motivating individuals to pursue it. In other words, financial 
education  does  not  necessarily  motivate  individuals;  motivation  brings  individuals  to  financial 
education. Here the role of banks assumes importance as financial counselors of the clients.  
2 
 BIS Review 107/2006
Possible themes  
Inspite of the above challenges, it should be possible to arrive at a set of basic themes/issues that 
could be addressed effectively through a financial education program. As per a study conducted by 
the  under  the  project  'Financial  Education  for  the  Poor'  by  Microfinance  Opportunities,  a 
microenterprise  resource  center,  a  consistent  demand  was  found  for  the  following  broad  themes  of 
financial education:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Money Management: How to proactively manage money  
Debt Management: How to control debt and avoid over-indebtedness  
Managing Savings: How to save regularly and in a safe location  
Financial  Negotiations:  How  to  strengthen  clients'  bargaining  position  vis-à-vis  input 
suppliers, other household members, and financial institutions  
Use  of  Bank  Services:  How  banks  work  and  impose  charges;  How  clients  can  maximize 
bank services, interact with banks, and effectively use ATMs  
 An analysis of such programs in the OECD countries reveals that many educational programmes are 
integrated  into  the  provision  of  specific  financial  services,  such  as  first  or  basic  bank  accounts, 
checking and savings accounts and matched-savings plans while others adopt a broad stand-alone 
approach,  teaching  budgeting,  savings  and  credit  management,  etc.,  with  no  connection  to  any 
product of service. Aims tend to vary according to the majority target population.  
• 
For  the  generic  unbanked,  aims  are  to  explain  the  benefits  and  use  of  bank  account 
ownership and services or to build up fundamental financial literacy skills.  
For  low/moderate-income  underserved  consumers,  most  programmes  offer  advice  on 
general  money  and  credit  management;  whereas  others  have  a  specific  goal  or  are 
embedded in schemes to encourage savings, asset-building and homeownership.  
 These initiatives aim to build economic empowerment and increase long-term self-sufficiency in order 
to revitalize and stabilize disadvantaged communities. 
Indian context 
Financial education has an ever more critical role to play in the changed financial landscape of the 
country which, while on one hand has presented with newer opportunities for future collective growth, 
on  the  other,  it  has  also  heightened  fears  of  uncertainty  in  certain  quarters  mainly  because  of 
increasing multi-faceted choices and options in the management of personal finances and exposure to 
a gamut of risks. The issue of inclusive growth has been given top priority and in this direction, the 
banking sector is expected to play its part. The initiatives on financial inclusion so far, have been a 
small step in this direction. Financial education could ideally supplement these initiatives for long term 
efficacy. 
…Some issues  
One of the major hindrances in the way of delivery of financial services is the lack of basic knowledge 
and lack of awareness of the products and services available from the banks. It is important to note 
that the Financial Inclusion Task Force of the United Kingdom, one of the pioneers to talk of financial 
inclusion,  has  identified  'access  to  free  face-to-face  money  advice'  as  an  important  component  of 
financial  inclusion,  apart  from  'access  to  banking'  and  'access  to  affordable  credit'.  People  need 
information  and  advice  when  they  either  save  their  money  or  get  into  debt.  Such  information  and 
guidance can best be delivered by appropriate mechanisms and if such effective mechanisms are put 
in place through the banks, they in turn would reinforce the demand for financial services.  
Another  impediment  is  the  difficulty  or  the  lack  of  ease  of  addressing  issues  that  affect  a  common 
man.  Despite  concerted  efforts,  the  current  state  of  transparency  coupled  with  the  difficulty  of 
consumers in identifying and understanding fine print information leads to an information asymmetry 
between the financial intermediary and the customer. It is important to understand that the lack of such 
awareness in itself amounts to risk; and the challenge is to make customers aware of the various risk. 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 3
In  terms  of  promoting  financial  inclusion,  much of  the work  is  simply  in providing easily  understood 
information in a safe and engaging environment.  
…Scope for financial education 
Undoubtedly, there is a role for promoting financial education in the context of development policies 
and programs to reduce vulnerability and expand opportunities for the poor. To this end, there is a 
need  to  explore  the  potential  for  integrating  financial  literacy  into  various  types  of  development 
programs: microfinance, vocational education, skills training, business development, health, nutrition, 
agriculture,  and  food  security  programs.  In  the  late  1990s  a  move  in  the  UK  and  US  to  have  all 
Government  payments  made  electronically  contributed  to  heightening  the  importance  of  financial 
exclusion as a policy concern. Electronic government payments have made having a bank account 
essential  in  order  to  receive  payments  and  benefits.  This  has  made  it  all  the  more  important  for 
unbanked  consumers  to  access  information  on  basic  bank  accounts  savings  accounts  and  other 
financial services. Financial education programs would be required to access information on financial 
services. 
In  India  too,  improved  technology  will  enable,  for  example,  Governments  to  make  all  payments, 
including  under  various  schemes  electronically.  I  understand  that  in  Andhra  Pradesh,  the  State 
Government has taken initiative to make payments thorough e-seva. Other states have also launched 
such  initiatives.  Governments  should  now  explore  the  possibility  of  direct  credit  to  bank  accounts. 
Eventually,  part  of  the  funds  received  by  the  beneficiary  under  various  government  schemes  and 
deposited with the banks can form part of the seed capital for forming Self Help Groups (SHGs) for 
such beneficiaries.  
While some banks have on their own taken steps to provide such education, any large scale delivery 
of financial education needs to leverage on the experience and expertise of other agencies, such as 
private  entities,  non-governmental  organizations,  civil  society  organizations,  outlets  of  the  corporate 
sector etc., apart from Government initiatives, wherever available.  
The use of information technology offers a lot of promise in providing financial literacy and education 
and experience in several parts of the country through the use of rural information kiosks, mobile vans, 
etc. which have shown to what extent IT can be leveraged to provide information on various products 
and services. Information kiosks can be run by the Business Correspondents or installed in PCOs, etc. 
to  disseminate  information  about  not  only  banking  products,  but  also  other  useful  information  like 
input/output  prices,  insurance  products,  health  services,  weather  information,  etc.  Such  variety  of 
knowledge would help in better risk mitigation, lesser documentation hassles while sanctioning loans, 
etc. The kiosks need not even have any connectivity and the service personnel can perform most of 
the updating through electronic media like CDs. Banks can provide funds for setting-up such kiosks 
and meeting the running costs or the cost can be shared among banks, and the other organizations 
involved in the process.  
Some  non-banking  initiatives  are  also  being  experimented  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  In  this 
context, the project on financial counseling service for poor self-employed women in India started by 
SEWA is well known. Project Tomorrow, as it is called, was started in 2001 with a purpose to develop 
and test a financial counseling curriculum to help participants manage money productively, plan ways 
to increase assets, address life cycle events, manage risks. Through this project, SEWA has set up a 
training  unit  and  training  delivery  system  and  is  developing  tools  and  procedures  to  monitor  the 
counseling work. The project began with market research to assess the needs and demand among 
SEWA clients for financial education, followed by a 'training of trainers' course. SEWA is now providing 
financial  counseling  to  its  clients  through  a  weekly  course.  The  initial  experience  suggests  that 
participants  grasp  the  concepts  presented  and  welcome  new  perspectives  stemming  from  such 
training.  
…Extending the scope  
• 
While  talking  about  financial  education,  it  is  important  that  the  focus  also  extends  to  the 
urban  populace,  including  the  literate  masses,  which  may  not  be  having  the  financial 
acumen, technology suaveness and may not be 'financially literate'. It is not that the urban 
masses are well versed in the Internet Banking and other newer methods of banking; there 
continues  to  remain  a  segment,  which  either  avoids  using  the  services  due  to  lack  of 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2006
 confidence or remains unaware of the options available. Financial education to such target 
group would be mutually beneficial.  
There is also need for greater awareness of various products and services offered by banks. 
A  specific  case  that  comes  to  mind  pertains  to  the  housing  finance  sector.  RBI  had  also 
raised the issue of transparency and fairness in housing loans in the recent mid-term review 
of monetary policy. It has been reported that some banks, while lending for housing, are not 
fully transparent in indicating the factors governing the benchmark in respect of floating rates 
as well as in regard to reset clauses. As part of consumer awareness, many initiatives have 
been taken to increase the disclosure levels on part of lenders, but effectiveness of all this 
would be predicated on the financial understanding of the person taking the loan. The short 
point is - Does the consumer understand the underlying principle of a floating rate or can he 
even  ensure  that  the  bank  has  been  fair  and  transparent  in  its  dealing  with  him?  Clearly, 
there  is  need  for  financial  education  to  prevent  vulnerable  consumers  from  falling  prey  to 
'financially disquieting credit arrangements'.  
Even in regard to remittance facilities and foreign exchange encashment, the lack of awareness about 
the various facilities could adversely impact a population segment at the 'bottom of the pyramid' which 
is the beneficiary of smaller remittances from migrant workers. Recently, a Working Group on Cost of 
NRI Remittances has stressed in its report the need for an ongoing 'awareness program' for imparting 
basic awareness on facilities existing for making remittances, particularly for migrant workers. Apart 
from other things, this could also help in reducing the cost of effecting remittances.  
• 
Though  the  term  'financial  education  has  come  to  be  associated  with  individual/personal 
finance, a very important segment that must be brought under the ambit of such initiatives 
relates to small entrepreneurs and small businesses. Particularly when the effort is towards 
'inclusive growth', it is these segments in smaller cities and towns that could really showcase 
the benefits of economic growth. The focus in such cases, would obviously be different, with 
greater  stress  on  awareness  and  timeliness  of  financial  advice,  instead  of  just  education. 
Such timely advice could be the deciding factor in the success or failure of their ventures. In 
all probability, the promoters of these small ventures would be educated and already have a 
business sense and a business idea that needs to be actualized. It is here that awareness 
about  new  financial  products  and  an  understanding  of  their  pricing  could  enable  them  to 
ensure that they understand the downsides of the product, present and future, and be in a 
better bargaining position vis-à-vis the lender.  
Finally,  the  concept  of  financial  education  could  ideally  be  stretched  to  cover  economic 
education as well. At a broader societal level, given the path of economic reforms India has 
embraced since the early nineties, and the ensuing debates, it is imperative that the society 
and general populace be objectively informed about the fundamental economic issues and 
the rationale for, at-times difficult, choices to be made in this regard. This could go a long 
way in creating an informed and harmonious democracy.  
 Conclusion 
There is a need for banks and other agencies striving to extend financial education to the masses to 
appreciate  that  financial  inclusion  is  a  continuous  process.  Efforts  to  extend  literacy  to  make  the 
common man enabled by being aware of the evolving functional, legal and technical issues cannot be 
a one-time effort. 
A common effort of the educational programmes typically focusses on the 'supply' side that stresses 
on  attracting  customers  in  the  financial  fold.  However,  what  is  needed  is  to  have  is  an  'auto  pilot' 
concept, where the prospective customer is empowered to make / demand the desired services. This 
could create a qualitative 'demand' situation of the financial services.  
The  objective  of  financial  education  is  also  customer  protection.  It  helps  customers  to  better 
understand and manage financial risk and deal with complexities of the market place place and take 
advantage of increased competition and choice in the financial sector. The RBI, on its part, intends to 
advance  the  cause  of  financial  education  in  the  country  as  part  of  an  overall  strategy.  Currently,  a 
process of credit counseling is being encouraged to help all borrowers, particularly those in distress, to 
overcome current financial problems and gain access to the structured financial system. 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 5
However, in the ultimate analysis financial education is only one pillar of an adequate financial policy 
to  improve  financial  literacy  and  expand  access  to  financial  services.  It  can  complement,  but  not 
replace other pillars such as greater transparency, policies on consumer protection and regulation of 
financial institutions. I do hope that in our collective interest the issues raised in this Conference are 
operationalised and translated into grass root level initiatives. 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2006
