Jean-Claude Trichet: The role of money – money and monetary policy in the 
21st century (closing address) 
Closing address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Fourth 
ECB Central Banking Conference “The role of money: money and monetary policy in the twenty-first 
century”, Frankfurt am Main, 10 November 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It has been a great pleasure to host you at this fourth ECB central banking conference. Over the past 
day and a half, we have enjoyed several outstanding presentations and stimulating discussions, which 
have helped understand better the role of money in modern monetary policy-making.  
The  richness  of  the  discussions  stems  in  large  part  from  the  diversity  of  views  that  have  been 
expressed.  In  selecting  the  leading  participants  at  this  conference,  we  did  not  hesitate  to  choose 
speakers who would challenge our established views and those of others. And we strongly believe in 
frank  and  candid  exchanges  of  views  and  in  the  benefits  of  a  close  interaction  with  the  academic 
community. At the conclusion of the conference, I certainly can agree with Prof. Woodford that there is 
indeed room for further refinement of the intellectual framework used as a basis for monetary policy 
deliberations. At the same time, I remain convinced that we should not lightly discard elements – such 
as monetary analysis – that have served central banks well in the past.  
With these two points in mind, what are the main messages we should draw from the proceedings? At 
the very beginning of this conference, Jürgen Stark mentioned three issues: 
First,  to  what  extent  is  analysis  of  monetary  developments  relevant  for  the  conduct  of  a 
monetary policy aimed at the maintenance of price stability? 
Second,  how  should  the  analysis  of  money  be  organised  in  the  policy  process  leading  to 
interest rate decisions about the policy rates?  
And  third,  how  should  the  monetary  analysis  and  its  implications  for  monetary  policy  be 
presented to the financial markets and public? 
With the benefit of hindsight, let me take stock of what I have learned over the past couple of days.  
With regard to the first question, Prof. Flandreau has demonstrated that, in assessing the success of 
central bank policy, the historical context always needs to be taken into account. Political, institutional, 
and economic circumstances need to be adequately considered. During the run-up to Monetary Union, 
money  and  monetary  analysis  played  a  crucial  role  in  the  experiences  of  most  central  banks  in 
Europe. Viewed in this context, the ECB’s choice of strategy was a natural continuation of previous 
best practice, while at the same time incorporating insights from economic theory and the experience 
of other central bank. I think it is fair to say that the strategy has served us well.  
The clearest evidence of this is the high credibility which the ECB has enjoyed since its inception. The 
historical  fact  that,  at  the  time  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  market  interest  rates  on  instruments 
denominated in euro all along the yield curve were to be aligned with the lowest – and not with the 
average – rates prevailing prior to the euro was not foreseen by many observers prior to Stage III. The 
historically low level of short, medium and long-term market interest rates was unthinkable in some 
countries, which had experienced much higher inflation in the past. In my view, the incorporation of 
monetary analysis into our monetary policy strategy served, in the eyes of the global market, as an 
anchor for expectations that in no small way contributed to our success in building and maintaining 
credibility. 
The  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  ECB  announced  in  October  1998  explicitly  recognises  the 
monetary nature of inflation by assigning an important role to money in the formulation of monetary 
policy decisions aimed at the maintenance of price stability. As Prof. Issing explained to us in detail, 
there were and still are many good reasons to do so. 
Milton Friedman’s famous dictum that “inflation always and everywhere is a monetary phenomenon” is 
one of the central tenets of economic theory. On the basis of the discussions at this conference, I draw 
the conclusion that there is no disagreement in the economics profession on this central tenet, but a 
BIS Review 110/2006 
 1
lot of different views on how to organise the monetary analysis so that it has an appropriate influence 
on interest rate decisions. And this is the second issue mentioned at the opening of the conference. 
As was pointed out by Prof. Christiano and his co-authors Rostagno and Motto, including informational 
asymmetries,  transactions  costs  and  financial  frictions  in  “state-of-the-art”  macroeconomic  models 
allows  to  better  reflect  the  role  of  money  and  credit  aggregates  within  such  frameworks.  I  found 
compelling  the  argument  that  monetary  analysis  be  used  to  monitor  (and  possibly  offset) 
macroeconomic  risks  which  are  not  related  to  price  stability  at  shorter  horizons,  but  which  may 
nevertheless have important consequences for maintaining price stability over the medium and long 
run,  like  risks  to  financial  stability.  On  this  point  in  particular  Lucas  Papademos’  remarks  yesterday 
evening  were  particularly  stimulating.  Although  the  use  of  such  models  for  policy  purposes  is  in  its 
infancy,  their  further  development  is  a  promising  way  forward  and  should,  therefore,  remain  an 
important field of ongoing research. 
However, at present the practical challenge of conducting the monetary analysis requires the adoption 
and employment of practical and fully operational tools. Conducting such an analysis has not always 
proven to be an easy task. But, as the paper by Fischer, Lenza, Pill and Prof. Reichlin demonstrates, 
the  careful  analysis  of  monetary  developments  in  real  time  has  helped  the  ECB  to  shape  its 
assessment of the economic situation and the associated risks to price stability and to better identify 
the nature of the shocks impacting on the euro area economy. As I already said I can bear testimony 
that, over the past eight years, monetary analysis has helped the ECB to improve its policy decisions. 
At the same time, the importance attached to the monetary pillar has also signalled that the ECB’s 
monetary  policy  has  an  appropriate  medium-term  orientation.  I  strongly  believe  that  this  has 
contributed to shaping agents’ expectations in a manner which enhanced the credibility of the ECB. 
In this context, the third issue raised by Jürgen – namely how monetary analysis should be presented 
to the public – is crucial. Presenting the monetary analysis in a manner that serves to stabilise private 
sector long-term inflation expectations by clearly signalling the ECB’s alertness with respect to risks to 
price stability at longer horizons is key.  
Thus, it is particularly important that markets and the public at large have a good understanding of the 
systematic and conditional conduct of monetary policy by the central bank, so that expectations about 
future  price  developments  and  the  path  of  policy  rates  are  in  line  with  the  central  bank’s  mandate. 
Transparency enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy by helping to guide the expectations of 
economic agents and bring them into line with policy objectives and actions. For these reasons, the 
ECB has striven to be as transparent as possible, communicating clearly, and by a variety of means, 
its policy objective, its strategy, its assessment of the economic situation, and its view of the outlook 
for price stability and associated risks. 
There is no doubt, however, that communication is a challenging task. I can assure you that we at the 
ECB  –  in  light  of  the  mandate  that  was  assigned  to  us  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  trust  and 
credibility we have earned from more than 313 million citizens – take this challenge very seriously.  
 Chairman,  Governors,  Professors,  dear  friends,  I  have  on  behalf  of  the  Executive  Board  and 
Governing Council  of  the  ECB  to  thank  all  of  you  for  having  accepted  our  invitation  and  for  having 
contributed so actively to the discussions. The ECB considers important to permanently guard against 
complacency  and  to  remain  open  to  criticisms  and  suggestions,  to  take  regularly  stock  of  the 
advances of academic research. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2006
