Mario Draghi: 2006 World Savings Day 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, on the occasion of the 2006 World Savings 
Day, at the Association of Italian Savings Banks (ACRI), Rome, 31 October 2006. 
 Savings and investment 
1.  
Half a century ago, when Italy was moving towards prosperity, it was the parsimony of its population 
that financed economic growth. Right up to the mid-1970s, while expenditure on investment amounted 
to 26 per cent of gross national disposable income, private saving exceeded 30 per cent, with more 
than two-thirds of it due to households; their thrift was encouraged and upheld as a social virtue. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  twentieth  century,  both  expenditure  on  capital  goods  and  private  saving 
diminished  to  around  20  per  cent  of  national  income;  household  saving  dropped  below  9  per  cent. 
Since  then,  Italian  households  have  started  to  save  again,  partly  in  response  to  the  public  pension 
reforms of the 1990s; they continue to be among the thriftiest of the developed countries. 
With no more barriers to capital movements and a globalized financial market, savings worldwide are 
now  in  search  of  investment  opportunities,  wherever  they  may  arise.  The  link  between  saving  and 
investment is no longer related to national borders. Only a growing country will attract capital, from 
both within and without. 
Italy’s weak economic growth in the past ten years has been aggravated by inadequate investment, 
not so much in terms of quantity as of quality and composition. The technological component of real 
assets, human capital and organizational structure are of growing importance. If the present recovery 
is  to  last,  economic  policy  and  the  financial  system  must  support  the  restructuring  of  production, 
channelling savings towards innovative investment. 
Returning to growth 
2.  
2006 is about to become another year of record growth in world output. Since the summer there have 
been increasingly clear signs of slower growth in the United States, where the lengthy property boom 
appears to be coming to an end. World demand may be affected by the slowdown, but it continues to 
be fuelled by the exceptional growth of the Asian economies. 
Economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  considerably  stronger  now  than  in  the  previous  months.  The 
momentum could be lessened over the next quarters by the decline in demand in the United States 
and the need for some of the main euro-area countries to consolidate their public finances. 
In Italy, too, GDP growth resumed at a rapid pace in the first half of this year. Industrial production 
recorded  an  estimated  year-on-year  rise  of  over  2  percentage  points  in  the  first  ten  months  and  is 
steadily picking up from the low point of early 2005. The substantial increase in indirect tax revenue is 
another indication of a cyclical upswing. Available indicators point to strong GDP growth in the third 
quarter as well. 
So far the recovery has drawn strength principally from exports and investment. Italian goods have 
penetrated further on foreign markets, including the fast growing markets of South-East Asia, thereby 
slowing the erosion of our market shares. Exports to China are soaring, not only those of traditional 
products  but  also  of  capital  goods,  suggesting  an  improvement  in  the  competitiveness  of  some 
medium-to-high technology firms. The expansion in foreign demand has helped to rekindle investment 
in machinery and equipment, which has also been fostered by the shortage of spare capacity, ample 
availability of financial resources and persistently low interest rates. Domestic orders for capital goods 
have reached their highest level in five years. The Bank of Italy’s business surveys indicate that the 
trend will continue in the coming months. 
Although output growth has been stronger than expected, it is still slower than in the rest of Europe. 
Productivity  in  industry  remained  at  a  standstill  in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  while  in  France  and 
Germany the quarterly increase was over 3 per cent. We need to step up the action, just initiated, to 
overcome the structural constraints impeding Italy’s growth. 
The aim of the budget for 2007 is to ensure financial stability in the years to come. It is to be hoped 
that the debate in Parliament will not attenuate the push for structural reform of the public finances. 
Achieving  this  objective  is  a  prerequisite,  but  also  a  consequence,  of  economic  growth.  The  best 
response to the rating agencies’ assessments is a country that is growing. 
The  Government’s  budget  proposals  include  measures  to  help  firms  recover  their  competitiveness, 
such as the reduction in the tax component of labour costs. However, most of the policies to stimulate 
renewed economic growth remain outside the sphere of the budget because they are concerned with 
measures to change the rules of the economic game more than with changing the volume of public 
resources. 
Five months ago, in my Concluding Remarks, I listed several areas of action for structural policies. 
Common  to  all  of  them  was  the  need  to  increase  competitiveness,  in  the  goods  markets  as  in  the 
markets for factors of production, by eliminating the protection of vested interests and the monopoly 
revenues that weigh on firms’ costs and households’ budgets. 
In the summer the Government took steps to open up further the market for private services. Various 
measures to revive the productive system are now set out in bills recently passed by the Council of 
Ministers.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  progress  in  this  direction  will  continue,  without  deviating  from  the 
objective of improving competitiveness and efficiency at every point of the productive system. 
As far as incentives are concerned, automatic facilities for firms appear preferable as being less costly 
and distorting than discretionary measures, which rely on the public bodies concerned to select the 
sectors  for  promotion  and  choosing  between  different  technologies  and  projects.  Such  a  model 
requires  a  remarkable  capacity  for  strategic  evaluation.  If  that  is  lacking,  there  is  a  serious  risk  of 
scarce resources not being optimally allocated. 
To  promote  growth,  improving  the  environment  in  which  the  productive  system  operates  is  more 
important than augmenting or refining the incentives offered to firms. The areas needing action are 
many and well known. They include simplifying the regulatory and tax system, introducing rewards for 
merit  and  mechanisms  of competition within  the  educational  and  training system,  reducing  the  cost 
and enhancing the effectiveness of business services and local public services, promoting competition 
in the production and distribution of those services everywhere possible, and acting to ensure that the 
legal order and governmental authorities are guided by the values of the market and efficiency rather 
than the deleterious standards of legal formality and bureaucratic power. 
3.  
The financial system’s contribution to growth 
The stock market and institutional investors 
3.1  
Structural reform must also extend to the financial industry. The possibility of direct or indirect recourse 
to  the  capital  market  plays  an  essential  role  in  facilitating  the  expansion  of  firms  that  have  growth 
potential.  Market access  is  assisted by  the  presence  of  a  large stock  exchange,  a  good  number  of 
institutional investors and a web of specialized intermediaries. Progress on all these fronts is needed. 
As we know, the Italian share market is smaller than those of the other advanced countries. Both the 
number of companies listed and the ratio of their total capitalization to GDP are not only far lower than 
in the United States and the United Kingdom but also below the euro-area average. 
As for specialized intermediaries, in 2005 total private-equity investment in Italy was half the European 
average in proportion to GDP. The resources invested in Italy go largely to buyouts. Only 15 per cent 
of  Italian  private-equity  investment  in  2005  went  to  venture-capital  operations,  compared  with  a 
European average of 27 per cent. And even of that, only a marginal portion, far smaller than in the 
other major European countries, went to start-ups. Investment in high-technology sectors is minimal. A 
good part of the capital is of foreign origin; the domestic component comes largely from banks, while 
the role of other investors, especially pension funds, is scant. 
As a rule, small firms with highly innovative projects are unable to raise funds directly in the capital 
market, nor can ordinary bank lending suffice. Even medium-sized companies with opportunities for 
growth are often incapable of attaining stock exchange listing. There is a need for intermediaries that 
are able to select risky but promising projects in which to invest, with the ultimate aim of placing the 
equity on the market. More generally, private equity is also helpful in other corporate transitions, such 
as generational change, management buy-outs, crises and restructuring. 
The expansion of the stock exchange and of specialized intermediaries can also be fostered by an 
enhanced presence of institutional investors, pension funds above all. In the countries where pension 
funds  play  a  significant  role,  even  relatively  small  firms  tend  to  seek  stock  exchange  listing. 
Institutional  investors  play  an  active  role  as  minority  shareholders,  monitoring  management’s 
performance. They reduce informational asymmetries and increase the volume of resources available 
on  the  market  to  finance  enterprises.  They  are  among  the  leading  sources  of  venture  capital  and, 
more generally, of funds for intermediaries specialized in supplying risk capital to firms. 
The  spread  of  private  pension  funds  in  Italy  is  essential  to  the  equilibrium  and  the  equity  of  the 
pension system. The rules governing the allocation of workers’ accruing severance pay entitlements 
will  play  a  key  role  in  shaping  the  funds’  development.  While  the  amounts  accumulated  must  be 
earmarked  for  retirement  purposes,  workers  must  be  given  full  freedom  of  choice:  free  and  fair 
competition between classes of asset managers and types of retirement scheme, at low cost to the 
saver, constitutes a guarantee for the robust, competitive development of the sector. Workers must be 
provided with clear and complete information on their pension situation and the alternatives available if 
they  are  to  be  in  a  position  to  make  informed  choices.  The  Finance  Bill’s  provision  for  the  partial 
transfer  to  the  social  security  administration  of  resources  now  going  to  firms’  severance  pay  funds 
must not conflict with the objective of developing supplementary pensions. 
The shape of the banking system 
3.2  
Banks  were  once  virtually  the  sole  agents  for  collecting  savings  in  Italy  and  channelling  these 
resources  to  firms.  Overseeing  their  stability  was  tantamount  to  protecting  households’  savings. 
Today, banks and the capital market perform complementary functions in sustaining the operation and 
growth of the economy, but small and medium-sized enterprises still depend decisively on bank credit. 
Helping  such  firms  to  grow  is  necessary  to  strengthen  them  for  competition  in  an  increasingly 
globalized market. When the technological and human factors and the market conditions are right, the 
careful and rigorous assessment of creditworthiness does not conflict with a lending policy designed to 
accompany firms’ growth in size. 
In the 1990s technological progress, privatization and deregulation triggered a wave of consolidation 
within the banking industry. In the last ten years the number of banks has diminished; mergers and 
acquisitions have involved institutions accounting for 80 per cent of total assets. And further significant 
concentrations  are  being  discussed.  Those  who  propose  concentrations  –  board  chairmen  and 
directors  –  increasingly  grasp  the  necessity  and  the  benefits  of  consolidation  and  are  showing  an 
ability to transcend the localisms and personal interests that impede it. The Bank of Italy wants the 
stability and competitiveness of the banking system to emerge stronger still. In a financial system that 
is open to international competition, it encourages banks to continue on the path of consolidation on 
the basis of plans decided upon independently by the market. 
In  bank  mergers,  rational  governance  arrangements  in  the  new  bank  are  essential  to  reap  all  the 
benefits  of  consolidation. 
facilitate 
concentrations; they must be organizationally effective and not jeopardize efficient decision-making. 
A fundamental contribution to the reorganization of the banking system has come from the banking 
foundations. The great majority of them have disposed of their controlling interests but they are still 
significant shareholders of banks, even if consolidation has nearly always diluted their holdings. Their 
conduct is directed today towards enhancing the value of capital invested, in keeping with their role of 
long-term  investors;  their  interest  lies  in  pursuing  institutional  objectives.  It  might  be  appropriate  to 
reconsider  the  regulatory  discriminations  that  limit  their  ability  to  acquire  and  manage  bank 
shareholdings, such as the sterilization of voting rights in excess of 30 per cent. 
Consolidation has also involved cooperative banks, whose number has fallen from 95 to 36 in the last 
ten  years.  Based  mainly  in  the  most  developed  regions  of  Italy,  they  diversify  the  structure  of  the 
banking system, draw competitive advantages from their proximity to the productive system at local 
level, and play a significant role in the investment of households’ savings. There is scope for further 
concentrations  permitting  potential  synergies  to  be  exploited,  without  the  new  groups’  greater 
complexity compromising their mission of financing the local economy. 
Consolidation  has  accentuated  the  differences  between  cooperative  banks.  Alongside  banks  that 
preserve an exclusively local vocation, there have emerged groups of considerable size and national 
reach.  A  reflection  is  necessary  on  how  to  adapt  the  corporative  governance  rules  typical  of 
cooperative banks to the reality of each bank. Recent events have demonstrated the risks of instability 
Innovative  corporate  governance  models  may  serve 
to 
that can derive from inadequate rules. The inflexible rule of one vote per head, limits on the collection 
of  proxies  and  restrictions  on  individual  shareholdings  can  result  in  a  self-referential  attitude  of 
management, insufficient protection of shareholders and obstacles to capital strengthening. Parliament 
has examined various reform projects in recent years. Towards the end of the last Government’s term 
of office a broad consensus had been reached on a bill that would have eased the shareholding limits, 
especially  for  institutional  investors,  and  strengthened  the  protection  of  shareholders  of  listed 
cooperative banks, while preserving the essential features of the cooperative form. The matter needs 
to be taken up again. 
The  rules  imposing  rigid  separation  between  banking  and  industry,  particularly  those  setting  strict 
quantitative  limits  on  shareholding  in  banks  by  investors  not  belonging  to  the  financial  sector, 
constitute  an  isolated  case  in  Europe  and  have  to  be  assessed  also  for  their  compatibility  with  the 
legislative reform proposals now under discussion at Community level. 
The need for adequate safeguards is undiminished. It remains essential to ensure the autonomy of the 
bank vis-à-vis companies that, as a result of conflicts of interest, can unduly influence its decisions, 
distorting  the  allocation  of  loans  and  imperiling  its  very  stability.  But,  as  with  other  aspects  of 
supervision, the instruments to be used change. They now consist first of all in governance rules that 
ensure  transparency  of  decisions,  checks  and  balances,  the  presence  of  independent  directors, 
interaction between the different corporate functions and effective internal controls. Secondly, the rules 
that limit the concentration of risk, particularly vis-à-vis related parties, take on increasing importance. 
Likewise,  with  regard  to  the  restrictions  “downstream”,  on  shareholding  by  banks  in  firms,  the 
experience  acquired  and  the  development  of  risk  management  and  control  techniques  make  it 
possible today to ease the existing limits, bringing Italian rules into line with Community provisions. 
The  management  of  the  conflicts  of  interest  that  arise  in  private-equity  activity  requires  adequate 
transparency safeguards and decision-making guarantees, including the separate conduct of private-
equity business by companies within banking groups, and rules on the spreading and diversification of 
risk. 
Replacing rigid regulatory constraints with flexible supervisory principles restores autonomy to banks 
and  entrepreneurs  and  stimulates  efficient  decision-making.  At  the  same  time,  this  increases  the 
responsibility of the supervisory authority, demands continual refinement of its technical apparatus and 
requires it to be fully transparent in accounting for its actions. 
Banks: costs and transparency 
3.3  
The efficiency gains deriving from concentrations must be transferred in full to households and firms. 
The costs of banking services for customers are still too high in Italy. Customer protection must be 
entrusted above all to instruments that guarantee complete information on terms and conditions and 
the application of a general canon of correctness in business relations. Ordinarily, competition is the 
most effective means of curbing the costs charged to customers. However, one set of costs - those 
directly  or  indirectly  connected  with  closing  bank  accounts  -  hinder  customer  mobility  and  thus 
constitute in themselves an impediment to the free working of the mechanisms of competition. Such 
costs should be eliminated. The full portability of accounts, including accessory services, must also be 
ensured. 
The aim of the recent measure that provides for the closing of accounts without expense and other 
rules protecting bank customers are therefore commendable. 
However, the formulation of the measure, based on the dictation of economic clauses by statute, has 
engendered  problems  of 
the  obligation  under  certain 
circumstances to modify lending and deposit rates simultaneously and the exact identification of the 
items to be considered in the charges connected with closing accounts. A situation of uncertainty has 
been  produced  that  creates  operational  problems  for  banks,  keeps  customers  from  taking  full 
advantage  of  the  new  rights  and  may  cause  costly  litigation.  It  would  be  better  if  the  statutory 
provisions  were  limited  to  laying  down  general  rules,  referring  their  implementation  to  secondary 
legislation and self-regulation. 
Besides, it is in the banks’ own interest to strengthen the consumer safeguards they have already put 
in  place  as  part  of  the  sector’s  self-regulation,  by  extending  their  scope  and  introducing  effective 
mechanisms for settling disputes. In Italy there are already bodies for the out-of-court settlement of 
banking  disputes.  For  banking  business  the  law  on  the  protection  of  savings  has  entrusted  the 
interpretation,  particularly  as  regards 
Interministerial  Committee  for  Credit  and  Savings  with  the  task  of  regulating  the  procedures  and 
decision-making bodies. Forms of direct involvement of the supervisory authority could be considered. 
Transparency  and  fairness  in  customer  relations  are  an  integral  part  of  the  sound  and  prudent 
management of banks. Every transgression creates legal and reputational risks. Banking relationships 
are based on trust; loss of trust can cause risks of instability, including at a systemic level. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  must  verify  that  banks’  organization  and  internal  controls  provide  adequate 
protection against risks deriving from business practices that are unfair to customers. Proposed rules 
on the compliance function have been sent to financial intermediaries and the public for consultation; 
the related regulations will be issued shortly. 
Transparency  of  banking  business  also  requires  that  banks’  financial  statements  and  other  public 
information on their financial positions be comparable. There has been a significant increase in such 
comparability in Europe with the adoption of international accounting standards. Greater convergence 
is necessary with regard to the methods of classifying impaired loans. 
Adopting the strictest definition of defaulted loans - which includes overshoots and payments overdue 
by more than 90 days - the figures for Italian banks are high owing to the tolerance of late payments. 
Banks  must  further  shorten  their  reaction  times  by  speeding  up  the  organizational  and  procedural 
interventions that have already reduced overshoots from 1.7 to 1 per cent of the total loans in the last 
twelve months. 
Payment services 
3.4  
Technological progress offers plenty of scope for increased competition and greater efficiency in the 
payment system. The spread of mobile telephony, which can be used to provide financial services, 
and of cards and equipment prepared by the suppliers of electronic payment services is conducive to 
the  entry  into  the  market  of  new  operators  and  the  growth  of  innovative  payment  mechanisms, 
especially for small amounts. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  has  already  authorized  the  purchase  of  products  over  the  phone,  when  they  are 
supplied by the operator of the service and it does not involve the creation of payment instruments for 
general use. But in view of the evolution of technology and the market the rules on the reserves for 
electronic money and the collection and transfer of funds will need to be re-examined, in line with the 
revision of the European rules now under way. Access to a variety of competing operators must be 
ensured, while maintaining the public’s trust in the payment system. 
4.  
The Bank of Italy 
Ownership structure 
4.1  
In  my  recent  testimony  before  Parliament  concerning  the  law  on  the  protection  of  savings,  I  drew 
attention to the need to reflect on the implementation of the provision calling for the redefinition of the 
Bank of Italy’s ownership structure and the transfer within three years of those of its shares held by 
persons other than the state or other public entities. 
As I pointed out, it is not up to the Bank of Italy to choose its owners; but it is in the Bank’s interest, 
indeed it is its duty, to call attention to any solutions that are likely to conflict with the safeguarding of 
its independence. 
A  plurality  of  shareholders,  a  balanced  distribution  of  shares,  non-interference  in  the  Bank’s 
institutional  functions,  a  guarantee  of  its  financial  autonomy  and,  above  all,  consistency  with 
Community law - an aspect to which the European Central Bank has drawn attention several times - 
are the principles with which the central bank’s ownership structure and corporate governance must 
conform. 
In  light  of  international  standards  and  the  experience  of  other  countries,  it  may  prove  necessary  to 
reflect on the choice made by the law and move towards a configuration of the Bank’s ownership that 
fully protects its independence, the guarantee of stability and a cornerstone of the European economic 
constitution. 
Organizational developments 
4.2  
A  working  document  has  been  sent  today  to  the  trade  unions  present  in  the  Bank  of  Italy  on  the 
overhaul of the Bank’s organization. The document identifies and details the medium-term strategic 
objectives for the performance of the Bank’s central banking functions, in harmony with the evolution 
of the Italian and European institutional framework. 
The measures outlined in the document aim to increase the Bank’s effectiveness and efficiency both 
at international level and in Italy, by concentrating its local structure in appropriately strengthened units 
at  regional  level.  The  new  organizational  structure  -  which  also  envisages  the  incorporation  of  the 
Italian Foreign Exchange Office (UIC) - must be able to respond to the challenges imposed by change 
and  to  offer  staff  greater  participation  in  decision-making  and  operational  processes  and  better 
opportunities of professional and cultural growth. 
The reorganization will call on the vast stock of professional skills available within the Bank. A path will 
be  agreed  with  the  trade  unions  that  sets  out  the  timetable  and  content  of  the  changes  and  the 
manner of achieving the objectives of the reorganization. Clear objectives, gradual implementation and 
dialogue are what are needed for this to be completed in a reasonably short time and without trauma. 
The ability of the Bank of Italy to go on playing its role in Italy and the European System of Central 
Banks efficiently and authoritatively depends on the success of this project, which will require the joint 
efforts of all concerned. 
