Hamad Al-Sayari: Review of the Saudi Arabian economy  
Speech by His Excellency Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, to the 
Custodian  of  the  Two  Holy  Mosques,  on  the  occasion  of  the  presentation  of  SAMA's  Forty-Second 
Annual Report, Riyadh, 14 November 2006. 
 Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
It is a great pleasure for me to present to You the Forty-Second Annual Report of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary  Agency  which  reviews  the  most  salient  domestic  developments  of  fiscal  year  1425/26  H 
corresponding to 2005G and latest developments during the current year 2006.  
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
Your government continued during 2005 and the preceding period of this year to make a number of 
important decisions and achievements in the area of updating regulations, restructuring the national 
economy,  approving  a  number  of  great  development  projects,  accession  to  the  World  Trade 
Organization which is a significant step towards further integration into the world economy, attracting 
foreign investments, opening and expanding markets and reinforcing the competitive capacity of the 
national economy. Therefore, an observer may say that the national economy is moving in confident 
and rapid steps on the right path towards more strength, diversification and employment of national 
man power. All these efforts would boost achieving sustainable growth.   
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
In pursuance of Your efforts aimed at regulating, streamlining and enhancing institutional work, You 
have recently approved the Homage System (Nidham Al-Bai'a). Undoubtedly, since the unification of 
our country by His Majesty King Abdulaziz, May God bless him, it has been witnessing stability, thanks 
to God. However, the enactment of the Homage System will impart further stability in accordance with 
a clear institutional system, The Kingdom's fundamentals of governance will also be enforced, and this 
will be positively reflected upon the security and welfare of our Homeland. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
At present, we feel and reap the fruits of your efforts in the Supreme Economic Council in the field of 
regulating and restructuring all sectors of the national economy. Since the foundation of the Council in 
1999 (1420H), the national economy has recorded an average annual real growth rate of 4.2 percent, 
exceeding  population  growth  rate  of  2.5  percent.  The  private  sector  recorded  a  continuous  growth 
during  the  last  six  years and  its  average  annual  real  growth  amounted  to  4.6  percent.  In 2005,  the 
Saudi  economy  continued  achieving  distinguished  results  that  exceeded  the  average  annual  real 
growth of that period. Gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 6.5 percent as compared to a growth of 
5.3  percent  in  the  preceding  year;  the  real  domestic  product  of  the  private  sector  and  government 
sector grew by 6.6 percent and 7.2 percent respectively. The State budget registered a surplus for the 
third consecutive year amounting to Rls 218 billion, with a wise expansion in the public expenditure, 
apart  from  what  has  been  allocated  to  repay  a  notable  amount  of  the  public  debt.  The  positive 
outcomes led to an increase in the current account surplus to Rls 338 billion in 2005 in comparison 
with a surplus of Rls 195 billion in the preceding year. In keeping with these developments, the money 
stock increased by 11.6 percent. These economic developments took place in an environment marked 
by stability in domestic prices. The cost of living index increased by less than 1 percent during 2005. It 
is expected that the positive results of the economy would continue at the same levels in this year, 
God willing.  
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
These positive economic developments were achieved in spite of surrounding challenges, internal or 
external. The composition of the Kingdom's population represents the most prominent challenge. The 
Saudi  youth  group  (male  and  female),  younger  than  30  years,  exceeds  60  percent  of  the  Saudi 
population which entails continued extensive efforts to build Saudi nationals in scientific, health and 
intellectual terms to carry out their future development role in the best manner. 
Your  direct  attention  to  satisfy  the  current  and  future  needs  of  the  country  and  citizens  has  been 
embodied by Your directives providing for using a portion of the additional revenues realized due to 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 1
improved fiscal balance in vital areas, at the top of which is the development of human resources as 
being the first pivot and ultimate goal of development. 
The  efforts  based  on  further  expanding  the  number  of  universities,  technical  and  technological 
colleges  as  well  as  schools  of  general  education;  increasing  admissions  and  offering  more 
scholarships  for  study  abroad  and  increasing  budgetary  allocations  for  promoting  health  and  social 
services represent a sound strategic option for enhancing the sound march of economic development 
and will bear fruitful results, God willing. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
The economic indicators observed by SAMA indicate a continuous high inflow of direct investments in 
almost all sectors, and a deeper and more solid national economy. This, in turn, was reflected by the 
International Rating Agencies’ increase of the Kingdom’s credit rating and the remarkable interest of 
the world top investors in the Kingdom’s investment opportunities. 
Your wise directives have emphasized that the development and investment efforts should cover all 
the  Kingdom’s  regions,  which  were  supported  by  Your  regional  field  visits  around  the  Kingdom  to 
increase growth and investment capacities and expand the economic base.  
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
Inflow  of  direct  investments  to  various  productive  sectors  is  a  strong  evidence  of  the  Kingdom’s 
investment attraction and the interest of both local and foreign investor. Part of these investments flow 
through the Capital Market which plays a very important role in the economy. It provides additional 
channels  for  project  financing,  and,  at  the  same  time,  it  offers  to  investors  diverse  investment 
instruments.  Your  government  has  made  strenuous  efforts  to  develop  the  Saudi  Capital  Market  by 
utilizing state-of-the-art dealing technologies; increasing the number of financial firms operating in the 
market and continued floating of joint-stock companies on the market for public subscription. These 
steps call for optimism as they would further stabilize and deepen the market and enhance investors' 
confidence and investment awareness. However, the need for boosting more awareness efforts of all 
categories of market participants on the market is still a challenge that has to be dealt with. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
In  pursuance  of  mobilizing  all  efforts  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  economic  development,  You  have 
issued Your wise directives requiring timely dissemination of economic and other information and data 
with further transparency so as to be available to everyone seeking them as dissemination of accurate 
information reinforces creditability and helps in thoroughly identification of the economic situation. We 
are all confident that Your continuous efforts in the restructuring process to improve and develop the 
structure  of  the  domestic  economy  and  continue  expanding  the  private  sector's  activities  will  boost 
economic developments witnessed in the domestic economy.  
May Allah guide your steps to greater success.
2 
 BIS Review 111/2006
