Sir K Dwight Venner: Growth, profitability and regulation – the imperatives  
Opening address by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, of the 
33rd Annual  Caribbean  Association  of  Indigenous  Banks  Conference  “Growth,  Profitability  and 
Regulation - The Imperatives”, Port of Spain, 16 November 2006. 
 Mr Chairman 
I  am  appreciative  of  the  invitation  of  the  CAIB  to  address  your  Opening  Ceremony  at  this  very 
important juncture in our history. 
We are a very short time away from a year that will go into the before and after category, that is 2007. 
It can prove to be our undoing, or the path and stimulus to sustainable growth and development, which 
we have been waiting for these past four decades and counting. 
When  it  comes  to  Caribbean  affairs  however,  I  am  forever  the  optimist  and  see  it  as  the  golden 
opportunity we have been waiting for. 
Your theme “Growth, Profitability and Regulation: The Imperatives” is sufficiently flexible, yet focused 
to allow me to build on the above statements. 
Growth  as  has  been  recorded  by  economic  historians  has  always  been  episodic  and  sometimes 
ephemeral in many countries and regions. Its sustainability over substantial periods of time has been 
limited to a relatively few countries, most of them being in the northern hemisphere. 
The first instance of sustained economic growth in modern times took place in the United Kingdom 
over  the  period  1760-1850.  This  was  effected  through  a  fundamental  structural  change  from 
mercantile capitalism to industrial capitalism. 
This first episode has affected the thinking on growth and development to this day as we consider the 
sequential  steps  in  the  evolution  of  economies  from  the  production  of  primary  commodities  in 
agriculture and mining, to secondary areas in manufacturing and processing, to high quality services in 
design, financial services, personal services and entertainment. 
This first growth episode was followed by similar sequels in continental Europe, Germany, France, The 
Netherlands, and the United States of America. 
The so called G7 countries, which after a time included Italy, particularly northern, and Japan, seemed 
to have a monopoly on sustained growth. 
The  Post  World  War  II  period  ushered  in  a  significant  change  in  the  thinking  on  growth  and 
development.  The  coming  into  existence  of  many  new  countries  through  decolonisation  and  the 
intrusion of the East-West divide resulted in four significant imperatives for reviewing the nature and 
causes of growth. 
• 
• 
• 
The war ravaged countries were trying hard to reconstruct their economies. 
The underdeveloped countries were attempting to initiate economic development. 
The  advanced  countries,  being  relatively  free  from  periodic  slumps,  were  trying  to 
concentrate on raising the long-term rate of growth. 
The  socialist  countries  were  determined  to  overtake  the  richer  capitalist  countries  by  fast 
economic expansion. 
 Despite significant development aid and assistance, however, the next and most marked instance of 
sustained growth occurred in the East Asian countries of Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and South 
Korea between the early 1960s to the late 1990s when the miracle crashed, so to speak. 
In  the  light  of  these  experiences  it  is  possible  to  sift  through  the  policies  and  circumstances  of  the 
countries cited above, and our own countries in the region to come to certain conclusions. 
These conclusions, while identifying where we supposedly went wrong, should not preclude us from 
accepting this and reverting to better policies or actions. Certainly, for us at this juncture, it is not about 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 1
looking backwards to convince ourselves of what we cannot do because we failed to do it before, but 
to objectively decide what we should do if we are to succeed. 
There are two issues we must therefore confront if we are to proceed apace namely, Globalisation and 
Regionalism. 
The first growth episode occurred in environments of open trading systems mixed with a consolidation 
of domestic markets brought about by the formation of larger states from small divided entities. 
This was the case of the United Kingdom, particularly the Union of Scotland and England. 
Similarly, with Germany under Bismarck and most notably the United States of America, which was 
created from thirteen former colonies. Such was the case of Italy under Garibaldi. 
Customs  Unions  were  formed  by  the  new  states  to  protect  their  embryonic  manufacturing  sectors 
while actively trying to compete in export markets. 
In the case of the East Asian NICs, they followed the Japanese model, the so called flying geese and 
picked up industries which had become uncompetitive in Japan. 
Pre World War I was a significant period of globalisation with the free flow of commodities, capital and 
labour which facilitated development in the developed countries. 
The 1950s, 60s and 70s were periods of global growth which facilitated the East Asia NICs. 
Where does the Caribbean stand in all of this? 
Certainly our economies, based on a plantation system of exploitation, was disfigured, but certainly in 
the early 1960s, when independence came to the region, the larger countries, Jamaica, and Trinidad 
and  Tobago  were  ahead  of  the  East  Asian  NICs,  and  were  in  close  proximity  to  the  NICs’  largest 
market, the United States. 
The question then becomes what went wrong and what were the events and/or policies which put us 
off track? 
The major argument I would posit was not to have consolidated the West Indian State as was the case 
of the United Kingdom, United States, United Germany and United Italy. We opted for disintegration 
for the very reasons they opted for consolidation, namely, customs union and movement of labour. 
The greatest historical irony is that forty years later these are the very things we are desperately trying 
to put in place. 
On  the  policy  front,  another  historical  irony  is  that  the  script  written  for  our  development  “The 
Industrialisation of the British West Indies” was rejected by us and applied by the East Asian countries, 
particularly, Singapore and Taiwan which are small island states with less natural resources than the 
combined Caribbean. Singapore is in fact the same size as St Lucia! 
I have calculated on the back of an envelope that we are not particularly poor in the Caribbean. Taking 
the example of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU), where all foreign exchange reserves 
go into a pool and all the commercial banks have in addition, their own external assets, if this was to 
be extrapolated to the wider region with combined receipts from Oil, Tourism, Finance, Services and 
Manufacturing, we would be a very powerful economic entity. 
They say that opportunities lost can never be regained. From my vantage point I would say, can the 
Caribbean genius, including our tendency towards the traits of Ananci, put Humpty Dumpty together 
again? 
The  answer  must  be  yes,  or  why  else  are  we  gathered  here  under  the  auspices  of  the  Caribbean 
Association  of  Indigenous  Banks  (CAIB)  to  discuss  “Growth,  Profitability  and  Regulation:  The 
Imperatives.” 
The word Imperative gives it away – there is an urgency to do something as 2007 approaches and the 
train is about to leave the station. 
We also have to do it together or why else are we assembled here from all parts of the region, from 
Guyana in the South and Jamaica and The Bahamas in the North, and all points in between. 
We  also  have  the  belief,  and  correctly  so,  that  the  financial  sector  is  going  to  be  one  of  the  main 
drivers of our growth and development. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2006
Following these assertions, or if you wish, assumptions, what have we learnt, and what can we put 
into practice? 
Let me be very frank with you and speak of what I know, and not what I assume. 
It is assumed and acknowledged by the statements made at the time that the West Indian Federation 
failed, among other reasons, due to the inability to deal with the extremely small state problem, the 
same one that was resolved in the United States in 1776. 
Our small States, not having the where withal of the largest States, had no choice but to engage in 
joint activities such as a common judiciary, common currency and central bank, joint regulation of civil 
aviation,  banking,  securities,  and  telecommunications.  Joint  procurement  of  pharmaceuticals,  joint 
overseas diplomatic representation, cooperation in Agriculture, Tourism, Transport, etc. 
In the financial arena we have over the years worked hard to maintain a stable currency through thick 
and thin, to ensure that we had a safe, sound and profitable banking sector, and to create regional 
institutions and markets for government securities, equity and secondary mortgages. 
We  now  have  an  electronic  exchange,  which  is  probably  second  to  none  internationally,  with  a 
settlement  period  of  T  +1  and  a  dematerialised  environment.  With  respect  to  connectivity,  all  our 
countries are connected to the platform in St Kitts and we have successfully connected from Guyana, 
Trinidad, Barbados and the British Virgin Island in the region, and from Singapore in East Asia. 
Let me say factually that we are a microcosm of what CARICOM would like to be in the future with a 
common currency and a regional stock exchange. 
If my assumptions are not correct in the above statement then a number of questions logically follow. 
For instance, Have the OECS/ECCU countries been on the wrong track? Does this stem from a notion 
that there is nothing in these countries that the others can emulate? Should we then dismantle these 
arrangements to enter into the wider CARICOM arrangements? 
When the OECS paused to reflect on their entry to the CSM, CSME early in the year, the criticisms 
flew thick and fast. 
Two issues were conveniently forgotten: 
1. 
2. 
Where do we go from here with 2007 so near at hand? 
The financial sector has demonstrated that it has the capacity and vision to be a significant leader in 
the thrust for regional integration. Our banks and insurance companies have led the way by their cross 
border activities. 
The  way  ahead  however,  lies  as  we  have  recognised  in  the  ECCU,  through  the  Integration, 
Development and Regulation of the financial sector on a wider scale. 
This will require the satisfactory resolution of three issues: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
If our financial sector in the region is to reach its full potential the rules under which it operates must 
not be so widely different that they become more of an obstacle course than a facilitator of innovation 
and development. The amazing thing about the Caribbean is how seriously we take our insularity. We 
come to the table with ingrained notions of how different we are, and argue vehemently about points 
which  are  in  the  wider  scheme  of  things,  singularly  unimportant  except  to  the  protagonist  who  has 
been charged with protecting national pride and sovereignty with his life. On a less serious note, and 
this  being  Trinidad  where  picong  is  a  way  of  life,  can  you  imagine  a  Jamaican,  Trinidadian  or 
Barbadian conceding an argument to someone from the OECS and living to tell the tale! 
We must recognise that in a rule based environment, when there is the need for progress, the rules 
must be uniform and simple. Once there are deviations and exceptions, rules become restrictions and 
not what they should be, that is, sign posts to allow progress to be made. 
That we were the stones the builder rejected forty years ago; and 
That the OECS is at a much higher level of integration than the rest of CARICOM. 
Uniformity of Legislation and Regulation; 
Appropriate Technology; and 
The question of Ownership. 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 3
The utilisation of technology is a critical factor in the evolution and development of the financial sector. 
The ability to connect across long distances and the necessity to handle large volumes of transactions 
at high speeds is the rationale for the use of technology. For our region, where face to face meetings 
are  costly,  both  in  terms  of  time  and  money,  other  means  of  communication  through  video  and 
teleconferencing are important constructs for our progress. We must invest significantly in technology 
if we are going to be successful. 
Ownership is a critical factor in any integration arrangement. Integration in a fundamental way has to 
do with the allocation of productive resources and the distribution of benefits across countries. 
In  a  situation  where  capital  and  labour  cannot  move,  benefits  only  accrue  to  the  country  or  place 
where productive resources are located. 
If labour and capital can move freely then labour in a country where the productive resource is not 
located, can move to that location, and the benefits can be spread in that way. With the movement of 
capital, individuals can purchase shares in the enterprise and enjoy benefits while not being resident. 
This means of sharing benefits through the financial sector is much more palatable in the first instance 
and  therefore  stakes  out  a  special  place  for  the  financial  sector  in  successful  integration 
arrangements. 
It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  various  branches  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  region  need  to  come 
together, firstly among themselves, and then in joint meetings to map out a vision for the integration, 
development  and  regulation  of  the  sector  to  facilitate  the  sustained  growth and  development  of  the 
region. 
The Cricket World Cup 2007 (CWC) could be the event that catapults us into action. After successfully 
achieving  adult  suffrage  and  independence  we  have  had  no  event  which  has  had  the  capacity  of 
capturing the imagination of the West Indian people like this one. 
After all, it is cricket, and we will have the world looking at us. People both within and outside of the 
region will ask the obvious question. Why are we not more united? We will have no reasonable reply. 
The CWC will demand of us an upgrading of our commercial and networking skills. It will provide us 
with better physical infrastructure and facilities. It will expose us to the world. 
What better platform could we hope for to launch us into a period of sustained growth? 
We  need  to avoid  continuing  down  the  road  of  insularity  and recall  not  only  our  own  history  in  this 
regard  but  also  the  fact  that  we  live  in  an  increasingly  globalised  and  liberalised  world  and  that 
regional integration and state formation worked for those countries which are now developed. 
We have to use our imagination and have a vision of what could be if we are united. 
In the words of George Bernard Shaw: 
“You see things that are, and say, ‘Why’? 
But I dream things that never were, and say, ‘Why Not’! 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2006
