Lucas Papademos: The role of money in the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the Fourth ECB 
Central  Banking  Conference  “The  role  of  money:  money  and  monetary  policy  in  the  twenty-first 
century”, Frankfurt am Main, 9 November 2006. 
 Introduction  
I. 
The choice of the topic of this conference, “The role of money in monetary policy”, may, at first sight, 
appear somewhat strange for a central banking conference, as it might suggest some uncertainty or 
even doubt about the role of money in monetary policy. But is it really possible for a policy described 
as “monetary” to be formulated and implemented without money playing a central role in it? Indeed, 
the suggestion that monetary policy can be conducted without assigning a prominent role to money 
seems like an oxymoron – a statement containing apparently contradictory terms, if not worse: for the 
literal meaning of the Greek word “oxymoron” is “pointedly foolish”. 
Yet in recent years, a large and influential body of academic work has disregarded or deemphasised 
the role of money as a determinant of inflation, even in the long run. The theory of monetary policy has 
often focused on the links between the policy-controlled interest rate and the paths of the price level 
and  real  output  in  theoretical  frameworks,  in  which  money  plays  no  essential  role,  if  any,  in  the 
transmission of the effects of policy and, consequently, in its conduct. The monetary policy reaction 
functions employed in theoretical analyses do not typically involve measures of the quantity of money, 
either  as  an  intermediate  policy  objective  or  as  an  indicator  that  may  provide  useful  and  timely 
information relevant for determining the appropriate policy stance. 
Parallel to these theoretical developments, and in the environment of relatively low inflation that has 
prevailed over the past ten years, the role of money in the conduct of policy by many central banks 
has  diminished  or  has  even  been  ignored.  Lawrence  Meyer,  a  former  member  of  the  Board  of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  summarised  these  developments:  “[…]  money  plays  no 
role in today’s consensus macro model, and it plays virtually no role in the conduct of monetary policy, 
at least in the United States.” Larry was careful to include this qualification at the end of his statement. 
For as you very well know, there is another major central bank that does assign a prominent role to 
money in its policy strategy. A role that, I will argue, is justified by both theory and empirical evidence, 
and which has served us very well in the conduct of our policy since the establishment of the ECB. On 
this  last  point,  we  have  no  doubt.  In  fact,  we  have  organised  this  conference  because  we  are 
interested  in  promoting  scholarly  debate  on  these  important  issues  in  an  open  and  transparent 
manner. We believe that we can all benefit by sharing our experiences and learning from each other. 
In my remarks, I would like to share with you some thoughts on four issues pertaining to the role of 
money  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  These  issues  relate  to  the  theoretical 
arguments, the empirical evidence, the uncertainty and practical considerations facing policy-makers 
that have a bearing on the role of money in the conduct of monetary policy. In addition, I will briefly 
address the role of money in performing the central banking task of safeguarding financial stability.  
Theoretical arguments 
II.  
What  are  the  basic  principles  and  theoretical  arguments  supporting  the  view  that  money  is  the 
fundamental determinant of the price level over the medium and long term, and that money and its 
counterparts – notably credit – play a key role in the transmission of the effects of monetary policy to 
the economy? The essential role of money as the fundamental determinant of the price level can be 
established  –  and  has  been  established  –  in  the  context  of  a  microeconomic  general  market-
equilibrium  framework  and  a  stylised  consensus  macroeconomic  model.  At  a  microeconomic  level, 
and under certain plausible and rational assumptions concerning agents’ preferences and optimising 
behaviour, the conditions for equilibrium in the product, services, labour and asset markets determine 
the relative prices of goods and services, the real wage (in terms of a general price index), and the 
spectrum of the relative real rates of return on all assets, including the associated risk premia. The 
determination of the general price level, and its rate of change, requires control of the nominal quantity 
of base money or of some other monetary aggregate that can be effectively controlled by the central 
bank. This result reflects the role of money both as a medium of exchange and as a unit of account. 
BIS Review 110/2006 
 1
Under  price  and  wage  flexibility,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  nominal  rigidities,  the  price  level  will 
promptly and fully respond to a change in the money stock. More generally, the determination of the 
price level by the nominal quantity of money will be established in the long-run equilibrium.  
At an aggregate, macroeconomic level, the fundamental proposition concerning the link between the 
supply of money and the price level is captured by the quantity theory of money. In the context of this 
simple theory, the causality of the link is clear. The point that I would like to stress, however, is that the 
causal relationship between the stock of money and the price level is in principle also valid, at least in 
the  long-run  equilibrium,  in  more  general  and  sophisticated  macroeconomic  frameworks,  which 
incorporate alternative hypotheses concerning the factors and processes that determine the level and 
the dynamics of aggregate demand and supply and, consequently, the evolution of the price level over 
time. 
One  such  general  framework  is  what  could  be  called  the  consensus  macroeconomic  model,  which 
was  developed  in  the  1980s  and  has  been  widely  accepted  as  a  useful  stylised  framework  for 
monetary analysis, at least until the late 1990s. It is useful to briefly discuss the role of money in the 
transmission of the effects of monetary policy in the context of this framework for three reasons: first, 
because it incorporates many of the advances in macroeconomic theory made over the past 20 years, 
reflecting  different  approaches  to,  or  schools  of  thought  on,  the  functioning  of  the  macroeconomy; 
second,  because  in  a  general  sense,  it  underpins  most  of  the  macroeconometric  models  currently 
used  by  many  central  banks;  and,  third,  because  it  provides  a  benchmark  for  comparison  with  the 
latest  generation  of  macroeconomic  models  developed  in  recent  years  for  the  analysis  and 
assessment of monetary policy.  
This  consensus  theoretical  framework  for  monetary  analysis  is  the  outcome  of  a  synthesis  that 
combines three elements: first, the insights and basic characteristics of the New Classical models of 
Robert Lucas (1972, 1976) and the real-business-cycle models of Kydland and Prescott (1982) and 
others, including the emphasis placed on forward-looking “rational” expectations; second, the inclusion 
of institutional factors, staggered wage and price contracts and market imperfections, which have been 
associated with the work of Phelps, Calvo, Fischer and Taylor, and which result in nominal rigidities in 
a Keynesian tradition that have important implications for the dynamic response of real output and the 
price level to shocks and to a change in the monetary policy stance; third, the elaboration, in certain 
extensions  of  this  framework,  of  the  economy’s  financial  structure,  which  would  allow  for  a  richer 
representation of the potential channels through which monetary policy can affect economic activity 
and  the  price  level,  for  example  via  wealth  effects,  variations  in  asset  prices,  credit  and  liquidity 
constraints and other “financial frictions”.  
In this general and eclectic theoretical framework, money plays an important role in the transmission of 
the effects of monetary policy, and in the conduct of policy. Aggregate demand, as determined by the 
conditions for simultaneous equilibrium in the product, money and financial markets, depends on the 
real value of the quantity of money, which influences aggregate spending both directly and indirectly 
via the level of real interest rates. In general, short-term and long-term market rates and bank lending 
rates  need  not  move  in  parallel  when  monetary  conditions  change,  differing  only  by  constant  risk 
premia and intermediation costs, but they may vary over time in response not only to transitory shocks 
but also to other factors, including changes in liquidity conditions. A change in the nominal quantity of 
money affects both real output and the price level over time, but progressively and ultimately it affects 
only the price level. Money is neutral and super-neutral in the longer run. The impact of money on real 
output  and  the  price  level  over  short-term  and  medium-term  horizons,  and  the  speed  at  which  a 
change in money growth affects inflation, depend on behavioural and institutional factors and, most 
importantly, on the way inflation expectations are being formed and influenced. The extent to which 
expectations  are  formed  “rationally”  and  the  nature  and  modalities  of  the  associated  learning 
processes play a crucial role in determining the magnitude of, and the time lags in, the effects of a 
change in the monetary policy stance on the price level and aggregate output over time. 
Two conclusions with implications for the conduct of monetary policy emerge from these theoretical 
considerations.  The  first  relates  to  the  central  bank’s  strategy  and  policy  implementation.  Because 
expectations play an important role in the transmission of the effects of monetary policy and because 
expectations should, by and large, be formed “rationally”, in the sense that they take into account all 
relevant  available  information  concerning  the  factors  and  policies  that  may  affect  future  price 
developments, the quantitative definition of the price stability objective of the central bank, the strategy 
it  adopts  in  pursuing  this  objective,  and  the  credibility  with  which  policy  is  conducted  all  influence 
expectations  and,  thus,  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  policy  itself.  The  ECB’s  quantitative 
definition of price stability and its commitment, in the context of its strategy, to achieving this objective 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2006
are reflected in the effective anchoring of inflation expectations in the euro area at a level in line with 
our quantitative definition of price stability.  
A second conclusion concerns our ability to capture empirically, and in a reliable manner, the role of 
money  in  the  monetary  transmission  process,  and  the  implication  of  this  for  the  central  bank’s 
monetary  policy  strategy.  The  model  I  referred  to  implies  that  the  long-term  relationship  between 
money  growth  and  inflation  is  theoretically  robust,  that  is,  independent  of,  and  consistent  with,  the 
model’s behavioural or structural features that may reflect alternative hypotheses. However, over short 
and medium-term horizons, the effects on future price and output developments of a change in the 
monetary  policy  stance,  and  of  monetary  conditions  in  particular,  cannot  be  settled  a  priori  on 
theoretical grounds. The magnitude and time profile of these effects is an empirical issue that must be 
assessed on the basis of the evidence available. But as the response of the economy to a change in 
policy rates and/or the quantity of base money reflects the influence of various factors and past policy 
actions that may have varied over time, and are likely to differ across countries, the estimation of these 
effects  is  not  straightforward,  especially  for  relatively  low  rates  of  inflation.  Indeed,  the  estimated 
parameters of traditional macroeconometric models cannot be expected to be invariant over time. This 
is not only because they will not be invariant to the central bank’s strategy or policy rule, as Lucas 
(1976)  has  emphasised,  but  also  because  other  factors  and  processes,  such  as  technological 
advances,  productivity  gains,  financial  innovations  and  possibly  changes  in  preferences  reflecting 
demographic developments are likely to exert an ongoing, and difficult to precisely identify, influence 
over time on the dynamic response of the economy to a monetary policy change.  
The latest generation of macroeconomic models for monetary analysis, developed in recent years and 
referred to as “new Keynesian” or “new neoclassical” models, can address some of these challenges, 
particularly those stressed by Robert Lucas. These models are conceptually appealing as they also 
emphasise  the  role  of  forward-looking  rational  expectations  and  nominal  rigidities  and,  furthermore, 
are  based  on  more  rigorous  microfoundations.  The  derived  macroeconomic  relations,  linking  policy 
objectives to instruments, reflect explicitly the optimal behaviour of economic agents and they can be 
considered  truly  structural  in  the  sense  that  their  parameters  are  invariant  to  monetary  policy 
changes1. These types of models have been employed to argue, as Michael Woodford did forcefully 
this  afternoon,  that  monetary  policy  can  be  effectively  conducted  to  control  price  and  output 
developments without any use or reference to monetary aggregates. For money plays no essential or 
active role in the monetary transmission mechanism, it reacts only passively to price developments – 
which are influenced directly only by the monetary policy interest rate – without any feedback effects 
on the economy. So money does not matter. 
One  feature  of  an  analytical  framework  in  which  money  plays  no  meaningful  role  and  of  a  policy 
strategy  in  which  the  policy-rate  is  set  without  taking  into  account  monetary  developments  is  the 
possibility that the central bank may fail to anchor inflation expectations effectively. This is a troubling 
possibility, which would imply increased output and price volatility that would impair the central bank’s 
ability to pin down the price level efficiently. Christiano, Motto and Rostagno gave a pertinent example. 
But the issue is more general and deserves further reflection. 
The strong conclusions on the irrelevance of money in the conduct of monetary policy derived from the 
New Keynesian models are not a consequence of the key and attractive features of those models – 
the role of expectations and the more solid microfoundations – but they reflect underlying assumptions 
concerning the role of money and of financial intermediaries in the economy. One such simplifying but 
limiting assumption is that real money balances do not affect aggregate demand directly. Another is 
that financial intermediation, which is important for credit provision and liquidity creation, has no effects 
on economic activity and prices other than those resulting from changing lending rates which move in 
parallel with all market rates. In these markets, there are no informational asymmetries or liquidity and 
credit constraints affecting the behaviour of economic agents, which is not the case in the real world. 
And  movements  in  asset  prices,  that  in  reality  can  be  affected  by  liquidity  conditions,  do  not  affect 
directly or via wealth affects spending decisions. I am sure that as the new framework for monetary 
policy  analysis  is extended,  to  allow  for  a sufficient degree  of realism  on  the role  of  money  and  its 
counterparts – notably credit – in the economy, the relevance of money in the conduct of monetary 
policy  will  be  revealed  and  restored.  Research  carried  out  at  the  ECB  and  elsewhere  aims  at 
incorporating a richer financial sector into dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models, in order to 
                                                      
1   They, of course, will not be invariant to changes in the economy’s structure or agent’s preferences. 
BIS Review 110/2006 
 3
study  the  role  of  financial  variables  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  And  we  should  be  looking 
forward to the findings of this research. 
It is, of course, legitimate to ask whether these additional refinements that I am suggesting will turn out 
to be quantitatively significant. My expectation – and, I should say, my rational expectation based on 
the observation and assessment of economic reality – is that they are likely to be important. But the 
extent of their relevance in practice can only be judged on the basis of the available evidence, which 
can perhaps be better assessed in the context of the new theoretical framework and the associated 
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models being developed.  
The empirical evidence 
III.  
So far, I have argued that theory clearly suggests that money does play a role, but I have also pointed 
to potential challenges in identifying in practice and estimating with sufficient accuracy the effects of 
money on the economy over time. What does the empirical evidence available tell us? Is it robust and 
useful? What are the implications of this evidence, especially in the euro area, for policy?  
A  first  and  important  finding  is  that  there  is  strong  and  robust  evidence  concerning  the  long-term 
relationship  between  money  and  prices,  based  on  data  collected  for  many  countries  and  over  long 
periods of time. One such study, which estimates this relationship on the basis of a methodology that 
should make the estimates independent of country-specific events and of the sample period, finds that 
the correlation between inflation and the growth of money is close to 1, as suggested by theory. The 
existence  of  a  strong  and  stable  long-term  relationship  between  inflation  and  money  growth  is 
documented by many other studies, including a number of major studies at the ECB based on euro 
area  data.  It  is  also  interesting  to  note  that  the  relationship  between  inflation  and  money  growth  is 
particularly  close  for  high-inflation  countries,  as  illustrated  in  a  book  co-authored  by  one  of  our 
distinguished  guests,  Chairman  Bernanke.  These  findings  are,  of  course,  important  and  consistent 
with theory. But because robust correlations and long-term relationships need not imply causality, and 
because we are also interested in the links between money and prices over shorter time periods, we 
have to examine other types of evidence.  
One approach employed in recent empirical studies to study the impact of monetary phenomena on 
the economy is based on vector autoregressions (VARs), which were pioneered by Sims (1972, 1980) 
and  further  developed  and  extensively  applied  by  Professor  Christiano  and  his  colleagues.  This 
approach  has  the  merit  that  it  is  not  constrained  by  a  particular  specification  of  the  underlying 
structural relationships, and it provides evidence on the intertemporal response of the price level and 
output  to  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Although  the  empirical  results  based  on  this 
approach are subject to several caveats, I would like to point to two findings from extensive research 
carried out at the ECB. First, there are remarkable similarities in the price level and output responses 
of the euro area and the US economies to a change in the monetary policy stance, although the exact 
time  profiles  of  the  dynamic  effects  differ  and  cannot  be  estimated  with  great  precision.  Second,  a 
reduction  in  the  policy  rate  or  an  increase  in  the  monetary  base  induces  a  very  gradual  positive 
adjustment of the price level that is long lasting, while it leads to a temporary increase in output which 
reaches a peak after a period of between one and two years, but eventually diminishes to zero. These 
time  patterns  of  output  and  price  responses  are  consistent  with  the  theoretical  paradigm  of  the 
monetary transmission mechanism that I previously reviewed, and with simulations of the effects of 
monetary policy based on highly stylised dynamic general equilibrium models calibrated for the euro 
area economy. 
This brings us to the evidence available on the role of money, as captured by the macroeconometric 
models currently employed by many central banks, including the ECB. The pertinent evidence is not 
encouraging, but this is not entirely surprising in the light of the arguments previously made and the 
results  of  vector  autoregressions.  The  relationship  between  monetary  and  price  developments 
involves considerable time lags, which reflect the various channels of the transmission of the effects of 
monetary policy. The short to medium-term dynamics of inflation, which are captured by the existing 
structure of this type of model, tend to be dominated by the impact of economic factors and shocks, 
such as changes in the price of oil or indirect taxes, especially in a low-inflation environment. It could 
thus be argued that the success of past monetary policy in keeping trend inflation at a low level has 
made it more difficult to estimate, in the context of this type of model, the short-term links between 
money  and  price  developments.  At  the  same  time,  econometric  models  focusing on  the medium  to 
long-term links between money growth and inflation have been able to capture statistically significant 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2006
empirical  relationships  that  can  help  us  to  predict  long-term  inflation  and  assess  the  risks  to  price 
stability emanating from monetary developments.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
The conduct of monetary policy 
IV.  
What does all this imply for the ECB’s choice of monetary policy strategy and the conduct of its single 
monetary policy? There is one logical conclusion, based on theoretical considerations, the empirical 
evidence and the current state of analytical tools: the sensible approach to assessing the outlook for 
and the risks to price stability over all pertinent horizons, but especially over the more policy-relevant 
medium term, is to analyse and combine all available information in a conceptually appropriate and 
consistent manner. This conclusion is further supported by the nature and extent of the uncertainty 
faced by policy-makers:  
1. 
uncertainty  about  the  impact  of  ongoing  processes,  such  as  technological  advances  and 
financial innovations, on the economic structure; 
the associated uncertainty concerning the estimated values of key economic concepts, such 
as the economy’s potential growth rate, the neutral real rate of interest or the non-inflationary 
rate of unemployment; 
uncertainty about the way in which economic agents form expectations; 
uncertainty  relating  to  the  robustness  and  completeness  of  the  estimated  quantitative 
approximations of the theoretical paradigms that may be employed in policy analysis; and  
uncertainty about the accuracy of data, especially on a real-time basis. 
5. 
And needless to say, uncertainty was heightened – for the ECB – during the transition to the euro and 
the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Taking  all  of  this  into  account,  the  choice  of  our  policy 
strategy  –  employing  both  economic  analysis  and  monetary  analysis,  and  using  the  latter  to  cross-
check over the medium- and long-term the assessment resulting from the former – was the right one. 
It  has  served  us  well.  My  view  on  the  assessment  of  the  appropriateness  and  effectiveness  of  a 
monetary  policy  framework  is  summarised  in  the  old  saying  that  “the  proof  of  the  pudding  is  in  the 
eating.” And I would contend that, over the past seven years, the pudding has been very satisfying. 
Otmar Issing, who played a central role in shaping this strategy, will elaborate on this tomorrow, and I 
should not say much more. I would, however, like to briefly make some points relating to the future. 
As  shown  in  the  paper  presented  earlier  today  by  my  ECB  colleagues  (Fischer,  Lenza,  Pill  and 
Reichlin),  the  monetary  analysis  carried  out  at  the  ECB  has  evolved  over  time  and  is  fairly 
comprehensive, going beyond the standard assessments based on the quantity theory of money and 
the stability of money demand. It employs a variety of tools in a manner that is not mechanical but 
combines judgement and analytical rigour in reaching a money-based assessment of the risks to price 
stability.  The  main  conclusion  from  our  experience  with  monetary  analysis  is  that,  on  the  whole,  it 
helps us to extract useful information from monetary aggregates about the inflation outlook and the 
associated  risks.  This  information  has  proven  relevant  and  has  made  a  decisive  contribution  to 
monetary policy decisions.  
There is, however, more work to be done towards deepening and refining our monetary analysis. This 
will  involve  not  only  improving  the  pertinent  analytical  tools  and  examining  more  thoroughly 
developments in the components and counterparts of money, but also a more comprehensive use of 
the signals contained in money data to extract information on the current state of the economy, and 
which can be useful for forecasting inflation: money and credit aggregates can play an important role 
in providing timely information about variables which are measured with a lag, and about variables that 
are  not  observable,  or  shocks  hitting  the  economy  that  may  be  correlated  with  monetary 
developments. Some work that has been done in this area is very promising. The general aim of this 
research agenda is to get more value from money. 
At the same time, we will also enhance the tools employed in our economic analysis by introducing a 
new euro area-wide model (a state-of-the-art dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model of the euro 
area  economy),  which  is  based  on  more  solid  microfoundations,  in  line  with  the  latest  theoretical 
advances.  This  model  has  the  potential  to  incorporate  in  a  substantive  way  the  role  and  effects  of 
money  and  credit  in  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  Perhaps,  in  the  future,  we  will  be  in  a 
position  to  develop  and  reliably  estimate  a  single  empirical  approximation  of  a  general  theoretical 
framework in which money is of central importance. When this is done, it may be possible to merge 
BIS Review 110/2006 
 5
the  two  pillars  of  our  analysis  into  a  single  one.  But  this  will  be  a  larger  pillar  in  which  money  will 
continue to play a prominent role in guiding our monetary policy decision-making.  
Money and financial stability 
V.  
A final issue that I would like to briefly address concerns the role of money and credit – the usefulness 
of monitoring and assessing monetary and credit developments – in the performance of another major 
central bank task, namely the safeguarding of financial stability. This issue is important in its own right, 
but it is also linked to the conduct of monetary policy, since price stability and financial stability are 
intertwined and should be mutually reinforcing. In recent years, extensive work has been undertaken 
at the BIS, the ECB and elsewhere that demonstrates that excessive monetary and credit growth can 
provide  useful  early  signals  concerning  the  potential  emergence  of  asset  price  bubbles,  and  that 
excessive liquidity growth has been associated with asset price boom episodes that have sometimes 
been followed by post-boom recessions. These findings are obviously important for the role of money 
and credit  in the  monitoring  and assessment of  financial stability,  but  they  are  also relevant  for  the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
A recently expressed view is that a narrow focus of monetary policy on price stability in the short term 
might pose risks to price stability in the longer run, if the potential consequences of financial instability 
for  long-term  price  developments  are  overlooked.  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  with  its 
medium-term orientation and the important role it assigns to monetary analysis for assessing medium- 
to  long-term  price  developments,  allows  us  to  address  challenges  that  may  arise  from  financial 
imbalances and potential instability in the financial markets. Monetary analysis can help us to identify 
distortions and imbalances in the financial system, and the implied potential risks to long-term price 
stability, in a timely manner. Moreover, market expectations of the monetary policy response to these 
long-term  risks  to  price  stability  should  help  to  contain  evolving  financial  imbalances  and  thereby 
mitigate the vulnerability of the financial system. There is, therefore, no conflict between the conduct of 
a monetary policy focused on the preservation of price stability over the medium and longer term, and 
the safeguarding of financial stability. On the contrary, price stability and financial stability should be 
mutually  reinforcing.  And  the  monitoring  and  assessment  of  monetary  and  credit  developments 
contribute to this, which reinforces what I said before: there is “value in money”. 
However,  it  is  worth  keeping  in  mind  the  implications  of  the  rapidly  changing  global  economy.  Its 
structure and functioning is affected not only by (i) productivity developments related to technological 
advances;  and  (ii)  the  process  of  globalisation,  but  also  by  financial  innovation  and  the  increasing 
complexity of financial instruments. All these factors have a bearing on the dynamics of the inflationary 
process and the evolution and information content of monetary and credit aggregates. It is therefore 
essential that we continue to monitor these developments, and keep our antennas alert for monetary 
and financial signals that can be of use in assessing medium- to long-term trends in consumer and 
asset price developments and their potential interaction. Needless to say, it is not easy to interpret this 
information in the context of the ongoing structural changes in the real economy and financial markets 
that  are  difficult  to  identify  and  measure  in  real-time.  But  we  have  to.  I  am  convinced  that  the 
information  value  that  can  be  provided  by  money  will  remain  important,  but  it  also  requires  careful 
analysis and interpretation.  
Concluding remarks 
VI.  
According to an old saying, “The best advice about money is not to talk about it”. Well, I obviously did 
not heed this advice, as I have talked about money quite extensively. But I felt it necessary to treat 
“money” comprehensively in my remarks, because it is money – according to an ancient compatriot of 
mine – money that “holds all things together”. Around 330 B.C., Aristotle recognised that “all goods 
must therefore be measured by some one thing […] that holds all things together.” He emphasised 
that “Money has become a sort of representative of demand by convention; […] it exists not by nature, 
but by law. And it is in our power to change it and make it useless.” In modern democracies, the power 
–  and  the  responsibility  –  to  ensure  that  money  retains  its  value  is  vested  in  independent  central 
banks. And it is precisely because we take this responsibility very seriously that we want and need to 
talk about money, and the value we get out of money for our analysis, and for the pursuit of our price 
stability objective. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 110/2006
