John Gieve: Practical issues in preparing for cross-border financial crises 
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Financial Stability Forum 
Workshop:  Planning  and  Communication  for  Financial  Crises  and  Business  Continuity  Incidents, 
London, 13 November 2006. 
 largely  national  and  our  machinery 
for  cooperation  has  not  kept  pace  with 
Introduction 
My subject this evening is the challenge that globalisation poses for handling and resolving financial 
crises. 
If  that  seems  a  typically  gloomy  subject  for  a  meeting  of  central  banks,  regulators  and  finance 
ministries, I would like to start by emphasising two points. First, I do not believe that globalisation is a 
source of instability; indeed in financial as in other markets, the opening up of international competition 
has been a huge force for good; by spreading and diversifying risk, it has in many ways made financial 
markets more efficient and stable. However, the fact is that governments, regulators and central banks 
remain 
the 
internationalisation of markets. 
Second, I have not chosen the subject because I believe a crisis is imminent. Indeed, in the UK and 
elsewhere economic and financial conditions currently are mostly benign and are forecast to remain 
so. Of course concerns about global imbalances and the search for yield in financial markets remain 
but  our  central  projections  like  those  of  the  IMF  and  most  other  international  forecasters  show  the 
‘Great Stability’ of the last 10 years continuing at least in the near term. But remote events do happen 
–  and  by  their  nature  we  cannot  always  see  them  coming.  Researchers  at  the  World  Bank  have 
recorded  13  borderline  or  full-blown  financial  crises  since  the  late  1970s,  involving  at  least  one 
Financial Stability Forum (FSF) member country.1 And there are well known incidents not on the list: 
including the 1987 crash, the less developed countries’ debt crisis and LTCM’s near collapse. 
So we are fortunate in having a time of relative calm to work out together how we should react when a 
problem does arise. And we have in the FSF a body that was established “to co-ordinate the efforts of 
…various  bodies  in  order  to  promote  international  financial  stability,  improve  the  functioning  of 
markets,  and  reduce  systemic  risk”2.  In  its  first  7  years,  much  of  the  FSF’s  focus  has  been  on  the 
identification and assessment of risks in a rapidly changing financial system; it has played a valuable 
role in building a common understanding among authorities and among market participants of what 
the risks are and how they can be reduced. However, that level of progress has been less apparent on 
putting in place arrangements for handling and resolving cross-border crises. 
During  that  period  a  number  of  countries,  including  the  UK,  have  improved  their  processes  for 
handling financial crises – including for crises sparked by business continuity events. And there have 
been  a  number  of  exercises  and  co-ordination  initiatives  in  different  regional  groups  (for  example 
amongst  the  Nordic  countries,  Dutch  and  Belgian  authorities,  and  more  widely  across  the  EU).  But 
there  has  been  less  progress  on  the  wider  international  front.  Overall,  I  do  not  know  anyone  who 
believes that we have established either the common approach to crises or the practical machinery 
which would enable us to handle a complex cross-border failure with confidence. 
I would like to make some suggestions tonight on how we might take matters forward. 
When and how should the State intervene to prevent or manage a financial crisis? 
Of course the underlying questions are very difficult even for one country. Financial markets are often 
volatile and they can only work well if investors and firms expect to live or die by their own decisions 
and  do  not  come  to  rely  on  a  safety  net  to  mitigate  their  losses.  To  avoid  that  ‘moral  hazard’, 
authorities have tended to be reluctant to spell out in what circumstances and what ways they would 
                                                      
1   Gerard Caprio and Daniela Klingebiel, 2003. “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises”, World Bank Research 
Dataset. http://econ.worldbank.org
2   http://www.fsforum.org/home/home.html
BIS Review 112/2006 
 1
be  willing  to  help  support  a  market  or  a  participant,  beyond  making  clear  that  it  would  only  be  in 
exceptional circumstances and where it was essential in the wider systemic interest. But the difficulty 
in spelling out underlying reasons must not become an excuse for lack of analysis and preparation. In 
order  to  make  cross-border  crisis  management  work,  we  may  have  to  consider  sacrificing  some 
mystery – even if only amongst ourselves – for greater effectiveness. 
The most recent cases of official emergency liquidity support to UK banks occurred in the early 1990s, 
when the Bank lent to a few small banks in order to prevent wider loss of confidence in the banking 
system. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Treasury, FSA and Bank which sets 
out our current roles in maintaining financial stability makes clear that decisions on support operations 
now rest with the Chancellor, acting in the light of advice from both the Bank and the FSA. 
Following  the  early  1990s  experiences,  Eddie  –  now  Lord  George  –  discussed  various  options  for 
intervention.3 He argued that, in deciding whether to provide support, the authorities should: explore 
every option for a commercial solution before committing public funds; structure any support such that 
losses  would  fall  first  to  shareholders  and  any  benefits  fall  first  to  the  authorities;  not,  in  normal 
circumstances, lend to a firm known at the time to be insolvent; and, look for a clear exit from provision 
of the lending. 
These guidelines go more to the question ‘how’ rather than the question ‘when’ the authorities should 
intervene, and they were drawn up before the globalisation of banking and capital markets had got 
fully  underway.  So  I  do  not  put  them  forward  as  the  complete  answer;  rather  I  think  we  should  be 
discussing  whether  there  are  some  common  understandings  which  could  inform  and  shape  cross-
border cooperation. 
International complexity 
Of  course  reaching  a  common  view  will  be  difficult.  But  it  seems  to  me  a  necessary  step  towards 
meeting the challenges of handling financial instability in the new world of open international capital 
markets and giant complex financial institutions. 
Many of the challenges have been discussed in the international community. In particular: the potential 
difficulty  in  amassing  a  complete  picture  of  the  health  of  firms  and  capital  markets  in  crisis  from 
different authorities; the potential complexity of large firm structures, where entities within a firm may 
be subject to different legal arrangements, preference rules and rules concerning ownership interests 
and  creditor  arrangements;  and  the  possible  technical  difficulties  in  winding  down  an  entity  that  is 
engaged  in  complex  trading  strategies.  There  are  also  of  course  issues  around  how  liquidity  and 
capital  can  be  moved  around  a  group:  whether  collateral,  funding  or  capital  can  be  moved  quickly 
across borders to where it needs to be. 
Further,  some  of  the  commonly  preferred  methods  for  resolving  a  financial  crisis,  before  moving  to 
winding down methods, may be less easy to deploy than they were even a few years ago. I think many 
of us would share Eddie George’s view that we should look first for a private sector solution before 
committing public money to a rescue operation. When LTCM got into serious difficulties in 1998, and 
there was a risk that its liquidation could further destabilise markets, the New York Federal Reserve 
was able to facilitate discussions that resulted in a cooperative market solution. 
But would this kind of approach still be possible today? Certainly private sector solutions looked easier 
when lending was the predominant source of funds, banking systems were arranged predominantly 
along national lines, and it was possible to get the key counterparties round a single table. Will firms 
that have actively engaged in methods to lay off risk when a problem occurs – through, for example, 
credit derivatives and collateralisation – be as ready to contribute to solutions predicated on the give 
and  take  of  long-term  relationships?  And  will  the  increasing  complexity  and  size  of  large  complex 
financial institutions deter previously willing possible participants? 
Since  the  FSF’s  creation,  there  has  been  further  consolidation  of  international  banking  groups  and 
globalisation  of  markets.  Our  vulnerabilities  are  more  concentrated:  although  the  firms  and  capital 
markets in which they are concentrated are probably more resilient, we have bigger and potentially 
more complex points of failure. This concentration has brought efficiencies, and has been supported 
                                                      
3   George, E (1994) “The pursuit of financial stability”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, February. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2006
by enhanced oversight of global firms and the capital markets they operate in. But the price we pay is 
more complicated (and therefore potentially more costly) crisis resolution. 
A practical way forward 
So how can we make more progress? I have spoken about drawing up a shared framework or set of 
principles but I am only too aware how easily that could become a drafting exercise in which difficult 
issues are evaded rather than dealt with. 
Clearly initiatives such as this workshop are a useful way to bring relevant policymakers together – 
and I am encouraged by the shared commitment to make progress that you have shown by being here 
today. 
My  suggestion  is  that  probably  the  best  way  of  making  further  progress  on  a  genuine  and  useful 
common  approach  is  to  work  together  on  practical  examples;  to  consider  some  of  the  operational 
problems that we would face if particular sorts of crises arose. And thus establish a shared fact base 
and understanding of what we might expect from each other in a crisis, and how we should go about 
handling it. 
This  idea  of  informal  groups  of  relevant  authorities  is  not  new.  In  a  sense,  it  is  borrowed  from  the 
supervisory world, where colleges of regulators have existed for some time, with the aim of devising 
ways of pooling knowledge and developing common approaches – to supervise firms efficiently and to 
reduce the supervisory burden for them. 
The groups to discuss crisis management issues would need to bring together supervisors and central 
banks. Both are likely to have day to day information which is relevant in a crisis, and both will also 
have  control  of  tools  which  can  be  used  to  handle  the  problem.  At  the  same  time,  the  number  of 
participants would probably need to be smaller than in a regulatory college if these group are to be 
effective. To remain focused, the core group might perhaps need to be limited to authorities from two 
or three countries each, rather than wider groups. 
And selectivity, flexibility and pragmatism would be absolutely key. I am not advocating, for example, 
that we form a group for every firm that includes all authorities in every jurisdiction where that firm has 
a  presence.  Instead,  that  we  use  a  risk-based  approach  to  concentrate  on  those  authorities  with  a 
mutual interest, identify the specific firms and capital markets that that mutual interest might cover, and 
bring together those relevant authorities to discuss those firms and the capital markets they interact in. 
Indeed,  some  countries’  authorities  have  already  met  bilaterally  or  in  small  groups  to  discuss  crisis 
management topics of particular mutual interest. 
There  are  a  number  of  practical  aspects  of  crisis  management  that  these  interest  groups  could 
enhance.  First,  co-ordination  in  a  crisis.  This,  alongside  information-sharing,  is  the  area  that  has 
received most generic attention at the cross-border level. Our challenge is to embed processes that 
will  be  relevant  for  crises  into  our  everyday  interactions:  co-ordination  is  likely  to  be  much  easier 
amongst  colleagues  who  are  already  familiar  with  each  other  and  with  each  other’s  views  and 
approach, than with someone who is simply a name on a contact list. This is one positive feature of 
discussing these issues, just as some of the value of MoUs lies in the process of negotiation and the 
relationships that fosters. 
Second: information-sharing in a crisis. Interest groups would be a good forum to discuss in advance 
what  information  it  might  be  appropriate  to  share  on  specific  firms,  and  to  ensure  that  it  would  in 
practice be readily available. And in doing so, we will better understand the information and therefore 
be able to assess it more quickly and more confidently in-crisis. 
Third: in-crisis systemic impact assessment. A key first step in deciding how to handle a crisis is in 
understanding the likely cost of not intervening in it – the likely systemic impact of it. The impact of a 
particular  problem  or  failure  of  a  particular  firm  will  of  course  depend  on  the  characteristics  of  that 
specific  problem  –  and  importantly  on  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system,  and  the  interlinkages 
amongst  different  elements  of  it  at  the  time.  However,  there  are  common  channels  through  which 
shocks propagate. And some of those channels will be more relevant for particular firms than others. 
The  important  aspect  of  developing  this  work  is  in  providing  a  common  vocabulary  in  which 
policymakers can discuss the possible impact of a problem. This may also help to provide a framework 
for deciding whether to intervene in a crisis, as well as helping to understand who may be interested in 
intervening. 
BIS Review 112/2006 
 3
And  fourth:  the  types  of  measures  we  have  available  in  a  crisis.  I  outlined  earlier  a  number  of 
challenges  in  resolving  a  crisis  involving  a  large  complex  financial  institution,  and  the  obstacles  we 
may face in addressing them. The Contact Group 2002 report on legal underpinnings4 provided more 
detail on the extent to which different legal regimes created vulnerabilities in managing crises. Through 
discussion of hypothetical problems for real firms we may get closer to understanding more concretely 
what  these  obstacles  will  look  like  in  practice  and  therefore  what  we  might  want  to  put  in  place  to 
mitigate  them.  Put  another  way,  it  is  potentially  a  way  to  develop  practical  solutions,  or  at  least  a 
practical understanding of the specific issues we might face, within the parameters of our current legal 
and fiscal set up. 
What we learn from firm-focussed interest groups should also put us in a better position to tackle some 
of the thorny issues we face. One which particularly exercises me is ensuring that we should always 
have the option of closing down a large firm in an orderly way, even if we need to use emergency 
liquidity assistance as a bridging loan to do so (rather than as a step towards keeping the firm open). 
Looking further ahead, it is clear that these interest groups should not remain inward-looking. In order 
for any preparations for crisis to be relevant, authorities will need to ensure that they are informed by 
firms’  plans  and  views  –  for  example  on  their  likely  own  actions  in  crisis,  where  they  see  their 
vulnerabilities in managing a problem, what they expect the authorities to do, and where arrangements 
could  be  improved.  So  the  ongoing  dialogue  that  the  relevant  authorities  have  with  firms  may  well 
inform, and be informed by, the work of interest groups. 
What role could the FSF play in promoting these kinds of bilateral or small multilateral discussions and 
exercises on practical topics regarding specific firms and markets? As we all know, it is not the role of 
the FSF to manage cross-border crises. But my view is that the FSF does have a role in this area. To 
me it seems the ideal group to draw out the common messages and lessons that may emerge from 
these interest group discussions, and to establish a common framework for handling crises which will 
be of use both to its members and more widely. 
                                                      
4   http://www.bis.org/press/p021210.htm
4 
 BIS Review 112/2006
