Y V Reddy: Banking and financial sector reforms - status and prospects 
Comments  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Panel  Discussion  on 
“15 Years  of  Reforms  and  the  Road  Ahead”  convened  on  the  occasion  of  “The  Economic  Times 
Awards for Corporate Excellence 2006-07” , Mumbai, 6 October 2006. 
 Respected Prime Minister Sir, Shri Vineet Jain, Honourable Shri Chidambaram, Dr. Rangarajan, Shri 
Ahluwalia, leaders of industry and finance, and friends, 
I am thankful to the organisers for according me the privilege of participating in this panel discussion.  
My comments are divided into three parts – personal, present status, and prospects for Banking and 
Financial Sector Reforms. 
On the personal front, I have worked closely with all the distinguished panelists here and hence, would 
like to publicly acknowledge my deep debt of gratitude.  
I have been working with Dr. Manmohan Singh, our Prime Minister, in various capacities, starting in 
1977 as his Deputy Secretary in the finance ministry and more closely since the initiation of reforms. 
Let me be very brief and say that I have always been inspired by his vision and guidance. I am grateful 
to him for the continued trust in me.  
I have known Montek for about twenty-five years and had worked with him closely for sometime during 
the reform period. One is inevitably impressed with his sharp intellect and admirable articulation. We 
have been friends and have deep respect for each others’ professional abilities. 
Dr. C. Rangararjan is my guru – a guru in the true Indian tradition. He made me more of an economist 
than I could ever dream of. The conceptual framework and intellectual as well institutional foundations 
for the unique and impressive reforms in the monetary-fiscal, financial, and external sectors were laid 
by him.  
His successor Dr. Jalan refined and nuanced the framework not only for taking these reforms forward 
but  also  for  managing  threats  to  stability.  Dr.  Jalan’s  contribution  to  exchange  rate  management  is 
admittedly legendary. 
I worked with Shri Chidambaram, initially, when he was the Commerce Minister and later when he was 
the  Union  Finance  Minister.  We  continue  to  work  together  closely  and  it  is  a  delight  to  have 
discussions with him knowing fully well that the outcome would be a better policy.  
Shri  Chidambaram  is  bold,  decisive,  and  effective.  Striking  examples  of  these  qualities  are  his 
decisions  relating  to  gold  liberalisation  and  the  introduction  of  the  system  of  the  ways  and  means 
advance, which were the critical prerequisites for the evolution of money, government securities and 
forex markets.  
I  recall  that  when  I  joined  as  Governor  three  years  ago,  I  emphasised  the  continuity  and  change 
aspects  of  the  policy.  This  is  a  defining  characteristic  of  the  Indian  reforms,  which  have  been 
described as cautious. Shri Vajpayee, the then Prime Minister, and Shri Jaswant Singh, who was then 
the Finance Minister, supported this approach. Shri Singh provided strategic guidance and put full trust 
in my professional skills and judgment. 
In fact, I believe that, over the fifteen years of reforms, all our leaders with their diverse backgrounds, 
and their varied qualities, have contributed to an economic policy in India that has given us some pride 
today and great hope for tomorrow. 
On the present status of the banking sector, admittedly, there is scope for considerable improvement. 
Yet, its strength and resilience in ensuring growth and stability have been recognised universally. In 
the  major  emerging  economies,  we  compare  favourably  in  the  services  sector  and  are  seeking  to 
compete in the manufacturing sector while we try to catch up on the fiscal and infrastructural fronts. 
However, it is in the financial and banking sectors that we are unarguably ahead.  
Our  banking  sector  reform  has  been  unique  in  the  world  in  that  it  combines  a  comprehensive 
reorientation of competition, regulation and ownership in a non-disruptive and cost-effective manner. 
Indeed our banking reform is a good illustration of the dynamism of the public sector in managing the 
BIS Review 94/2006 
 1
overhang problems and the pragmatism of public policy in enabling the domestic and foreign private 
sectors to compete and expand. 
Similarly,  the  financial  sector  of  India  as  a  whole  exhibits  vibrancy  and  resilience.  The  government 
securities, money and forex markets have significant public policy implications for a gradually-opening 
emerging  market  economy.  These  have  developed  during  the  reform  period,  with  impressive 
diversification of participants and instruments.  
The institutional, technical, and micro-structural aspects of the Indian financial sector are in alignment 
with the best global standards. Here, again progress achieved in financial sector is a testimony to the 
healthy  evolution  through  mutual  cooperation  amongst  government,  monetary  authority,  regulators, 
and above all, diverse market participants – domestic and foreign, in public as well as in private sector.  
Reflecting  on  future  prospects  in  banking,  immediate  focus  has  to  be  on  the  cleaning  up  of  the 
remnants  of  undercapitalised  banks,  while  concentrating  on  improvements  in  the  rural  co-operative 
credit  system.  It  is  also  necessary  to  ensure  improvements  in  their  governance  and  financial 
management. In the banking system as a whole, a healthy credit culture encompassing appropriate 
pricing, quality of service, financial inclusion and contract-enforcement would be vital.  
While the larger corporates have already acquired considerable freedom in accessing funds from a 
variety of sources such as banks, non-banks, capital markets, and external resources, the small and 
medium  enterprises,  agriculture  sector,  artisans  and  the  informal  sector  as  a  whole,  remain  to  be 
demonstrably benefited.  
For  the  way  ahead,  for  the  financial  sector  as  whole,  given  the  strong  foundations  and  basic 
institutional  framework,  the  issues  relate  to  the  pace  of  further  deregulation  and  liberalisation, 
consistent with the progress of reform in the real and fiscal sectors. In practice, within the given legal 
framework,  priorities  have  to  be  formulated  to  ensure  implementation  in  tune  with  the  evolving 
domestic and external developments. 
The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has,  in  the  service  of  our  country,  a  proven  track  record  and 
professionalism,  which  have  lent  it  considerable  credibility  -  both  domestically  and  globally.  This 
credibility  enables  the  RBI  to  confidently  carry  the  reforms  forward  to  credibly  maintain  price  and 
financial stability, while enabling self-accelerating equitable growth at elevated levels.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2006
