T T Mboweni: The challenge of employment equity with specific reference to 
transformation at the South African Reserve Bank 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Black Management 
Forum Annual Conference, Durban, 13 October 2006. 
 The President of the Black Management Forum, 
Former Presidents and Executive members of the Black Management Forum, 
Members of the Black Management Forum Executive, 
Ordinary members of the BMF, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
When we were approached by the BMF leadership to address this august gathering on challenges of 
employment equity with specific reference to the transformation process at the South African Reserve 
Bank,  we  were  more  than  pleased  to  oblige  and  grabbed  the opportunity  with both  hands primarily 
because the progress we have made at the Bank since 1999 has been remarkable. This does not in 
any  way  imply  that  our  current  transformation  milestones  are  a  destiny  already  reached,  but  we 
thought that we could share with you how we have embraced transformation as a journey which will 
hopefully someday help us realise the desired South African end-state1. 
When one takes into consideration that the Bank comprised mainly, but not only, of Afrikaner white 
males in technical and strategic decision making positions in 1998 at the Bank, we are certain that all 
might  concur  that  the  road  to  transformation  at  the  Bank  was  paved  with  many  serious 
challenges/obstacles  and  presented  an  extremely  steep  gradient  of  resistance.  It  is  against  this 
opening scene and milieu that we can lay claim that the progress made has been indeed remarkable 
and to some extent (maybe) exemplary. 
Allow me to share with you the facts and figures of employment equity and transformation at the Bank. 
This will entail a little walk back in the history of the Bank’s workforce movements and composition, but 
the historic walk will serve as empirical support of the Bank’s transformation and equity successes. 
A  historically  significant  starting  point  would  be  the  year  1994.  In  that  year  the  Bank’s  total  staff 
comprised 21 per cent Blacks and 38 per cent females. The management levels, however, comprised 
1 per cent Blacks and 12 per cent females. When we joined this transformation journey after 19982, 
we  had  a  workforce  that,  in  total  comprised  36  per  cent  Blacks  and  42  per  cent  females,  but  the 
management levels comprised only 13 per cent Blacks and 19 per cent females. The strategic General 
Management  level  comprised  only  15  per  cent  Blacks  and  7  per  cent  females.  Thus  the  workforce 
composition of 1998 will effectively serve as the starting point of numerical transformation in the Bank 
since then. 
The  question  that  confronted  us  was:  how,  when,  by  who  and  what  should  be  done  to  change  the 
status  quo.  It  was  clear  that  a  strategic  plan  and  modalities  had  to  be  developed  to  answer  this 
question. And so the Journey began. 
Firstly, we developed a strategy driven by the executive level of the Bank. An important element of that 
strategy  was  to  talk  through  the  issues  with  ALL  management  and  staff  about  the  imperative  of 
transformation  as  an  optimal  human  resources  allocation  issue  and  also  as  a  contribution  to  the 
deracialisation  of  South  Africa.  This  was  not  an  easy  task  and  still  is  not  an  easy  one.  Numerous 
strategy planning meetings to achieve a buy-in were and still are the order of the day. 
                                                      
1   Change is continuous though. We are always in a state of change. So the end-state is nothing but a brief moment to reflect. 
As some philosophers have said “nothing is stable except stability” 
I say “joined” because I do not want to claim that transformation only began in 1998. Far from it. The fact that by that time 
there  were  some  black  mangers  and  females  in  the  senior  professional  and  assistant  general  management  level  is 
testimony to the fact that my predecessors had begun the journey. We accelerated the pace. 
2 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 1
Secondly, management was tasked with the responsibility to indicate to the Executive Team3 how and 
by when they could go about implementing a numerical target of 50-50 black/white ratio and a 33% 
female  representation  at all  occupational  levels  of the  Bank  by 2005.  This was  the  basic plan.  The 
process was both fascinating and difficult. Eventually we produced the plan. 
Thirdly,  it  was  an  essential  element  that  transformation  was  more  than  about  employment  equity 
numbers. It also involved changing the culture and the decision making processes in the Bank. To that 
extent we sat down to create a committee or syndicate decisionmaking system. This forced people to 
engage  in  regular  discussions  and  debates  about  the  work  of  the  Bank  around  the  same  table  or 
tables.  Examples  in  this  regard  are  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC),  the  Management 
Committee  (MANCO),  Financial  Stability  Committee,  etc.  These  committees  or  syndicates  brought 
together people from different departments to make collective decisions in order to advance the work 
of the Bank. 
Fourthly,  the  Board  of  Directors  had  to  change  too.  In  1998,  the  Board  of  Directors  was  extremely 
unrepresentative with only four (4) black people out of a total of fourteen (14). The secretary of the 
Board was also white. There was only one female. It was more than clear that change needed to start 
at the top for it to have any meaning amongst the staff of the Bank. 
So where do we stand today in terms of equity representation within the Board of Directors and the 
Bank  as  a  whole?  The  following  statistics  are  taken  from  the  Bank’s  Annual  Report  on  the 
Employment Equity Plan to the Department of Labour and has accordingly become a public document 
and is available for public scrutiny. 
As of the 31st March 2006, the Board of Directors was composed of ten (10) black directors and four 
(4) who were white. Of these, five were female. The secretary of the Bank is a black male. The Board 
has a committee of non-executive directors which is chaired by a female director. The Executive team 
is made up of five (5) black members out of seven (7). There is a vacancy for a Deputy Governor and 
hopefully this could be occupied by a female. The Monetary Committee (MPC) has seven members. 
At the moment five (5) are black and two (2) are white. The secretary of the MPC is a black male. This 
is quite a nice mix, `me thinks`! 
The  total  workforce  of  the  Bank  comprised  56  per  cent  Blacks  and  46  per  cent  women.  The 
management levels of the Bank comprised 43 per cent Blacks and 36 per cent females. The strategic 
General Management level comprised 51 per cent Blacks and 20 per cent females. The figures speak 
for themselves. You can draw your own conclusions. 
So what were the successful strategies that supported these transformation objectives? They focused 
mainly  on  the  manner  in  which  the  Bank  aligned  its  workforce  movements  with  its  strategic 
employment equity objectives. 
In general the Bank’s staff turnover rate hovers between 5 and 8 per cent. In 2005, the Bank’s Black 
turnover rate was 6.18 per cent and that of females was 4.51 per cent with the Bank total turnover rate 
at 5.62 per cent. In 2006, the Bank’s Black turnover rate was 6.64 per cent and that of females was 
5.56 per cent with the Bank total turnover rate at 7.07 per cent. The following discussion is focused on 
the Bank’s workforce movements since its first Employment Equity Plan in 2000. 
Who has the Bank been recruiting? The following recruitment percentages answer this question: 
Table 1  
  
% Blacks 
% Females 
 
Recruitment by race and gender 
2002 
83 
54 
2000 
87 
43 
2001 
85 
54 
2003 
80 
32 
2004 
89 
50 
2005 
81 
47 
2006 
76 
43 
                                                      
3   The Executive Team at that time was comprised of the Governor, three Deputy Governors and two Advisors. At present, the 
Executive Team is made up of the Governor, Deputy Governors and four Executive General Managers (EGMs) 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2006
On  average,  over  the  past  7  years,  the  Bank’s  recruitment  included  about  83  per  cent  Blacks  and 
about 46 per cent females. These percentages are significantly higher than most of the other players 
in the Financial Sector. 
Who has been resigning the Bank? The following termination figures provide this information: 
2006 
52 
42 
2005 
49 
34 
2004 
37 
37 
2003 
49 
36 
2001 
47 
42 
2000 
40 
34 
Termination by race and gender 
2002 
46 
28 
Table 2  
  
% Blacks 
% Females 
 
On average, over the past 7 years, the Bank’s terminations included about 45 per cent Blacks and 
about 36 per cent females. We would venture to suggest that the Bank’s experience might very much 
be similar to that of most business organisations in the country. 
People  resign  from  organisations  for  various  reasons  and  the  Bank  has  made  a  serious  attempt  to 
gather information about why people resign. We do this by making use of exit interviews. This method 
seems unreliable since most of the information gathered during these interviews does not reveal the 
real or true reasons why people resign from the Bank. One of the reasons for this might be because 
the Bank avails to staff who have resigned the opportunity to rejoin the Bank should they elect to do so 
and vacancies exist. As such many who resign try to leave on a “good note” so that doors are not 
closed behind them. We have had numerous instances where staff have returned to the Bank which 
calls  into  question  the  claim  that  the  “…  grass  is  always  greener  on  the  other  side”.  In  the  Bank’s 
recent  culture  and  climate  survey,  external  service  providers  interviewed  some  of  the  Bank’s 
ex-employees  who  declared  that,  “…  it  has  been  a  privilege  to  work  for  the  Bank  because  of  its 
national and international status and because it was a good organisation to work for”. 
Internal  promotions  are  an  important  strategy  and  good  practice  in  any  business.  This  provides 
existing employees with a career path and rewards good performance as we all know. So how did we 
go about the promotions process in order to support our strategy at the Bank? The following promotion 
percentages answer this question: 
2005 
69 
48 
2004 
65 
45 
2003 
55 
50 
2002 
57 
39 
2001 
57 
41 
2000 
39 
42 
2006 
62 
51 
Promotion by race and gender 
Table 3 
  
% Blacks 
% Females 
 
Managing  development  and  progression  at  such  an  institution  of  specialised  skills  (and  full  of 
intellectuals too!) is as fragile as doing the tango on a frozen lake – if you succeed you are the hero, 
but if you fall through the ice, you are ridiculed for attempting the impossible. Further, one has to be 
exceptionally  sensitive  to  managing  the  extremities  of  White  fears  and  Black  aspirations.  The  Bank 
has been able to steer a fairly stable ship through the sometimes turbulent waters of transformation. 
On average, in the last 7 years, promotions have included about 58 per cent Blacks and about 45 per 
cent females. 
The  Bank  consults  with  its  employees  on  all  its  employment  equity  and  skills  development  issues 
through  our  democratically-elected  Employment  Equity  Consultative  Body  (EECB).  The  Bank’s  first 
employment equity targets of 50 per cent Blacks and 33 per cent females at all levels of the Bank by 
2005 (extended to 2006) received positive support from the EECB. The Bank, in consultation with the 
staff has adopted new targets of 50 per cent Blacks, 50 per cent females and 2 per cent People with 
Disabilities by 2011. 
Special interventions and strategies that address women’s participation at all levels of management 
and  technical  skills  and  development,  and  the  employment  of  People  with  Disabilities  are  currently 
being discussed and deliberated upon at the Bank. 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 3
Experience and research have shown that if there is one place to always look out for within business 
management  is  the  supervisory  level.  If  one  does  not  focus  on  this,  one  might  experience  lots  of 
turbulence going forward. Bad managers and seniors can spoil all the honest efforts being made by 
any organisation. The executive team has to constantly examine its role vis-à-vis the staff. More often 
than not that may be where the problem is firmly located. 
Recently, on learning about my frustrations and complaints about losing skilled black staff from at the 
Bank and thus weakening our employment equity position, an anonymous Good Samaritan sent me 
an  email saying  that “if  you  are  losing people,  look  to  their  immediate  boss.  Immediate  boss  is  the 
reason  people  stay  and  thrive  in  an  organisation.  Different  managers  can  stress  out  employees  in 
different ways – by being too controlling, too suspicious, too pushy, too critical, but they forget that 
workers are not fixed assets, they are free agents. When this goes on too long, an employee will quit – 
often over a trivial issue”.4 Very right too! 
The Bank submits its draft employment equity progress first to the EECB at least once a quarter where 
we detail our progress, discusses the barriers that exist and compare our employment equity progress 
with  that  of  the  Financial  Sector  Charter  targets.  The  Bank  is  positioned  way  above  the  Financial 
Sector  targets  in  all  of  the  stipulated  target  levels  and  categories.  In  terms  of  the  barriers  to 
employment equity, staff identified 19 in 2000. This number has been significantly reduced to just 3 in 
2006. Some officials from the Department of Labour have often cited the consultation mechanism of 
the Bank as a benchmark that other organisations could emulate. 
The  Bank’s  EECB  has  hosted  various  organisations  that  were  keen  to  learn  about  how  the  Bank’s 
consultative mechanism functioned so harmoniously. Further, the Bank’s Change Management Unit 
was  instrumental  in  establishing  the  Employment  Equity  Forum  –  a  platform  at  which  employment 
equity practitioners from the Bank and various other organisations including Telkom, Escom, SABC 
and the big-four banks meet to discuss, debate and demystify employment equity issues and prepare 
for challenges going forward. 
The  Bank  is  committed  to  more  than  just  achieving  its  numerical  goals.  We  are  convinced  that 
supporting our staff to develop their skills and proficiencies to their full potential is a more important 
objective than just pursuing a numbers game. In the last year we have conducted both a skills audit 
and a bank-wide organisational culture and climate survey primarily because we wanted to establish 
the developmental needs of our employees and also to determine empirically, what makes employees 
want to stay in the Bank’s employ and what issues may coerce or indeed induce them to resign. 
The findings of both audits have resulted in the need for a strategic response from the Bank to mitigate 
against  the  issues  that  have  been  identified.  Over  and  above  these  interventions,  the  Bank  has 
revised  all  of  its  policies  to  ensure  that  we  remove  all  vestiges  of  unfair  discrimination  against  the 
designated  group  and  also  to  ensure  that  we  kept  abreast  with  best  practices  both  nationally  and 
internationally. The Bank has a generous study aid policy for both employees and their children. We 
have committed programmes that focus on ABET. Staff is encouraged to attend conferences both as 
participants  and  also  as  delegates  in  the  country  and  internationally.  Maternity  benefits  have  been 
significantly improved. The Bank has joined the BankSeta in its Letsema project through which we fulfil 
some  of  our  corporate  social  responsibilities.  We  have  a  dedicated  programme  that  focuses  on 
graduate recruitment (this is our cadet programme). The Bank views the policy revision process as an 
ongoing endeavour. 
Our philosophical views on transformation are documented in the Bank’s Vision 2010 which says that 
“The responsibility to effect change lies not only with management, but also with all staff – every one 
should be an agent of change.” The operative phrase here is that “everyone should be an agent of 
change”, not to sit around and whinge and complain, but to do something positive to advance the good 
of the Bank and society. 
Our  position  is  that  change  and  transformation  are  equally  accountable  partnerships  between 
management  and  staff.  The  Bank  has  walked  its  talk  and  the  success  of  transformation  within  the 
Bank  is  testimony  of  that  enshrined  philosophy.  We  have  capable  black  and  white  staff  that  have 
stayed  the  cause,  worked  hard,  have  become  internationally  respected  experts  in  their  fields.  I  am 
eternally grateful to all of them for their dedication and loyalty. 
                                                      
4   For more on this issue see the book: First Break All The Rules – What the World’s Greatest Managers Do Differently by 
Marcus Buckingham and Curt Coffman. 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2006
Let me conclude by asking some questions. 
Firstly, when we wake up in the morning we are likely going to do one of the following: go to the loo, 
flush after our business is done and probably brush our teeth and have a bath as the case might be 
and whichever comes first. Do we ever ask ourselves the question: why is it that water actually comes 
out of the toilet, the bath tap? We will all say that it is the job of the technical people? 
Well which people? What skills do they possess and who are they? Who are these water and toilet 
engineers? Are they members of the BMF? 
Secondly, most of us came here to Durban most probably by South African Airways. Who was the 
pilot? Who were those guys at the Johannesburg Airport who work in the technical division of South 
African Airways? Are they in the BMF? 
I am asking these and could ask more questions to draw our attention to the absolute imperative for all 
of us to look beyond our comfort zones and focus on the strategic human resources issues facing our 
country. We need to be aware that managerial and technical know-how in a transformed environment 
is fundamental to our success. The economy is becoming more and more service oriented and this 
requires  a  different  skills  mix  than  those  which  might  have  been  applicable  to  the  primary  or  even 
secondary sectors in the past. 
Let us join hands and look on the bright side of these challenges. 
Ke a Leboga 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 96/2006 
 5
