Caleb M Fundanga: Bank of Zambia Risk Management Framework 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Risk Management 
Framework Sensitisation Workshop for Board of Directors, Chisamba, 24-26 November 2006. 
 • Chairperson 
• Directors 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
I wish to welcome you all to the first in the series of the Risk Management Framework Sensitisation 
Workshops organised by the Risk Management Department. As the Directors are, no doubt aware, the 
Board approved the establishment of a Risk Management function at the Bank of Zambia in February 
2006. Following this approval, the Risk Management department was created to, among other duties, 
coordinate Bank-wide risk management activities, for which Heads of Departments remain primarily 
responsible. 
In this regard, my vision is to move the Bank to a position where risk management becomes our way 
of doing things. This workshop, therefore, is one critical step towards achieving this vision. Directors 
would agree with me that Risk Management has always been part and parcel of the financial sector, 
and as financial industry authorities, central banks are no exception to this. The increasing pace of 
globalisation, largely, on account of advancements in Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICT),  has  provided  an  added  impetus  for  institutions  to  strengthen  their  governance  structures, 
including implementing enterprise-wide risk management strategies. 
It is for this reason, therefore, that the Bank, like other world-class central banks, decided to position 
itself, in this fast-changing financial landscape, by incorporating risk management in its operations. In 
this regard, it gives me much pleasure to officiate at this workshop for the Board of Directors, whose 
objectives are twofold: 
i. 
to raise the Directors’ awareness about the Bank of Zambia Risk Management Framework; 
and 
by so doing, secure the Directors’ unwavering commitment to embedding risk management 
culture in the Bank. 
ii. 
Going  forward,  Risk  Management  Department  has  lined  up  similar  workshops  targeting  the  various 
categories of staff ranging from the Executive to unionised staff. The workshops are designed in such 
a manner that they address both the strategic and practical issues involved in the risk management 
process. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is not my intention to give a long speech, but allow me to urge the Directors to take this workshop 
seriously, for it is my expectation that at the end of this workshop, Directors will be better placed to not 
only understand the Bank of Zambia Risk Management Framework fully, but also provide guidance to 
the Bank on risk management issues. 
In conclusion, I wish to thank you for finding time from your busy schedules to attend this workshop. I 
urge you to ask as many questions as you could possibly can, in order to get the best out of it, as well 
as make the workshop more lively and interactive. 
With these few remarks, it is now my honour and privilege to declare the workshop officially open. 
I thank you! 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 1
