Durmuş Yilmaz: Dollarization – consequences and policy options   
Speech  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yilmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,  at  a 
Conference on “Dollarization”, Istanbul, 14 December 2006.  
 Distinguished Governors, Academicians and Guests, 
I  would  like  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  conference  entitled  “Dollarization:  Consequences  and  Policy 
Options”. I would also like to thank you for sharing your precious knowledge and experiences with us. 
As  this  conference  is  one  of  the  activities  organized  in  the  context  of  the  75th  anniversary  of  the 
Central Bank of Turkey, it gives me an honor to give the start for it. 
Before continuing with my speech, I would like to comment on the motives that lie behind the topic of 
this  conference.  Although  we  have  never  had  hyperinflation,  we,  in  Turkey,  experienced  high  and 
chronic inflation for the past almost 30 years before 2001. Living long years with chronic inflation led to 
huge  losses  in  the  credibility  of  our  national  currency,  which  is  important  for  us  as  an  institution 
responsible  for  issuing  banknotes  and  maintaining  stability  of  the  money.  In  this  sense,  it  will  be 
appropriate indeed to discuss dollarization in depth, I believe. 
Given the wide range of issues related to dollarization and the limited time available, I will make some 
brief  remarks  on  the  concept  of  dollarization  in  general  and  touch  upon  the  Turkish  experience  in 
particular. 
Dear Guests, 
Dollarization  has  evolved  as  one  of  the  noteworthy  features  of  globalization  during  the  last  two 
decades.  The  integration  of  the  international  financial  system,  the  removal  of  restrictions  on  capital 
mobility and the increasing trade volumes have contributed to the evolution of dollarization. Although it 
was  a  phenomenon  in  different  economies  for  a  long  time,  the  word  “dollarization”  has  become  a 
well-known term in the 90’s. In this period, the number of countries that gave foreign currencies the 
legal tender status increased and the official dollarization has been a widely discussed issue. 
Alternatively, unofficial dollarization has expanded even more and become a pervasive phenomenon 
in a wide range of countries. The number of countries where the ratio of foreign exchange deposits to 
total  deposits  higher  than  30  percent  increased  from  7  in  1990  to  46  in  the  year  20001.  Similarly 
unofficial  dollarization  in  Turkey  has  also  evolved  during  this  decade.  In  this  sense,  I  will  focus  on 
unofficial dollarization in the rest of my speech. 
Distinguished Guests, 
In  general,  dollarization  occurs  in  circumstances  where  residents  lose  confidence  in  their  own 
currency. The evidence from countries has also shown that dollarization process advances by certain 
stages. At the first stage, domestic currency loses its function of being a store of value, which is called 
“asset  substitution”.  Following  this  basic  level,  dollarization  takes  the  form  of  “currency  substitution” 
referring to the domestic currency’s loss of functions as being unit of account and means of payment. 
Apart  from  this,  dollarization  can  take  some  other  forms  like  “liability  dollarization”,  “payments 
dollarization”,  “real  dollarization”  and  “financial  dollarization”.  Among  these,  particularly  financial 
dollarization, which can be described as the combination of asset and liability dollarization, has gained 
ground in recent years in many emerging countries, including Turkey. 
I can cite the following factors, which I am going to examine under the two main groups, as influential 
on dollarization: namely the macroeconomic instability and the market imperfections. 
In  the  context  of  macroeconomic  instability,  inflation  is  the  most  important  issue  to  be  considered: 
dollarization  is  a  rational  response  of  economic  agents  to  inflation  uncertainty  that  reduces  the 
confidence  in  domestic  currency.  In  this  regard,  dollarization  is  technically  explained  through  the 
higher expected volatility of inflation-relative to that of real  exchange rate by the portfolio approach. 
                                                      
1   De  Nicolo,  G.;  Honohan,  P.;  Ize,  A.  (2003);  “Dollarization  of  the  Banking  System:  Good  or  Bad?”;  IMF  Working  Paper; 
WP/03/146. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 1
Also,  the  issue  of  high  and  fragile  public  debt  structure  along  with  high  budget  deficits  has 
considerable  impact  on  dollarization.  In  the  case  of  “time  inconsistency”,  when  governments  create 
inflation in order to decrease the real burden of the debt, the risk premium of the debt denominated in 
domestic  currency  tends  to  rises.  In  essence,  this  pushes  governments  to  borrow  in  foreign 
currencies, and hence gives rise to dollarization. 
In this respect, “original sin” is a specific term, which was first coined by Eichengreen and Hausmann2 
in  1999;  and  which  means  that  countries  without  fully  developed  financial  markets  are  obliged  to 
borrow in foreign currencies since borrowing in their national currencies at longer maturities is almost 
impossible. 
The  other  main  factor  behind  the  dollarization  is  related  to  the  market  imperfections.  Market 
distortions, fixed exchange rate regime accompanied with high inflation, low institutional quality, poorly 
developed domestic financial markets, currency-blind financial regulations and safety nets in foreign 
currency  such  as  deposit  insurance  can  all  be  evaluated  under  this  framework.  Due  to  those 
imperfections,  moral  hazard  problems  arise  and  this  in  turn  results  in  a  larger  demand  for  foreign 
currency. As the studies3 have showed, the low quality of legal and political institutions and the lack of 
legal protection for domestic creditor provide incentives for dollarization. 
Dear Guests, 
Now,  the  question  is  why  we  should  care  about  dollarization.  Before  anything  else,  it  increases  a 
country’s  vulnerability  to  shocks.  Let me  also  mention  the  vulnerabilities  of two  major  sectors  in  an 
economy: one arising from dollarization in private sector and the other one having to do with dollarized 
public debt dynamics. 
Beginning with the private sector, the dollarized financial systems and the companies’ balance sheets 
are obviously exposed to solvency risks, due to currency mismatch problem. Keeping in mind that the 
risks  for  both  financial  and  real  sectors  are  interrelated,  the  banks  that  lend  in  foreign  currency  to 
firms, which earn revenues in domestic currency, are also indirectly affected. In such cases, the whole 
economy  becomes  more  vulnerable  to  shocks  due  to  amplified  risks  resulting  from  dollarization.  A 
recent strand of literature and country cases such as the Asian meltdown of 1997 and the 2000-2001 
banking crisis in Turkey, have all emphasized the importance of such vulnerabilities brought about by 
dollarization. 
Moreover,  firms  adjust  their  prices  more  frequently  in  a  dollarized  economic  environment  where 
depreciation of national currency is perceived as permanent. Thus, dollarization leads to higher pass 
through effect from exchange rates to prices via deteriorating pricing behaviour of firms. 
Ultimately, from the public sector’s point of view, the issue of debt sustainability is highly influenced by 
dollarization. In fact, public sector is exposed to problems similar to that of non-trading firms indebted 
in foreign currency4. There is no doubt that dollarized debt adversely affects government’s solvency as 
its assets are in domestic currency. In this sense, given the high level of dollarization, the fluctuations 
in real exchange rate might turn an apparently sustainable fiscal situation into an unsustainable one. 
Furthermore, public sector insolvency can immediately lead to banking sector insolvency if domestic 
banking system holds large claims against government. 
Dear Guests, 
Before  continuing  with  the  Turkish  experience,  I  have  to  add  that  dollarization  deserves  a  special 
attention from a central banker’s perspective. 
As we all know, the choice of exchange rate regime is of critical importance for a central bank. The 
empirical findings show that in economies with serious balance sheet mismatches, the policy makers 
prefer fixed or controlled exchange rate regimes5..
 
                                                     
 
2   Eichengreen, B.; Hausmann, R. (1999); “Exchange rates and Financial Fragility”; NBER Working Paper No:7418. 
3   De  Nicolo,  G.;  Honohan,  P.;  Ize,  A.  (2003);  “Dollarization  of  the  Banking  System:  Good  or  Bad?”;  IMF  Working  Paper; 
WP/03/146. 
4   Galindo A.; Leiderman L. (2003); ”Living with Dollarization and the Route to Dedollarization”; Inter-American Development 
Bank; Working Paper; 526; p. 14. 
5   Choi, W.; Cook, D. (2004); "Liability dollarization and the bank balance sheet channel"; Journal of International Economics; 
Vol. 64(2), p. 247-275. 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2006
On the other hand, flexible exchange rate regimes provide more room for monetary policy that enables 
to  respond  to  external  shocks  freely.  It  has  also  been  found  by  using  cross-country  data  for  the 
banking  sector  that  more  volatile  exchange  rates  reduce  the  share  of  the  foreign  currency 
denominated loans and deposits6, thus contributes to prevent dollarization. 
However,  even  if  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  is  chosen  de  jure,  dollarization  and  high  pass 
through effect from exchange rates to inflation may cause “fear of floating”, thus monetary authorities 
are put under pressure to intervene in fluctuations in exchange rates at all costs. In such a case, the 
policy  makers  are  left  in  a  big  trade  off  between  monetary  policy  independence  and  balance  sheet 
mismatches7. 
Obviously, there is not one single commonly accepted solution for all countries. Nevertheless, country 
experiences  in  recent  years  have  shown  us  that  there  is  a  tendency  in  choosing  more  flexible 
exchange  rate  regimes  under  the  assumption  that  vulnerabilities  regarding  mismatch  problems  are 
accurately hedged. 
Subsequently, dollarization affects monetary policy through the increased volatility of money demand. 
Thus, the traditional transmission of monetary policy would not work properly as central banks have no 
direct  control  over  foreign  currency  assets.  Accordingly,  as  Kevin  Cowan  and  his  colleague8 
mentioned  in  their  study,  dollarization  limits  the  capacity  of  central  banks  to  conduct  stabilizing 
monetary  policy  in  the  short  run  and  to  a  large  extent  limits  the  ability  of  monetary  authority  gain 
credibility in the long run. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Having  given  a  brief  introduction  into  the  notion  of  dollarization,  now  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the 
Turkish case. As in the evidence of the other countries, the dollarization in Turkey also took its roots 
from  macroeconomic  instability  with  fixed  or  predictable  exchange  rate  regimes,  inefficient  market 
regulations and the lack of credibility of economic policies. 
In  order  to  comprehend  the  dollarization  in  Turkey  better,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  look  at  the 
macroeconomic instability and examine the evolution of dollarization in a historical perspective. 
With  the  1980’s  liberalization  policies,  the  barriers  on  foreign  exchange  transactions  of  commercial 
banks were removed and the Turkish residents were allowed to open foreign exchange deposits in 
1983. Beginning from that date, the volume of foreign currency denominated deposits had started to 
increase. 
In  my  opinion,  the  liberalization  of  the  financial  system  without  macroeconomic  stability  and  the 
necessary  institutional  and  structural  changes  made  the  economy  more  vulnerable  to  shocks  in 
1990’s.  Besides,  the  imprudent  fiscal  policies  resulted  in  high  levels  of  public  sector  borrowing 
requirement and put the debt sustainability on top of the agenda. Along with it, the accommodative 
monetary  policies  and  the  lack  of  the  Central  Bank  independence  led  to  high  and  chronic  inflation 
rates. In order to tame inflation and to achieve the macroeconomic stability, a number of exchange 
rate  based  stabilization  programs  were  launched,  but  all  of  them  were  either  interrupted  or 
abandoned, causing loss of confidence to economic policies. 
Accordingly, 1990s and the early 2000s were the times, during which Turkey had frequently faced with 
economic crises  and  turmoils.  Average  annual  inflation  realized as  around 75  percent  in  the  period 
between 1990 and 2001. The ratio of net public debt to GNP reached to 90 percent by 2001. All these, 
coupled  with  the  currency-blind  market  regulations  such  as  blanket  guarantee  on  foreign  exchange 
deposits boosted the financial dollarization in Turkey. 
A closer look into the figures indicates how severe the dollarization was. From 1990 to the end of 2001 
the ratio of foreign exchange deposits to total deposits increased from the level of 25.5 percent to 57.6 
percent; the share of foreign exchange deposits in broad money supply went from 19.7 percent to 55 
                                                      
6   Arteta, C. O. (2002); “Exchange rate regimes and financial dollarization: does flexibility reduce bank currency mismatches?” 
International Finance Discussion Papers 738; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
7   Frankel J.; Schmukler S.L.; Serven L. (2004); “Global transmission of interest rates: monetary independence and currency 
regime”; Journal of International Money and Finance; Vol.23 p.701-733. 
8   Cowan,  K.;  Quy-Toan  Do.  (2003);  ”Financial  Dollarization  and  Central  Bank  Credibility”;  World  Bank  Policy  Research 
Working Paper No.3082. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 3
percent.  Similarly  as  of  2001,  the  share  of  foreign  currency  loans  in  the  total  loans  of  the  banking 
sector reached to 47.2 percent, while the share of foreign currency denominated and indexed debt of 
the government in its total domestic debt increased to 36 percent9. As of 2001 Turkey became one of 
the most dollarized economies in the world. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Dollarization  process  in  Turkey  has  two  striking  characteristics.  First  of  all,  dollarization  rose 
significantly even the real rates of return on foreign exchange deposits were lower than that on the 
Turkish currency deposits. This indicates the fact that the political and macroeconomic instability in the 
country,  particularly  high  inflation  and  inflation  uncertainty,  had  played  the  major  role  in  the 
dollarization process. 
Secondly, Turkey had lived through the first stage of dollarization in which the foreign currency is used 
mainly as a store of value and partly as a unit of account, but not as a medium of exchange. In this 
context, the dollarization in Turkey can be called as financial dollarization. 
Distinguished Participants, 
After  the  2001  crisis,  the  implementation  of  tight  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  together  with  the 
structural reforms has enabled the country to bring the inflation down to single digit numbers and to 
reduce the ratio of public debt to GNP significantly. Also, financial markets have become deeper and 
less  fragile.  In  this  context,  the  banking  sector  reform  that  aimed  to  strengthen  the  regulation  and 
supervision of the banking sector, restructure the public banks, improve the asset and loan quality and 
the capital adequacy ratio of the system has been of great importance. 
Additionally,  the  progress  made  towards  economic  stability,  particularly  the  significant  decrease  in 
inflation, enabled us to drop six zeros from the Turkish currency. This currency reform has increased 
the credibility of the Turkish currency both in internal and external markets. The issuance of the New 
Turkish Lira debt instruments by foreign banks in the international markets is an important indicator of 
this increasing credibility. Consequently, the desire and the need to invest in foreign currency in order 
to hedge the value of wealth decreased significantly and investors have started to increase the share 
of Turkish currency assets in their portfolios. 
The amendments made in the Law of the Central Bank of Turkey in 2001 have been a turning point 
and  instrumental  for  the  efforts  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability.  With  these  amendments, 
achieving and maintaining price stability is stated as the primary objective of the Central Bank and the 
Bank  acquired  its  instrumental  independence.  In  fact,  the  independency  has  given  the  Bank  the 
opportunity to set its policies for longer terms, free of political cycles and pressures. 
As an assurance given to the public to ensure the long term price stability objective, the independence 
of the Central Bank of Turkey together with its transparent and effective communication policy have 
increased the credibility of the monetary policy. 
Besides,  the  new  monetary  policy  framework  implemented  first  as  implicit  and  then  as  full-fledged 
inflation targeting regime together with the floating exchange rate regime have contributed a lot to the 
decline in dollarization since 2002, as the literature10 suggests. 
In  this respect,  we  can observe  the  findings of  the  portfolio  approach  in  Turkey  very  clearly.  To  be 
more specific, the volatility of exchange rates has increased due to floating exchange rate regime on 
the  one  hand  and  inflation  and  its  volatility  have  declined  significantly  on  the  other.  Since  higher 
exchange rate volatility relative to inflation volatility decrease the hedging benefits of foreign currency 
assets11 this monetary policy framework can be said to help the process of “liraization”, a term that 
was  suggested  by  Dr.  Leiderman  at  the  conference  on  “Inflation  Targeting:  Performance  and 
Challenges” hold by the Central Bank of Turkey at the beginning of this year. 
                                                      
9   Bahmani-Oskooee,  M.;  Domaç,  I.;  “On  the  Link  Between  Dollarization  and  Inflation:  Evidence  from  Turkey”;  The  Eighth 
Dubrovnik Conference on Monetary Policy and Currency Substitution in Emerging Markets; Dubrovnik; June 27-29, 2002. 
10  Leiderman,  L;  R.  Maino  and  E.  Parrado  (2006);  “Inflation  Targeting  in  Dollarized  Economies”;  IMF  Working  Paper, 
WP/06/157. 
11   Bahmani-Oskooee,  M.;  Domaç,  I.;  “On  the  Link  Between  Dollarization  and  Inflation:  Evidence  from  Turkey”;  The  Eighth 
Dubrovnik Conference on Monetary Policy and Currency Substitution in Emerging Markets; Dubrovnik; June 27-29, 2002. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2006
Here, I want to make a point on the floating exchange rates. The floating exchange rate regime has 
transferred  the  exchange  rate  risk  to  the  market  and  made  economic  agents  to  perceive  and 
understand the importance of risk management and using hedging instruments and derivatives market 
better.  In  this  context,  as  we  have  mentioned  in  several  platforms,  the  opening  of  the  Turkish 
Derivatives Exchange Market in February 2005 has been an important step. Accordingly, promoting 
the use of this Market by a wider range and the development of the hedging instruments further are 
very important for both the financial stability and dedollarization. 
Distinguished Guests, 
As  a  result  of  the  steps  taken  towards  macroeconomic  stability  and  the  implementation  of  prudent 
policies, the level of dollarization in Turkey started to decrease after 2001, despite some pauses. 
As of November 2006, the share of foreign exchange deposits in the total deposits12 and in the broad 
money supply were 38 percent and 35.5 percent respectively. 
Also the ratio of foreign currency loans to total loans in the banking sector decreased to the level of 16 
percent in the same period. Moreover the share of the foreign currency denominated and the indexed 
debt of the government to total domestic debt decreased to 15.8 percent as of October 2006. 
By any measure, this, I believe, is a remarkable performance. But all these positive developments do 
not enable us to call it a persistent and permanent dedollarization process, for sure. 
It is apparent that the level of dollarization in Turkey is still high, which is an important challenge for 
monetary policy-making. Obviously, the dollarization is not declining fast naturally. This confirms the 
evidence that even if the inflation falls and the macroeconomic stability is maintained to great extent, 
the memories of the past inflationary and unstable economic environment can cause economic agents 
to carry on their past habit of holding foreign currency assets and create an inertia. 
Therefore,  even  a  small  threat  to  the  macroeconomic  stability  or  any  kind  of  internal  or  external 
development that increase uncertainty perceptions can easily lead to a deterioration in expectations 
and  give  rise  to  an  increase  in  dollarization.  The  last  turmoil  in  the  global  and  domestic  financial 
markets has been a concrete proof of this fact. 
Thus, the dedollarization is not a straightforward process. As a clear evidence of this, the findings of 
Reinhart  and  her  friends13  show  that  only  two  countries,  Israel  and  Poland,  out  of  a  total  of  85 
countries managed to achieve large and lasting declines in domestic dollarization. Accordingly, we can 
say  that  dedollarization  is  a  difficult  and  long  lasting  process  that  is  very  much  related  with  the 
macroeconomic stability and proper incentives. 
Hence,  what  we  should  do  first  is  to  continue  with  the  current  sound  macroeconomic  policies  and 
structural reforms in a decisive way. 
Second, in order to start dedollarization, an active dedollarization strategy such as the so-called “carrot 
and stick approach” in the literature, which consists of regulations that will encourage the use of the 
Turkish currency, should be planned. 
However, as Ize and Levy-Yeyati14 suggest, before launching an overly ambitious policy agenda, we 
should make all the necessary researches to understand the roots, risks and costs of dollarization and 
the implications of policy reforms made against it. I think, this conference provides a big opportunity for 
all of us to share our opinions and experiences and to enlighten our way of dedollarization. 
Distinguished Participants, 
I  would  like  to  conclude my  words  by  repeating  that  I  am  very  glad  to  welcome  such  distinguished 
economists from all over the world. I am sure that we have a lot to draw on the experiences of each 
other. I hope you enjoy both the conference and your stay in Istanbul. 
Thank you very much. 
                                                      
12  Provisional data. 
13   Reinhart, C.M; K.S. Rogoff and M.A. Savastano; 2003; “Addicted to Dollars”; NBER Working Paper Series; No:10015. 
14   Ize, A. and E. Levy-Yeyati (2005); “Financial Dedollarization: Is it For Real?”; IMF Working Paper; WP/05/187. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 5
