Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Malaysia as an international Islamic financial centre 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the dialogue 
with  industry  participants  on  MIFC  (Malaysia  International  Islamic  Financial  Centre),  Kuala  Lumpur, 
1 November 2006. 
 The  MIFC  initiative  was  launched  on  14  August  2006  amidst  strong  foundation  and  steady 
performance  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  It  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new  era  for  the  future 
landscape of the Islamic financial system in Malaysia. Several landmark measures were announced to 
initiate the MIFC agenda. It is to set the stage for Malaysia to position itself as a centre for the offering 
of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  in  international  currencies  to  the  global  and  domestic 
financial community. This presents new prospects and business considerations for financial institutions 
to realise the potential of evolving a vibrant Islamic financial hub. 
Today's  dialogue,  the  first  of  its  kind  among  key  stakeholders,  is  aimed  at  promoting  greater 
awareness on the initiative, to discuss implementation issues and to foster greater collaborative effort 
for  the  MIFC's  overall  success.  We  have  with  us  here  today  the  members  of  the  MIFC  Executive 
Committee, the country's high level coordinating body that has been set up to advance forward this 
national agenda. 
Objectives of MIFC  
This  national  agenda  aims  to  achieve  several  major  objectives.  As  one  of  the  key  intermediation 
linkages in the global market place, the MIFC can have an important role in accelerating the process 
of bridging and strengthening the relationship between the international Islamic financial markets and 
thereby expand the investment and trade relations between the Middle Eastern, West Asia and North 
Africa regions with East Asia. Situated centrally in the Asian time zone, Malaysia is well positioned to 
effectively  serve  the  East  Asian  region.  Among  the  key  intermediation  role  for  MIFC  is  to  act  as  a 
centre for origination , issuance and trading of Islamic capital market and treasury instruments such as 
sukuks,  and  to  act  as  an  investment  gateway  to  the  region  specialising  in  Islamic  fund  and  wealth 
management, and as a takaful and retakaful centre. 
In promoting capital and cross-border trade flows between the financial communities of these regions, 
it  will  thereby  strengthen  the  international  integration  of  our  domestic  Islamic  financial  system.  In 
addition, this initiative is expected to improve further the performance of the Islamic financial industry 
and strengthen its competitive edge in this increasingly more challenging global environment. 
Currently, assets of the Islamic banking and takaful in Malaysia have been increasing at a double digit 
growth rate of 19 percent and 25 percent respectively in the recent five years. The Islamic banking and 
takaful markets which amounted to RM122 billion and RM6.6 billion in assets are among the largest in 
the  world.  The  Islamic  sukuk  market  has  now  exceeded  RM120  billion  and  represents  the  largest 
Islamic bond market in the world. 
Malaysia  has  developed 
finance.  The 
comprehensiveness of the Islamic financial system in Malaysia has been mutually reinforcing with the 
key components of the financial system comprising the Islamic banking, takaful, Islamic money and 
capital markets now being at an advanced stage of development. In addition, the established legal, 
regulatory  and  Shariah  frameworks  in  the  Islamic  financial  infrastructure  is  also  a  key  competitive 
advantage for Malaysia , placing it ahead of other financial centres offering Islamic financial services. 
In terms of Shariah governance, it has enabled the development of Islamic finance to be orderly and 
compliant with the Islamic injunctions, thereby ensuring that customer confidence be maintained. The 
conducive Shariah environment has also ensured that Malaysia is sustained as a centre of product 
innovation, producing cutting-edge products for the increasingly sophisticated customers. In respect of 
Shariah  interpretation  and  practices,  the  MIFC  will  adopt  a  stance  of  mutual  recognition  and 
accommodate the various juristic reasoning that has been approved by recognised Shariah advisers . 
Next week, Bank Negara Malaysia will again host the 2nd International Shariah Scholars Dialogue, 
gathering  the  Shariah  scholars  from  different  regions  in  our  endeavour  to  continuously  bridge  and 
the  comparative  advantage 
the  area  of 
Islamic 
in 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 1
foster  greater  interaction  and  promote  understanding  on  the  issues  and  challenges  faced  by  the 
Islamic community on the aspect of Shariah. 
Malaysia also has a strong and advanced regulatory regime and legal structure in the Islamic financial 
system.  This  was  deliberately  undertaken  since  the  inception  of  Islamic  finance  in  this  country  to 
sustain the soundness and stability of the system and thus the confidence of the financial community. 
Reinforcing  this  is  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  as  the  international  standard-setting 
body  of  the  prudential  and  supervisory  framework  that  was  established  in  2002.  The  balanced 
regulatory approach being applied also aims to ensure that the trust and efficiency of doing business 
is maintained. 
In undertaking a holistic approach to drive the MIFC initiative, the Government has streamlined the 
associated delivery system to facilitate advancing the MIFC agenda with the formation of the MIFC 
Executive  Committee.  The  Committee comprises  a high-level  group  of  28  top officials  from  the  key 
relevant  Ministries,  Government  departments  and  agencies,  financial  and  market  regulators  and 
representatives from the banking and takaful sectors. Through the shared vision and commitment, this 
Committee  is  responsible  for  providing  the  direction  as  well  as  undertaking  a  review  of  all  existing 
policies  that  are  relevant  for  the  comprehensive  and  coordinated  promotion  of  the  MIFC.  Two 
meetings  thus  far  have  been  convened  and  several  issues  have  now  been  resolved  with  solutions 
provided  to  several  key  implementation  issues  which  ranged  from  foreign  ownership  to  immigration 
policies. 
The Secretariat, formed by Bank Negara Malaysia will not only serve the Executive Committee but will 
also  act  as  a  single  contact  point  for  the  implementation  of  the  MIFC  initiatives.  Working  level 
committees have also been formed to undertake the task of considering new proposals and monitoring 
the  implementation  of  the  MIFC  recommendations.  To  take  into  consideration  global  trends  and  to 
provide insights on the strategic direction, an International Advisory Panel (IAP) comprising industry 
leaders and experts from the global community is also being established. 
Conducive environment for business 
In  continuously  creating  an  enabling  environment  for  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  MIFC,  the 
Government  has  identified  several  key  strategic  objectives.  T  he  Government  has  also  granted  an 
attractive tax package to promote Malaysia as a competitive international Islamic financial centre. The 
objective is to build the base - that is, to create the necessary critical mass of participating financial 
players  and  to  increase  the  scale  of  activity.  Malaysia  aims  to  attract  global  players  as  well  as  to 
enhance the capacity and capabilities of the existing financial institutions. Among the measures that 
have been introduced are:  
• 
first,  liberalising  the  Islamic  banking,  and  takaful  and  retakaful  markets  with  the 
issuance of new licences to allow for increased foreign participation;  
second, allowing foreign equity of up to 49 percent in existing Islamic banks and takaful 
companies;  
third, issuance of International Islamic Bank and International Takaful Operator licences 
under  the  Islamic  Banking  Act  and  the  Takaful  Act  respectively  to  qualified  foreign  and 
Malaysian  financial  institutions  to  conduct  the  full  range  of  Islamic  banking  business  or 
takaful and retakaful business in international currencies and enjoy tax holiday for 10 years 
under the Income Tax Act starting from the year of assessment 2007;  
fourth,  granting  approval  to  Malaysian  Islamic  banks  and  takaful  operators  to  set  up 
International  Currency  Business  Unit  (ICBU)  to  offer  Islamic  financial  services  in 
international currencies and enjoy similar tax holiday; 
fifth,  provide  greater  flexibility  to  the  Labuan  offshore  entities  offering  Islamic  financial 
services  to  open  operation  offices  anywhere  in  Malaysia.  The  Labuan  tax  law  will 
continue to be applied to these players. 
    Players,  therefore  have  the  option  in  participating  in  the  MIFC either  by  being  licensed under  Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  to  benefit  from  the  tax  holiday  for  10  years  under  the  Income  Tax  Act  and  fully 
benefit from the Double Tax Agreement, or alternatively to be licensed under LOFSA and be taxed 
accordingly under the Labuan Offshore Business Activity Tax Act. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2006
The second strategic objective is activities generation - that is, to promote Malaysia as the preferred 
choice  as  the  centre  for  the  offering  of  Islamic  financial  services.  Associated  with  this  objective  is 
building the pool of talent and expertise, and to ensure that the environment is cost competitive and 
conducive for product innovation and product offering. The measures to address this include:  
• 
first, setting up the International Centre for Education in Islamic Finance (INCEIF). This 
represents the Malaysia 's investment in human capital to support the global development of 
the Islamic financial services industry;  
second,  establishing  a  Shariah  Endowment  Fund  for  scholarships,  research  and 
international Shariah  dialogues  for  the  regional  and  international  Shariah  communities  to 
enhance the harmonisation of Shariah interpretation and practices;  
third, an additional 20 percent exemption in stamp duty on Islamic financial instruments on 
top of the stamp duty exemption that is currently available to ensure tax neutrality;  
fourth, encouraging Malaysian-owned banks including Islamic financial institutions to expand 
their operations abroad by allowing the profits of the newly established branches overseas 
or remittances of new overseas subsidiaries to be given income tax exemption for 5 years. 
This is to enhance market access and business networking, and also to widen the customer 
base and to generate new sources of businesses in uncharted territories;  
fifth,  liberalising  the  foreign  exchange  administration  rules  to  allow  multilateral 
development banks and multinational corporations to issue ringgit denominated instruments 
in our domestic bond market. 
    In further liberalising the market, I am pleased to announce that resident and foreign issuers will now 
be  able  to  raise  foreign  currency-denominated  bonds,  in  particular,  Islamic  bonds,  in  the 
Malaysian  capital  market.  The  foreign  issuers  eligible  to  take  this  opportunity  are  the  sovereigns, 
quasi-sovereigns,  multilateral  development  banks,  multilateral  financial  institutions  and  multinational 
corporations,  while  resident  issuers  are  the  local  MNCs.  This  represents  part  of  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia's  continuous  efforts  to  promote  the  development  of  the  Malaysian  bond  market,  and  to 
enhance  Malaysia  as  a  centre  of  origination,  distribution  and  trading  of  sukuks.  The  issuance  of 
foreign  currency  denominated  bonds  will  also  provide  additional  flexibility  for  both  residents  and 
foreign investors to diversify their investments into non-ringgit investments in Malaysia . 
In taking the MIFC initiative to the next phase of development, I am also pleased to share with you 
some of the current work-in-progress to this agenda further forward. The International Islamic Bank 
(IIB) and International Takaful Operator (ITO) will be allowed to be set up as a branch in addition to a 
subsidiary as currently stipulated under the domestic banking and takaful legislation. To create greater 
international awareness on these new initiatives, financial ambassadors are being appointed to meet 
with potential players and investors and road shows will be conducted as part of the promotional plan. 
In addition, the MIFC Executive Committee is formulating the supporting immigration policies with 
the  Immigration  Department  where  long-term  employment  pass,  multiple  entry  permits,  dependent 
pass and professional visit pass would be offered to expatriates identified as professionals and experts 
in Islamic finance. To attract specialist and high level expertise, a Permanent Resident status may also 
be  offered  based  on  the  recommendation  of  the  relevant  financial  regulators.  A  mechanism  is  also 
being put in place to ensure the efficient processing of these measures. This is aimed at addressing 
the  acute  current  shortage  of  such  talent  and  expertise  in  the  global  financial  system.  While  the 
education infrastructure has already been put in place to address this shortage, Malaysia also needs 
to be competitive in attracting and retaining the talent. The Executive Committee will therefore look 
into customised incentives to attract best talents to Malaysia in addition to the entry of international 
legal firms that are able to provide services for the international currency business in Islamic finance. 
Role to be played by financial institutions 
One of the key success factors for a vibrant financial hub is having the critical mass of reputable and 
diversified  range  of  financial  institutions.  With  extensive  incentives  and  measures  in  place,  it  is  a 
priority for those already based in Malaysia to be encouraged to be the players in the MIFC. In building 
the base, the financial institutions in Malaysia , onshore and offshore, are encouraged to develop a 
niche  in  the  overall  landscape  for  MIFC.  Players  with  expertise  in  structuring  Islamic  instruments 
should capitalise on the tax incentives by having the syndication team to be based in Malaysia for the 
BIS Review 104/2006 
 3
issuance  of  ringgit  and  non-ringgit  sukuks  out  of  Malaysia,  while  those  with  investment  and  private 
banking as well as fund management expertise should intensify their focus on efforts in this area and 
structure  innovative  Islamic  investment  instruments.  Existing  players  are  also  urged  to  be  MIFC 
players  and  develop  Malaysia  as  their  regional  hub  with  the  potential  to  have  the  international 
currency business operations either through the onshore regulatory framework or under the Labuan 
offshore structure. 
The success of MIFC will depend on the collaborative efforts of the financial regulators, the delivery 
system,  the  industry  players  and  the  supporting  professionals.  In  meeting  the  MIFC  objectives,  we 
encourage the exploitation of this new growth area. At the onset, it is also emphasized that an equally 
important part of this process is having the right people in place with the appropriate skills, having in 
place the appropriate systems and governance framework to ensure the viability and sustainability of 
this industry. 
This  morning's  dialogue  will  provide  the  opportunity  to  deliberate  the  issues  from  the  different 
perspectives and dimensions so that the full potential of the MIFC initiatives can be realized. 
On this note, I wish you a successful Dialogue. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2006
