Jean-Pierre Roth: Recent economic and financial developments in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the 
end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 14 December 2006. 
 As stated in our press release, the Swiss National Bank is raising its target range for the three-month 
Libor with immediate effect by 0.25 percentage points to 1.50–2.50%. The SNB intends to hold the 
rate in the middle of the target range for the time being.  
Economic  activity  in  Switzerland  is  very  robust.  Next  year,  the  economic  trend  is  likely  to  continue 
favourable, albeit somewhat less pronounced. This will have a positive effect on the labour market. 
The National Bank is expecting real GDP to grow by just under 3% in 2006 and by around 2% in 2007.  
Declining oil prices have pushed back inflation. Average inflation for 2006 is likely to stand at 1.1%. By 
lifting  the  target  range,  the  National  Bank  ensures  that  the  inflation  outlook  will  remain  favourable, 
even  in  view  of  the  high  level  of  utilisation  of  economic  resources.  On  the  assumption  of  an 
unchanged three-month Libor of 2.00%, it expects annual inflation to reach 0.4% in 2007 and 0.9% in 
2008.  If  the  economy  performs  as  expected,  the  SNB  will  further  pursue  its  strategy  of  gradual 
normalisation of its interest rates. 
The economy is currently in excellent shape and has clearly strengthened during the past two years. 
At  the  monetary  policy  assessment  at  the  end  of  2004,  we  had  suspended  a  normalisation  of  the 
interest rates after previously having lifted the three-month Libor from a low point of 0.25% to 0.75% in 
June and September. The three-month Libor remained at that level up to December 2005 when we 
made  the  decision  to  resume  the  normalisation  process,  given  the  improved  economic  outlook. 
Today's decision – an interest rate hike for the fifth time in succession – confirms the stance we have 
taken.  
International environment 
The change in the international environment with the most tangible impact since the monetary policy 
assessment in September concerns the price of oil. The current oil prices are clearly below the highest 
level of 78 dollars per barrel of Brent crude which was reached in August. Will we see higher oil prices 
again? There is no real conclusive answer to this question. What we have witnessed is nonetheless 
the longest interruption of a rising trend since the beginning of 2004. This decline will weaken inflation 
in most countries in the year ahead. However, the economic impact of the reduced oil prices is likely to 
be low, if we bear in mind that the oil price is still approximately three times higher than it was five 
years  ago.  At  least  the  oil  price  has  not  put  any  additional  damper  on  the  economy  since  the  last 
monetary policy assessment.  
Another  significant  factor  for  Switzerland  is  the  marked  improvement  of  the  economic  situation  in 
Europe, in particular in Germany. For 2006, growth forecasts in our neighbouring countries have been 
gradually revised upward; for 2007, development is expected to be more muted. Economic activity in 
the United States, however, has slowed at a somewhat faster pace than anticipated. In 2007, the US 
economy is set to expand in the area of potential growth again. Asia will continue its dynamic growth 
pattern.  
Economic situation 
What  does  the  situation  look  like  in  Switzerland?  As  anticipated  at  the  last  monetary  policy 
assessment, the economic situation has continued to improve. It is both balanced and broadly based. 
As  the  latest  employment  figures  reveal,  the  momentum  in  the  economy  has  spilled  over  into  the 
labour market. A great many new jobs were created in the third quarter, and unemployment continued 
to decline. The number of gainfully employed persons rose by approximately 100,000 from Q3 2005 to 
Q3 2006. The unemployment rate is likely to fall below the 3% mark at the beginning of 2007. The 
brighter  outlook  on  the  labour  market  has  improved  job  security  and  strengthened  consumer 
confidence. Expenditure by private households is soaring. Companies appear upbeat as well. Many 
BIS Review 123/2006 
 1
industries, such as manufacturing, construction and the hotel trade, report full employment. According 
to our assessment, this translates into unchanged growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) of just 
under 3% in 2006. 
For 2007, we predict a decline in economic momentum. Almost all components of demand continue to 
grow, albeit at a more moderate pace. Private consumption will benefit from the healthy improvement 
in  disposable  income.  Equipment  investment  is  being  stimulated  by  the  high  rate  of  utilisation  of 
production capacity and the favourable business outlook in many industries. Residential construction 
is likely to see a measure of calm. Yet increased investment in commercial and industrial building may 
offset  this  development  to  some  extent.  The  somewhat  weaker  global  economic  development  – 
though still favourable overall - will probably continue to have a positive impact on exports. For 2007, 
we expect overall GDP growth of about 2%. 
Monetary developments 
Allow me to explain developments in the financial markets and the monetary aggregates. Two topics 
merit particular attention: the development of credit and money supply and the exchange rate. 
In  addition  to  long-term  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates,  loans  –  among  other  things  –  play  an 
important role when changes in key interest rates are transmitted to the economy. What information 
can  we  derive  from  the  development  of  lending  activity?  Loans  are  registering  constant  growth. 
Mortgage loans, which account for the great majority of all bank loans, have grown at a rate of more 
than 5% since 2003. This is a reflection of the clearly expansionary monetary policy at that time. The 
growth rate of mortgage loans has gradually slowed, however, and is now slightly below 5%. This is 
nevertheless still a high growth rate.  
Other loans, however, are witnessing stronger growth and are currently expanding by 6%. Unsecured 
loans, in particular, are rising substantially. During phases of favourable economic development, there 
is greater willingness to grant unsecured loans. This was the case in 1999, when the economy found 
itself  in  a  similarly  robust  state.  There  is  a  long-term  correlation  between  loan  volume  and  the  M3 
aggregate.  Loan  development  typically  lags  behind  the  development  of  money  supply.  Monetary 
aggregates  have  grown  only  moderately  for  the  past  three  years.  The  M3  monetary  aggregate  is 
currently growing at a modest 2%, while M1 and M2 are even registering a decline. The measured 
development of the monetary aggregates suggests a slowdown in lending.  
The development of the Swiss franc attracted considerable attention as it has weakened vis-à-vis the 
euro since the beginning of the year, although it has firmed against the US dollar. To gauge the effects 
of exchange rates on the economy, we need to make use of the inflation-adjusted exchange rate that 
is  also  weighted  to  take  account  of  the  importance  of  individual  trading  partners.  Measured  by  this 
real, effective exchange rate, the Swiss franc today is at the same level as it was in 2000.  
In what way do exchange rate developments enter into our decision-making process? The exchange 
rate is important to the extent that it influences inflation, either directly via the prices of imported goods 
or indirectly via the business cycle.  
Volatility of the Swiss franc against the euro has been negligible as of late. This relative calm should 
not, however, deceive us. It is not necessarily going to last. Experience has shown that phases of a 
weaker Swiss franc can be followed by periods in which the franc exhibits an upward trend. Financial 
market players and businesses should therefore be aware of the exchange rate risks they take. 
Monetary policy decision 
The inflation outlook forms the basis for the monetary policy decision. How does this look to us? As 
has already been pointed out in the considerations on the economic situation, there is likely to be an 
above-average  utilisation  of  economic  resources.  The  monetary  analysis  shows  that  lending  is  still 
growing  vigorously  and  that  the  Swiss  franc  is  trending  relatively  lower  against  the  euro.  Yet  the 
inflation  outlook  remains  favourable.  The  reasons  are  three-fold:  First,  falling  oil  prices  will  push 
inflation down considerably next year, at least during the first six months. Second, the opening of the 
labour market is making production more flexible, thereby exerting a favourable influence on inflation. 
Third,  the  National  Bank  lifted  its  interest  rates  at  an  early  stage.  The  chief  contribution  of  today's 
interest  rate  adjustment  is  to  prevent  resources  from  being  over-utilised  in  2007  and  2008.  As  a 
consequence, inflation is also likely to be muted in 2008 and 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2006
Inflation forecast graph 
The new inflation forecast is shown in the graph as a red dashed line. It covers the time span from Q4 
2006 to Q4 2009 and depicts the inflation forecast on the assumption that the interest rate remains at 
2.00% during this period of time. The dash-dotted green curve shows the inflation outlook published 
after the interest increase of September, which was based on a constant three-month Libor of 1.75%. 
The red line is clearly lower than the green one. This is partly due to falling oil prices and partly results 
from the dampening effect of today's interest rate increase. The level of inflation expected in 2007 is 
0.4%.  However,  as  is  evident  from  the  inflation  dynamic,  the  effect  of  a  2.00%  interest  rate  is  still 
expansionary. 
Continuation of previous monetary policy 
With today’s decision to increase the three-month Libor by 25 basis points, we are adhering to our 
previous  monetary  policy course  of  gradual normalisation.  In so  doing, we are pursuing  the goal of 
continuing  to  ensure  long-term  price  stability.  If  the  economy  performs  as  expected,  we  will  further 
pursue this strategy. 
Observed inflation December 2006 
BIS Review 123/2006 
   3
Inflation forecast of September 2006 with Libor at 1.75% and of December 2006 with Libor at 
2.00% 
 The National Bank’s 100-year anniversary 
Ladies and Gentlemen, before concluding, I would like to say a few words on a completely different 
topic: The Swiss National Bank will celebrate it's 100-year anniversary in 2007. We are happy that we 
can celebrate this anniversary at a time when Switzerland’s economy is in good shape. And it is also 
with a certain sense of pride that we can look back upon a long phase of price stability. 
We  will  celebrate  our  anniversary  in  a  festive,  yet  modest  way.  The  100th  anniversary  General 
Meeting of Shareholders on 27 April will, of course, be turned into a special event. On 13 June, at our 
traditional joint dinner before the news conference in Berne, we will take the opportunity to toast our 
centenary together with you. The highlight of the celebrations will be the launch of our commemorative 
publication  on  21  June  followed  by  the  official  ceremony  in  Zurich  on  22  June.  I  look  forward  to 
welcoming  many  of  you  to  these  festivities.  We  will  conclude  our  anniversary  year  with  a  two-day 
event for our staff in Berne on 25/26 August. 
Apart from these anniversary events, we will realise two special projects in 2007: the publication of 
historical time series and the launch of an internet platform on macroeconomic issues. 
The  new  statistical  publication  series  comprises  several  booklets  which  will  be  published  on  a 
quarterly basis in the first year and then at irregular intervals. The topics presented cover the fields 
that were, or still are, significant for the formulation and implementation of monetary policy. The data 
series go back 100 years, where possible. The printed publications will contain annual figures, while 
additional data series and series with shorter intervals (quarterly, monthly, etc.) will be available on the 
internet.  The  publications  also  include  commentaries  on  the  data  series,  describing  the  calculation 
method and, for some topics, the historical and regulatory background. The first issue – dedicated to 
the monetary base and monetary aggregates – will be published in the first quarter of 2007. 
In autumn 2007, the SNB will launch Iconomix, an internet platform intended for public use. It will take 
visitors  on  a  journey  of  discovery  into  the  world  of  economics.  The  site  "iconomix.ch"  will  contain 
teaching modules, highlighting various aspects of our daily life from an economic point of view. The 
modules are mainly designed to be used by senior secondary school students. In principle, however, 
the contents can be freely accessed by the public at large. By setting up this platform, the National 
Bank wishes to contribute to a better understanding of economic issues by a wider public.  
4 
 BIS Review 123/2006
