Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The international economic scene and analysis of 
the Spanish economy  
Speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, before the Senate Budget 
Committee, Madrid, 23 November 2006. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Appearances by the Governor of the Banco de España before Upper and Lower House committees, 
as part of the discussion and approval of the State Budget, have traditionally been one of the main 
occasions for Parliament to deliberate on the analysis of the Spanish economy that forms the basis of 
the central bank's actions.  
As this is my first appearance as Governor before the Senate, allow me to reiterate, as I did in the 
Lower House, the importance that I attach to relations with the people’s representative bodies for the 
proper  performance  of  the  tasks  entrusted  to  the  Banco  de  España.  Tasks  which  are  of  great 
importance in the light of macroeconomic and financial stability, and which justify the independence 
granted by European laws and treaties to the Banco de España. Indeed, this is one of the Bank’s main 
identifying features, but one whose corollary is full transparency and fluidly operating accountability. At 
issue here, therefore, is an institutional arrangement whose balance hinges significantly on relations 
between the Banco de España and Parliament.  
Before moving to the analysis of the Spanish economy, I should dedicate some time to the external 
environment, focusing on the euro area, which is where our monetary policy is designed and decided.  
The international economic scene has been marked throughout 2006 by the continuing robust growth 
in global trade and activity seen in recent years. Such growth has been particularly notable in that it 
has come about against a background of considerably high oil prices which have only eased in recent 
months. It is very likely that in the coming quarters this dynamism will be maintained in most of the 
main geographical areas. Nonetheless, signs have emerged lately of growth easing in certain areas, 
most notably in the United States, meaning that the pace of expansion of global activity as a whole 
should be somewhat more contained in the immediate future.  
Thanks to this global framework, the euro area's economic situation has improved substantially. On 
most available forecasts, GDP in the area could grow by around 2.5% this year, marking a significant 
acceleration  on  2005.  Accompanying  this  greater  dynamism  has  been  the  recovery  in  internal 
demand, which should contribute to extending the length of this upturn. Prominent among the internal 
expenditure components is the robustness of investment, both in capital goods and in construction. 
The persistence of highly favourable financial conditions, companies' improved financial position and 
their higher earnings have contributed to buoyant corporate investment, in a setting in which capacity 
utilisation has reached the highest levels of the past five years and unit labour costs remain moderate. 
Household spending has recently gained some momentum and the course of the determinants of this 
variable  paint  a  favourable  picture.  In  particular,  the  employment  growth  rate  has  reached  levels 
unknown since the start of the decade, and this has been duly reflected in the indicators of consumer 
confidence.  
Overall, the information available suggests the expansionary phase of euro area output will continue 
over the coming quarters, though possibly at a somewhat lower rate than in the first half of 2006. In 
any  event,  around  the  turn  of  the  year  the  economic  situation  will  foreseeably  be  perturbed  by  the 
temporary impact of the rise in the main VAT rate in Germany in early 2007. Against this background, 
medium-term risks of a growth downswing cannot be ruled out if the slowdown in the US economy 
becomes  more  intense.  Adding  to  this  uncertainty  is  the  possibility  that  oil  prices  will  resume  the 
upward  course  interrupted  in  August  and,  over  a  longer  horizon,  that  there  will  be  a  disorderly 
correction of the macro-financial imbalances between the main world areas.  
The most recent changes in the growth rate of the harmonised index of consumer prices have been 
much assisted by the marked decline in oil prices since mid-August and by the stripping out of the 
base effects from the previous year. These factors have meant that, for the first time since early 2005, 
inflation  has  stood  below  2%,  the  ECB  target  (it  stood  in  fact  at  1.6%  in  October).  Beyond  the 
temporary variations in this variable, the index that excludes energy goods prices has also performed 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 1
more favourably throughout the year. The absence to date of underlying inflationary pressures is also 
seen  in  the  moderate  evolution  of  labour  costs  and  of  the  indicators  of  long-term  inflationary 
expectations. However, the upside risks to inflation have been growing in step with the improvement in 
activity and employment, which might drive the pass-through to consumer prices and wages of past 
rises in energy product prices. Faced with this, the ECB decided to readjust monetary conditions by 
raising its official interest rates on five occasions since December 2005. These measures have proved 
necessary  to  keep  inflationary  expectations  anchored  at  lower  levels,  against  a  background  of 
strengthening aggregate demand and a gradual move closer towards the potential level of output. In 
any  event,  I  should  stress  that  at  present,  even  following  these  interest  rate  rises,  the  financial 
conditions in place remain conducive to economic activity.  
Having  a  monetary  policy  geared  to  ensuring  price  stability  is  a  vital  requirement  for  economic 
dynamism to be sustainable. However, monetary policy can in no way supplant the other economic 
policies which, in fact, are of paramount importance for the growth of our economies.  
In particular, the European authorities must strive more resolutely to eliminate the structural obstacles 
holding back growth potential. The relatively disappointing results in terms of economic expansion in 
the  euro  area  in  the  past  decade  are  due,  above  all,  to  the  scant  dynamism  of  labour  productivity 
which, in turn, is largely a response to the relatively modest pace of innovation, and its spread and 
application  to  the  rest  of  the  economy.  Overcoming  this  problem  requires  the  implementation  of  a 
broad array of measures aimed at stimulating human capital formation, providing for the creation of 
new companies promoting the development of new products and combating rigidities in the different 
markets.  
On the other hand, there has recently been an improvement in the use of the labour factor, suggesting 
that labour market reforms and wage moderation have yielded some benefits. However, much room 
remains for further progress, since the unemployment rate is still high and the number of hours worked 
and the employment rates for specific groups (women, youths and older individuals) are too low.  
On  the  fiscal  policy  front,  budget  balances  have  recently  seen  what  was  in  part  an  unexpected 
improvement. This is because the pick-up in activity has given rise to more vigorous growth in certain 
tax receipts than was foreseen a year ago. The increase in revenue is therefore essentially transitory, 
therefore the authorities of these countries would be mistaken to become complacent and believe that 
budgetary consolidation has become a less pressing task. On the contrary, it is necessary to maintain 
sufficient control of spending in the economic upturn so as to speed up the correction of budgetary 
imbalances. This objective  is  vital  for creating a stable  macroeconomic  environment and  increasing 
the headroom available to tackle the challenges posed by population ageing in the future.  
 The changes  I  have  described  in  the  international setting,  where  the  greater dynamism  of  the  euro 
area and, therefore, of our export markets is notable, along with the gradual withdrawal of the impulse 
provided by monetary conditions, all shape a favourable scenario in which the Spanish economy may 
continue growing at a high rate in a sustained fashion. The easing in oil prices has led to a marked 
slowdown in the inflation rate, which it would be highly desirable to consolidate in the coming quarters.  
The  information  available  on  the  first  half  of  2006  shows  the  Spanish  economy  has  remained  very 
strong, with activity even moving on a mildly accelerating path. This means that the improved external 
environment has so far offset the slight tightening of financial conditions, which has made for some re-
balancing of the sources of growth of our economy, in favour of the external sector and with a smaller 
contribution by national demand. The increase in GDP growth in Q3 is along similar lines, with a year-
on-year growth rate of 3.8%, as a result of a further improvement in the contribution of net external 
demand to output. This will allow activity to expand over the course of 2006 at a sharper rate than in 
2005, meaning the current year would show the highest growth rate of the present decade.  
Yet despite this narrowing of the gap between the contributions of national and external demand to 
growth that I have referred to before, the expansion of the Spanish economy in 2006 has essentially 
been underpinned by the buoyancy of domestic spending. In particular, gross capital formation has 
retained  considerable  strength,  while  only  private  consumption  and  government  consumption  have 
slowed slightly in the year to date.  
The somewhat less dynamic behaviour of private consumption in the first three quarters of 2006 is a 
result of the interplay of numerous factors whose effects, in some cases, have tended to counter each 
other. The losses of purchasing power caused by the high inflation rates in the first half of the year 
have affected household disposable income and, therefore, they will have tended to reduce consumer 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2006
spending.  Further,  the  increase  in  borrowing  costs  following  the  successive  rises  in  official  interest 
rates  by  the  ECB  must  have  curtailed  the  spending  capacity  of  some  sectors  of  households. 
Conversely, intense job creation - running at a rate of over 3% - and the notable rise in household 
wealth  are  factors  that  should  have  sustained  the  growth  of  private  consumption.  Regarding 
household wealth, it should be pointed out that, although house prices have begun to show signs of 
slowing,  there  have  continued  to  be  very  significant  stock  market  rises  in  2006,  outpacing  those  in 
recent years, which were already considerable.  
As I mentioned earlier, gross capital formation has been very robust throughout 2006. Its soundness 
has,  moreover,  been  appreciable  in  all  its  components.  In  the  case  of  investment  in  construction, 
growth rates of over 5% have been observed. In this respect, residential investment, along with the 
non-residential building and civil engineering works segments, were particularly buoyant. In the case 
of housing, the latest available data suggest that this dynamism might run into 2007. Investment in 
equipment has not only remained the most dynamic component of demand, but it also moved on a 
rising path in the first half of the year. This facet of the current growth pattern is, perhaps, one of the 
most favourable points, since it may be interpreted as a renewed effort by Spanish firms to extend and 
modernise their productive apparatus at a time at which returns are high and the financial conditions 
for  undertaking  such  spending  are  still  attractive.  Evidently,  increased  export  activity  and  the 
improvement  in  the  industrial  sector  in  2006,  which  I  shall  address  hereafter,  are  very  closely 
connected to the momentum of investment in equipment.  
The dynamism of exports is in fact one of the key features of the current economic situation, as it has 
served to raise the contribution of net external demand to GDP growth and offset the slight slowdown 
in national demand. The pick-up in goods exports has been driven by the forceful increase in world 
trade  and  by  the  take-off  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  countries.  This  has  led  our  export 
shares  in  international  markets  to  stabilise  somewhat,  following  the  losses  recorded  in  the  two 
previous  years.  However,  no  substantial  changes  to  the  gradual  deterioration  in  the  price-
competitiveness indicators seen in recent years are discernible yet. Combined with the buoyancy of 
final demand, this has meant that purchases abroad have retained strong momentum, whereby import 
penetration has continued to increase.  
Despite  the  better  export  performance  and  the  slowdown  in  expenditure,  the  external  deficit  has 
continued to increase both in nominal terms and as a percentage of GDP during the first half of 2006, 
albeit at lower rates than in the two previous years. The rise in the external deficit reflects, first, the 
impact  of  some  temporary  or  one-off  factors  such  as  more  expensive  energy  and  the  cyclical 
discrepancy between our economy and that of the euro area. We may also include here the import 
intensity  of  investment  in  capital  goods,  although  this  component  may  have  a  more  permanent 
underpinning. Foreseeably, the recent course of energy prices and the recovery in the euro area will 
contribute to alleviating the tendency towards deterioration. However, we must not lose sight of losses 
in competitiveness. Reversing these losses may prove much more complex since that will ultimately 
depend on the economy’s efficiency and flexibility.  
The labour market has continued to be governed by the patterns of previous years, with strong job 
creation that has provided for the incorporation of a growing number of workers into the market and a 
reduction  in  the  unemployment  rate.  As  in  past  years,  the  dynamism  of  the  labour  force  has  been 
underpinned by a higher participation rate among women and continuing sizeable migratory flows. On 
Eurostat figures, the unemployment rate fell to the point of reaching the same level as the euro area 
average (7.8%) in October, a rate not seen in Spain since the 1970s.  
The dynamism of job creation is linked to the relatively moderate rate of increase of compensation per 
employee seen in recent years. In any event, these figures should be properly analysed. Firstly, labour 
costs  -  which  have  risen  slightly  in  the  first  half  of  2006,  standing  at  a  rate  of  around  3%  -  are 
appreciably  lower  than  negotiated  wage  settlements  under  collective  bargaining  agreements.  When 
taking  into  account  the  effect  of  indexation  clauses,  these  settlements  exceed  4%  in  2006.  That 
means  that  the  more  moderate  rate  of  increase  seen  in  compensation  per  employee  masks  very 
relevant composition effects. Specifically, the sizeable inflows of new workers at low wage levels - with 
immigrants accounting for a significant portion - is alleviating the rising labour costs that would have 
stemmed from the rises negotiated in collective agreements.  
Further, it is important to note that, when this relatively moderate trend of compensation per employee 
is combined with the low productivity of the Spanish economy, the result is unit labour costs that are 
continuing to grow at a higher rate than those in the euro area. The manufacturing sector, however, 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 3
has  recently  seen  high  productivity  gains  and  some  stabilisation  of  unit  labour  costs  relative  to  the 
euro area countries.  
Turning to inflation, we have seen two very different trajectories in 2006. In the first half of the year, 
price  increases  were  very  high,  driven  by  labour  costs  and  by  widening  margins,  but  especially  by 
higher  oil  prices.  The  12-month  rate  of  increase  of  the  CPI  held  at  close  to  4%  until  July,  with  a 
differential  in  relation  to  the  euro  area  that  at  one  point  was  1.8  percentage  points  (pp),  above  the 
average differential observed since 1999.  
However,  the  decline  in  oil  prices  that  began  in  August  has  swiftly  passed  through  to  prices  in  the 
Spanish economy. As a result, the CPI rate stood at 2.5% in October, 1.4 pp below the July rate. That 
enabled the differential with the euro area countries to be cut by 1 pp, to slightly below the average in 
recent years. The improvement in underlying inflation was, however, very limited, and this variable is 
holding at a rate of close to 3%.  
Admittedly,  2006  may  possibly  close  with  a  growth  rate  somewhat  higher  than  that  of  the  previous 
year. But the outlook for 2007 points to a slight slowdown in GDP growth, as part of a continuation of 
the patterns in recent quarters I have described to you. National demand is estimated to hold on a 
mildly slowing path, and there will be further improvements in the contribution of net external demand. 
This profile would be in line with the macroeconomic scenario on the basis of which the State budget 
for 2007 has been prepared, although the starting point is somewhat higher growth rates in 2006. As 
to inflation, although the growth of the CPI in 2007 on average will be far below that of the current year 
if  cheaper  oil  takes  root,  it  is  clear  that  there  will  only  be  significant  headway  in  inflation  rate 
convergence with the euro area if this reduction in energy prices feeds through permanently to agents' 
expectations.  
We  are  therefore  faced  with  a  picture  of  sustained  growth  and  some  gradual  correction  to  certain 
imbalances in the Spanish economy. Yet this scenario is not free from risks in the medium term. On 
the international front I have already mentioned risks relative to the outlook for the world economy and 
the uncertainty over the intensity of the European recovery. Furthermore, oil prices are subject to the 
influence of numerous economic and geopolitical factors, any changes in which may prompt a reversal 
of the fall seen in recent months. Within Spain, both the persistent inflation differential with the euro 
area  and  the  high  indebtedness  of  Spanish  households  harbour  uncertainties  that  economic  policy 
should contribute to dispel.  
The  maintenance  of  price  increases  higher  than  those  in  the  euro  area  over  a  lengthy  period  is  a 
cause for concern. Underlying inflation appears to have stabilised at a relatively high rate close to 3% 
in  recent  years.  This  persistence  relates  partly  to  the  presence  of  factors  that  add  inertia  into  the 
inflation rate, such as the indexing mechanisms in collective bargaining. The differential with the euro 
area is particularly high in the case of services, standing at around 2 pp. Against this background, the 
recent reduction in the inflation rate offers the perfect opportunity for this containment of inflation to be 
incorporated fully into the price formation process, providing for a moderation in expectations of price 
increases. That would allow it to have a lasting effect on future inflation and, thereby, we would see 
progress in the narrowing of our differential with the euro area. The lesser impact that the activation of 
the  indexation  clauses will  foreseeably  have  in 2007,  along with  the  fact  that  wage  bargaining next 
year may unfold while the main inflation reference is at a rate of below 3%, substantially down on the 
related rate in the first half of 2006, should be conducive to such moderation. This improvement would, 
moreover,  be  important  for  further  re-balancing  domestic  and  external  demand  and  ensuring  the 
continuity of economic dynamism in the medium run.  
In my recent appearance before the Lower House Budget Committee, I referred to the growing debt of 
companies and, in particular, of households as one of the sources of medium-term risk to the scenario 
of sustained growth and the tendency towards the re-balancing of the Spanish economy that I have 
set  out  today.  Given  the  importance  of  the  issue,  I  believe  it  would  be  useful  to  reiterate  what  I 
consider is a balanced analysis of this phenomenon.  
The  Banco  de  España  has  been  on  a  vigilant  footing  regarding  the  rate  at  which  corporate  and, 
especially, household debt has been growing in recent years, particularly given that most of such debt 
is  floating-rate.  This  tends  to  increase  households'  exposure  to  potentially  unfavourable  changes  in 
their income or in the cost of borrowing. Such exposure may particularly affect those segments of the 
population whose room for manoeuvre in these situations is more limited. There is thus no reason for 
complacency.  
4 
 BIS Review 117/2006
A  balanced  analysis  requires  the  joint  assessment  of  all  factors  making  up  the  household  financial 
position.  In  this  connection,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  payments  associated  with  the  debt 
incurred have grown at a substantially lesser extent than the volume of the debt and, at present, they 
account for a proportion of household income which, at the aggregate level, is still fairly moderate. The 
value of household financial and non-financial assets has also risen considerably in recent years. That 
is  due  in  particular  to  the  property  market  boom,  on  which  the  recent  structural  changes  in  the 
economy, including immigration, have had a bearing. Consequently, the financial position of the sector 
as a whole is fairly sound.  
The trend of indebtedness in the past ten years has been sufficiently significant as to identify it as one 
of the risks to consider in the essentially favourable scenario of the Spanish economy. The Banco de 
España should signal this fact, particularly in a setting in which credit continues to show signs of being 
very buoyant. But, at the same time, we cannot ignore the fact that the financial position of households 
and firms is healthy and provides a sound basis for adaptation to the interest rate levels in keeping 
with the recovery in economic growth in the euro area. The solvency of the Spanish financial system is 
a further guarantee for the maintenance of stability in the economy as a whole.  
In sum, the outlook for growth in the Spanish economy in the coming quarters is, in my view, relatively 
healthy. And economic policies can contribute to providing continuity to this expansion in the medium 
term, defusing some of the risks highlighted. In that connection, it will be essential to restrain demand 
impulses and improve supply-side functioning.  
The change in the ECB's monetary policy stance is not only useful for sustaining the recovery in the 
euro area in a manner which is compatible with price stability, but is also beneficial for the Spanish 
economy, since the least easing of monetary conditions is conducive to containing domestic demand 
and helps re-balance the expansion.  
Spanish public finances, for their part, remain very healthy. On the latest official forecasts, the general 
government budget balance will run a surplus of 1.1% in 2006, 0.2 pp up on the figure set in the last 
Stability  Programme  update.  A  balance  on  this  scale  obviously  complies  comfortably  with  the 
European fiscal discipline rules in the Stability and Growth Pact. Moreover, it will allow for a further 
reduction in the public debt/GDP ratio, possibly to below 40% of GDP at the end of the current year. In 
view of the figures available for the budget outturn during the first three quarters of 2006, it seems very 
likely that the final balance will be above the latest official forecast.  
The sound fiscal position reflects the fact that revenue from the main taxes has amply exceeded the 
estimates made in the budgetary programming exercise, which can be explained only in part by the 
higher-than-forecast economic growth recorded.  
The draft State budget for 2007 sets a surplus target for the overall general government sector of 0.7% 
of GDP, under a macroeconomic scenario marked by a slight slowdown in GDP. True, various factors 
will  tend  to  diminish  revenue  in  2007,  such  as  the  entry  into  force  of  the  personal  and  corporate 
income tax reform, the new EU financial perspectives and certain aspects of the labour market reform 
applied last July. But if we take into account the better-than-estimated closing budgetary balance in 
2006 and the continuity of the economic boom scenario, revenue should foreseeably continue to be 
buoyant,  enabling  the  surplus  target  set  in  the  draft  budget  for  the  coming  year  to  be  exceeded. 
Achieving a higher-than-forecast budget surplus would also be favourable both from the standpoint of 
the Spanish economy’s conjunctural situation and from a medium-term perspective. In this respect, a 
budgetary consolidation drive would contribute to setting in place the right foundations for tackling the 
challenges posed by ageing and the commitment to meet the requirements arising from protection in 
situations of dependency.  
In the budget for 2007, some expense items have been accorded particular attention, such as those 
aimed  at  improving  productivity;  in  this  connection,  the  resources  earmarked  for  education  and 
innovation and for investment in infrastructure have been increased. The priority given to these items 
is most appropriate, given the poor productivity figures witnessed. Yet what is important is to ensure 
the efficiency of the measures undertaken, so that increased resources effectively translate into actual 
improvements in the Spanish economy's capitalisation and productivity in the medium term.  
Improving  the  efficiency  of  expenditure  management  by  the  different  tiers  of general  government  is 
also a vital requirement for maintaining a healthy fiscal position. This is a challenge that calls for the 
involvement of all levels of government. From this standpoint, it is very important to adapt the analysis 
of  public  finances  and  its  economic  policy  implications  to  the  current  Spanish  situation,  marked  by 
highly  decentralised  public  spending.  Leaving  aside  the  transfers  between  different  tiers  of 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 5
government and interest payments, which reflect past financing patterns, the volume of spending by 
territorial governments is almost two and a half times that within the State sphere. Such a figure shows 
the enormous increase in the role of these agents, which has significant consequences for budgetary 
policy  conduct,  both  in  terms  of  its  contribution  to  macroeconomic  equilibrium  and  as  regards  its 
influence on the economy’s growth capacity in the medium and long run.  
From the standpoint of the contribution to macroeconomic equilibrium, the initial data on the regional 
governments'  budgets  for  2007  point  to  a  balanced  budget  target  for  the  year.  We  might  wonder, 
however, whether the macroeconomic situation I have described, at a cyclical juncture marked by a 
prolonged expansion, would require the setting of somewhat more ambitious targets, in line with the 
spirit of the new Budgetary Stability legislation, even though these are only legally binding as from the 
2008  budget.  Also,  from  the  standpoint  of  their  contribution  to  long-term  growth,  the  role  of  the 
territorial  governments  in  managing  the  public  spending  items  of  most  relevance  for  improving  the 
Spanish economy's competitiveness acquires considerable importance. Illustrative of this point is the 
fact  that  the  territorial  governments  are  responsible  for  more  than  90%  of  public  spending  on 
education.  
As regards supply-side policies, the main thing is to bring about an improvement in the capacity of the 
economy, its agents and its markets to adapt, which enables them to respond flexibly to a changing 
and highly competitive environment. Better supply-side functioning would help square the continuation 
of the current strong employment generation with the attainment of productivity gains. The National 
Reforms Plan lays down a series of measures geared in this direction, and they should be resolutely 
applied.  Moreover,  there  are  areas  such  as  the  labour  market  where  it  is  still  necessary  to  push 
through reform measures to increase flexibility and efficiency, harnessing the current good times to 
adopt reforms that will prevent a cyclical change from causing job destruction as occurred in the past.  
The  picture  that  emerges  from  the  recent  information  I  have  set  out  is  that  of  an  economy  which 
continues to show signs of high dynamism, with the prospect of this continuing - with somewhat less 
momentum - in the coming years. Yet this favourable situation prolonging an exceptionally long upturn 
should not be understood as signifying the absence of problems in the medium term. On the contrary, 
over  a  longer  horizon  the  Spanish  economy  will  have  to  face  major  challenges  in  competitiveness, 
productive efficiency and the flexibility of the markets for goods, services and factors. Integrating new 
labour  force  entrants  into  the  labour  market  will  have  to  be  compatible,  moreover,  with  improved 
productivity.  In  this  connection,  it  will  be  necessary  to  better  incorporate  technical  progress  and 
innovations  into  business  and  general  government  activity,  and  to  enhance  human  capital  skills. 
Likewise, prospective demographic developments will pose significant demands in respect of pensions 
and protection in situations of dependency. This will all call for further policies geared to re-balancing 
the sources of growth and stepping up the reform agenda in order to dispel the risks that are emerging 
and to ensure the continuity of the ongoing improvement in well-being in the medium and long-term.  
6 
 BIS Review 117/2006
