Svein Gjedrem: The outlook for the Norwegian economy and the business 
sector in southwestern Norway  
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), in Vats for Norges 
Bank’s regional network, 2 October 2006.  
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 27 September, Inflation Report 2/06 and 
previous speeches.  
 The economic situation 
Growth in the Norwegian economy has been solid during the past 15 years, but there have still been 
shifts in the business cycle. A pronounced upturn between 1993 and 1998 was followed by a period of 
more moderate growth and a mild recession in 2002 and into 2003. Since summer 2003, there has 
again been a clear upturn in the Norwegian economy. A low interest rate level in Norway, increased 
petroleum investment, favourable prices in important export markets and a strong upturn in the world 
economy have contributed to solid growth in the Norwegian economy. So far in the cyclical upturn, the 
mainland  economy  has  grown  by  an  average  of  close  to  4  per  cent  annually.  At  the  same  time, 
inflation has remained low as the upturn has also been underpinned by a rise in productivity in the 
business sector of more than 3 per cent and a shift in imports towards low-cost countries.  
Current  information  about  economic  developments  indicates  that  the  cyclical  upturn  is  continuing. 
Corporate sector profitability is solid. Companies are borrowing and investing. There is strong growth 
in  employment,  unemployment  has  fallen  markedly,  and  household  demand  continues  to  rise. 
Capacity utilisation in the business sector is high and a growing number of enterprises are now facing 
constraints.  
Statistics  Norway’s  business  tendency  survey  for  the  second  quarter  shows  that  Norwegian 
manufacturing is optimistic about the prospects ahead. A clear majority of industrial leaders assess the 
general  outlook  as  more  positive  in  the  short-term  than  in  the  second  quarter.  At  the  same  time, 
consumer price inflation excluding energy products remains low and is lower than the inflation target.  
Employment growth was lower over a long period compared with the cyclical upturns in the 1980s and 
1990s. During the first phase of the upturn, output growth was largely attributable to a sharp increase 
in  person-hours  worked.  This  partly  reflected  a  marked  increase  in  average  working  hours  when 
sickness absence declined in 2004. Higher activity did not therefore result in substantial labour market 
tightening. Considerable labour inflows following the enlargement of the EU and the EEA in 2004 also 
contributed to increasing potential output. A substantial share of inward labour migration is accounted 
for by foreign companies with contracts in Norway.  
Labour  inflows  from  the  new  EU  member  states  still  appear  to  be  growing,  with  the  construction 
industry absorbing a particularly large share. On the other hand, a rise in sickness absence and the 
number of persons on disability benefits are pushing down production capacity this year. In view of the 
tightening taking place in the Swedish labour market, there may be reason to expect a reduction in the 
supply of labour from Sweden. Over the past six months, there have been steadily growing signs of 
labour shortages in the Norwegian economy.  
Unemployment has shown a marked decline and is now at a low level. Employment is still on the rise, 
while the labour force as it has been registered in current statistics has remained virtually unchanged 
in recent months. Seasonally adjusted, registered unemployment stood at 2.4 per cent of the labour 
force in September. The number of registered unemployed adjusted for seasonal factors was close to 
59 000. Unemployment has declined for all occupational groups and has been most pronounced in 
manufacturing, the construction industry and in the engineering and ICT sectors.  
There are probably limitations to how much the supply of Norwegian labour can increase in the period 
ahead.  Labour  participation  rates  are  high,  particularly  when  taking  into  account  demographic 
developments.  Developments  in  the  labour  market  are  similar  to  the  profile  observed  ahead  of  the 
period of accelerating wage and cost inflation that started in 1998, but wage growth has been fairly 
moderate since the upturn began. Several factors may have contributed to this. An increase in inward 
labour migration and the opportunities provided by an international labour market may have prompted 
participants in local and centralised wage negotiations to place greater emphasis on the considerably 
BIS Review 92/2006 
 1
higher wage level in Norway relative to our trading partners and potential job vulnerability. At the same 
time, inward labour migration has reduced bottlenecks in some industries. However, despite increased 
labour market flexibility, the risk of higher growth in labour costs is now probably rising.  
The business sector in the southwestern part of Norway includes a large number of petroleum-related 
activities  and  manufacturing  companies.  The  number  of  public  sector  employees  is  clearly  lower  in 
Rogaland than in the rest of the country. The industry structure in Hordaland is very similar to the rest 
of the country.  
Information from Norges Bank’s regional network confirms the impression that the cyclical upturn is 
continuing. Region South-West reports solid profitability, a high activity level – higher than average for 
the rest of the country – and a positive market outlook. Growth in the activity level is particularly high in 
the supplier industry and services. Domestically-oriented manufacturing and retail trade also report a 
solid rate of growth. On the other hand, growth  has slowed in the building and construction sector. 
This probably reflects a particularly high activity level and marginal spare capacity in this sector.  
The  export  industry  reports  steady  solid  growth,  although  reports  from  the  contacts  in  the  regional 
network varied somewhat in the August contact round. One industry that reports a very solid first half 
year is the fish farming industry. This industry is particularly important in Hordaland, which alternates 
with Nordland in being the county that produces the most farmed fish.  
Prices for fresh farmed salmon rose sharply at the beginning of the year, generating solid earnings in 
the industry. Prices have fallen somewhat since June but are still higher than they have been in recent 
years and far higher than unit productions costs.  
Our  contacts  in  region  South-West  also  report  that  the  market  outlook  for  the  next  six  months  is 
favourable in all sectors. Service industries are most optimistic about growth. In this year’s highest-
growth industries, oil and gas and building and construction, growth is expected to be slightly lower. 
Most  sectors  expect  an  increase  in  investment.  In  the  local  government  and  hospital  sectors,  the 
investment level remains relatively stable.  
Employment  is  rising  in  most  sectors  in  this  region.  Seven  of  ten  enterprises  report  that  labour 
shortages  are  limiting  their  possibilities  for  expansion.  The  situation  is  particularly  demanding  for 
manufacturing and building and construction, as well as for some parts of the public sector. More than 
half of the contacts plan to increase their workforce during the next three months.  
The  labour  market  is  tightening  further  in  the  region.  This  is  reflected  in  falling  unemployment  and 
rising  wage  growth.  A  number  of  sectors  now  expect  higher  annual  wage  growth  in  2006  than 
indicated  in  the  previous  round  of  interviews.  Wage  growth  is  now  put  at  4.5-5.0  per  cent  in  most 
sectors. It is reported to be even higher in building and construction.  
Profitability continues to improve in all industries in region South-West. In many industries, profitability 
growth  is  somewhat  lower  than  in  the  previous  round.  The  exception  is  import-competing 
manufacturing where profitability is stable and in the service industry where it is improving further.  
So far, the buoyant activity level in the region has resulted in an accelerating rise in prices in highly 
sheltered sectors such as building and construction and services. More generally, enterprises report 
that prices have risen in the past 12 months. Six of ten companies expect prices to continue rising at 
the same pace during the next 12 months, while more than 25 per cent of the companies expect prices 
to rise at a faster pace.  
For the country as a whole, inflation has edged up since the beginning of the cyclical upturn. The year-
on-year rise in the consumer price index (CPI) was 1.9 per cent in August.  
Energy  products  such  as  electricity  and  oil  has  accounted  for  a  considerable  portion  of  the  rise  in 
prices over the past year. Electricity prices, including grid rent and taxes, were 25 per cent higher in 
August than one year earlier, while petrol prices were close to 11 per cent higher. Since the beginning 
of 2001, energy prices have exhibited an average increase of over 7 per cent.  
Variations in energy prices may also lead to wide monthly variations in consumer price inflation. High 
electricity prices may lead to a pick-up in CPI inflation through 2006. However, the rate of increase in 
energy prices is still expected to slow as from spring next year. A fall in energy prices may curb CPI 
inflation as from 2007.  
The  rise  in  prices  for  non-energy  goods  has  been  moderate  in  recent  years.  Price  impulses  from 
imported  consumer  goods  have  been  particularly  weak.  Their  contribution  to  inflation  has  been 
negative virtually every year since the mid-1990s, partly reflecting increased trade, a shift in imports 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2006
towards low-cost countries and a substantial improvement in distribution efficiency in Norway. Price 
impulses  from  imported  consumer  goods  are  expected  to  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on 
inflation in the period ahead, albeit to a lesser extent than in previous years.  
The rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services pushed up CPI inflation until this year, 
but since the beginning of the year this measure of inflation has edged down again. The 12-month rise 
in prices for goods and services produced in Norway, excluding energy, was 1.1 per cent in August, 
0.2 per cent lower than in July. This is the lowest domestic inflation rate witnessed since autumn 2004. 
The  reduction  in  day-care  rates  in  January  this  year  has  pushed  down  domestic  inflation  by  an 
estimated 0.3 per cent over the past year.  
The rise in prices has been lower than expected for both goods and services. It seems that strong 
competition between various producers within the food industry and the construction industry has had 
a dampening impact on inflation. In addition, productivity growth in retail trade has been high in the 
past  few  years.  Intensified  competition  may  also  have  contributed  to  curbing  the  rise  in  prices  for 
banking and insurance services.  
Several  factors  point  to  higher  inflation  in  the  period  ahead.  Capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian 
economy is picking up. This will contribute to a higher rise in prices for domestically produced goods 
and services. A tighter labour market will probably lead to higher wage growth in the coming years. 
High energy prices are feeding through to producer input prices.  
Outlook for the years ahead 
Growth in disposable income has been high in recent years. Lower interest expenses and relatively 
high real wage growth have resulted in an increase in household purchasing power. The rise in house 
prices  may  also  have  fuelled  growth  in  private  consumption.  With  high  growth  in  employment  and 
falling unemployment, consumption growth is expected to be high again this year.  
Since the publication of the June Inflation Report, electricity prices have increased to a further extent 
than  expected.  Forward  prices  for  next  winter  have  also  increased.  Higher  electricity  prices  may  in 
isolation  reduce  household  purchasing  power  somewhat.  On  the  other  hand,  growth  in  household 
income is high and market expectations indicate a fall in electricity prices later next year.  
A  continued  rise  in  house  prices  may  contribute  to  holding  up  consumption  growth.  House  prices 
increased  further  this  summer,  and  the  twelve-month  rise  moved  up  to  17.7  per  cent  in  August. 
Residential construction is still high. In 2005, the number of housing starts was the highest since the 
beginning of the 1980s.  
As the interest rate level gradually normalises, household interest expenses will increase. Combined 
with projected lower employment growth and higher inflation, this might reduce growth in household 
purchasing power in the years ahead. Higher wage growth would have the opposite effect. Overall, 
moderate growth in household purchasing power is expected to result in lower consumption growth 
ahead.  
A  gradual  increase  in  the  interest  rate  will  probably  curb  activity  in  the  housing  market.  Housing 
investment is expected to grow through this year, albeit less rapidly than last year. Housing investment 
growth  will  thereafter  moderate  further,  and  may  fall  somewhat  towards  the  end  of  the  projection 
period. House price inflation is expected to slow.  
Household indebtedness has increased in tandem with high activity in the housing market. Growth in 
household  debt  (C2)  has  abated  somewhat  in  recent  months,  but  remains  at  a  high  level.  Higher 
interest rates and lower house price inflation will gradually reduce household debt growth in the next 
few years.  
Growth in credit to mainland enterprises has also shown a sharp increase over the past year, partly 
reflecting  increased  fixed  investment.  With  prospects  of  continued  high  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
Norwegian economy, solid profitability, ample liquidity and a high level of optimism among enterprises, 
strong  growth  in  investment  is  expected  again  this  year.  As  economic  growth  gradually  slows, 
investment growth is also expected to moderate.  
Oil prices are of importance for the activity level in the Norwegian economy and central government 
revenues. In recent years, oil prices have risen sharply. During the summer, crude oil prices rose to 
more than USD 75 per barrel, partly owing to the conflict in the Middle East and reduced production in 
Nigeria and the US. The price of oil has fallen markedly during the past few weeks to below USD 60 
BIS Review 92/2006 
 3
per barrel. Futures prices have fallen less and futures prices are now at a good USD 65 per barrel at 
end-2008. Brent Blend futures prices indicate that oil prices may remain high several years ahead.  
Export  prices  for  Norwegian  natural  gas  largely  follow  developments  in  oil  prices  with  a  lag.  Since 
autumn  2005,  prices  for  Norwegian  gas  exports  have  risen  substantially  according  to  the  quarterly 
reports of the oil companies Statoil and Hydro. In the next few years, natural gas will account for a 
steadily larger share of total petroleum production on the Norwegian continental shelf.  
Petroleum investment has reached a high level after three years of strong growth. In 2005, investment 
was  nearly  NOK  87  billion.  The  large  Ormen  Lange  and  Snøhvit  projects  have  contributed  to  high 
petroleum  investment,  and  high  oil  prices  have  fuelled  activity  even  at  fields  that  have  been  in 
production for a long period. The level of investment is assumed to increase somewhat in 2006 and 
remain high next year, before declining slightly the following year when Ormen Lange and Snøhvit are 
scheduled for completion. Continued high oil prices are expected to contribute to high investment both 
in exploration and in fields in operation in the years ahead.  
Information from our regional network suggests that petroleum investment is providing considerable 
impulses to activity in Norway’s coastal regions. According to the network, suppliers to the petroleum 
industry  are  expecting  continued  strong  growth  over  the  next  few  months.  Statistic  Norway’s 
investment intensions survey for oil and gas activities confirms the impression of positive expectations 
for 2006 and 2007.  
There  are  prospects  for  strong  growth  in  the  Government  Pension  Fund  -  Global.  Given  our 
assumption  for  oil  price  developments  ahead  (oil  futures),  spending  in  line  with  the  expected  real 
return on the Fund implies that the structural, non-oil deficit may increase by close to NOK 15 billion at 
2006 prices in both 2008 and 2009. With a period of strong expansion in the Norwegian economy, 
somewhat lower petroleum revenue spending will be in line with the fiscal rule. Our projections are 
based on the assumption that fiscal policy will generate some stimulus to total demand and output in 
2008 and 2009, but somewhat less than the expected return on the Fund would imply.  
Economic growth in Sweden, the UK and the euro area is high. Economic developments in China and 
India remain strong. GDP growth in the US and Japan has slowed. Consumer price inflation among a 
number of our trading partners is high as a result of rising energy prices, but the increase in prices for 
other goods and services remains moderate. Continued solid growth among our trading partners is in 
prospect.  As  global  capacity  utilisation  increases  to  a  more  normal  level,  demand  for  Norwegian 
exports might remain buoyant. More export enterprises are facing capacity constraints. Export growth 
in  the  years  ahead  will  probably  occur  in  industries  such  as  the  engineering  and  shipbuilding 
industries. Production growth is now high in these sectors, and employment is rising after declining for 
several years.  
High  growth  in  the  global  economy  has  also  pushed  up  prices  for  non-oil  commodities.  Rising 
commodity  prices  and  buoyant  activity  in  markets  that  are  important  for  Norway  have  generated 
growth  impulses  to  the  Norwegian  economy.  Since  May  this  year,  commodity  prices  have  varied 
widely, but on the whole edged up since end-June. International equity markets have stabilised since 
the  turbulence  in  May,  and  have  edged  up  since  the  previous  monetary  policy  meeting.  The 
benchmark  index  on  the  Oslo  Stock  Exchange  is  now  at  a  good  12  per  cent  higher  than  at  the 
beginning of the year.  
Interest  rates  are  still  low  among  many  of  our  trading  partners,  in  spite  of  the  increases  in  several 
countries as a result of rising energy prices and higher consumer price inflation. In the US, there are 
now  expectations  that  the  rate  tightening  cycle  is  nearing  an  end,  and  that  the  policy  rate  will  be 
lowered in the course of next summer. A rise in key rates is expected over the next year in the euro 
area, Sweden, the UK, Australia, Japan and Switzerland. In the June Inflation Report, Norges Bank 
assumes that money market rates among our trading partners will gradually increase over the next 
three years.  
The path for domestic and external interest rates does not imply considerable changes in the krone 
exchange  rate.  Since  the  first  quarter  of  2004,  the  import-weighted  krone  exchange  rate  (I-44)  has 
shown a rising trend, albeit with some degree of fluctuation. Since end-May this year, the krone has 
depreciated from strong values. So far in the third quarter, the krone exchange rate has been about 3 
per cent weaker than projected in the June Inflation Report.  
4 
 BIS Review 92/2006
Monetary policy assessments and strategy 
According to the monetary policy strategy in Inflation Report 2/06, the sight deposit rate should be in 
the  interval  2¾  -  3¾  per  cent  in  the  period  to  the  publication  of  the  next  Inflation  Report  on  1 
November, conditional on economic developments that are broadly in line with projections.  
The analyses in Inflation Report 2/06 were based on a gradual increase in the interest rate towards a 
more normal level. In the first six months of 2006, the key rate was increased in two increments of 
0.25 percentage point. There were prospects that the interest rate would rise further at about the same 
pace.  The  key  rate  was  raised  by  a  further  0.25  percentage  point  at  the  meeting  of  the  Executive 
Board on 16 August.  
At  its  meeting  on  27  September,  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  decided  to  leave  the  key  rate 
unchanged at 3.00 per cent. The background for the decision was described as follows:  
"There  is  little  slack  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  A  steadily  rising  share  of  enterprises  lacks  the 
capacity to accommodate increased demand, largely because of labour shortages. The labour market 
has  grown  considerably  tighter,  and  there  are  several  signs  that  wage  growth  is  picking  up. 
Developments in aggregate demand, output and employment suggest a higher interest rate.  
At  the  same  time,  the  rise  in  consumer  prices  is  slowing,  and  the  rise  in  prices  excluding  energy 
products is unexpectedly low. This suggests a continued low interest rate."  
The  Executive  Board’s  overall  assessment  was  that  the  strategy  published  in  the  Inflation  Report, 
coupled  with  new  information,  warranted  that  the  interest  rate  should  be  left  unchanged  at  this 
meeting.  
Projections are uncertain. The uncertainty surrounding the interest rate forecasts is illustrated in the 
fan chart and indicates that monetary policy reacts to disturbances to the economy. This contributes to 
increasing  the  uncertainty  surrounding  future  interest  rates,  but  at  the  same  time  contributes  to 
stabilising economic developments.  
Monetary policy cannot fine-tune economic developments, but it can prevent the largest effects from 
occurring when the economy is exposed to disturbances. In some situations, it may be appropriate to 
hedge  against  particularly  unfavourable  developments.  In  the  baseline  scenario,  the  interest  rate  is 
gradually  raised  to  a  more  normal  level.  Norges  Bank  continuously  assesses  the  effects  of  interest 
rate changes and other new information concerning economic developments.  
   5
BIS Review 92/2006 
     6 
 BIS Review 92/2006
    BIS Review 92/2006 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 92/2006
    BIS Review 92/2006 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 92/2006
    BIS Review 92/2006 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 92/2006
    BIS Review 92/2006 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 92/2006
    BIS Review 92/2006 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 92/2006
    BIS Review 92/2006 
 17
   BIS Review 92/2006
 18 
 