Petar Goshev: Central banking in Macedonia – a brief review of the first 
60 years 
Welcome speech by Mr Petar Goshev, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  60th  anniversary  of  central  banking  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia, 
Skopje, 20 October 2006. 
 Honorable President of the Republic of Macedonia, Mr. Branko Crvenkovski, 
Honorable President of the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia, Mr. Ljubisha Georgievski, 
Honorable President of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, Mr. Nikola Gruevski, 
Honorable former President of the Republic of Macedonia, Mr. Kiro Gligorov, 
Honorable Ministers former and present, 
Distinguished representatives of the judicial, public and cultural institutions of the Republic of 
Macedonia, 
Your Excellencies,  
Distinguished leaders of religious communities' 
Honorable Mayor of the City of Skopje, 
Dear colleagues, leaders of the banking and business community, 
Dear friends from other countries, colleagues governors, representatives of central banks and other 
international financial institutions, present here tonight from four continents, dear Malcolm Knight, 
General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I wish you all the warmest welcome to this event, that is so important to all of us! 
On October 19, 1946, on the basis of a "Decree for merging of public sector credit enterprises", of the 
federal  state  of  that  time,  and  a  Decision  of  the  Macedonian  authorities  of  that  time,  "Makedonska 
Stopanska Banka" merged with the National Bank of the former Federal Yugoslavia. Thus it became 
an official unit, called Head Office for the National Republic of Macedonia, supposed to perform part of 
the central banking activities. Therefore, we have decided this year to commemorate those 60 years 
dedicated to central banking, i.e. 60 years dedicated service to the state. From a historical viewpoint, it 
is  not  a  long  period.  For  us,  however,  it  is  fundamental,  since  it  de  facto  means  fulfillment  of  the 
centuries-long endeavors of our people to have their own state with all attributes - in this case also 
with accomplishment of full financial sovereignty. 
Why is the role of central banking important for an economy? Because it is responsible for maintaining 
the  purchasing  power  of  the  currency  aimed  at  the  general  stability  of  the  economy,  as  the  main 
prerequisite  for  its  sustainable  growth  and  development.  Such  responsibility  is  not  always  easy  to 
fulfill, since the response to this challenge surely lies in the multitude of social and cultural factors, in 
the extent to which they support the idea that price stability is an indispensable, yet insufficient factor 
for achieving those objectives. It would have been nice had we found only successful stories in the 
history of central banking in the Republic of Macedonia. However, in the largest part of the past 60 
years, facts are different. Both successes and failures are evident. Starting from the fact that the role 
of  central  banking  in  the  development  of  the  economy  is  best  seen  in  the  development  of  the 
institution itself, please allow me to draw your attention to some of the more significant moments of 
that development. 
At the very beginning, the Bank was conducting only a few central banking operations: distribution od 
cash, payment operations, control, i.e. in today's language, supervision of banks. Its first manager was 
Dr. Todor Mirovski, at that time manager of Makedonska Stopanska Banka, while from the beginning 
of 1947 until June 1950, Aleksandar Bogoev. 
From a functional viewpoint, the central banking in the past 60 years may be conditionally divided into 
three periods.  
We  could  call  the  first  period  pre-institutional  (1946-1970),  the  second  was  a  period  of  formal 
institutionalization (1971-1991), and the third was a period of monetary independence (1992-2006). 
We  denote  the  first  period  as  pre-institutional  since  there  was  an  institution  established  only  on  a 
federal level - central bank. And, as you are well aware, the main feature of post-war life in all spheres, 
including  banking  as  a  whole,  was  centralization.  Consequently,  all  communal  banks  immediately 
BIS Review 100/2006 
 1
became  branches  of  the  National  Bank  of,  at  that  time,  Federal  Yugoslavia  -  Head  Office  of  NRM, 
engaged in attracting funds, extending credits in the amount of the funds attracted, performing limited 
activities in the international payment operations, performing vault activities for executing the budgets 
of the local units, etc. The Head Office, i.e. the rudiment of the Central Bank continues to distribute 
banknotes  and  coins,  attract  funds,  extend  credits  to  banks,  organize  international  payment 
operations. 
As late as in the sixties of the preceding century the competences of the National Bank, i.e. the Head 
Office in Macedonia started to be distinguished from the competences of the commercial banks. At the 
same  time,  however,  the  dependence  of  the  Head  Office  in  Macedonia  on  the  National  Bank  of 
Yugoslavia of that time, increased - a process which was the same for all former Yugoslav republics. 
In fact, the activities of the Head Office of the Republic of Macedonia were reduced to performing only 
routine operations of executive and operational character. All policies, decisions and regulations were 
created and adopted in Belgrade. 
The  second  period,  period  of  institutionalization,  represents  some  kind  of  a  turning  point  in  central 
banking.  In  1971,  instead  of  head  offices  of  the  former  Yugoslav  republics,  national  banks  of  the 
republics and provinces were established, including the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia. 
In 1972, the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia adopted for the first time a law on the National 
Bank of Macedonia on the level of the Republic, while in 1974 it was defined also with the Constitution 
of the Republic of Macedonia. The first Governor, appointed in 1972, was Stojan Kjosev, who was until 
then a member of the Executive Council of the Republic of Macedonia.  
In  the  Law,  the  National  Bank  of  Macedonia  was  defined  as  an  institution  of  the  single  monetary 
system of former Yugoslavia, with a status of a legal entity. Established as such, it was independently 
executing the projections of the credit policy for the Republic of Macedonia. However, the setting of 
the  monetary,  credit  and  foreign  exchange  policies  was  still  within  the  competence  of  the  National 
Bank of former Yugoslavia, but a growing number of the decisions of its bodies were adopted by a 
consensus of the representatives of the republics and provinces. Five years later, in 1977, the National 
Bank of Macedonia earned new competences: bank licensing, conducting international payment and 
credit operations. It was also given more rights and responsibilities with respect to maintaining banks' 
liquidity. These functions and competences remained almost the same in the following 15 years. 
The  third  period,  period  of  complete  monetary  independence,  followed  by  the  constitution  of  the 
independent  state  -  Republic  of  Macedonia,  is  definitely  the  most  important  period  in  the  central 
banking from all aspects. This is a period of sweeping transformations, which constitute the NBRM as 
an  institution  with  all  explicit  attributes  of  an  independent  central  bank,  hence  as  one  of  the  key 
attributes of the statehood of the Republic of Macedonia. 
In this period the following had to be done: 
• 
• 
introduce the new Macedonian national currency - Denar; 
surmount inflation, which at the time of the monetary independence equaled around 1.200 
percent on annual level;  
overcome the accumulated problems in banking, managed primarily by debtors; 
repay  the  so-called  "frozen"  foreign  currency  deposits  to  the  depositors,  as  the  first 
precondition for restoring the confidence in banking; 
build  capacity  in  the  Central  Bank  itself  for  pursuing  an  independent  monetary  policy  and 
efficient banking system supervision; 
establish a modern payment system. 
• 
Many of these issues were successfully solved. Manu of them are still being successfully treated. The 
national currency was successfully introduced, inflation was surmounted, and in the past 12 years it 
has been on average on the level of only 2.2 percent, annually. The function of prudential supervision 
has been established, which is continuously being improved and upgraded. Payment operations are 
conducted smoothly. So is the function of the government's fiscal agent.  
The  capacity  for  conducting  the  monetary  policy  is  in  constant  progress.  From  April  1992  until 
December 1995, the National Bank applied a monetary targeting strategy, with the money supply M1 
being  the  intermediate  target.  At  that  time,  mainly  direct  instruments  were  used:  selective  credits, 
minimum liquidity, compulsory CB bills, discount rate and reserve requirement. The choice made was 
  2 
 BIS Review 100/2006
imposed  by  the  circumstances:  lack  of  developed  financial  instruments  and  institutional  financial 
structure; absence of the interest rate transmission mechanism, and high interdependence between 
the aggregate demand and money supply. 
In October 1995, NBRM made a shift towards monetary strategy of targeting the nominal exchange 
rate against the German Mark, and later against the Euro, with the Denar exchange rate stability being 
the  intermediate  monetary  policy  objective.  Such  a  strategy,  applied  in  a  small  and  open  economy 
such as ours, has proved to be very successful for maintaining the price stability until present day.  
All reforms in the monetary policy instruments since the independence have been directed towards 
introducing  indirect,  market-oriented  instruments  for  enabling  efficient  monetary  policy  conduct. 
Therefore,  in  1993  deposit  and  credit  auctions  were  introduced,  and  at  the  end  of  1994  CB  bills 
auctions  were  introduced.  The  initial  development  and  strengthening  of  the  financial  system  of  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia,  especially  of  the  government  securities  market,  enabled  us  to  include  new 
instruments, following the example of the modern central banks. In April 2005, we promoted the over-
the-counter  market  for  government  securities.  In  the  same  year,  we  launched  the  general  repo 
agreement and we started with repo operations when concluding lombard credits. In March this year, 
together with the Ministry of Finance we introduced Treasury bills for monetary policy purposes. 
The  transition  of  the  monetary  strategy  and  of  the  monetary  instruments  would  not  have  been 
successful without adequate banking reforms. Therefore, rehabilitation and privatization of banks were 
undertaken, Deposit Insurance Fund was established and new regulation on prudential operations in 
line with Basel Principles for Efficient Banking Supervision was adopted and implemented. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We  said  that  this  approach  of  looking  back  at  the  past  six  decades  actually  means  considering  of 
central  banking  from a  functional  viewpoint  on  the basis  of which,  with  all risks of  arbitrariness,  we 
have  distinguished  among  three  developmental  stages  for  the  institution  upon  whose  invitation  you 
bestowed  us  to  organize  this  grand  meeting  of  excellencies,  honorable  guests  and  friends  of  the 
Central Bank and of the Republic of Macedonia.  
If  we  consider  the  development  of  central  banking  from  another  aspect,  conditionally  calling  it  a 
reflection of the environment, i.e. from the aspect of the social system in which central banking and 
banking in general have been developing until now, then undoubtedly there are only two stages. The 
first one took place in the period from 1946 until 1991, and the second one, from 1991 until present 
day. This classification is important and extremely didactic from a historical point of view. In the first 
stage,  central  banking,  just  as  everything  else,  was  established  on  a  negation  of  the  fundamental 
principles of market economy, i.e. on a negation of the ownership which in the beginning was defined 
as  state  ownership,  then  as  workers'  ownership,  which  least  was,  and  later  it  was  defined  as  self-
management ownership, which was impossible to define even with the best formulations. It turned out 
to be "everybody's and nobody's" but de facto it belonged to those with the largest political power. In 
line with those principles of the system, credit plans directed the reserve money issuance, rather than 
it  to  be  determined  by  economic  fundamentals:  economic  growth,  internal  and  external  balances, 
supply and demand, real market values. Printing of money was also dictated by the debtors, which did 
not repay the credits, but issued bills of exchange which at the end were borne by the reserve money 
issuance, then the extremely soft budget constraints, direct lending to whole economic sectors, and 
even  certain  companies,  from  the  reserve  money  issuance,  at  interest  rates  significantly  below  the 
inflation rate. Instead of the debtors, often their creditors went bankrupt, with the intention to preserve 
social  rest,  or  to  postpone  social  unrest.  Therefore,  the  end  of  1980s  and  the  beginning  of  1990s, 
followed  by  the  development  since  then  until  present  day,  have  been  years  of  Schumpeter's 
destruction, positive destruction - regardless of our dissatisfaction with the slow pace of the reforms 
and jeopardized social security, which, I would agree, did not have to erode to such an extent, before 
the new solutions started to give better results. 
However, we must emphasize that the Republic of Macedonia is finally back on the right track: back to 
the main mega-trends of the most developed part of human civilization, to the building and practicing 
of a functional market economy; to the competition on the open international market; to the dominance 
of  the  individualism  as  opposed  to  the  general  and  omnipresent  collectivization;  to  the  painstaking 
establishment of institutions responsible to the people; to the difficult road of providing the rule of law.  
And have we learned the lessons?  
• 
that we should stay away from the revolutionary methods which suddenly stop it all and start 
building it all over;  
BIS Review 100/2006 
 3
 that there is no efficient system in which ownership and rights deriving from it are not known; 
that there is no efficient system which denies the differences in the capabilities, dividing the 
social wealth on the basis of their harsh negation; 
that there is no sustainable economic growth by continuously spending more than we earn; 
that there is no strong economy without developed institutions and judicial system.  
• 
• 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Central  Bank  completely  distinguishes  between  the  principles  of  the  previous  and  of  today's 
system in creation. Therefore, today it is a successful and modern institution, with a satisfactory trend 
of development of its institutional capacity.  It is successful as we copy the institutional setup of the 
central banks of the developed countries, where the independence of central banking is recognized as 
one  of  the  main  preconditions  for  efficient  conduct  of  the  monetary  policy  and  the  exchange  rate. 
Fortunately,  political  institutions  in  the  country  understood  that,  too,  and  therefore  it  is  general 
assessment  that  today  NBRM  enjoys  a  significant  level  of  independence,  both  formal  and  actual. 
However, it is most important that we are aware where and how much we lag behind the central banks 
of  developed  countries,  how  much we  must  work  in  order  to  reduce  the  gap  and  where  we  should 
arrive at. 
We  should  improve  a  number  of  contemporary  analytical  and  research  models  and  practices.  We 
should expand our knowledge in the area of economic modeling and econometric techniques. As a 
matter of fact, in a month or two we start with regular training of the NBRM employees in this area, in a 
systematic and permanent manner.  
We are already preparing for outlining and implementing other monetary strategies, as it is imposed by 
the processes of globalization and integration of markets, the forthcoming very close full liberalization 
of the capital account, justifiably anticipated larger inflows of capital, which create new environment for 
our economy, together with the risks from instability and speculative pressures. This is imposed also 
by our strategic determination for admission of the Republic of Macedonia to the EU - which ultimately 
means  reaching  an  institutional  capacity  adequate  to  the  criteria  of  the  Maastricht  Agreement  from 
1992 in order to be prepared to join the European System of Central Banks. 
We should  even  further  increase  the  capacity  of  supervision.  Therefore,  new regulations,  which  we 
develop together with the Ministry of Finance are already underway, as well as new intensive activities 
for  gradual  shift  towards  risk-based  supervision,  as  a  basis  for  implementation  of  the  New  Capital 
Accord - Basel 2. At the same time, we should improve our capacity for analyzing the financial stability 
of the country - activities we have started, but which require great efforts and dedication.  
I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  on  behalf  of  the  National  Bank  to  all  of  you  who  in  various 
circumstances and under serious challenges contributed to the development of an institution such as 
the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia. The Monograph we prepared on this occasion - 60 
years of central banking in the Republic of Macedonia, is primarily a tribute to them. 
I would like to thank all of you who are here tonight, deeply feeling the historical significance of this 
jubilee! 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2006
