Radovan Jelašić: Dinar products and declining interest rates in Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the promotion of “Pure” 
Dinar Credit of HVB Bank, Belgrade, 18 October 2006. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen,  
My participation in this conference is motivated by two reasons: dinar products and decline in interest 
rates! I am happy to say that today we are all able to conclude that the National Bank of Serbia was 
right when it announced that interest rates will subside and that banks will expand their credit offer so 
as for it to include “pure” dinar credits. HVB bank has recently cut its effective interest rates on foreign 
currency  credits  and  has  now  launched  a  new  product  –  an  authentic  dinar  cash  credit,  with  no 
revaluation. Some other banks have also announced their intention to reduce interest rates on credits 
in  euros.  Present  developments  only  go  to  confirm  what  the  NBS  has  claimed,  in  response  to 
criticisms purporting that the restrictive measures of the National Bank are entirely to blame for the 
high cost of credits in Serbia: inflation needs to decline first, and only then can we count on a gradual 
decline in interest rates. And also, a drop in inflation is an essential precondition to increasing trust in 
the domestic currency and its use. Serbia is on the right track to achieving both these objectives! 
It is precisely the restrictive monetary policy of the NBS that gave a decisive contribution to a decline 
in inflation, and to the fact that, now that the policy interest rate on two-week repo operations amounts 
to 18 percent, with annual inflation dropping to 11.6% in September, banks are starting to reduce their 
interest rates on credits, even though the much criticized measure of the central bank – increase in the 
reserve requirement on short-term external borrowing of banks – introduced as far back as May this 
year,  is  still  in  force.  At  the  same  time,  the  share  of  reserve  requirement  on  external  credits  with 
maturity of up to two years, the ratio on which was raised from 40 to 60 percent, in total calculated 
reserve  requirement  is  only  17.5%.  When  this  measure  was  first  introduced,  this  share  was  30.3 
percent.  
In the first eight months this year, the sum of total credits increased by over CSD 100 billion, which 
plainly shows that measures that the NBS enacted with the aim of bringing down inflation did not have 
a  negative  effect  on  either  lending  activity  of  banks  or  country’s  economic  growth.  Neither  the 
corporate nor the household sectors were left without credits, which only disproves the “forecasts” put 
forward by opponents of central bank’s measures. Profit interest of banks appears not to have been 
affected  by  these  measures  either,  since  August  data  put  interest  rate  margin  in  Serbia  at 
approximately 11 percentage points (weighted average interest rates on total credits and total deposits 
were 16.43 % and 5.55%, respectively). In Romania, which is on the point of EU accession, this same 
margin is still around 9 percent! Those who wonder why interest rate margins range between 4 and 7 
percentage points in a majority of transition countries, and between 4 to 5% in EU countries, i.e. why 
they are lower than in Serbia, ought to have in mind the following facts: 1) our country rating is still 
BB-, almost exclusively because of high political risk, 2) until only few months ago, we had double-digit 
annual  inflation,  3)  a  large  part  of  the  corporate  sector  is  still  waiting  to  be  restructured,  with 
monopolies maintained or created in several branches of economy! But let us go back to our starting 
point – bringing down inflation, although it entails costs that are not insignificant for the NBS, for banks 
or the Government, is a priority, because low inflation creates real scope for lower interest rates. With 
the decline in inflation that occurred over the past five months, we can already see the beginning of 
this process in practice, and all that the NBS can now do is “promise” that monetary policy will be as 
restrictive as necessary in order to accomplish the set inflation objectives.  
High inflation is an additional tax affecting the poorest of the population, first by directly reducing the 
value of their income, and then also because it leads to a decline in foreign direct investments, which 
in turn narrows down opportunities for new and productive employment. The dinar is our currency, and 
I am surprised that the Government nominally advocates its use, while at the same time calculating all 
important  things  in  euros  –  credits  extended  by  the  Government  are  in  euros,  national  investment 
program is expressed in euros, country debt is disclosed in euros only – as if the Government has left 
Serbia and now lives in another country.  
I firmly believe that our citizens are ready to pay a certain cost of credit, but that they are not ready to 
buy  a  “pig  in  a  poke”  or  take  credits  on  imprecise  terms  or  terms  they  do  not  fully  understand,  for 
which at a later time they would have to pay a “tax on naiveté.” That is why we introduced the effective 
BIS Review 100/2006 
 1
interest rate, so that citizens should know how much each borrowing costs and so that they should be 
able to estimate whether they are able to meet the obligations they have assumed. The fact that our 
people have accumulated high credit appetite over the past decade or so, and that, when they borrow, 
they  do  not  respond  adequately  to  the  level  of  interest  rates,  does  not  relieve  banks  from  the 
responsibility to be real partners and financial advisors to their clients – from being responsible not 
only for what they do, but also for what they tell their clients. The NBS and I, as its Governor, are being 
reproached for warning citizens of the risks of foreign currency clause indexation or borrowing in Swiss 
francs because Serbia will one day enter the EU, but certainly not a monetary union with Switzerland. 
We are also being reproached for advocating full transparency in banks’ operations, and for requiring 
observance of the ethical code which would obligate bankers to fair competition. The NBS will intensify 
its efforts on educating citizens as users of financial and banking services, and I hope that in this it will 
be joined by an increasing number of banks.  
The  immediate  task  that  the  NBS  has  set  itself  is  to  restore  public  trust  in  the  dinar  not  only  as  a 
transaction  currency,  but  also  as  a  savings  instrument.  Although  dinar  savings  have  grown 
significantly over the past two years despite high inflation, their present level of around CSD 4.7 billion 
is still not satisfactory, even though all calculations show that dinar savings are much more profitable 
than foreign currency ones. This is due primarily to negative past experiences citizens have had with 
dinar savings, which, as opposed to foreign currency savings, completely lost their value in the years 
of hyper-inflation. However, with low inflation rate and higher exchange rate fluctuations, citizens will 
be increasingly interested in saving in dinars, especially when they realize that this is not a short-term 
trend, as it most certainly is not (!), while the increase in interest rates in the euro area will provide 
banks with an additional motive for a more active approach to collecting and increasing dinar savings. 
The NBS has offered citizens its savings bills, whereas banks are expected to diversify their offer of 
dinar  products,  both  deposit  and credit  ones.  At  this  point, when  external borrowing  is  the  principal 
source of banks’ credit potential, it is quite understandable for me that banks are not overly interested 
in a more active approach to boosting dinar savings. However, I am also convinced that in the near 
future this will became a significant factor of competition among banks, as Serbian citizens get their 
salaries in dinars. Therefore – if the NBS is successful in its fight against inflation, and it most certainly 
will be successful, just as has been the case with all other challenges so far – it is quite logical that 
Serbian people will want to save in dinars, if this yields a higher rate of return, and that they will want 
to  borrow  in  dinars  and  not  have  to  worry  about  foreign  currency  risk  from  which  banks  are  now 
protected, but citizens are not. Competition in the Serbian banking market is strong enough to ensure 
success for all those who first understand the needs of the market and of their potential clients.  
2 
 BIS Review 100/2006
