Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Overview of scenario thinking and planning  
Official remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia and Chairman of the 
International Centre for Leadership in Finance (ICLIF) Board of Directors, at the ICLIF's Seminar on 
“Overview of Scenario Thinking and Planning”, Kuala Lumpur, 5 October 2006. 
 I am very pleased to welcome you this morning to ICLIF's Scenario Thinking and Planning Seminar. 
There  has  been  growing  interest  amongst  corporations  and  policy  makers  in  the  usefulness  of 
scenario thinking and planning as a strategic tool. In the current environment that is rapidly changing 
and highly uncertain with new risks emerging, we need to be better positioned to be prepared for the 
future.  Scenario  thinking  and  planning  may  offer  a  solution  to  managing  such  situations.  Good 
scenarios have been used most productively by many multinationals to challenge perceived business 
expectations.  Scenario  analysis  and  planning  have  also  been  extensively  used  by  policymakers  to 
ensure a state of readiness to respond to sudden or significant changes in the environment.  
Scenario  analysis  and  planning  is  particularly  relevant  to  the  financial  services  sector  in  which  the 
pace  of  change  has  accelerated  exponentially  in  this  recent  decade.  Unpredictable  shifts  in  the 
environment  have  also  heightened  the  uncertainty  and  increased  the  unpredictability  of  the  future. 
Thinking  about  the  possibilities  and  probabilities  thus  becomes  relevant.  Scenario  analysis  and 
planning  offers  a  solution.  Scenarios  however,  are  not  projections,  predictions  or  preferences  but 
rather it provides a way of making sense of uncertainties and in addition it challenges our assumptions 
about what the future holds. 
Scenario  building  today  is  synonymous  with  thinking  broadly  and  more  freely  about  a  problem, 
enlarging  the  frames  of  reference  and  involving  different  worldviews,  rather  than  seeing  a  situation 
from  a  single  perspective.  Essentially  scenario  planning  interventions  have  been  most  useful  in 
supporting the construction of multiple frames of future states of possibilities. The process of scenario 
planning enhances the evaluation and integration of information and promotes contingency planning. 
Scenarios  are  also  important  for  risk  management.  As  risk  is  inherent  in  any  business  activity  the 
framework becomes a useful tool in risk assessment and management. Most of all a major risk in the 
current environment is the lack of preparedness for how the environment might change and for the 
new challenges that may emerge. To attempt to predict these changes in any specific manner in this 
environment would be highly speculative. The risk management process therefore involves preparing 
for,  rather  than  attempting  to  predict  the  change.  This  would  promote  an  increased  level  of 
preparedness to cope with the inevitable changes. 
Scenarios  also  help  to  connect  strategies  and  action  plans  to  our  visions.  Using  scenarios  will 
essentially  widen  our  perspectives,  increase  our  understanding  of  the  issues  and  developments.  It 
also allows us to see opportunities that we may otherwise miss. New developments emerging would 
be seen from different angles and perspectives. The framework thus promotes a greater awareness 
and  appreciation  of  the  wider  range  of  issues  and  will  allow  the  potential  to  see  things  earlier  and 
thereby  respond  to  them  more  promptly.  Thus,  embedding  scenario  analysis  and  planning  in  our 
organizational  activities  is  aimed  at  enhancing  the  potential  for  the  organization  to  successfully 
maximize its position in a rapidly changing and highly uncertain environment.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This seminar is part of ICLIF's skills building and knowledge sharing initiatives. Our ultimate aim is to 
create a critical mass of high calibre leaders who can bring their organizations from good to great.  
Dr.  Robert  Bood  and  Mr.  Ronald  Bradfield,  the  two  domain  experts  who  have  been  conducting 
Scenario  Thinking  and  Planning  Programme  for  ICLIF,  will  shed  more  light  on  these  areas  in  the 
course  of  the  seminar.  We  hope  you  will  benefit  from  the  session,  I  wish  you  a  productive  and 
successful seminar.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 93/2006 
 1
