Y V Reddy: Dynamics of balance of payments in India 
Text of the First Diamond Jubilee Lecture delivered by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank 
of  India,  at  the  Inauguration  of  the  Diamond  Jubilee  Celebrations  of  the  Department  of  Commerce, 
Osmania University, Hyderabad, 16 December 2006. 
 Vice-Chancellor Professor Siddiqi, Prof. J. Satyanarayana, Dr. J. Rameshwar Rao, Prof. Purushotham 
Rao, Prof. Ali Khan, faculty members and distinguished friends,  
I am honoured by the kind invitation of the Vice-Chancellor to me to be the Chief Guest and to deliver 
the first Diamond Jubilee lecture of the Department of Commerce, Osmania University. I specifically 
owe a deep debt of gratitude to Osmania University and I have also been proud to acknowledge it. 
In August 1960, Prof. V. V. Ramanadham consented to be my guide for Ph.D. after a grueling test of 
an essay on competition, thus making the beginning of my association with the University. I joined the 
University as a full-time research scholar and continued with the research work. I was initiated in to the 
intricacies and joy of research in applied economics by the faculty of the Department of Commerce, 
specially  through  the  Weekly  Seminars  in  Applied  Economics.  My  first  seminar  participation  was  in 
February 1962 on monopoly power in India. In these seminars, the participants used to include the 
distinguished  civil  servants,  academicians,  businessmen,  etc.  It  also  included  Mr.  B.P.R.  Vithal,  a 
highly  respected  civil  servant  who  was,  at  that  time,  the  Registrar  of  the  University  and  has 
subsequently become my esteemed ‘Guru’. The two earliest research articles published by me were in 
the quarterly journal "Applied Economics Papers"; one  of them as a co-author, with this publication 
having a globally distinguished editorial board. During this period in the University, I came into contact 
with eminent persons like Dr. I.G. Patel, later Governor, Reserve Bank of India and Mr. S. S. Khera, 
Cabinet Secretary. Subsequently, since Prof. Ramanadham had by then left for the United Nations, I 
had  the  good  fortune  of  being  guided  by  Prof.  G.  Ram  Reddy  and  Prof.  J.  Satyanarayana,  which 
enabled me to complete my Ph.D.  
As some of you may know, I had a second spell in the Osmania University in the academic year 1985-
86  when  I  came  back  here  as  a  full  time  UGC  Visiting  Professor  in  the  Department  of  Business 
Management, on deputation from the Government of Andhra Pradesh, where I was a Secretary to the 
Government. In fact, Prof. Raghuram had then commented that my spirit had been hovering around 
here and that I had never left the University. This stint provided me a break to sit back, contemplate 
and review my  understanding of  the Indian  economy.  It  is  this campus, which  actually  gave  me  an 
inspiration to revisit the relative roles of the State and market in India. This permeated not only my 
subsequent academic work in the Administrative Staff College of India as well as the London School of 
Economics, but also my participation in the exciting adventure of economic reforms, particularly the 
external  sector  reforms  since  1991.  In  the  15  years  of  reforms,  we  have  moved  away  from  crisis 
management in the external sector to a confident conduct of public policy. It is, therefore, useful to 
review  our experience  in this regard  particularly since commerce  is now  a  lot  more  globalised  than 
ever before and is likely to become even more internationalised in future. 
I intend presenting before you the dynamics of balance of payment in India since independence and 
will  conclude  with  a  few  remarks  on  the  way  forward.  Normally,  I  do  not  take  recourse  to  detailed 
tables, charts, etc., but in this case, I will be using several tables. I am doing it as a tribute to Prof. 
Ramanadham  who  always  insisted  that  there  should  not  be  a  single  superfluous  word  and  every 
sentence  should  emanate  from  solid  data  presented  with  specific  objectives,  scope,  limits  and 
methodology. In a way, therefore, my address today is dedicated to Prof. Ramanadham.  
At the time of independence, higher imports and capital outflows, led by partition, resulted in significant 
deficit in the balance of payments necessitating running down of the accumulated sterling balances. 
As  the  country  embarked  upon  the  planned  development  in  the  fifties,  rapid  industrialisation  of  the 
country  through  development  of  basic  and  heavy  industries  guided  the  industrial  and  trade  policies 
during  the  First  (1951-56)  and  the  Second  (1956-61)  Five-Year  Plans.  'Import  substitution'  was 
recognised as the appropriate strategy for rapid industrialisation.  
Export  pessimism  permeated  the  policy  stance  throughout  the  early  decades  of  our  Planning.  This 
thinking was based on the four premises, which were considered appropriate at that time. First, it was 
believed that only after industrialisation had proceeded some way that increased production would be 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 1
reflected  in  larger  export  earnings.  Secondly,  it  was  argued  that  given  the  large  domestic  market, 
exports need not be an engine of growth. Thirdly, growth in external demand for India's products was 
likely  to  be  inelastic  because  of  the  traditional  nature  of  our  exports.  Finally,  there  was  what  was 
known as the Prebisch-Singer argument that primary commodity exports face a secular deterioration 
in the terms of trade. Accordingly, exports were regarded as a residual, a vent-for-surplus on those 
occasions when such surpluses were available. 
The  inward  looking  industrialisation  strategy  during  the  first  three  Plans  resulted  in  higher  rate  of 
industrial growth. However, the signs of strain in the balance of payments were clearly visible in the 
Second  Plan  (see  Table  1  attached  for  trends  in  India's  current  account).  As  the  import  demand 
surged on account of development of heavy industries, current account deficit (CAD) in the Second 
Plan surged to 2.3 per cent of GDP. The difficulties in financing fast growing imports with stagnant 
exports put considerable strain on reserves as import cover of reserves (or foreign currency assets) 
plunged to barely two months’ by the terminal year of the Second Plan. In the Third Plan, improved 
export  performance  and  slowdown  in  import  demand  led  to  some  improvement  in  CAD  and  at  the 
same time the financing requirements were met through stepping up of official assistance.  
The Third Plan reflected the first signs of rethinking in the policy strategy by dedicating itself to ‘self 
sustaining growth’, which required ‘domestic saving to progressively meet the demand of investment 
and for the balance of payment gap to be bridged over’. While it envisaged that normal capital flows 
will  continue,  it  set  out  the  early  indications  of  the  concept  of  self  reliance  by  foreseeing  a  steady 
reduction in the reliance on special foreign aid programmes and dispensing with them after a period of 
time. A more liberal view of self reliance evolved over the Third Plan with a shift in stress from 'import 
substitution' to policy emphasis on 'efficient substitution of imports'. However, in reality, until the end of 
the 1970s, exports were primarily regarded as a source of foreign exchange rather than an efficient 
means  of  resource  allocation.  Though  the  devaluation  of  1966  brought  to  the  fore  the  problems 
associated with the overvalued exchange rate, it did not bring immediate desired improvement in the 
balance of payments position. In fact, CAD-GDP ratio widened to 2.0 per cent during the Annual Plans 
(1966-69).  
Unlike the export pessimism of the earlier Plans, the Fourth Plan (1969-74) visualised an aggressive 
approach  to  export  growth  for  achieving  self  reliance.  As  a  consequence,  trade  policy  became  the 
primary instrument for achieving a more dynamic concept of self reliance than what was prevalent in 
the earlier decades. However, it was in the Fifth Plan (1974-79) that self reliance was recognised as 
an  explicit  objective.  In  the  Fifth  Plan,  invisibles  surfaced  as  an  important  element  of  the  current 
account with policy attention on tourism and shipping. Discovering the remittances from Indian workers 
as a new source of meeting the growing financing needs, the period witnessed new confidence in the 
external sector and prepared the ground work for take off to the exchange rate regime based on a 
basket arrangement initiated since 1975. The fact remains that the phase till the 1970s represented 
the  era  of  the  dominance  of  external  assistance  as  a  financing  instrument  in  balance  of  payments. 
(See Table 2 for net capital inflows to India). 
The  second  oil  price  shock  was  the  precursor  of  another  phase  of  strain  on  India's  balance  of 
payments.  However,  emergence  of  rising  invisible  surplus  in  India's  balance  of  payments  helped 
neutralise the widening trade deficit. Notwithstanding this, the CAD averaged 1.5 per cent of the GDP 
in  the  Sixth  Plan.  Against  the  backdrop  of  second  oil  shock,  the  decade  of  the  1980s  brought  the 
balance  of  payments  position  to  the  forefront  of  the  macroeconomic  management.  The  Sixth  Plan 
(1980-85) emphasised the strengthening of the impulses of modernisation for the achievement of both 
economic  and  technological  self  reliance.  The  Seventh  Plan  (1985-90)  noted  the  conditions  under 
which  the  concept  of  self-reliance  was  defined  earlier,  particularly  in  the  preceding  Plan.  It 
conceptualised self-reliance not merely in terms of reduced dependence on aid but also in terms of 
building up domestic capabilities and reducing import dependence in strategic materials. Achievement 
of technological competence through liberal imports of technology was also envisaged. Alongside, the 
winds of change were added by the recommendations of a number of committees set up during the 
late 1970s and the 1980s.  
Some critical developments in India's balance of payments gathered momentum in the second half of 
the 1980s (i.e., Seventh Plan, 1985-90) that made the management of India's balance of payments the 
most  challenging  task.  The  Plan  targeted  to  achieve  a  high  growth  rate  and  recognised  that  the 
management of balance of payments was critically dependent on a sizeable improvement in earnings 
from  exports  and  from  invisibles.  It  conceptualised  self  reliance  not  merely  in  terms  of  reduced 
dependence  on  aid  but  also  in  terms  of  building  up  domestic  capabilities  and  reducing  import 
dependence in strategic materials. However, several developments that put severe pressure on the 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2006
balance  of  payments  position  during  the  Plan  need  attention.  First,  the  CAD  assumed  a  structural 
character in the 1980s. With underlying expansion in economic activities, exports and imports grew in 
tandem, keeping the trade deficit at a high level. The invisible balance also deteriorated sharply due to 
stagnation  in  worker's  remittances  and  rising  interest  burden  due  to  building  up  of  external  debt. 
Second, with flows of external assistance falling short of the financing need, recourse to costly sources 
of finance in the form of external commercial borrowings (ECB), especially short term debt and non-
resident deposits, became relatively large. Third, persistence of high fiscal deficit averaging 8.7 per 
cent of GDP (Centre and States) in the latter half of the 1980s, which could be only partly financed by 
the  private  sector  surplus,  thus,  became  a  cause  of  deteriorating  CAD.  Fourth,  higher  reliance  on 
monetary financing of deficits also led to rise in inflation to double digit in the early 1990s, adversely 
affecting  the  relative  price  competitiveness  of  India's  exports.  Some  possible  misalignment  of 
exchange rate, thus, resulted in loss of export competitiveness of exports and bias towards imports.  
The rising financing requirements described above required not only higher recourse to external debt 
but also draw down of reserves, which declined to US $ 4 billion by end-March 1990 from US $ 7.4 
billion at end-March 1980. (See Table 3 for India's outstanding foreign exchange reserve position; and 
Tables 4 and 5 for components of external debt and India's external debt indicators, respectively). 
The  weaknesses  in  the  Indian  economy  were  exposed  by  the  Gulf  crisis  of  1990  and  ensuing 
developments. The current account deficit rose to 3.1 per cent of GDP in 1990-91. Around the same 
time,  credit  rating  of  the  country  was  lowered,  restricting  the  country’s  access  to  commercial 
borrowings and unwillingness on the part of normal banking channels to provide renewal of short-term 
credit  to  Indian  banks  abroad.  As  reserves  kept  on  falling  on  expectations  of  an  impending 
depreciation of Rupee, there was a temporary loss of confidence leading to a flight of Non Resident 
Indian (NRI) deposits.  
The severity of the balance of payments crisis in the early 1990s could be gauged from the fact that 
India’s  foreign  currency  assets  depleted  rapidly  from  US  $  3.1  billion  in  August  1990  to  US  $  975 
million  on  July  12,  1991.  I  must  admit  that  I  entered  the  policy  circuit  in  Ministry  of  Finance, 
Government of India during this period. As a result of the crisis, a conscious decision was taken to 
honour all debt obligations without seeking any rescheduling and several steps were taken to tide over 
the  crisis.  The  steps  undertaken  towards  this  objective  included,  among  others,  pledging  our  gold 
reserves, tightening of non-essential imports, accessing credit from the IMF and other multilateral and 
bilateral donors.  
After the Gulf crisis in 1991, the broad framework for reforms in the external sector was laid out in the 
Report  of  the  High  Level  Committee  on  Balance  of  Payments,  popularly  known  as  Rangarajan 
Committee, as it was chaired by Dr. C. Rangarajan, former Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and 
currently  Chairman  of  the  Economic  Advisory  Council  to  the  Prime  Minister.  After  downward 
adjustment  of  the  exchange  rate  in  July  1991,  following  the  recommendations  of  this  Committee  to 
move  towards  the  market-determined  exchange  rate,  we  adopted  the  Liberalised  Exchange  Rate 
Management  System  (LERMS)  in  March  1992  involving  dual  exchange  rate  system  in  the  interim 
period.  The  LERMS  was  essentially  a  transitional  mechanism  and  a  downward  adjustment  in  the 
official exchange rate took place in early December 1992 and ultimate convergence of the dual rates 
was made effective from March 1, 1993, leading to the introduction of a market-determined exchange 
rate regime. (See Table 6 for Movements of Indian rupee from 1993-94 to 2005-06). The unification of 
the exchange rate of the Indian rupee was an important step towards current account convertibility, 
which was finally achieved in August 1994 by accepting Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the 
IMF.  Capital  account  liberalisation  started  as  a  part  of  wide-ranging  reforms  beginning  in  the  early 
1990s.  The  Rangarajan  Committee  recommended,  inter  alia,  liberalisation  of  current  account 
transactions  leading  to  current  account  convertibility;  need  to  contain  current  account  deficit  within 
limits; compositional shift in capital flows away from debt to non-debt creating flows; strict regulation of 
external  commercial  borrowings,  especially  short-term  debt;  discouraging  volatile  elements  of  flows 
from non-resident Indians; gradual liberalisation of outflows; and disintermediation of Government in 
the flow of external assistance.  
A  credible  macroeconomic,  structural  and  stabilisation  programme  encompassing  trade,  industry, 
foreign investment, exchange rate, public finance and the financial sector was put in place creating an 
environment  conducive  for  the  expansion  of  trade  and  investment.  It  was  recognised  that  trade 
policies,  exchange  rate  policies  and  industrial  policies  should  form  part  of  an  integrated  policy 
framework  if  the  aim  was  to  improve  the  overall  productivity,  competitiveness  and  efficiency  of  the 
economic system, in general, and the external sector, in particular.  
BIS Review 126/2006 
 3
With the onset of structural reforms in 1991-92, accompanied initially by severe import compression 
measures and determined efforts to encourage repatriation of capital, there was a turnaround in the 
second half of 1991-92. Over the next two years (1993-95), mainly due to foreign investment flows, 
robust  export  growth  and  better  invisible  performance,  the  balance  of  payments  situation  turned 
comfortable and reserves surged by US $ 14 billion. A combination of prudent and unique policies for 
stabilisation and structural change ensured that the crisis did not translate into generalised financial 
instability. In the 1990s, the lessons drawn from managing the crisis led to external sector policies that 
emphasised the competitiveness of exports of both goods and services, a realistic and market-based 
exchange  rate  regime,  external  debt  consolidation  and  a  policy  preference  for  non-debt  creating 
capital flows. These policies ensured that the current account deficit remained around one per cent of 
gross domestic product (GDP) and was comfortably financed even as the degree of openness of the 
economy rose significantly relative to the preceding decades and capital flows began to dominate the 
balance of payments.  
Since the mid-1990s, the management of the capital account with emphasis on risk averseness has 
assumed importance in the overall framework of macro economic decision making processes. While 
the capital account has to continue to perform its conventional role of meeting the economy’s external 
financing  needs,  the  massive  movement  of  capital  through  globally  integrated  financial  markets 
imposes new constraints on the content and goals of policy. The pace and sequencing of liberalisation 
of capital account in India has been gradual in response to domestic developments, especially in the 
monetary and financial sector, and the evolving international financial architecture. 
In recent years the capital account has been dominated by flows in the form of portfolio investments 
including GDR issues, foreign direct investments and to a lesser extent, commercial borrowings and 
non-resident  deposits,  while  traditionally,  external  aid  was  the  only  major  component  of  the  capital 
account.  The  compositional  shifts  in  the  capital  account  have  been  consistent  with  the  policy 
framework, imparting stability to the balance of payments.  
In the recent past, there has been significant liberalisation on the outflows on account of individuals, 
corporates  and  mutual  funds  recently,  consequent  upon,  among  other  things,  comfortable  level  of 
foreign  exchange  reserves  and  greater  two  way  movement  in  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee.  This  is 
reflected  in  the  increasing  global  operations  of  Indian  corporates  in  search  of  global  synergies  and 
domain knowledge. Transfer of technology and skill, sharing of results of R&D, access to wider global 
markets,  promotion  of  brand  image,  generation  of  employment  and  utilisation  of  raw  materials 
available in India and in the host country are other significant benefits arising out of such overseas 
investments.  
With significant opening up of the capital account, particularly on inflows, there were sustained foreign 
capital  inflows  since  1993-94.  The  net  foreign  assets  of  the  Reserve  Bank  have  also  increased 
warranting open market operations involving sale of Government of India securities from the Reserve 
Bank’s  portfolio  and  repo  transactions  -  in  order  to  offset  the  liquidity  created  by  the  purchases  of 
foreign  currency  from  the  market;  though  use  of  cash  reserve  ratio  is  not  uncommon.  A  Market 
Stabilisation  Scheme  (MSS)  was  introduced  in  April  2004  wherein  Government  of  India  dated 
securities/Treasury  Bills  are  issued  to  absorb  liquidity.  Proceeds  of  the  MSS  are  immobilised  in  a 
separate identifiable cash account maintained and operated by the Reserve Bank, which is used only 
for redemption and/or buyback of MSS securities.  
Importance of retaining external competitiveness and stability: the way forward 
In the present milieu, what are the issues that acquire considerable importance from the perspective of 
continued strengths in balance of payments?  
First, the focus of external sector policy will have to continue to be on maintaining competitiveness in 
terms of expansion of our trade in goods and services on a sustained basis. At the aggregate level, 
competitiveness  can  be  assessed  in  terms  of  trade-GDP  ratio,  export  growth  of  both  goods  and 
services, and their price competitiveness. Improvements in infrastructure assume critical importance 
for  maintaining  and  improving  our  competitiveness.  We  can  no  longer  view  external  sector 
competitiveness in isolation from domestic economy.  
Second, the realised product competitiveness is embedded in the shifts in the commodity composition 
of  India's  trade.  India’s  export  base  (i.e.,  the  commodity  and  country  composition)  is  far  more 
diversified now than it used to be in the early 1990s. Rising import intensity of exports is another sign 
of Indian industry bracing up to higher level of competition. The preponderance of imports of capital 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2006
goods  in  import  basket  of  India  points  to  industrial  capacity  expansion  with  emphasis  on  quality  of 
products  for  domestic  consumption  as  well  as  exports.  The  world  is  moving  forward  very  fast  and 
hence productivity, increases in India have to equal and exceed that of the best producer in the world. 
The  benchmark  for  our  competitiveness  in  future  is  not  our  past  but  the  emerging  best  in  the  field 
globally. 
Third, progressive reductions in peak tariff rates on imports have provided Indian industry access to 
new  technology  and  inputs.  The  positive  developments  in  the  external  sector  enable  a  further 
rationalisation of tariffs with a view moving to a single, uniform rate on imports and further simplifying 
procedures in line with best global practices. The current external environment, including the level of 
the foreign exchange reserves, enables such a move to be made with minimal downside risks.  
Fourth,  in  the  current  international  context,  movements  in  national  current  account  balances  are 
increasingly  being  recognised  as  manifestations  of  the  global  imbalances.  The  empirical  evidence 
indicates  that  even  current  account  deficits,  which  appear  optimising  from  an  inter-temporal 
perspective or are on account of private sector imbalances, run the risk of sharp reversals. Hence, the 
need to keep current account deficits within manageable limits – an approach followed by India in its 
external  sector  management  since  the  early  1990s.  In  this  regard,  It  is  necessary  to  recognise  the 
significance  of  approach  to  the  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  'towards  faster  and  more  inclusive  growth' 
adopted by the National Development Council last week (9th December, 2006). It is gratifying to note 
that the average CAD-GDP ratio indicated is 2.8 per cent for the target growth rate of 9 per cent, thus 
ensuring continued comfortable level of current account deficit, as we move forward. 
Fifth,  the  current  account  deficit  being  the  mirror  image  of  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the  economy 
should truly reflect the interplay of productive activities and the domestic absorption. Looking at the 
current  account  deficits  from  the  angle  of  macroeconomic  management,  one should really view  the 
current  account,  which,  represents  the  demand  and  supply  of  goods  and  services  and  reflect  the 
domestic  fundamentals  of  growth  and  employment.  Keeping  these  issues  in  mind,  current  account 
deficit (CAD) has to be viewed in two ways: (i) a conventional measure including all current account 
flows, and (ii) an adjusted measure of CAD, where workers' remittances are excluded from the current 
account as these represent broadly the exogenous component not driven essentially by the current 
pace  of  domestic  activities  and  employment.  The  current  account  deficit,  in  a  conventional  sense, 
remained at a moderate level during last three Plans. However, an adjusted measure of CAD indicates 
that rapid expansion in domestic economic activities in the recent years has been reflected in higher 
absorption through external sector. In this light, the indicative CAD over the eleventh Five-Year Plan 
reflects significantly higher absorptive capacity than what the CAD to GDP ratios indicate. (See Table 
7 for adjusted measure of current account balance) 
Sixth, the policies for FDI are critical since relative to portfolio flows they are less volatile. While the 
emphasis  is  on  dismantling  of  regulatory  entry  barriers,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  they  are  not 
portfolio  flows  in  the  garb  of  FDI.  It  must  be  recognised  that  overall  investment  climate  must  be 
improved  so  that  both  domestic  and  foreign  investors  are  attracted.  In  the  final  analysis,  well  over 
ninety  per  cent  of  our  investment  has  to  be  funded  by  domestic  saving.  Hence,  generalised 
improvements  in  investment  climate  are  crucial  and  FDI  flows  will  also  be  enabled  by  such  an 
environment. Overall, consistency in legal framework within the country and in line with international 
standards modified to suit our needs, and accompanying State level reforms would be useful in this 
regard. Overall, flexibilities are essential for supply and demand responses to price signals, which are 
critical for improving investment climate and more generally, for an open economy that best serves the 
national interest.  
Finally,  the  gross  volume  of  capital  account  transactions  has  been  rising  at  a  rapid  pace,  with  bi-
directional flows. Capital flows are managed from the viewpoint of avoiding adverse impact on primary 
liquidity  growth  and  inflationary  pressures.  Capital  flows  are  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  supply 
response  of  the  economy  and  vulnerabilities  or  potential  for  shocks.  A  key  issue  in  managing  the 
capital account is credibility and consistency in macroeconomic policies and the building up of safety 
nets in a gradually diminishing manner to provide comfort to the markets during the period of transition 
from an emerging market to an evolved market. This also underscores the importance of continuing 
prudential regulations over financial intermediaries in respect of their foreign exchange exposures and 
transactions, which are quite distinct from capital controls.  
Let me conclude by thanking you all for giving me this opportunity and wishing the Diamond Jubilee 
Celebrations all the best.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 126/2006 
 5
 6 
   BIS Review 126/2006
    BIS Review 126/2006 
 7
  8 
 BIS Review 126/2006
