Jean-Claude Trichet: The role of money – money and monetary policy in the 
21st century (panel discussion) 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the panel intervention 
at the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference “The role of money: money and monetary policy in the 
twenty-first century”, Frankfurt am Main, 10 November 2006. 
 Your first question was whether monetary analysis has helped us to anchor inflation expectations in 
the euro area. As I have stressed on previous occasions,1 I am convinced that a thorough monitoring 
of  monetary developments  is  important  for  the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  On  the  empirical 
side, there is ample evidence that there is a strong long-run link between money growth and inflation. 
This has recently been re-emphasised in the academic literature.2 On the theoretical side, Professor 
Woodford  very  eloquently  told  us  yesterday3  that  money  does  not  play  an  important  role  in  the 
conduct of monetary policy in standard modern-style macroeconomic models. And I have particularly 
appreciated his elegant and nuanced exposition of the present intellectual debate. I have noted also 
that Professor Christiano has pointed out in his convincing presentation that, when such models are 
extended in a realistic way, also good theoretical arguments in support of a clear commitment to take 
monetary  developments  into  account  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  emerge.  This  is  because  it 
directly helps to stabilise long-term inflation expectations, and as Lucas also pointed out yesterday, 
because it can help to mitigate the effects of boom-bust cycles in asset markets.4 In fact, the ability of 
monetary developments to indicate imbalances in the financial system and the implied potential risks 
to  long-run  price  stability  has  recently  been  stressed  in  particular  by  the  BIS5  and  is  confirmed  by 
recent research at the ECB.6
The money pillar of our monetary policy strategy constitutes a visible commitment to take the long-run 
link between monetary developments and inflation into account in monetary policy decisions. From my 
experience I can tell you that this has indeed played an important role in our success in anchoring 
inflation expectations in the euro area.  
At the time of the transition to EMU, giving money an important role in our strategy ensured continuity 
with the most credible central banks joining the Eurosystem. I am convinced that the monetary pillar 
was  crucial  to  stabilising  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  at  the  low  level  prevailing  in  the 
countries with the most stable currencies at that time. Given the historical dimension of the launch of 
the euro and the great number of watchers and academics, not to speak of market participants, who 
were very sceptical, to say the least, about EMU, it is surprising to me that the successful transition to 
the euro has received so little attention from academic researchers.  
Stressing the importance of the monetary pillar at the time of the introduction of the euro must not be 
interpreted as suggesting that, now that the ECB has matured, we do not need it any more. In fact, in 
                                                      
1   See, for example, Trichet (2005a,b) 
2   See, for example, Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2006), Kugler and Kaufmann (2005) and Hofmann (2006). 
3   See Woodford (2006). 
4   Christiano and Rostagno (2001) present a theoretical framework showing that monitoring monetary dynamics can help to 
minimise the possibility that inflation expectations might settle on a point that is inconsistent with the central bank’s inflation 
objective.  In  this  context,  a  central  bank  commitment  to  systematically  monitor  monetary  indicators  and  factor  them  into 
policy would act as an insurance device which prevents instability from arising in the first place. The interesting feature of 
this commitment is that, in equilibrium, such a central bank would not necessarily be observed to react to unstable dynamics 
in monetary aggregates, as these would never materialise in the first place. However, such a favourable outcome would 
presuppose,  rather  than  disprove,  the  existence  of  the  strategic  commitment  to  act  forcefully  in  the  event  of  abnormal 
developments  in  monetary  indicators.  Christiano,  Motto  and  Rostagno  (2006)  show  that  taking  into  account  monetary 
indicators in the  conduct of monetary policy can also alleviate the macroeconomic volatility  arising from overly optimistic 
expectations.  In  an  earlier  paper,  Christiano,  Motto  and  Rostagno  (2003)  also  showed  that  a  monetary  policy  rule  that 
assigned more weight to monetary developments would have substantially mitigated the severity of the Great Depression. 
5   See Borio and Lowe (2002, 2004), Borio, English and Filardo (2003), Borio (2005) and White (2006). 
6   See Detken and Smets (2004) and Adalid and Detken (2006). For a more detailed discussion see Trichet (2005c) and ECB 
(2005). 
BIS Review 110/2006 
 1
helping us to take good and timely policy decisions, the monetary analysis has played an important 
role in our success in fully preserving the achieved anchoring of inflation expectations over the last 
eight  years.7  This  in  turn  has  contributed  to  low  macroeconomic  volatility  in  the  euro  area.8  When 
inflation expectations are well anchored, temporary deviations of inflation from levels consistent with 
the  central  bank’s  inflation  objective  are  not  expected  to  be  long-lasting.  As  a  consequence, 
macroeconomic  shocks  will  have  a  smaller  impact  on  inflation  expectations  and  the  evolution  of 
inflation  over  time  will  be  less  persistent,  with  the  result  that  inflation  and  economic  activity  will  be 
more stable.  
It is certainly true that other central banks which put less emphasis on monetary analysis have also 
achieved  low  and  stable  inflation  expectations  and  low  macroeconomic  volatility.  However,  it  is 
important to bear in mind that the uncertainty faced by the ECB has been much higher than that faced 
by  other  more  established  central  banks.  Our  success  in  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation 
expectations  in  a  rather  adverse  macroeconomic  environment  is  also  due  to  the  commitment  to  be 
continuously alert upon monetary trends built into our strategy by the money pillar.  
This brings me to the second question, on the criticism that our policy actions have not corresponded 
to the announced role of money in our strategy. I know that this objection is sometimes put forward by 
critical observers who argue that there is no direct correlation between our policy rate decisions and 
monetary developments. This kind of criticism does not discomfort me, because the relevance of the 
monetary pillar can anyway not be judged based on the simple bivariate correlation of policy rates with 
the  growth  rate  of  headline  M3  (or  any  other  single  monetary  indicator).  First,  such  a  simplistic 
approach cannot reflect the crucial role of cross-checking the information derived from the economic 
and the monetary analyses that is a key feature of our monetary policy strategy. Second, it overlooks 
the broad-based and by no means mechanical character of the ECB’s approach to monetary analysis, 
which Jürgen has also stressed yesterday.  
Allow  me  to  elaborate  on  the  second  point.  Monetary  data  are  contaminated  by  noise  at  higher 
frequencies blurring the signal from their low-frequency movements which provide information about 
medium to longer-run inflation trends. The ECB’s monetary analysis aims to extract this low-frequency 
signal by assessing a large range of monetary indicators based on statistical tools and judgement in 
real time. Since the signal extracted from the monetary analysis refers to the low frequency it will not 
change  much  from  month  to  month.  As  a  consequence,  it  will,  by  its  very  nature,  normally  not  be 
closely correlated with individual policy moves, but will rather influence the medium-term direction of 
policy rates. As Otmar has explained this morning,9 money can be seen as a kind of anchor for the 
longer-term direction of our monetary policy.  
As I mentioned before, the monetary analysis has played an important role in our success in anchoring 
inflation expectations and containing macroeconomic volatility in the euro area by helping us to take 
good and timely policy decisions. It is generally very difficult to disentangle the respective contribution 
of  the  two  pillars  of  our  strategy  to  monetary  policy  decisions.  Nevertheless,  let  me  give  you  three 
examples where I felt that the monetary analysis had a particularly decisive influence.10 The first goes 
back to the period from late 2002 up to June 2003. At that time, some commentators were concerned 
that  the  euro  area  might  be  heading  for  deflation  and  called  for  a  more  aggressive  loosening  of 
monetary  policy.  Our  decision  not  to  follow  these  calls  was  also  due  to  the  observation  that  the 
underlying monetary expansion was fairly sustained and therefore clearly ruled out any deflationary 
pressures  over  the  medium  term.  The  monetary  analysis  therefore  played  an  important  role  at  that 
                                                      
7   This is clearly indicated by the low level and low volatility of measures and indicators of long-term inflation expectations that 
are available from surveys and from capital markets. For instance, the average level of long-term inflation expectations for 
the euro area according to the long-term  Consensus forecasts was 1.85%,  which is in line with the ECB’s medium term 
inflation objective. The volatility (measured by the standard deviation) of the long-term Consensus inflation forecasts was 
below 0.1 percentage point and thus among the lowest of the group of the major economies. 
8   Since the start of EMU, the volatility (measured by the standard deviation) of annualised quarterly consumer price inflation in 
the  euro  area  was  0.85  percentage  point  and  the  volatility  of  annualised  quarterly  real  GDP  growth  was  around  1.5 
percentage points. For comparison, over the same period the volatility of inflation and real GDP growth in the United States 
was 1.3 and 2.1 percentage points respectively. 
9   See Issing (2006). 
10   For a more comprehensive account of the role of the internal monetary analysis for the direction of euro area policy rates 
see the narrative evidence presented at this conference by Fischer et al (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2006
time, preventing us from lowering interest rates more aggressively. With the benefit of hindsight, we 
know that this decision was right.  
My second example refers to the long period during which we maintained rates at the level of 2%, from 
July 2003 up to December 2005. A period, by the way, during which we had made no pre-commitment 
to maintain rates at this historically low level during a “considerable period of time”. On the contrary, 
the Governing Council had made it crystal clear that we could change rates at any time during 2004 
and  200511  and  the  markets  had  pretty  well  understood  that  posture.  My  understanding  of  our 
decision-making during this period was that it was sometimes a very close call as regards the balance 
of risks to price stability stemming from the economic analysis. We experienced two periods, around 
the turn of 2003/2004 and around mid 2005 – before the slight recovery of early 2004 was perceived 
and when it became clear that this start of recovery had aborted – where the balance of risks to price 
stability from the economic analysis was starting in our minds to slightly tilt on the downside. On behalf 
of the Governing Council I made clear during these two periods, in the questions and answers of the 
press conferences, that all our options were open, including a decrease of rates. If this option did not 
materialise, it was in my understanding because the monetary analysis was not only not confirming the 
downward  risks  to  price  stability  suggested  by  the  economic  analysis  but  was  tilting  in  the  other 
direction. We maintained rates at the level of 2% and again, with the benefit of hindsight, that decision 
seems to me clearly vindicated. 
My third example refers to the recent sequence of policy rate increases. In December 2005, when we 
first increased policy rates, many commentators judged our move premature against the background 
of a seemingly fragile economic recovery. In fact, at that time the signals coming from the economic 
analysis were not yet so strong. But the continued expansion of money and credit through the course 
of  2005  gave  an  intensifying  indication  of  increasing  risks  to  medium-  to  longer-term  price  stability 
which played fully their role in our decision to start increasing policy rates in late 2005. In retrospect, 
the  strength  of  the  economic  recovery  unfolding  in  the  course  of  2006  has  also  shown  that  our 
decision was well timed. Without our thorough monetary analysis, we could have been in danger of 
falling behind the curve.  
Your last question referred to the communication challenges related to monetary analysis. We have 
consistently communicated the results of our monetary analysis and any uncertainty surrounding it to 
the public. The conference paper by Fischer, Lenza, Pill and Reichlin helps in this respect. After all, a 
central bank that is not successful in explaining the principles guiding its monetary policy decisions will 
not be able to preserve its credibility. To me, the success of our policy and the high predictability of our 
policy  decisions12  suggest  that  we  have  probably  been  able  to  communicate  our  monetary  policy 
strategy and, within that strategy, the role of the monetary analysis in a reasonably efficient way. And 
this conference bears testimony to our will to continue being as transparent as possible. 
References 
Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2006), Money’s role in asset price booms, ECB Working Paper, forthcoming 
Assenmacher-Wesche, K. and S. Gerlach (2006), Understanding the link between money growth and 
inflation in the euro area, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 5683. 
Borio, C. (2005), Monetary and financial stability: so close and yet so far?, National Institute Economic 
Review No 192. 
Borio,  C.,  B.  English  and  A.  Filardo  (2003),  A  tale  of  two  perspectives:  old  or  new  challenges  for 
monetary policy?, BIS Working Paper No 127. 
Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus, BIS 
Working Paper No 114. 
Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2004), Securing sustainable price stability: should credit come back from the 
wilderness?, BIS Working Paper No 157. 
                                                      
11   See Trichet (2005d). 
12   The  evidence  suggests  that  since  the  start  of  EMU,  the  policy  moves  of  the  ECB  have  been  well  anticipated  by  money 
markets (ECB, 2006). 
BIS Review 110/2006 
 3
Christiano, L. and M. Rostagno (2001), Money growth monitoring and the Taylor rule, NBER Working 
Paper No. 8539. 
Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2003), The Great Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz 
hypothesis, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 35, 1119-1197.  
Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2006), Monetary policy and stock market boom-bust cycles, 
paper presented to this conference. 
Detken,  C.  and  F.  Smets  (2004),  Asset  price  booms  and  monetary  policy,  ECB  Working  Paper  No 
364. 
ECB (2005), Asset price bubbles and monetary policy, Monthly Bulletin, April 2005. 
ECB (2006), The predictability of the ECB’s monetary policy, Monthly Bulletin, January 2006. 
Fischer, B., M. Lenza, H. Pill and L. Reichlin (2006), Money and monetary policy: ECB 1999-2006, 
paper presented to this conference. 
Hofmann, B. (2006), Do monetary indicators (still) predict euro area inflation? Bundesbank Discussion 
Paper No. 19/2006. 
Issing,  O.  (2006),  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy:  why  did  we  choose  a  two-pillar  approach?, 
paper presented to this conference. 
Kugler,  P.  and  S.  Kaufmann  (2005),  Does  money  matter  for  inflation  in  the  euro  area? 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank Working Paper No. 103. 
Trichet, J.-C. (2005a), Monetary policy and private expectations, Zolotas lecture, Bank of Greece, 25 
February 2005, Athens. 
Trichet,  J.-C.  (2005b),  Remarks  on  the  European  financial  integration  and  on  the  management  of 
inflation expectations by the European Central Bank, speech given at the conference “The euro: one 
currency, one financial market” organised by the European Commission, 19 April 2005, New York. 
Trichet, J.-C. (2005c), Asset price bubbles and monetary policy, Mas lecture, 8 June 2005, Singapore. 
Trichet, 
Intervention 
at  the  Panel  Discussion  “Monetary  Policy  Strategies:  A  Central  Bank  Panel”,  at  the  Symposium 
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2005 
White, W. (2006), Is price stability enough?, BIS Working Paper No 205. 
Woodford, M. (2006), How important is money in the conduct of monetary policy?, paper presented to 
this conference. 
(2005d),  Monetary 
alertness, 
credible 
policy 
J.-C. 
and 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2006
