John Gieve: Pricing for perfection 
Speech by Sir John Gieve, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Bank of England, London, 
14 December 2006. 
 Many of you will have seen the new Financial Stability Report (FSR) that we published in July. Our aim 
in that Report was to set out more concisely and clearly than in previous years what we considered the 
main risks to the stability of the UK’s financial system. 
The bottom line was that the financial system looked pretty resilient to disturbances in the near-term, 
but there were some underlying, longer term, vulnerabilities lurking in the background. Some related to 
potential  mismatches  or  mis-pricing  in  international  financial  markets.  Others  to  extended  balance 
sheet positions at home and abroad. And some reflected structural dependencies across the financial 
system, for example, on the smooth functioning of financial infrastructure. Our view was that they were 
unlikely  to  cause  problems  in  the  near  future  but  there  was  a  non-negligible  risk  that  they  could 
crystallise rapidly and disruptively for the financial system. 
On past form we would be publishing the next Report this month but we have decided to change the 
publication  schedule.  Future  FSRs  will  appear  in  the  Spring  and  Autumn  rather  than  Summer  and 
Winter. So the 2007 editions are planned for late April and late October. 
But  in  case  four  months  is  too  long  to  wait,  I  want  to  use  my  comments  today  to  set  out  our 
assessment of prospects for financial stability as we near the end of 2006. 
Recent developments 
Our view remains that near-term risks to UK financial stability are low. 
That is mainly a reflection of the continuation of broadly benign macroeconomic conditions in the UK 
and globally A rebalancing in global sources of growth does appear to be under way - and we are 
watching developments in the US economy and movements in the US dollar closely – but overall the 
global economy remains strong. 
UK  financial  institutions  profitability  and  capital  levels  have  remained  robust,  providing  them  with  a 
buffer against future disturbances. 
Financial markets have also demonstrated resilience over the past six months. Markets were turbulent 
at  the  time  we  were  preparing  the  July  FSR.  It  was  unclear  whether  we  were  at  the  start  of  a 
significant correction. The subsequent rebound in asset prices, and declines in measures of volatility, 
showed that it was a pause not a sustained change in risk appetite. 
More recently, we have seen huge losses at the Amaranth hedge fund. These losses exceeded those 
of  LTCM,  yet  markets  facilitated  a  smooth  wind  down  in  positions.  That  is  reassuring  though  some 
questions remain about the capacity of markets to handle such a disturbance if the macroeconomic 
backdrop  and  the  balance  sheets  of  major  institutions  were  less  rosy.  The  incident  may  also  raise 
some questions about how effectively market forces are acting to restrain those taking outsized risk 
positions, something that I will return to in a moment. 
Taken together, these developments provide a strong baseline for financial stability. But the risks that 
we pointed to in July are still there. In particular, we pointed to the risk that financial firms concerned 
about losing market share in rapidly expanding markets might pay less attention than they should to 
their resilience to unexpected shocks. 
[Chart  1]  gives  our  assessment  of  developments  since  July.  It  shows  that  a  number  of  the 
vulnerabilities  have  edged  up  a  little  as  leveraged  buy-out  (LBO)  activity  and  commercial  property 
lending have grown and as the number of personal insolvencies has increased. 
On the other hand, the slowdown in the US economy and the beginning of a narrowing in its trade 
balance may  have  reduced  the  risks  on  that  side,  although we didn’t  judge  this  material  enough  to 
change our overall assessment. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 1
 We know  how  easy  and  how  fruitless it  can  be  to draw  up  long  lists  of  things  that  could go  wrong 
without paying attention to their likelihood. So we try to take a balanced view that recognises not just 
what could go wrong but also recognises changes that we think have a positive impact on financial 
stability. For example, I have been clear that, in the long run, the growth of derivative markets and the 
development of new players like hedge funds should help to price risks better and spread them more 
widely, and thus make the financial system more resilient. 
However,  there  is  no  denying  that  financial  markets  are  liable  to  overshoot.  And  it  is  particularly 
important to stay alive to this risk when new records are being set for leveraged bids, returns on equity 
and City bonuses. Over-optimism in the financial system can have costs not just for the consenting 
counterparties  but  more  broadly  across  the  economy.  By  talking  to  you  individually,  drawing  the 
threads together with our own analysis and feeding back a dispassionate but informed assessment of 
what your actions and plans add up to, we hope we can inform your decisions and thus help to head 
off instability. 
Low volatility 
One of the main vulnerabilities on our league table is low risk premia in financial markets – that is, the 
low level of compensation that investors are demanding to hold risk. In my remaining remarks I want to 
offer some observations on a closely related and interconnected topic: the low level of volatility in a 
number of asset classes. 
My colleague Paul Tucker has recently commented on low historic volatility. [Charts 2 to 4] show how 
the volatility of asset returns has come down for equities, bonds, and exchange rates to low levels by 
modern standards. One needs to go back to the Bretton Woods era to get volatility levels as low as at 
present. 
 2 
 BIS Review 124/2006
   BIS Review 124/2006 
 3
 Of  course  the  reduction  in  the  volatility  of  returns –  and  the  lower  compensation  for  future  volatility 
embedded in risk premia – is responding to some real changes in the world. You might break down 
sources  of  uncertainty  about  future  returns  into  three  components:  macroeconomic  risks,  financial 
risks and risks in the broader environment. 
Macroeconomic volatility has fallen considerably over the last decade in many economies [Chart 5]. In 
the  real  economy,  greater  flexibility  in  labour  and  product  markets,  especially  openness  to  foreign 
competition through trade and immigration, has enabled smoother adjustment to shocks. On the price 
side, central bank independence and inflation targeting have contributed to greater price stability. 
There is also greater depth and sophistication and fewer rigidities in financial markets. Innovation has 
created a variety of products enabling more and better risk transfer by financial market players and 
greater  choice  for  end-investors.  Greater  financial  market  flexibility  can  support  macroeconomic 
stability by keeping credit and liquidity available during periods of stress. 
But  risks  in  the  broader  environment  haven’t  gone  away.  Threats  from  ecological  or  biological 
disasters,  fraud,  political  conflict  and  terrorism  seem  as  high  as ever.  And  these are  risks  we  have 
identified. As ever there may be some significant “unknown unknowns”. 
 4 
 BIS Review 124/2006
So while there are some good reasons for the reduction in financial risk premia significant risks do 
remain. The question is how well are they priced? Are there any reasons for thinking that markets may 
be underpricing risk? I think there may be. 
Low risk premia and low volatility 
Sustained low economic and financial market volatility is bound to have implications for the level of 
compensation for risk that investors require in asset prices. 
In theory if assets become fundamentally less risky, then investors should receive a capital gain but 
should accept a lower future rate of return. If there have been signs of the capital gains, it is less clear 
that investors have revised down their expectations of rates of return on their portfolios. Indeed the 
pressure  is  to  go  beyond  performing  relatively  well  against  your  peers  and  to  produce  absolute 
returns. This has been fuelling a fierce search for yield and for ‘excess returns’ by asset managers 
who  have  to  respond  to  this  demand.  Delivering  on  such  a  commitment  in  a  world  of  low  volatility 
takes impressive stock picking skills; buying or selling mis-priced assets and spotting emerging trends 
before the rest of the market. 
Clearly  not  everyone  can  beat  the  market.  Some  asset  managers  will  be  able  to  do  so  for  a  while 
either  through  luck  or  good  judgement  and  their  challenge  is  to  keep  ahead  –  often  with  the  extra 
funds that their performance has attracted. Their competitors face added pressure to catch up. Both 
are bound to be tempted to take on greater risk to generate absolute returns. 
Of course this syndrome is widely recognised. Investment mandates and management remuneration 
are often measured against a risk-adjusted benchmark to avoid rewarding such activity. But it can take 
considerable  efforts  to  spot  such  behaviour.  The  proliferation  of  new  and  highly  complex  financial 
instruments is making it harder to assess the incidence of underlying risk. The assumptions underlying 
the valuation of positions in such instruments are often unclear. 
Many of these products have the effect of selling insurance against unlikely financial market events. In 
so  far  as  there  has  been  a  genuine  increase  in  the  stability  of  the  economy  and  financial  markets, 
selling volatility is less risky than it used to be. But it can be more risky than it appears. 
Our market contacts often cite the example of selling ‘out-of-the-money’ options as a popular strategy 
recently. Here the seller receives a steady stream of small payments today in return for paying up in 
the unlikely event that the price of an underlying instrument moves significantly from its current value. 
With sufficient leverage, a small payment stream can be turned into a tidy return. But as all insurers 
know, the key to long term return is to spread your risks widely or to avoid correlated risks. 
In  assessing  risk  in  financial  markets,  a  common  metric  is  correlation  of  positions  with  the  market 
return. But this is quite inappropriate in this case. The value of a ‘deeply-out-of-the-money’ option has 
relatively  low  correlation  with  movements  in  the  price  of  the  underlying  instrument  or  the  market 
generally.  So  a  simple  measure of  riskiness  based on  historical correlations will  mistakenly  show  a 
leveraged out-of-the-money option trade as providing a good risk/return trade-off. In the jargon, selling 
volatility protection can be one way to generate ‘beta disguised as alpha’. 
One would usually expect that any mispricing of risk here would be counteracted by market forces. 
Countervailing strategies – buying volatility - should be profitable in the long run. The problem is that it 
requires patience, persistence and deep pockets. Going ‘long’ volatility means being prepared to make 
regular small payments and hoping to be compensated by a large irregular payoff. In a world of short 
run return targets, it is not surprising to find this is unpopular. 
If  mispricing  of  this  sort  is  underway  it  would  show  up  in  higher  asset  prices  and  lower  implied 
volatilities across a range of markets. And implied volatilities are at or around historic lows in equity 
markets, bond markets, credit markets and foreign exchange markets [Chart 6-8] despite the market 
turbulence during May and June and recent rumblings on the dollar. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 5
   6 
 BIS Review 124/2006
Implications of low risk premia 
These  low  levels  of  implied  volatility  –  and  associated  low  level  of  risk  premia  –  can  have  real 
implications for the economy and the stability of the financial system. 
In the corporate sector, for example, low risk premia may be one factor that has supported the rapid 
growth in private equity backed LBOs [Chart 9]. Spreads on high yield corporate debt have narrowed 
sharply in recent years, to the point where there seems very little compensation for credit risk, and 
almost none for liquidity risk [Chart 10]. A combination of squeezed corporate credit spreads and low 
reference  risk-free  government  yields  has  resulted  in  the  lowest  nominal  cost  of  borrowing  for 
corporates since the 1950s.  
  In the July FSR we included a rough estimate that - other things equal - LBOs in 2004 and 2005 would 
raise  the  future  probability  of  corporate  default  by  20  basis  points.  Given  recent  activity  we  now 
estimate it will add around 40 basis points over coming years relative to the current average probability 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 7
of corporate default of about 2.0%. Given the funds already raised by private equity firms, this might 
be expected to increase further in 2007. 
Furthermore, there is anecdotal evidence that other corporates have increased leverage in defence – 
taking the view that it is imprudent to be ‘under-geared’ in an environment where private equity firms 
are flush with cash. Indeed, the CFO of one FTSE 250 company which geared up significantly to avoid 
being taken over remarked that “we have seen almost no drawbacks from being junk”. 
Another example of low implied volatilities and risk premia affecting risk taking occurs in cross border 
capital  flows.  In  this  case,  low  implied  volatilities  on  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  can  support 
cross-border carry trades because the yield pick up looks attractive when you can hedge the worst 
risks  quite  cheaply  [Chart  11].  The  continued  smooth  financing  of  global  imbalances  through  these 
carry-trades in turn leads to low volatility. But this can of course work in reverse. Foreign exchange 
volatility has jumped up since the US Thanksgiving Day holiday. If  this volatility were to persist the 
perceived risks in the carry trade would increase. 
 The  common  characteristic  of  these  examples  is  that  low  implied  volatilities  reduce  the  apparent 
riskiness of portfolios and can encourage investors to take on more risk. And if implied volatilities are 
not a good measure of future volatility, they will end up bearing more risk than they expected. 
Avoiding  this  pitfall  requires  diligent  risk  assessment  by  investors  and  other  counterparties.  That  is 
what is needed for market discipline to do its work. It requires both adequate disclosure of risk-relevant 
information  and  its  effective  use  in  investment  decisions.  In  the  case  of  the  hedge  fund  sector,  for 
example,  it  seems  likely  that  greater  institutional  investor  interest  will  continue  to  raise  the  bar  on 
disclosure  requirements,  particularly  for  those  generating  returns  using  complex  products  where 
traditional measures like value-at-risk (VaR) may fail to capture fully the underlying risks. 
Conclusions 
To conclude, our overall assessment remains benign. The financial sector is strongly capitalised and 
well  placed  to  handle  even  large  shocks  like  Amaranth.  The  rapid  pace  of  innovation  in  financial 
markets  also  promises  better  and  wider  distribution  of  risk  which  is  good  not  just  for  the  financial 
sector’s stability but should support more risk taking in the real economy. Greater investment could 
deliver stronger medium and long term growth. 
But there remain a number of sources of vulnerability in the world economy and in financial markets 
which firms need to bear in mind. 
Volatility  is  low,  and  as  time  passes  longer  memories  are  needed  to  remember  when  it  was  high. 
While there have certainly been improvements in macro performance in recent years, I do not know a 
central banker who is not surprised at the faith that markets appear to have in us to keep the great 
stability going. And the risks in the wider environment are as great as ever. 
8 
 BIS Review 124/2006
It is not clear to me that these risks are fully priced into the market. Market forces may not have been 
able to correct any excess optimism given the incentives and constraints of participants operating in a 
world with a good deal of opaqueness about risk taking. 
In closing, I would stress that I am not saying market participants should avoid risk. But I do think it is 
important that market participants recognise that risk has not gone away, and that there are limits in 
the ability of financial engineering to insulate the financial system in aggregate against risk. Given the 
rapid pace of innovation in financial markets and products and the low level of risk premia, investors 
may need to take particular care to understand the risks they are exposed to. More than in the past, 
they may need to ask some searching questions about how funds are being invested and how risks 
are being managed. One approach might be to put greater emphasis on stress test results as well as 
more conventional risk metrics. Failure to ask probing questions could prove costly for those directly 
involved – and, of greater concern, to others in the system – as and when the credit cycle turns. 
BIS Review 124/2006 
 9
