Rachel Lomax: Perspectives on current monetary policy 
Speech by Ms Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Cardiff Business Club, 
Cardiff, 27 November 2006. 
I am very grateful to Gareth Ramsay for his help in preparing this speech, and to a number of colleagues at the Bank of England 
for useful comments. 
 The decade to 2004 was one of the most remarkable in the UK’s economic history. For the first time in 
a  generation,  inflation  was  low  and  stable.  Output  grew  for  forty  straight  quarters,  and  the 
unemployment rate fell steadily to levels not seen since the mid seventies. By these high standards, 
the  economy’s  performance  over  the  past  couple  of  years  looks  slightly  more  mixed.  After  a  mild 
slowdown in the first part of 2005, output has been growing steadily at around its long-term average 
rate for the past year. The inflation rate has varied around the target. But unemployment has been 
rising for most of the past eighteen months. 
As always, there is more than one view about what may be going on. I want to start by setting current 
monetary policy preoccupations in a broader context, and highlighting some difficult issues. Was the 
UK  alone  in  experiencing  such  unusual  economic  stability  since  the  mid  1990s?  What  might  have 
caused it? Was it expected? Can we count on it continuing? And how should monetary policy makers 
deal with the exaggerated expectations that the stability of the past decade may have encouraged? I 
don’t pretend to offer definitive answers to any of these questions. But they are very relevant to the 
ways  that  different  members  of  the  MPC  think  about  the  current  situation,  and  approach  the 
challenges now facing monetary policy. 
The international context 
I’ll start by looking at the wider world. 
The UK was not alone in enjoying a decade of unusual stability. Across the industrialised world, output 
growth  and  inflation  were  less  volatile  than  in  the  70s  and  80s,  though  growth  was  disappointingly 
weak in Japan and Germany. The slowdowns that followed the East Asian crisis and the stock market 
crash were relatively mild and short-lived. Economists have named this period the Great Stability (or 
the Great Moderation, in the US) and contrasted it with the Great Inflation of the 1970s. And there has 
been a lively but inconclusive debate about how much of this better performance is due to good luck 
and how much to good policy. 
Over  the  past  couple  of  years  there  has  been  a  growing  view  among  central  bankers  and  some 
academics  that  a  substantial  part  of  the  ‘good  luck’  story  may  have  reflected  the  benign  effects  of 
globalisation. This realisation has dawned as it has become clear that globalisation is having pervasive 
effects  on  our  economies,  as  well  as  contributing  to  some  trends  which  are  not  so  immediately 
favourable. 
Globalisation,  in  the  present  context,  is  shorthand  for  the  increasing  integration  of  international 
markets for goods and services, capital and labour. As we all know from first hand experience, the 
world economy is being transformed by the lowering of all sorts of barriers to the free movement of 
people, money, knowledge, goods and services. These trends are, of course, as old as human history. 
But there have been periods, like the second half of the nineteenth century, when globalisation has 
proceeded rapidly and periods, like the first half of the twentieth century, when it has gone into retreat. 
The past fifteen years or so have been a period of major advance as a result of far-reaching political 
and regulatory changes as well as revolutions in technology and communications. 
The pace of change has been striking in several key areas. 
First,  international  capital  flows  have  grown  explosively,  as  financial  markets  have  become  more 
integrated. As a result, the value of the global stock of assets in cross-border ownership tripled over 
the ten years to 2004. As well as increasing the scope for mobilising savings and allocating capital 
across  different  markets,  the  development  of  deep  and  liquid  international  financial  markets  has 
opened up new possibilities for diversifying risks and smoothing the adjustment to unforeseen events. 
This should promote both economic stability as well as growth. 
BIS Review 116/2006 
 1
Second, the sheer scale and pace of economic development in China is without precedent. What is 
not new is its strong export orientation – this was the route taken by Japan and the East Asian Tiger 
economies. China is now a key part of both global and regional supply chains for the production of 
low-cost  manufactured  goods.  China  now  produces  80%  of  the  world’s  photocopiers,  50%  of  the 
world’s textiles and 50% of the world’s computers. These developments will tap the labour of hundreds 
of millions of people who were previously effectively outside the global market place. They are also 
triggering urbanisation – and infrastructure investment – on a scale, and at a rate, which makes our 
own Industrial Revolution look sedate, even puny. 
The Chinese Government expects 300 million people to migrate from the countryside to urban areas 
over the next 20 years. China had no motorways in 1988, now it has 41,000 kms, second only to the 
US. It is adding the equivalent of the UK’s total power generating capacity every year. Beijing alone 
plans to build 15 new metro lines by 2020, to create a network larger than the London Underground. 
No surprise, then, that China consumed 50% of the world’s cement last year. 
Third,  and  more  tentatively,  there  seems  to  have  been  an  increase  in  the  international  mobility  of 
labour.  This  is  the  area  where  the  continuing,  largely  political,  barriers  to  free  movement  are  most 
apparent,  and  where,  partly  in  consequence,  it  is  hardest  to  assemble  reliable  information. 
Nevertheless, many developed countries seem to have been experiencing increases in their long- and 
short-term immigrant workforces, both skilled and unskilled - notably the US, where the foreign-born 
work force is now around 15% of the total, and a number of Southern European countries. Italy and 
Spain both had increases in their foreign-born workforces of over a million in the five years to 2004. 
There have been smaller, but still sizeable, increases, in Germany, Sweden, Ireland, the Netherlands, 
and the UK.1
It  is  too  soon  to  assess  the  full  impact  of  these  developments  on  the  performance  of  industrial 
countries. A few obviously important effects have been identified but they may not turn out to be the 
most significant in the long term. 
Most  comment  has  focused  on  the  direct  effects  of  the  emergence  of  China  on  relative  prices, 
especially  the  price  of  manufactures  relative  to  other  goods  and  services.  The  emergence  of  an 
economic  superpower  with  abundant  supplies  of  labour  and  a  relatively  poor  natural  resource 
endowment has probably had several effects. First, it has pushed down on the price of manufactured 
goods  over  a  long  period  of  time.  Across  the  world’s  industrial  countries  the  real  price  of  goods 
(adjusted for general inflation), fell by over 10% between 1995 and 2005. Second, in the last couple of 
years it has helped to fuel a sharp surge in world prices for energy and other commodities. Between 
the beginning of 2004 and their peak in August of this year, world oil prices rose from $30 to $78 a 
barrel. There have been comparable increases in the prices of metals and other raw materials over the 
same period. 
Economists  have  also  speculated  that  globalisation  may  be  changing  wage-  and  price-setting 
behaviour in developed countries, by adding to the competitive pressures facing domestic producers 
and  wage  earners.  This  is  not  just  a  reflection  of  increased  competition  from  cheap  manufactured 
imports,  and  the  greater  availability  of  migrant  labour  to  ease  domestic  labour  shortages.  A  Welsh 
audience will need no reminding of the many ways in which both inward and outward foreign direct 
investment can affect domestic employment opportunities. Hard as it is to quantify, the net effect of 
these trends may have been to reduce the sensitivity of domestic inflation to changes in the margin of 
spare capacity in the economy. 
But while these effects go some way towards explaining why the global inflationary climate may have 
been relatively benign over much of the past decade, I think they fall short of providing a complete 
explanation for the strength and resilience of global output growth. For this we might look to the more 
elusive  influence  of  financial  integration,  and  the  added  impetus  to  global  growth  provided  by  the 
increasing weight of fast-emerging market economies, particularly in Asia. 
It  is  just  worth  pausing  on  the  remarkable  ease  with  which  the  world  economy  has  apparently 
absorbed the impact of sharply higher oil prices. World output expanded at its fastest rate for 30 years 
in 2004, and this year growth looks like being as strong again. One obvious explanation is that both 
high oil prices and the strength in the world economy have reflected the rapid pace of development in 
                                                      
1   Data from OECD’s International Migration Outlook 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2006
China, where growth has been around 10% a year since 2004, and which last year was responsible 
for nearly half of the growth in total world oil demand. So the two have helped to offset each other. 
But  the  recent  behaviour  of  oil  prices  has  also  reflected  supply-side  problems.  The  rapid  growth  in 
demand seems to have taken oil producers by surprise. The world is currently operating on a very thin 
margin of spare oil production capacity as a result of low investment in the 1990s. The result is that oil 
prices  have  also  been  volatile,  as  well  as  high,  moving  sharply  in  response  to  geopolitical  and 
weather-related news, as well as changing expectations about world demand and supply. In time, both 
supply and demand will respond to higher prices, but the lead times for new production capacity are 
very long – around ten years to develop a new field. 
High and volatile oil prices pose a grisly challenge for monetary policy makers. But so far there has 
been no surge in inflation across the world as there was following the oil price increases in the 1970s. 
True, headline inflation rose initially in many countries, especially the US, where it ticked up to nearly 
5%, before falling sharply to less than 1.5% when oil prices fell this autumn. But central banks have 
been on the alert for any signs that higher oil prices would feed into higher wages, and so trigger an 
inflationary  spiral.  And  so  far  wage  growth  has  remained  moderate  in  all  developed  countries, 
including the UK. 
Monetary policy 
Inflation has remained firmly under control despite a doubling in the price of oil. This, to my mind, is 
striking evidence of a sea change in policy since the 1970s. But how far was the Great Stability due to 
good  policy,  as  opposed  to  globalisation  or  plain  good  luck?  This  broader  question  is  probably 
unanswerable, but a couple of points are worth making. 
First, there is no doubt that, in the medium term, the actual inflation rate is determined by the Bank of 
England.  Our  decisions  about  interest  rates  –  the  price  of  money  –  determine  the  amount  of  total 
money spending in the economy. The rate of inflation reflects the difference between this spending 
and  what  the  economy  is  capable  of  producing  –  total  supply.  The  faster  money  spending  grows 
relative to supply, the higher inflation will be. In that sense low inflation reflects policy, not luck. 
But external conditions may make it more or less easy to keep inflation low and stable. If the Bank 
aims for a low but positive rate of inflation, and imported goods prices are falling, the prices of other 
goods  and  services  will  have  to  rise  faster  to  compensate.  So  for  example,  the  prices  of  imported 
goods and services fell by 13% between 1995 and 2004, while the prices of other consumer goods 
and services rose, on average, by around 20%. To produce this result, and keep overall inflation close 
to target (as it was), the Bank was probably able to keep interest rates lower than they might otherwise 
have been. 
That’s why people sometimes say that the falling world prices resulting from globalisation have acted 
as  ‘favourable  tailwinds’  for  central  banks  over  the  past  decade.  And  why,  over  the  last  couple  of 
years, there have been worries that high and volatile energy prices would provide ‘strong headwinds’. 
Second,  there  have  been  important  innovations  in  the  practice  of  monetary  policy  over  the  past 
decade. These have not been confined to the UK - there is an international traffic in good monetary 
policy  ideas,  as  in  almost  everything  else.  So  while  the  UK  was  a  pioneer  in  some  respects,  our 
current approach to policy is more fairly described as close to international best practice. There’s been 
a  widespread  move  to  give  central  banks  more  independence,  with  clear  objectives  and  a  strong 
commitment to transparency and accountability. In the UK, we adopted a target for inflation as long 
ago as 1992 and the whole framework for taking decisions about interest rates was overhauled after 
the 1997 election. 
I am sometimes asked how different British economic history would have been if we had adopted the 
present approach to monetary policy at various landmark dates – such as 1976 or 1979. This is a hard 
one. 
Tolstoy famously said that all happy families are alike, but unhappy families are each unhappy in their 
own way. It is rather the same with monetary policy. There are very many ways of getting it wrong – 
the UK has some experience here - but the hallmark of all good monetary policy is what Hans Dietrich 
Tietmeyer  (President  of  the  Bundesbank  in  the  1990s)  used  to  call  ‘the  three  Cs’:  credibility, 
consistency, and continuity. 
BIS Review 116/2006 
 3
My own view, for what it is worth, is that there has been a virtuous circle over the past 10-15 years 
when central banks have taken advantage of relatively benign global conditions to embed the three 
Cs, by successfully implementing better policy-making frameworks and establishing strong reputations 
for  competence  on  the  back  of  excellent  track  records.  The  Bank  of  England  would  have  faced  a 
tougher challenge in doing this in the economic circumstances of the 1980s, and certainly the 1970s – 
even if the political consensus had existed to support such an experiment (which it didn’t). Even the 
Bundesbank built up its formidable reputation during the German post war economic miracle. 
That said, I do not think there is any doubt that the new approach to monetary policy did represent a 
major  advance  on  what  went  before.  In  what  way?  Inflation  targeting,  the  UK’s  current  approach, 
broke with past attempts to run an independent monetary policy by offering commitment and clarity. 
For  the  first  time,  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of  England  committed  to  clear  objectives,  clear 
communications  and  clear  lines  of  accountability.  We  now  have  a  decision-taking  framework  which 
allows  monetary  policymakers  plenty  of  room  for  discretion,  while  forcing  them  to  provide  a  full 
explanation of their thinking. 
By hook or by crook, the fact is that central banks do now enjoy considerable credibility. They treasure 
that legacy, much like any blue chip company, and for many of the same reasons. Credibility, and the 
trust that flows from it, is worth a great deal in policy-making, as in business. If people believe that the 
Bank will act to keep inflation low and stable they will factor that in to their decisions. (They may have 
been doing this recently, in judging how to respond to higher oil prices.) If so, that in turn makes it 
easier for the Bank to keep inflation on track, and reduces the fluctuations in output that controlling 
inflation can involve. So it is not implausible to assign a significant role to better policy in explaining the 
Great Stability. 
But the extraordinary stability of the past decade may have given people an exaggerated idea of what 
to expect of monetary policy. While the Bank can deliver low inflation, we cannot reliably deliver rock 
steady growth in output and employment, still less falling unemployment. Whether or not that happens 
depends on events in the wider world – what economists like to call ‘shocks’ - and other economic 
policies,  including  taxes  and  regulations.  All  we  can  do  is  try  to  keep  demand  growing  in  line  with 
supply. 
And  in  fact,  most  economists  a  decade  ago  would  have  said  that  the  Great  Stability,  as  we  have 
experienced  it  in  the  UK,  represented  a  pretty  unlikely  set  of  outcomes.  The  then  Governor,  Eddie 
George, said he hoped that low inflation would contribute to a more stable economy but warned: ‘We 
cannot hope to achieve that with any great precision’2. 
The MPC’s formal remit from the Chancellor, originally drafted nearly a decade ago and still in force, 
seems to be predicated on a more turbulent world. It makes specific allowance for situations in which 
inflation might be thrown sharply off course. It reads:  
‘The  framework  is  based  on  the  recognition  that  the  actual  inflation  rate  will  on 
occasions depart from its target as a result of shocks and disturbances. Attempts to 
keep inflation at the inflation target in these circumstances may cause undesirable 
volatility  in  output.  But  if  inflation  moves  away  from  the  target  by  more  than  1 
percentage point in either direction I shall expect you to send an open letter to me 
setting out the reasons why inflation has moved away from target …and the period 
in which you expect inflation to return to target’ 
In  1998  Charlie  Bean,  now  (but  not  then)  the  Bank’s  chief  economist,  calculated  that  open  letters 
might  be  triggered  at  least  40%  of  the  time,  on  the  basis  of  past  experience3.  This  did  not  seem 
unreasonable  at  the  time.  But  after  114  monthly  decisions,  inflation  has  always  been  within  1 
percentage point of the target. And I take the fact that no Governor has yet sent an open letter as 
further evidence that there has indeed been an unexpected increase in stability. 
                                                      
2  Mais lecture, June 1997. 
3  
“The new UK monetary arrangements: a view from the literature”, Charles Bean, Economic Journal 1998. 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2006
Where are we now? 
Are we now entering choppier waters? The world economy continues to grow at an impressive rate, 
with few signs of sustained inflationary pressure. Globalisation continues apace. But it is not difficult to 
think of things that could go wrong, ranging from an outbreak of protectionism, to another sharp surge 
in oil prices in response to geopolitical events, to a sharp correction in housing markets, which in a 
number of countries are very richly valued. 
But mindful of the old Chinese proverb that ‘He who lives by the crystal ball will die from eating broken 
glass’ I will stick to interpreting what’s happening in the economy right now. I’ll focus on two issues: 
first, what’s happening to inflation? And second, why has unemployment risen? 
Over  the  past  couple  of  years,  the  headline  rate  of  inflation  has  been  pushed  about  by  sharp 
movements in energy prices. Back in the autumn of 2004, CPI inflation was closer to 1% than the 2% 
target. A year later it had risen to 2.5%. It then fell back below target until the spring of this year, when 
it moved back up to around its present level of just below 2.5%. 
The first spike in inflation above the target – in the autumn of 2005 - corresponds with the very sharp 
rise in petrol prices around the time of hurricane Katrina. The second upward movement corresponds 
with  the  big  jump  in  domestic  gas  and  electricity  prices  this  spring.  This  autumn  petrol  prices  have 
fallen back sharply from their August peak. But CPI inflation has scarcely changed. Why? The simplest 
explanation is that the recorded inflation rate is still being boosted by high utility prices, and the effect 
of  lower  petrol  prices  has  been  partly  offset  by  high  seasonal  food  prices  and  the  introduction  of 
university tuition fees. Any broader-based pick up in inflation has been relatively small. 
Of course, life is not quite that simple. The prices of individual goods and services go up and down all 
the  time.  And  large  individual  price  changes  -  whether  or  not  you  take  them  out  of  your  preferred 
measure of inflation, as some central banks do – always add to the difficulties of interpretation. The 
MPC  needs  to  focus  on  persistent  price  movements.  It  has  to  look  through  short-run  volatility  and 
judge how fast the average price level is likely to rise over the next few years. This is the time horizon 
which is relevant for policy, since changes in interest rates take a year or two to have their effect. The 
current rate of inflation says rather little about where inflation is likely to go. We need to judge, as best 
we can, the changing balance of supply and demand in the economy – inflationary pressure. 
But why has unemployment been rising? One possibility is that the labour market is still feeling the 
effects of the period of below-trend growth in late 2004 and 2005. We know that employers tended to 
hold  on  to  people  then  rather  than  letting  them  go,  probably  because  they  expected  –  rightly  as  it 
turned out – that the slowdown would be shallow and short-lived. As demand picked up, they were 
able to work their existing staff harder again, rather than hiring new people straight away. 
But meanwhile the potential workforce – the number of people in work or who say they would like to 
work - has been growing at its fastest rate in twenty years. This reflects a number of developments. 
First, the influx of workers from abroad, including from the European Union accession countries. The 
precise figures are very uncertain, not least because people come and go a lot, but recent research4 
estimates that 2005 probably saw the largest ever entry of foreign workers to the UK, totalling around 
400,000 – equivalent to around 1.5% of total employment (although outflows have probably risen, too). 
In  addition,  older  workers  are  increasingly  likely  to  stay  in  work  –  people  above  pensionable  age 
accounted for a quarter of the growth in the work force over the past year; and Government policies 
are encouraging people on benefit back into work. 
The  result  has  been  that  the  labour  force  participation  rate,  the  number  of  people  in  work  and  the 
number who are unemployed have all been rising at the same time – a fairly unusual combination. A 
faster growing labour force potentially raises the amount the economy can produce. Rather like raising 
the  economy’s  speed  limit,  it  implies  that  it  can  grow  faster  without  hitting  supply  constraints  and 
generating inflationary pressure. 
That may be the situation right now. 
In any event, putting all this together with the impact of energy-related price movements, I do not read 
the fact that inflation is currently above target as convincing evidence that the economy is overheating. 
                                                      
4  
“Foreign  labour  in  the  United  Kingdom:  current  patterns  and  trends”,  John  Salt  and  Jane  Millar,  Labour  Market  Trends, 
Office for National Statistics, October 2006. 
BIS Review 116/2006 
 5
While  demand  has  not  been  growing  unusually  slowly  over  the  past  year,  it  is  now  two  and  a  half 
years since it grew at a rate significantly above its longterm average. And that average could be an 
underestimate of how fast we could safely grow. 
Even  so,  there  is  a  risk  that  a  temporary  rise  in  the  inflation  rate  will  spark  off  inflationary  pay 
increases. And if that were to happen, the MPC would need to raise interest rates to restrain demand 
and bring inflation back to target. I thought this risk looked quite significant in August when – as the 
Governor said at the time – the Committee saw a 50/50 risk that consumer price inflation would rise 
above 3% this winter. 
At the same time, the latest figures were confirming that the economy had recovered its momentum. 
So it seemed prudent to take back the modest cut in interest rates which the Committee had narrowly 
voted for the previous August. I cannot speak for other MPC members. But for me, raising rates this 
summer was  akin  to buying  insurance  against  the risk  that a  possible spike  in  inflation  – which we 
could do little to avert – would cause people to revise up their expectations about future inflation, and 
maybe dent the credibility which the Committee had built up over the previous decade. 
Since  August,  the  short-  and  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  have  both  improved  somewhat,  as 
world oil prices have fallen back very sharply, and sterling has risen. The odds of inflation rising above 
3% have lengthened. There are still no real signs of pressure in the labour market. And while it never 
does to be complacent about pay, in today’s labour market there is quite a difference between asking 
for higher pay and getting it – even in sectors not exposed to the full blast of global competition. 
There are, of course, still some risks. But insurance is never costless. In the case of monetary policy, 
taking  out  insurance  against  risks  that  don’t  materialise  can  inject  unnecessary  volatility  into  the 
economy, with consequences for jobs as well as demand. That is why we have the remit we have. It 
gives the MPC scope to exercise its judgement. But those are precisely the sort of judgements about 
which reasonable people can – and probably - should disagree. So it was this month. 
One  judgement  about  which  reasonable  people  could  disagree  is  how  robust  the  Committee’s 
treasured credibility might be, if it ever came under real pressure. It is often said that it takes decades 
to build a high reputation but only a moment to lose it. And there are plenty of business horror stories 
that seem to prove the point. 
What moral should a member of the MPC draw? Is there a risk that the Great Stability has conferred a 
golden halo on the Committee which is only partly deserved? And that a more turbulent set of events 
could cause that halo to slip, and possibly trigger a sharp loss of credibility? 
The MPC clearly cannot afford to be complacent. And we – and you - need to be realistic about what 
monetary  policy  can  –  and  cannot  -  achieve.  That  said,  I  am  confident  that  our  present  policy 
framework does have the capacity to withstand more turbulent times, should they materialise. 
After all it was designed for them. 
6 
 BIS Review 116/2006
