T T Mboweni: An overview of the economic challenges of 2006  
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Annual Dinner in 
honour  of  the  Ambassadors  and  High  Commissioners  accredited  to  the  Republic  of  South  Africa, 
Pretoria, 30 November 2006. 
 Your Excellency, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps 
Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and High Commissioners 
Your Excellency, the Chief of State Protocol 
Your Excellencies, Heads of International Organisations represented in the Republic of South Africa 
Deputy Governors of the South African Reserve Bank 
Senior officers of the South African National Defence Force 
Senior Management of the South African Reserve Bank and their spouses/partners 
Editors and other media representatives 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introduction 
1.  
It is an honour to welcome you once again to the South African Reserve Bank for what has become an 
annual event on our calendar. Every year I am humbled by the turnout, and this year is no exception. 
This past year has been an extremely challenging one from a monetary policy perspective. Some of 
the challenges have emanated domestically, but external economic and geopolitical events have also 
provided challenges to us as well as to many other central banks around the world. This evening I will 
give a brief broad-brush review of some of these developments. Further details can be found in our 
publications, including our Quarterly Bulletin which will be released next week. I am aware that one of 
the issues that is close to your hearts in the diplomatic community is the behaviour of the exchange 
rate of the rand as your purchasing power in this country varies inversely with the fortunes of the rand. 
I have noticed that many of you are looking a lot happier tonight than you were this time last year! 
The external environment 
2.  
The recent World Economic Outlook published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) characterised 
the global economic environment as robust, with economic activity exceeding expectations. While the 
global expansion has in general been broad based, the improved growth performance of developing 
and emerging economies compared to that of developed economies has been most noteworthy. This 
improvement has taken place across all regions, including sub-Saharan Africa. As a group, developing 
countries now account for more than half of total world gross domestic product (GDP) in purchasing-
power parity terms. 
This past year has been overshadowed by a high degree of volatility in the international oil markets, 
which posed a risk to the outlook for world growth and inflation. During the course of the year, the 
price of Brent crude oil reached new highs of almost US$80 per barrel as a result of tight supply and 
demand  conditions  as  well  as  geopolitical  developments.  Since  then  the  markets  have  stabilised 
somewhat and prices are currently around US$60 per barrel. 
The pressures on world inflation have also been reinforced by high levels of capacity utilisation and 
strong  global  consumer  demand.  Consequently,  we  have  seen  the  adoption  of  a  general  monetary 
policy  tightening  cycle  in  many  countries.  During  the  past  year,  most  industrialised  and  emerging 
market central banks have raised interest rates at some point. These actions are expected to keep 
world inflation under control. 
The global imbalances which have persisted over the past few years have been topical issues in the 
IMF, World Bank and G20 forums. The anomaly of the current global imbalances is that developing 
countries, particularly those in Asia are now the financiers of the current account deficits of the United 
Sates and other industrialised countries. A major concern is whether or not the elimination of these 
imbalances will take place in an orderly fashion. Although the dominant view is that the process will be 
orderly,  the  risk  remains  that  the  international  economy  could  be  in  for  turbulent  times  should  a 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 1
disorderly  process  emerge.  It  is  probably  too  early  to  assess  whether  the  current  volatility  we  are 
observing  in  the  international  currency  markets  is  the  beginning  of  this  adjustment  process,  or  to 
predict how this process will unfold. 
Until May this year, emerging markets had enjoyed an extended period of investor exuberance and 
search  for  higher  yield,  which,  combined  with  a  generally  supportive  environment  of  strong  global 
growth and high commodity prices, caused emerging market currencies to appreciate, equity prices to 
increase and bond spreads to narrow. However, in May, uncertainty regarding future inflation, interest 
rates and growth in the major economies contributed to some repricing of these assets. Following the 
anxieties caused to the markets by the widening current account deficits of Iceland and New Zealand 
earlier in the year, those countries which were perceived to have greater external vulnerability as a 
result  of  either  high  current  account  deficits  or  higher  levels  of  external  debt,  were  most  affected. 
South Africa was among these, and as a result the rand depreciated significantly during the second 
and third quarters of 2006. 
Fortunately  this  episode  was  relatively  short-lived  and  the  latest  indicators  suggest  that  emerging 
markets  have  generally  recovered  and  are  enjoying  renewed  appetite  among  global  investors  for 
higher  yielding  assets.  On  the  positive  side,  it  seems  as  if  emerging  markets  have  become  more 
resilient  to  sudden  changes  in  investor  sentiment  than  they  were  at  the  time  of  the  Asian  crisis  in 
1997/98. 
A  major  disappointment  during  2006  was  the  inability  of  trade  negotiators  around  the  globe  to 
conclude or, at least, continue with discussions in the Doha Round of the World Trade Organisation. 
There is no doubt that the major reason for the Doha breakdown is to be found in disagreements over 
agricultural sector protection. The failure of these trade negotiations came as a major disappointment 
to  developing  countries  in  all  regions,  but  the  ultimate  cost  could  be  borne  by  both  developed  and 
developing  nations.  Apart  from  the  foregone  opportunities  for  both  developed  and  developing 
countries that a successful conclusion would have provided, of greater importance are the losses that 
all  will  be  incurred  if  the  world  trading  system  is  allowed  to  deteriorate  with  a  reversion  to 
protectionism. 
Domestic economic developments 
3.  
On  the  domestic  front,  2006  has  proved  to  be  an  eventful  and  challenging  year,  which  has  been 
influenced  to  a  significant  degree  by  the  international  developments  that  I  have  made  mention  to 
above. From a monetary policy perspective, we have continued to achieve our mandate, which is to 
keep CPIX inflation within the target range of 3-6 per cent. Inflation has been within this range since 
September  2003  which  enabled  us  to  reduce  nominal  interest  rates  by  a  total  of  650  basis  points 
between  June  2003  and  April  2005.  In  recent  months  the  trend  of  inflation  has  been  rising,  and  in 
October  CPIX  inflation  measured  (5%  )  per  cent  compared  to  3,7  per  cent  in  April  of  this  year. 
Furthermore our forecasts suggest that inflation could reach the 6 per cent level by the second quarter 
of  next  year.  In  response  to  the  deteriorating  inflation  outlook,  the  monetary  policy  stance  was 
adjusted in June of this year when we increased the repo rate by 50 basis points. The repo rate was 
increased further by 50 basis at each of the subsequent meetings in August and October. 
For much of the year, international oil price developments posed a major risk to inflation. The price of 
95 octane petrol increased from R5,49 per litre in January 2006 to peak at R7,04 per litre in August. 
Fortunately  pressures  on  inflation  from  this  source  dissipated  somewhat  with  the  decline  in  the 
international oil prices and since August domestic petrol prices have declined by a total of R1,07 per 
litre. Despite this recent moderation, we still see the international oil price being vulnerable to global 
geo-political tensions, and therefore it continues to pose an upside risk to our inflation outlook. 
Of concern to us during the year was the persistent rise in domestic consumer demand which in recent 
times has been increasing at a year-on-year rate of around 8 per cent. This consumer exuberance has 
been financed by high rates of domestic credit extension and has led to record levels of consumer 
indebtedness of around 70 per cent of household disposable income. Contributing to these high levels 
of  demand  have  been  rising  real  incomes,  increased  employment,  lower  interest  rates  and  higher 
asset prices. Both the housing market and equity markets have remained buoyant. The equity market 
in recent weeks has reached new record highs, having recovered from the reversal it suffered during 
the international market volatility in May and June when the all-share index declined by as much as 16 
per cent. 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2006
The rand exchange rate was also not spared the fall-out of the emerging market jitters in May and 
these developments have had an impact on the inflation outlook. Having traded in a relatively narrow 
trading  range  for  much  of  the  first  half  of  this  year,  the  exchange  rate  reacted  to  the  global  risk 
aversion, and between 11 May and the middle of June it depreciated from R6,10 to the US dollar to 
around R6.80. Subsequently, concerns relating to the widening current account deficit on the balance 
of payments in excess of 6 per cent of GDP caused the exchange rate to depreciate further. At one 
stage the exchange rate had depreciated to around R7,90 to the US dollar in early October, but more 
recently it has been trading at levels of around R7,20. 
In part the depreciation of the rand during 2006 should be seen as an element of the adjustment to the 
then widening current account deficit. Already the trade account has improved in the third quarter of 
this year, and a stable rand at current levels will help stabilise the inflation outlook. In addition, the 
exchange rate adjustments are expected to be positive for export growth, and in conjunction with the 
adjustment  of  interest  rates  should  help  to  ensure  that  domestic  growth  is  driven  by  exports  and 
infrastructural investment, rather than by strong consumer spending as has been the case in the past 
two years. 
International investor interest in South Africa has nevertheless remained strong. Despite the repricing 
of emerging-market assets in the middle of 2006, there has not been one month during the year to 
date in which non-residents had not been net purchasers of South African bonds and equities. In the 
year to date, the net amount of bonds and equities purchased by non-residents totals a record of more 
than R100 billion, compared R41 billion in the whole of last year. Consequently, the current account 
deficit  continued  to  be  adequately  financed.  Although  we  are  hesitant  to  become  too  confident  too 
soon, it also appears as if portfolio investments may be becoming a more stable source of financing, 
as  emerging  market  assets  become  a  more  integrated  part  of  global  investment  mandates,  in 
particular those like South Africa which have investment grade ratings. 
In 2004 and 2005 the South African economy grew at robust rates of 4.8 and 5.1 per cent respectively. 
This  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  3  per  cent  average  annual  growth  experienced  between  1994  and 
2003. In the first two quarters of this year, the economy grew at revised annualised rates in excess of 
5 per cent. Although the third quarter growth slowed to 4.7 per cent, this is still a very encouraging 
picture. According to the National Treasury projections, a growth rate of 4.4 per cent is forecast for 
next year, rising to 5.3 per cent by 2009. Growth is likely to be underpinned by higher infrastructure 
expenditure.  The  impact  of  this  can  already  be  seen  in  the  strongly  rising  investment  ratio.  These 
higher growth rates have also had a positive impact on employment growth. According to the latest 
Labour  Force  Survey,  approximately  1.2  million  jobs  were  created  over  the  3-year  period  to  March 
2006. This is good news indeed. 
This  positive  growth  outlook  suggests  that  with  an  appropriate  policy  environment,  the  aims  of  the 
Accelerated  and  Shared  Growth  Initiative  for  South  Africa  (ASGISA)  can  be  achieved,  that  is,  to 
maintain GDP growth at around 4.5 per cent until 2009 and 6 per cent thereafter. Fiscal policy has 
remained  prudent,  to  the  extent  that  for  the  first  time  ever,  provision  has  been  made  for  a  budget 
surplus  in  the  coming  fiscal  year.  Monetary  policy  will  continue  to  play  its  role  by  providing  a  low 
inflation environment. 
G-20 developments 
4.  
I would like to turn briefly to our role in the G-20 which South Africa will chair in 2007. The G-20 was 
established in 1999 as a forum where central bank Governors and Ministers of Finance of developed 
and systemically important emerging and developing economies deliberate on issues relating to global 
economic  and  financial  stability  in  support  of  global  growth  and  development.  The  Bank  and  the 
National Treasury are currently making the necessary preparations for hosting and arranging meetings 
and  seminars  of  the  G-20  next  year  and  three  themes  for  the  2007  work  programme  have  been 
identified. 
The first theme relates to the reform of the Bretton Woods Institutions. As I have said in the past, these 
institutions  need  to  be  thoroughly  examined  and  overhauled  since  their  modus  operandi  no  longer 
serves their diverse membership in today’s dynamic global environment. The second theme of fiscal 
elements of growth and development, or fiscal space, is envisaged to obtain the perspectives of G-20 
member  countries  on  how  to  create  and  use  this  fiscal  space  in  support  of  economic  and  social 
objectives.  Finally,  the  third  theme  will  analyse  the  effects  of  commodity  price  changes  on  G-20 
members from a financial stability perspective. 
BIS Review 117/2006 
 3
Conclusion 
5.  
As I noted earlier, 2006 has been a challenging year. Going forward, I would venture to guess that 
2007 will be no easier. The South African economy should continue on its positive growth path, and 
the Bank will maintain its focus on keeping inflation under control. We remain committed to our role of 
providing  a  stable  macro-economic  environment  which  would  mitigate  the  effects  of  negative 
international developments if they were to occur. 
Should you wish to have a further discussion on South African economic issues tonight, I urge you to 
engage our senior staff members that have been allocated to all the tables. Finally, please enjoy the 
rest  of  the  evening,  and  may  you  have  in  the  period  ahead  a  wonderful  festive  season  and  a 
prosperous New Year. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2006
