Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Brief overview of Islamic banking and finance 
Speech by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Official  Launch  of  Kuala  Lumpur  International  Islamic  Finance  Expo  2006,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
24 November 2006. 
 It  is  indeed  an  honour  to  be  here  this  morning  at  the  launching  of  the  Kuala  Lumpur  International 
Islamic  Finance  Expo  2006,  organized  by  the  Association  of  Islamic  Banking  Institutions  Malaysia 
(AIBIM). It was exactly five years ago that all of us witnessed the launching of the first Islamic Banking 
and Takaful Week by the then Deputy Prime Minister, Dato' Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi. And now, 
after  those  years,  Alhamdulillah,  we  are  pleased  with  the  positive  impact  of  the  comprehensive 
awareness  campaign  in  the  year  2001  as  it  has  paved  the  way  to  subsequent  nationwide  annual 
campaigns on financial awareness in Islamic banking and finance. In this regard, I wish to congratulate 
all financial institutions involved for providing their unwavering support in this virtuous endeavour. 
Before I proceed, allow me to take this opportunity to welcome our exhibitors, both local and foreign, 
who will be participating in the Kuala Lumpur International Islamic Finance Expo 2006. We believe that 
your  participation  will  benefit  the  patrons  to  this  expo.  I  hope  you  will  exploit  this  platform  to 
disseminate  as  much  information  on  Islamic  banking  and  finance  as  possible  so  as  to  provide  an 
opportunity for the public to learn more on the products, services and benefits of Islamic banking and 
finance. 
This  year's  Islamic  financial  expo  presents  a  different  appeal  altogether  with  various  differentiated 
activities  and  events  organised  for  the  diversified  target  groups  and  consumers.  I  note  that  various 
activities have been arranged for the next five days including Islamic banking and finance exposition, 
the annual Islamic Finance Forum, colloquium on Islamic finance, convention on takaful and Islamic 
unit  trust  advisors  and  Muzakarah  for  Shariah  advisors.  This  is  indeed  an  excellent  opportunity  for 
exchanging ideas as well as providing relevant information to the public on Islamic finance. It is also 
timely  and  augurs  well  with  the  recent  announcement  of  the  initiatives  to  position  Malaysia  as  the 
international Islamic financial centre. 
The  Islamic  financial  industry  in  Malaysia  has  experienced  rapid  transformations  particularly  in  the 
past  ten  years.  The  Malaysian  Islamic  banking  system  registered  strong  performance  with  higher 
profitability and positive trends in all key indicators. Profitability surpassed the RM1 billion mark for the 
first time in 2005, and this year the industry will again register good profit as for the first half of 2006, 
the  amount  of  profit  generated  was  already  RM800  million.  The  total  assets  of  Islamic  banking 
currently  stands  at  RM122  billion.  The  performance  of  the  Malaysian  Islamic  financial  market  in 
particular  the  capital  market  has  been  encouraging.  The  Islamic  corporate  bonds  stands  at  RM121 
billion, which constituted 55 percent of the total corporate bond market in Malaysia. More recently, a 
total of 26 new corporate sukuk issues with an aggregate value of about RM23 billion were announced 
in the first half of 2006, representing 71 percent of the Malaysian domestic market's rated corporate 
bond issues for that period.  
The operating environment of Islamic finance in Malaysia has also evolved dramatically. The product 
range  has  now  expanded  into  broad  array  of  innovative  instruments  using  contracts  beyond 
murabahah or Bai Bithaman Ajil (BBA). In past few years, several new Islamic financial products were 
introduced which included residential mortgage backed securities, commodity based financing, as well 
as  investment  and  equity  linked  product  based  on  musyarakah,  mudarabah  and  ijarah.  Recent 
issuance of Khazanah's exchangeable sukuk is based on musyarakah contract. Malaysia has strong 
potential to be the centre for sukuk origination as over 60 per cent (USD32 billion) of the outstanding 
sukuk issuance globally was originated from Malaysia. We have also seen that multi-lateral agencies 
have  begun  to  tap  the  Malaysian  market  and  our  recent  move  to  liberalise  foreign  currency 
denominated financial instruments to be issued out of Malaysia provides a strong catalyst in facilitating 
the international sukuk market. I would like to urge the industry players to take this opportunity and 
establish  strategic  alliance  and  form  syndicates  to  market  these  products  particularly  in  view  of  the 
growing infrastructure and construction projects being undertaken in the Middle East. 
Government facilitative policies are also an important enabler to accelerate the growth and support the 
development  of  the  industry.  Apart  from  establishing  strong  legal  and  Shariah  framework,  the 
Government  has  also  laid  down  conducive  tax  legislative  that  accords  tax  neutrality  treatment  for 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 1
Islamic  finance  transaction.  The  recent  initiative  to  position  Malaysia  as  an  International  Islamic 
Financial Centre, will further spur the business environment thus contribute to create more conducive 
landscape.  This  initiative  will  bring  in  more  players,  enhance  competition  and  encourage  new 
diversified products and services, especially in international currencies.  
This  rapid  growth  and  positive  performance  achieved  thus  far  signifies  one  of  our  major 
accomplishments  over  the  last  two  decades  in  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  The  robust  growth  of 
Islamic finance industry today augments the collaborative efforts within the industry to move in tandem 
to strengthen the position of Islamic finance in Malaysia. As Islamic banking and finance in Malaysia 
journeys towards global integration and international acceptance, there are key areas in the banking 
industry that needs to be enhanced to progressively support future development moving forward. Of 
importance,  is  the  need  to  effectively  engage  other  stakeholders  through  various  means  and 
approaches  including  promotional  activities  and  strategies.  It  is  imperative  that  the  approaches 
adopted  to  be  dynamic  and  innovative  so  as  to  ensure  consistency  and  relevancy  with  the  rapid 
development of the industry.  
The KLIIFEX 2006 is well-positioned to be the platform to effectively engage with key stakeholders; i.e. 
consumers, relevant agencies, scholars and intermediaries. Communication and direct interface with 
these key stakeholders will advance towards effective dissemination of information to promote greater 
awareness  and  appreciation  on  Islamic  finance  to  create  a  more  literate  society  on  the  virtues  and 
benefits of Islamic banking and finance.  
The  organising  of  KLIIFEX  2006  has  some  embedded  key  values  and  essence  that  need  to  be 
strengthened moving forward. The most significant is the strong alliance among the players within the 
industry  as  well  as  with  the  relevant  institutions  including  educational,  training  and  research 
institutions,  knowledge  centres  and  other  professional  bodies  in  promoting  the  development  of  the 
industry.  Islamic  finance  will  achieve  greater  heights  with  the  collaborative  efforts  of  all  relevant 
parties,  especially  those  outside  the  industry.  The  existence  of  these  networks  and  linkages  is  a 
catalyst  towards  strengthening  the  landscape  for  future  innovations  and  advancements  in  Islamic 
banking and finance at the domestic and international fronts.  
The second essence of KLIIFEX 2006 is the involvement of international players, particularly with the 
participation  of  foreign  exhibitors  in  this  year's  event.  As  the  cross  border  trades  and  international 
Islamic finance activities intensify, strong interlinkages among the domestic and international players 
are crucial. Leveraging on the significant inroads and growing global recognition enjoyed by Malaysian 
players, this event will accord opportunities for the players to understand each other's strength and 
capabilities that would lead to more strategic alliance in the area of Islamic finance. This is certainly 
relevant in our effort to enhance the position of Malaysia as an international Islamic financial centre 
(MIFC).  The  players  should  seize  the  opportunity  to  increase  interactions  towards  finding  the  right 
partners  and  exploring  strategies  and  that  are  able  to  capitalise  on  tax  incentives  and  other 
operational  flexibilities  accorded  under  MIFC  to  position  Malaysia  as  an  international  centre  of 
origination  and  issuance  of  Islamic  financial  instruments,  fund  and  wealth  management,  Islamic 
financial activities in international currencies and takaful and retakaful businesses.  
Thirdly, KLIIFEX 2006 also provides opportunities to present relevant, pertinent and timely information 
on Islamic finance to different levels of key stakeholders. In the era where customers are becoming 
more  discerning  and  demanding  greater  product  differentiation  and  value  added  services,  it  is 
imperative for the Islamic financial institutions to provide information that is beyond the features of the 
specific product. The information must be timely, easily comprehensible and at an appropriate depth 
so as to comply with the disclosure requirements required under the corporate governance practices 
for Islamic financial transactions as well as to facilitate comparability of products by the consumers. It 
is our collective responsibility to enhance the public's understanding and appreciation on the features 
of  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  products  and  the  Shariah  wisdom  associated  with  them.  All  players 
need  to  capitalize  on  these  initiatives  for  the  financial  industry  to  achieve  sustainable  success  and 
unleash the potential gains of the Islamic finance in Malaysia and abroad.  
I wish that the KLIIFEX 2006 and subsequent years will be the platform to fully realise the essence 
and aspirations and propagations that I have mentioned earlier.  
I also wish that our commitment to achieve future success of the industry as reflected in this event by 
the  joint  efforts  and  collaboration  of  the  regulators,  the  industry,  the  market  participants  and  the 
relevant parties will  be  further  enhanced  moving  forward.  In  this regard,  I would  again congratulate 
AIBIM  on  its  continuous  effort  undertake  the  initiatives  in  promoting  Islamic  finance,  particularly  by 
organizing this event.  
2 
 BIS Review 115/2006
On this note, I wish you a successful and eventful week. 
Dengan  lafaz  Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan  pelancaran  "Kuala 
Lumpur International Islamic Financial Expo 2006". 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 115/2006 
 3
