Axel A Weber: The independence of the central bank and inflation – the 
Bundesbank example 
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Narodowy Bank 
Polski (National Bank of Poland), Warsaw, 26 October 2006.  
 Introduction 
1  
Dear President Balcerowicz, ladies and gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure for me to be in Poland, in general, and in Warsaw, in particular. Warsaw is an 
impressive and fast-moving city.  
When coming here, I saw many reminders of Poland’s successful transformation from what used to be 
a centrally planned economy into one that is market-driven.  
A transformation of this kind is anything but easy as can be seen not only in Poland, but also in many 
other transforming countries in central and eastern Europe.  
All of these countries experienced more or less severe initial recessions in the transformation process 
during the early to mid-1990s, with per capita GDP dropping below levels witnessed during the era of 
central planning.  
Poland, however, was able to benefit rather quickly from the introduction of market mechanisms into 
its economy. Hence, it became the first country in the region to exceed the GDP levels recorded at the 
end of the socialist economy.  
Evidently, Poland has so far been more successful than other countries in managing the challenges of 
the transformation process.  
One  key  architect  of  this  success  story  is  undoubtedly  my  colleague  Leszek  Balcerowicz,  who,  in 
2005,  was  awarded  Poland’s  highest  decoration,  the  Order  of  the  White  Eagle,  reflecting  his 
contribution to Poland’s transformation.  
When Leszek asked me to deliver a speech here in Warsaw, I did not hesitate for a moment. Indeed, it 
is a pleasure for me to share my thoughts with you on a topic that is of the utmost importance for the 
stability of a currency.  
Over  the  next  30  minutes  or  so,  I  shall  mainly  elaborate  on  the  nexus  between  central  bank 
independence, inflation and economic performance.  
In doing so, I will occasionally refer to the history of my own institution, the Deutsche Bundesbank. 
However,  in  most  of  cases,  I  shall  focus  on  the  independence  of  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks (ESCB) in order to give you specific examples from the present day.  
Over  the  past  few  decades,  a  well-founded  consensus  has  emerged  about  the  nature  of  sound 
monetary policy. This consensus comprises the following two key elements.  
- 
- 
The clear assignment of responsibility for inflation to an independent central bank.  
Agreement that inflation should be low and stable. Thus, maintaining price stability should be 
a central bank’s primary objective.  
Irrespective  of  the  many  studies  supporting  the  rationale  behind  his  consensus,  politicians,  in 
particular, tend to question central bank independence and the benefits of price stability from time to 
time.  This  is  rather  worrisome,  since  both  elements  constitute  the  foundation  on  which  successful 
economies are being built.  
Against this backdrop, I therefore wish to elaborate on both these aspects in the course of my speech. 
I shall aim to point out the reasons why central bank independence is a prerequisite for price stability 
and why price stability, in turn, is conducive to fostering sustainable, non-inflationary economic growth.  
BIS Review 101/2006 
 1
2  
The independence of the ESCB  
Institutional arrangements 
2.1 
In the European monetary union (EMU), the independent central banks of the ESCB share a common 
responsibility  for  the  single  monetary  policy.  But  what  is  actually  meant  by  the  term  “central  bank 
independence”?  In  this  context,  it  refers  to  four  different  aspects  of  the  special  institutional 
arrangement which characterises the ESCB.  
First and foremost, the most important aspect of central bank independence in the euro area is that 
the  central  banks  of  the  ESCB  are  independent  of  political  instructions,  an  aspect  referred  to  as 
institutional  independence  [laid  down  in  Article  108  of  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community]. 
Neither the ECB nor the national central banks, nor any member of their decisionmaking bodies are 
allowed to seek or take instructions from Community institutions or from any government [Art. 108 of the 
Treaty, first sentence].  
In turn, the Community institutions and member states’ governments also have to respect this principle 
and must not seek to influence the decisionmaking bodies of the ECB or the national central banks 
[Art. 108 of the Treaty, second sentence].  
This  fundamental  principle  insulates  the  decision-making  bodies  of  the  ESCB  from  undue  political 
influence while carrying out the tasks and duties conferred upon them by the Treaty.  
The  second  aspect  is  that  of  personal  independence.  Governors  of  the  national  central  banks  are 
appointed for at least a five-year term of office, members of the ECB’s executive board for an eight-
year term (with no possibility of reappointment). In addition, members of the Governing Council cannot 
be recalled for political reasons.  
Both  arrangements  limit  the  possibility  of  exerting  political  pressure  on  individual  members  of  the 
Governing Council and, indirectly, on the council as a whole.  
The third aspect is that the central banks of the Eurosystem are also independent in financial terms. 
This means that they are not dependent on funds being provided to them by other institutions in their 
respective  countries.  This  also  helps  to  protect  central  banks  from  political  pressure  that  might 
otherwise be placed on them, for example, by limiting the banks’ financial capabilities.  
Finally, the fourth aspect of central bank independence in the ESCB is functional independence. The 
ESCB’s  primary  objective  –  to  maintain  price  stability  –  is  enshrined  in  the  Treaty  establishing  the 
European  Community.  Without  prejudice  to  this  objective,  the  ESCB  shall  support  the  general 
economic policies in the European Union. This ranking restricts the scope for potential conflicts that 
might  arise  if  the  ESCB  were obliged  to  pursue  different or  even  conflicting objectives  at the  same 
time.  
As a result of this transparent prioritisation, monetary policy is clearly geared towards maintaining the 
intrinsic value of money and, hence, becomes more credible as well as more predictable.  
The rationale behind central bank independence 
2.2  
The independence of the ESCB is enshrined in the Treaty establishing the European Community and 
the relevant protocols. This independence is very well protected since any amendment to the Treaty 
requires a unanimous decision from all member states.  
But  why  is  central  bank  independence  of  such  great  importance  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary 
policy? What is the reason for the unique institutional arrangement of the ESCB central banks?  
First and foremost, the independence of a central bank is not an end in itself. Rather, central bank 
independence helps to…  
- 
maintain  a  long-term  stability  orientation  of  monetary  policy  by  insulating  decision-making 
bodies from short-term-motivated political influence…  
and, thus, contributes to enhancing monetary policy’s credibility, which can be measured by 
inflation expectations, for instance.  
 Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  importance  of  central  banks’  independence  for  the  maintenance  of  price 
stability can scarcely be overestimated.  
2 
 BIS Review 101/2006
In this context, the track record of my institution, the Deutsche Bundesbank and its former currency, 
the D-Mark, is a good example of central bank independence definitely being conducive to maintaining 
price stability.  
The credibility-enhancing effect of the Bundesbank’s independence was probably best encapsulated 
by Jaques Delors, who in the 1990s famously remarked that “Not all Germans believe in God, but they 
all believe in the Bundesbank”.  
This  remark  has  to  be  taken  with  a  pinch  of  salt,  but  there  are  other  examples  which  support  the 
strong connection between independence and monetary stability. Many empirical studies demonstrate 
that central bank independence allows the monetary authority to pursue price stability more diligently, 
resulting in lower and less variable inflation.  
In  brief  (with  respect  to  maintaining  the  intrinsic  value  of  money):  institutions  –  in  other  words, 
independent central banks – are of key importance. Hence, central bank independence is an essential 
requirement for monetary stability.  
Therefore,  all  countries  wishing  to  join  the  European  monetary  union  are  required  to  ensure  the 
compatibility of national legislation – including the statutes of their national central banks – with both 
the Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB. This particularly applies to central bank independence.  
However, independent monetary policy alone cannot adequately ensure a currency’s intrinsic value in 
the long run.  
As a general principle, a stability-oriented monetary policy must be accompanied by a stability-oriented 
fiscal  policy.  The  reason  for  this  nexus  is  that  unsound  fiscal  policies  generally  entail  the  risk  of  a 
conflict between monetary and budget policy.  
Given high levels of public debt and associated high interest rate expenses, it cannot be ruled out that 
politicians will tend to exert pressure on the central bank in order to make it lower the real burden of 
public debt by easing monetary policy and, thus, allowing inflation to rise.  
Although,  in  general,  central  bank  independence  countervails  undue  political  influence,  it  does  not 
itself solve the potential for conflict which can harm the credibility of monetary policy. Consequently, 
fiscal  discipline  is  not  only  a  complementary  condition  of  monetary  stability,  but  also  of  overall 
macroeconomic stability.  
Given  the  potential  problems  associated  with  fiscal  imbalances,  the  avoidance  of  excessive  deficits 
represents an essential prerequisite for the maintenance of fiscal policies conducive to monetary and 
overall macroeconomic stability.  
The  need  for  sound  fiscal  policies  is  especially  evident  in  a  monetary  union  if  negative  spill-over 
effects from one member state’s budget to the rest of the union are to be avoided.  
This is the rationale behind the existence of the excessive deficit procedure – laid down in the Treaty 
establishing the European Community and further clarified in the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) – 
which aims to limit the risks to price stability that might otherwise arise from national fiscal policies.  
Finally, having outlined the importance of sound fiscal policies, I would like to emphasise that central 
bank independence contributes most effectively to monetary stability when it is supported by an overall 
stability consensus among the general public.  
This  has  been  the  case  in  Germany  for  many  decades.  Political  attempts  to  undermine  the 
Bundesbank’s  independence  and  its  pursuit  of  price  stability  have  been  repeatedly  rejected  by  the 
public.  
Let me give you one famous example, namely the public reaction to a speech in 1956 by the then 
Federal Chancellor, Konrad Adenauer.  
In what became known as his “guillotine speech”, Adenauer criticised the policy of the Bank deutscher 
Länder – the forerunner of the present-day Bundesbank – following the Bank’s decision to continue a 
restrictive monetary course.  
Adenauer described the Bank’s decision as “a heavy blow … struck at the German economy, and it is 
the little ones who will suffer most … the guillotine falls on the average man in the street, and that is 
what grieves me so much.”  
However,  the  response  in  Germany  was  highly  damaging  to  Adenauer.  The  media  as  well  as  the 
public overwhelmingly came out in support of the Bank.  
BIS Review 101/2006 
 3
The  success  of  the  Bank  deutscher  Länder  in  its  conflict  with  Adenauer  over  interest-rate  policy  in 
1956 was of great importance in reinforcing the de facto independence of the German central bank.  
Central bank independence and accountability 
2.3 
The extensive independence granted to the ESCB means that the central banks in the euro area are 
not  even  indirectly  subject  to  electoral  accountability.  Some  people  might  ask  how  this  can  be 
reconciled with the principle of accountability, which is a constitutive element of every democracy.  
This  is  a  reasonable  question  –  the  answer  to  which  is  that  the  fact  of  a  central  bank  being 
independent does not mean that it is unaccountable.  
Indeed, independent central banks, such as those in the ESCB, are accountable to the public in that 
they have to fulfil their mandate to maintain price stability.  
If the Eurosystem were to fail to fulfil its mandate, it would have to explain to the public at large why 
this had happened. There are various appropriate ways of communicating our policy.  
- 
We explain our monetary policy decisions every month in real time in the opening statement 
and  in  the  Q&A  session  with  journalists  and,  thus,  explain  them,  indirectly,  to  the  general 
public.  
Furthermore, there is the public dialogue during the regular quarterly meetings between the 
ECB president and the European Parliament.  
In addition, all 18 members of the Governing Council frequently give public speeches, such 
as the one I am delivering today.  
  A clear definition of the ultimate goal  
Communication of the monetary policy strategy  
Publication of the data used in decision-making  
Consistent substantiation of policy decisions.  
In order to ensure that this form of dialogue and accountability functions smoothly, central bank policy 
has to be transparent and the central bank has to communicate consistently with the public.  
Accountability,  transparency,  and  communication  are  therefore  rightly  seen  as  complementary 
elements to the independence of modern central banks.  
In  other  words:  the  need  for  accountability  on  the  part  of  independent  central  banks  calls  for 
transparency in monetary policy and consistent communication with the public.  
I  will  now  list  the  crucial  elements  of  a  transparent  monetary  policy,  such  as  that  pursued  by  the 
Eurosystem:  
- 
- 
- 
- 
In the context of transparency, I would like to make a few additional remarks. It is not only the need to 
hold the central bank accountable that makes a transparent monetary policy worthwhile. Central-bank 
transparency also helps to anchor inflation expectations more effectively.  
The importance of this aspect can hardly be overestimated. Ultimately, a central bank’s objective is to 
anchor inflation expectations at a level that is consistent with price stability. 
Some researchers such as Michael Woodford, a highly renowned US-based researcher, even puts it 
as follows, “Not only do expectations about policy matter, but, at least under current conditions, very 
little else matters.”  
Even  if  one  does  not  share  this  view  absolutely,  inflation  expectations  are  undoubtedly  a  crucial 
measure of a central bank’s performance and its credibility. At the end of the day, monetary policy is 
perceived to be successful when people’s decisions about savings, investment and consumption are 
not influenced by a fear of inflation.  
The benefits of price stability  
3 
As outlined above, central banks must be independent in order to pursue the objective of price stability 
effectively.  
4 
 BIS Review 101/2006
However, some people doubt that price stability should be monetary policy’s primary objective. In fact, 
they would like the central bank to simultaneously pursue other objectives, such as economic growth 
and job creation.  
Others  even  claim  that  maintaining  price  stability  impedes  economic  growth.  In  their  view,  the 
objective of preserving the intrinsic value of money should come second to the objective of fostering 
growth.  
I could not disagree more.  
Why  should  price  stability  actually  be  an  impediment  to  growth  and  the  economic  and  social 
development of society? In my view, quite the opposite is true; in actual fact, maintaining price stability 
is  the  best  contribution  which  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sustained  economic  growth  and  job 
creation.  
Let me explain the main reason for this conclusion. A monetary policy geared towards price stability 
reduces the level and variability of inflation and, thus, facilitates the efficient allocation of resources, 
which is the basis of any sustained economic development.  
In addition to this main benefit, maintaining price stability also minimises other negative effects that 
accompany inflation. To show this, let me briefly elaborate on the costs of inflation, which will clearly 
explain why price stability should be monetary policy’s primary objective.  
First, inflation distorts the price mechanism. In a market-driven economy, freely moving market prices 
are the key signals that indicate scarcity of goods and services. By indicating scarcity, relative market 
prices help to allocate economic resources to the most productive utilisation.  
Inflation, however, distorts this mechanism since the rapid increase of the general price level blurs the 
signal  function  of  the  movement  in  relative  prices.  As  a  result,  resource  allocation  becomes 
suboptimal, with negative repercussions for growth and development.  
Second,  inflation  induces unintentional effects on  the  distribution  of  income  and wealth.  Experience 
has shown that the holders of financial assets are particularly severely hit by the erosion of the value 
of money. Their inflation losses are accompanied by matching undeserved and purely arbitrary gains 
accruing to debtors.  
There are many indications that a considerable number of “small savers”, in particular, are not fully in 
a position to protect themselves against inflation-induced financial losses. Hence, price stability fulfils a 
crucial  social  function:  It  protects  the  “man  on  the  street”,  in  particular,  from  being  gradually 
dispossessed by creeping inflation.  
Finally, inflation acts as an additional tax. In most countries, tax systems are based on nominal values 
– in other words, these systems are not adjusted to a rise in the price level.  
In  such  systems,  inflation  has  the  effect  of  an  additional  tax  on  investment  and  labour  income  and 
produces considerable wealth losses. The main reason for this is that, in addition to “normal taxation”, 
inflation  drives  a  further  wedge  between  the  real  yield  before  tax  and  after  tax.  Inflation  therefore 
causes the effective tax burden to increase, a process referred to as “cold progression”.  
Thus,  inflation  has  significant  adverse  repercussions  not  only  for  growth,  but  also  for  income 
distribution in a society.  
In  this  context,  another  important  consensus  has  emerged  over  the  past  decades.  In  the  long  run, 
there  is  no  trade-off  between  low  inflation  and  high  employment  –  as  a  naïve  interpretation  of  the 
Phillips curve might suggest. A society cannot simply choose to have lower long-term unemployment 
at the cost of rising inflation.  
History  has  shown  that  many  of  the  countries  that  have  tried  to  exploit  this  alleged  connection 
eventually experienced both: high inflation and high unemployment.  
Thus, low inflation and not high inflation, is conducive to fostering sustained economic growth and job 
creation.  
Concluding remarks 
4  
I would like to sum up as follows: central bank independence is not an end in itself. As a matter of fact, 
such  independence  is,  instead,  a  precondition  for  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  and  helps  to 
BIS Review 101/2006 
 5
enhance  its  credibility.  A  monetary  policy  of  this  kind  keeps  inflation  contained  and  inflation 
expectations solidly anchored.  
An  environment  of  low  inflation  is,  in  turn,  a  prerequisite  for  sustained  non-inflationary  economic 
growth. Therefore, a central bank’s best contribution to the economic development of a society is to 
pursue, above all, the goal of maintaining price stability.  
It is with good reason that central bank independence and the associated credibility of monetary policy 
are highly valued.  
Thus,  governments  are,  as  a  general  rule,  strongly  advised  not  to  interfere  with  a  credible  and 
independent central bank, but to value its contribution to overall stability and to the social as well as 
economic development of the country or region concerned.  
In  this  context,  one  should  always  remember  that  monetary  policy  credibility,  –  which  is  of  utmost 
importance for the stable value of money – is hard won. It can, however, be easily lost, leading to long-
term negative repercussions for the overall performance of an economy.  
References 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monetary Policy Transparency, Monthly Report, March 2000. 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The Value of stable Money, Annual Report 1996, pp. 78 – 88. 
European Central Bank, The Accountability of the ECB, Monthly Bulletin, November 2002. 
Issing,  Otmar,  Communication,  Transparency,  Accountability:  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Twenty-First 
Century, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, March/April 2005, (Part 1), pp. 65-83. 
Neumann,  Manfred  J  M,  Monetary  Stability:  Threat  and  Proven  Response,  Deutsche  Bundesbank 
(Ed.),  Fifty  years  of  the  Deutsche  Mark  –  Central  Bank  and  the  Currency  in  Germany  since  1948, 
Oxford 1999, pp. 269 - 306. 
Woodford, Michael, Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness, Presented at the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Symposium,  “The  Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future",  Jackson 
Hole, Wyoming, 2005. 
6 
 BIS Review 101/2006
