Durmuş Yilmaz: Economic outlook for Turkey 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at a meeting 
organised  by  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  of  Malatya  and  Dünya  daily  newspaper, 
Malatya, 7 September 2006. 
 Distinguished industrialists, businessmen, guests and members of the press, 
I am very pleased to be in Malatya for this meeting arranged to bring together the Central Bank and 
the real sector and to create common ground for exchanging views. I would like to extend my most 
sincere thanks to the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Malatya and to Dünya daily newspaper 
for the excellent organization of this meeting.  
In today’s meeting, I would like to focus on the importance of Central Bank independence and price 
stability within the framework of our Bank’s monetary and exchange rate policies. Following this I will 
talk  about  the  inflation  targeting  regime  and  developments  in  inflation  as  well  as  those  in  floating 
exchange rate regime and financial markets and lastly, I will touch upon some of the issues at the top 
of the agenda, such as growth, employment and the current account deficit.  
The  amendment  made  in  the  Central  Bank  Law  in  2001  was  a  turning  point  for  monetary  policy 
implementations  in  Turkey  because  as  per  this  amendment,  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  acquired 
instrumental  independence  and  the  Bank’s  primary  objective  was  set  as  achieving  and  maintaining 
price stability. Inflation has been declining since 2001, and historic lows that had not been observed in 
the  last  30  years  were  made  possible  in  this  process.  Independence  enables  the  Central  Bank  to 
shape its policies free from political pressure and daily disputes, and with a medium-term perspective 
focusing directly on the targets. The point reached in the fight against inflation and the achievements 
so far confirm the importance of an “independent structure” with respect to both the legal framework 
and  the  implementation.  Therefore,  not  merely  political  circles  but  all  sections  of  the  public  are 
expected to take this into account - not only as an element of discourse but in their actions as a whole. 
It should be borne in mind that controversy over this concept leads to the questioning of economic 
policies and the credibility of targets, as these discussions eventually focus on monetary policy. It is 
obvious that these controversies may be very costly.  
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Central  Bank  will  show  no  hesitation  to  continue  utilizing  instrumental 
independence  in  order  to  achieve  targets  and  will  be  ready  to  take  any  risks  and  provide  the 
necessary warnings.  
It suffices to take a look at the past five years to see why fighting inflation is so important. The high 
and chronic inflation led to considerable economic and social losses in Turkey in the last 30 years. 
High and chronic inflation culminated in the adoption of short-term approaches, by adversely affecting 
expectations,  investment  and  production  decisions  and  deteriorating  resource  allocation  in  the 
economy,  which  brought  along  low  and  volatile  rates  of  growth  and  employment  and  aggravated 
injustice in income and wealth distribution.  
We have experienced all the damage of inflation in Turkey, so we expect all sections of the public to 
support  our  fight  against  inflation  and defend  the  achievements we  have  made  so  far.  It  should  be 
borne in mind that striving for price stability means striving for creating an environment where people 
can make a living, make investments and can look to the future with confidence. With this respect, 
price stability is a goal that cannot be sacrificed for any other priority or target.  
Thanks to the policies implemented by our Bank, great progress was made in the disinflation process: 
inflation, which was 73.2 percent at the beginning of 2002, was recorded as 10.26 percent in August 
2006.  
Within  the  framework  of  the  fight  against  inflation,  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  adopted  the  formal 
inflation-targeting regime as the monetary policy strategy at the beginning of 2006.  
Now, I would like to mention a few points that I believe are important with respect to the adoption of 
the inflation targeting regime. 
Studies on the inflation targeting regime as a monetary policy strategy were initiated at our Bank in 
2000. As of 2002, the “implicit inflation targeting regime” was adopted as a strategy of convergence 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 1
with the formal inflation targeting regime and gradually the components of this regime were adopted. 
In  line  with  these  efforts,  some  changes  were  made  in  our  Bank’s  organization  and  some  new 
departments  have  been  established,  our  set  of  data  has  been  expanded  and  the  decision-making 
processes have been further institutionalized.  
By 2005, the monetary policy strategy implemented under the name of the implicit inflation targeting 
regime had become a regime covering most of the elements of formal inflation targeting and significant 
achievements had been made in the pre-conditions necessary for a successful transition to the formal 
inflation  targeting  regime.  In  2006,  encouraged  by  our  achievements,  the  “formal  inflation  targeting 
regime” was adopted on time. The new regime necessitated a more institutionalized structure and a 
higher degree of transparency compared to the previous one.  
In  order  to  have  a  more  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  course  of  inflation  and  the  policy 
decisions of the Central Bank it is essential to have a good grasp of the framework that we have drawn 
for  the  inflation  targeting  regime.  Therefore,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  highlight  some 
important elements of the formal inflation targeting regime once more in this meeting today. 
Under this regime, the Central Bank adopts a medium-term perspective. Accordingly, inflation targets 
are announced for a period of three years. The targets pertain to consumer inflation and these “point 
targets” are set jointly with the government.  
However, with the aim of setting a rule for the Bank’s accountability principle in case inflation deviates 
from  the  target  or  in  case  a  possibility  that  inflation  might  deviate  from  the  targets  emerges,  an 
uncertainty band has been set as 2 percentage points in both directions.  
In case inflation figures go outside the band or there is a possibility of inflation going outside the band, 
the mechanism pertaining to the accountability principle of the Central Bank would be activated and 
our Bank would explain the reasons of deviation from the target and provide information on the time 
needed for converging to the target again in an Open Letter to the Government. Such an Open Letter 
was written and sent to the Government on July 14, 2006 and was also publicized.  
A lot of ground has been covered in the fight against inflation since 2002. However, price stability is 
yet  to  be  established.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  is  a  long  and  tough  journey.  The 
developments we have observed in the last few months verify this view and make our efforts even 
more important.  
Within this framework, in this part of my speech, I would like to talk about the developments in inflation 
and the monetary policy responses in the face of these developments since the beginning of 2006 and 
touch upon the future inflation outlook.  
I am sure you have been following very closely the upward trend in inflation observed since the turn of 
the  year.  Annual  inflation  became  10.12  percent  in  June  2006,  exceeding  the  upper  limit  of  the 
uncertainty band of the inflation path consistent with the end-year inflation target and this upward trend 
continued in July with 11.69 percent. 
The factors that played a primary role in the upward move in inflation in the first seven months of the 
year were seasonal factors and external developments.  
Prices of unprocessed food products started to increase due to adverse weather conditions by the last 
few months of 2005 and inflation in this group reached 21.8 percent by July 2006.  
Another factor that had an unfavorable impact on inflation was the rise in crude oil and energy prices. 
Parallel  to  the  rise  in  crude  oil  prices  that  started  in  international  markets  in  March,  energy  prices 
started to climb as of the first quarter also in Turkey and continued due to the rise in exchange rates 
as of May. The contribution of these increases to July inflation was 0.30 percentage points.  
Owing to the fluctuations in international markets and depreciation of the Turkish lira in the May-June 
period,  prices  of  gold  increased  by  72.6  percent  annually  as  of  July  and  had  a  negative  impact  on 
consumer prices in the first seven months of year.  
Meanwhile, depreciation of the Turkish lira due to excessive volatility observed in international markets 
in May and June, led to hikes in the prices of petroleum products, consumer durables and the prices of 
goods that are set in terms of foreign currencies and prices of imported goods. One of the sub-groups 
that are most severely affected by this situation is the transportation group. Petroleum products prices, 
which are registered under the transportation group, increased by 5.9 percent and 3.3 percent in June 
and July, respectively. Meanwhile, automobile prices registered under the same group increased by 
10 percent in April-June 2006. Prices of processed food products, which displayed a limited rise in the 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2006
first six months of the year, displayed a higher rate of increase in July due to the lagged effects of the 
fluctuations in exchange rates. The contribution of the depreciation of Turkish lira to consumer inflation 
in the May-June period reached 1.5 percentage points.  
When we analyze inflation under two groups as goods and services, it is observed that inflation in the 
services  group  has  decreased  throughout  2006  compared  to  the  same  period  last  year,  however 
especially due to the high rates of increase in house rents and restaurant-hotel prices, annual inflation 
in the services group became 11.7 percent annually as of July and maintained its high level. The 20.5-
percent rise in house rents is remarkable in this group. Meanwhile, compared to the same period last 
year, the upward trend in the goods group accelerated due to the rise in unprocessed food products, 
international  oil  prices  and  the  rise  in  exchange  rates.  Hence,  the  annual  increase  in  the  prices  of 
goods reached 12.1 percent annually as of July 2006, surpassing that of services.  
Price  increases  have  been  observed  in  all  of  the  special  CPI  aggregates  due  to  the  impact  of 
exchange rates developments on tradable goods. Within this framework, the annual rate of increase of 
the  special  CPI  aggregate  (D*)  excluding  energy,  unprocessed  food  products,  alcoholic  beverages, 
tobacco products and gold, which is calculated in order to measure the general inflation trend, became 
7.19 percent in July.  
Inflation followed a track consistent with our projections and decreased by 0.44 percent in July, thus 
becoming  5.30  percent  in  cumulative  terms  in  the  first  eight  months  and  10.26  percent  in  annual 
terms. The 1.21-percent monthly fall in food and non-alcoholic beverages prices and the 6.92-percent 
monthly fall in clothing and footwear prices as well as the disintegration of the base effect in the prices 
of alcoholic drinks and tobacco products were important factors in this decline. Especially the 4.43-
percent monthly decrease in the prices of unprocessed food products became the primary factor in the 
decline in the food and non-alcoholic drinks group prices.  
When  prices  of  goods  and  services  in  August  are  analyzed  separately,  it  is  observed  that  annual 
inflation in these groups are 10.08 and 11.40 respectively, both below those of the previous month. 
However, it is observed that the decline in the prices of goods is faster and thus, the services group 
inflation is once again higher than the goods group inflation. 
Moreover, the annual rate of increase in most of the special CPI aggregates declined in August and 
that verifies our projection that the effect of exchange rate developments on inflation would decrease 
in August. However, though less intense, the negative lagged effects of the depreciation of the New 
Turkish  lira  on  the  special  CPI  aggregate  excluding  energy,  unprocessed  food  products,  alcoholic 
beverages,  tobacco  products  and  gold  persisted  and  the  annual  increase  in  this  CPI  aggregate 
reached 7.8 percent by August 2006.  
This improvement in August inflation is very important with respect to attaining single-digits by the end 
of the year.  
The upward movement in inflation in the first seven months of the year and the high rates of increase 
in inflation exceeding expectations especially in April and May, coupled with excessive fluctuations in 
international  markets  and  perceptions  of  uncertainty 
international 
developments  have  been  deteriorating  medium  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  until  recently. 
Within  this  framework,  inflation  expectations  over  the  next  12  months,  increased  to  8.07  percent  in 
July  from  5.47  percent  in  April  2006  and  expectations  over  the  next  24  months  increased  to  6.07 
percent in July from 4.67 percent in April, that signifies an edging away from inflation expectations.  
In  response  to  these  developments,  with  the  aim  of  halting  this  deterioration  both  in  inflation  and 
inflation expectations and of attaining medium-term targets, the Central Bank of Turkey has effectively 
used the short-term interest rates that are the main policy instruments of the Bank and has exercised 
strong monetary tightening, by raising policy rates by 425 basis points to 17.5 percent.  
After  this  strong  monetary  tightening,  the  fluctuations  in  financial  markets  started  to  settle  and  the 
medium and long-term inflation expectations started to improve. Thus, in August, inflation expectations 
over the next 12 and 24 months declined to 7.94 and 6.02 respectively.  
It should be borne in mind that the impact of interest rate decisions on economic activities and inflation 
can be observed only with a time lag. It is advisable to take this fact into account while making the 
analysis and evaluations.  
As for the future inflation outlook, we foresee that the negative effect of the depreciation of the New 
Turkish lira on inflation will gradually diminish as was the case in August. 
fuelled  by  domestic  and 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 3
Although  we  have  achieved  rapid  recovery  and  relative  stability,  the  environment  created  by  the 
fluctuations  observed  in  financial  markets  in  the  May-July  period  are  expected  to  weaken  domestic 
demand in the second half of the year. Meanwhile, analyzing recent data such as those pertaining to 
investor confidence and to the expectations for domestic sales and orders for the next quarter, it is 
foreseen that the decline in domestic demand will not be a very sharp one. In other words, the impact 
of  the  fluctuations  observed  in  financial  markets  in  May  and  June  on  the  consumption  tendency  is 
likely  to  be  of  a  temporary  nature.  Therefore,  the  said  impact  is  expected  to  lead  only  to  a  limited 
decline in total demand. Furthermore, it is estimated that the relative depreciation of the New Turkish 
lira will boost net foreign demand.  
Despite the likely positive impact of the demand conditions observed in the second half of the year on 
inflation, it does not seem possible to attain the 5-percent inflation target set for end-2006. However, 
as a result of the measures taken by the Central Bank from June onwards, we expect the secondary 
effects of the developments in exchange rates and commodity prices on inflation to remain limited, the 
likely pressure on 2007 inflation to diminish along with the recovery observed and the downward trend 
in inflation to continue.  
Parallel to the recovery - albeit limited - observed in inflation expectations in August and the relatively 
more  favorable  course  of  international  liquidity  conditions  observed  recently,  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee stated at its last meeting that the medium-term inflation outlook was much better compared 
to previous months and decided to keep short-term interest rates unchanged. However, as the risks 
against the disinflation process still persist, the cautious stance of monetary policy will be maintained. 
In this framework, if any development that would deteriorate inflation in the medium term arises, the 
Central Bank will not hesitate to resort to further monetary tightening.  
As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  some  risks  that  endanger  the  continuation  of  the  downward  trend  of 
inflation in the medium term do exist.  
The first risk is the continuation of the increases in crude oil prices.  
Other  main  risk  factors  include  the  rapid  changes  in  global  risk  perceptions  resulting  from  the 
monetary  policies  of  developed  countries  and  the  fluctuations  that  might  occur  in  financial  markets 
accordingly.  In  case  such  a  risk  materializes,  the  Central  Bank  will  act  with  a  medium-term 
perspective, as it does today: It will not respond to temporary increases in inflation; however, it will 
closely monitor medium-term inflation expectations.  
Another risk factor is that by returning to old habits, variables other than the inflation target are taken 
as a reference in pricing behaviors. This represents the risk of deterioration in pricing behaviors. In 
order to prevent such a risk from materializing, the Central Bank will maintain its cautious stance until 
medium-term inflation expectations converge to the targets.  
One of the risk factors, which are important in the disinflation process and are closely monitored, is the 
price rigidity in the services sector. These sectors require implementations that will increase supply 
and competition.  
Additionally, the Central Bank carefully monitors the political risks that have come to the forefront more 
and more in the recent period. In this scope, in case it is foreseen that political developments in the 
country will have a negative effect on inflation, the Central Bank shall take the necessary measures.  
It is very important in the fight against inflation and for the attainment of medium-term inflation targets 
that tight fiscal policy is carried out decisively. It is observed that the primary surplus targets were, to a 
great  extent,  achieved,  in  the  last  four  years.  In  the  first  six  months  of  2006,  budget  surplus  was 
provided for the first time since 1984 and 78.4 percent of the primary surplus target that was set for 
2006 was reached.  
It is seen that the resolute attitude towards the continuation of fiscal discipline is still maintained today. 
In this framework, in the scope of the disinflation process, it is very important for the Central Bank that 
the policies regarding public revenues and pricing are established consistently with the inflation targets 
and that any need for any unplanned public price adjustments is precluded by respecting the limits of 
budgetary expenditures.  
In order for inflation to converge to medium-term targets, it is of critical importance that the structural 
reform process is maintained in a resolute manner and without any compromise. These reforms would 
enhance the quality of fiscal discipline, improve competition and the investment environment, which, in 
the  long  run,  would  support  an  increase  in  productivity,  and  would  therefore  contribute  to  the 
disinflation process.  
4 
 BIS Review 89/2006
Now, I would like to underline a point. In our country, expectations may change and go to extremes 
very  rapidly.  Therefore,  any  kind  of  implementation,  initiative  and  disclosure  that  might  lead  to 
deterioration in risk perceptions and expectations affect the disinflation process and macroeconomic 
stability in a rapid, harsh and negative way. In this respect, relations with the IMF and the EU are two 
important  anchors,  especially  as  to  medium  and  long-term  expectations.  These  two  factors  should 
remain  as  anchors  in  the  upcoming  periods,  as  they  bear  significance  for  the  enhancement  of 
confidence in our country, the uninterrupted implementation of structural reforms as planned and the 
predictability of our economy in the medium and long-term.  
The Central Bank analyzes all kinds of risks in its scenarios designed to foresee inflation and makes 
its  forecasts  accordingly.  As  I  have  mentioned  earlier,  on  condition  that  the  cautious  stance  of 
monetary policy, fiscal discipline and structural reforms continue, the targets set for 2007 and 2008 
seem  to  be  attainable.  The  target  we  set  for  2007  and  2008  is  4  percent  and  all  our  policies  are 
directed  towards  attaining  these  targets.  It  is  of  critical  importance  that  economic  agents  use  these 
targets as a reference while drawing up their future plans.  
The  floating  exchange  rate  regime  that  is  implemented  today  is  the  sine  qua  non  of  the  inflation-
targeting regime.  
The  basic  principle  of  formal  inflation  targeting  is  to  target  only  inflation  itself  and  to  make  no 
commitments  other  than  the  inflation  targets.  Therefore,  the  Central  Bank  cannot  make  any 
commitments  related  to  the  level  of  exchange  rates  in  an  implicit  or  explicit  manner,  nor  use  the 
exchange rate as a policy instrument. It is out of the question and is impossible.  
Under these circumstances, the value of the Turkish lira is determined in the short term by short-term 
expectations,  developments  related  to  foreign  exchange  supply  and  demand  and  the  behaviors  of 
market  players,  while  the  said  value  is  determined  in  the  medium  and  long-term  by  economic 
fundamentals, the course of structural reforms and the medium and long-term expectations.  
However, the fact that exchange rates are determined under market conditions does not imply that the 
Central Bank will not conduct any transactions in the foreign exchange markets.  
The  Central  Bank  basically  conducts  transactions  with  two  different  aims.  The  first  of  these 
transactions comprises foreign exchange purchase auctions that are held with the aim of building up 
reserves.  These  transactions  are  conducted  via  daily,  transparent  and  exchange  rate-dependent 
mechanisms in the periods where the foreign exchange supply increases in the market and with no 
intention of affecting the level of exchange rates. As a result of these transactions, Turkey’s foreign 
exchange reserves increased by 181 percent in the last four years and reached USD 57 billion as of 
25 August 2006.  
Nevertheless,  due  to  the  decline  in  foreign  exchange  supply,  foreign  exchange  purchase  auctions 
were suspended on 16 May 2006. Foreign exchange purchase auctions would be resumed in line with 
our  strategy  to  increase  reserves  moderately  when  favorable  conditions  occurred  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. 
The second transaction that is conducted by the Central Bank in foreign exchange markets comprises 
foreign exchange interventions. They are made in order to prevent any excessive volatility that might 
occur in exchange rates and depending on the reasons for this volatility and potential developments. 
In this framework, the Central Bank may intervene directly to curb excessive volatility in either direction 
and use announcements and warnings. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  a  point  related  to  the  excessive  volatility  interventions.  As  opposed  to  the 
auctions held in the framework of our strategy to build up reserves, these interventions do not have a 
mechanical  nature.  Each  situation  is  analyzed  according  to  its  conditions  and  the  decision  for  an 
intervention is made accordingly. Therefore, such interventions do not have a symmetrical nature.  
In this framework, in order to prevent excessive volatility, the Central Bank intervened directly in the 
foreign  exchange  markets  21  times  (15  purchase  auctions  and  6  sale  auctions)  under  the  floating 
exchange rate regime. 
In the framework of both strategies, the Central Bank has made a net purchase of foreign exchange 
amounting to USD 43.7 billion from the foreign exchange market since 2002.  
In the framework of the exchange rate policy that I have mentioned earlier in detail, developments in 
the foreign exchange market are monitored carefully by the Central Bank as they have a direct impact 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 5
on inflation and constitute an important part of financial stability. In this scope, I would like to briefly 
analyze the fluctuations in financial markets.  
In  the  period  between  the  beginning  of  May  -  when  fluctuations  started  -  and  the  end  of  June,  the 
Turkish lira depreciated by approximately 29 percent.  
What  triggered  the  rapid  depreciation  of  the  Turkish  lira  was  the  change  in  international  liquidity 
conditions against developing countries. Global risk perceptions changed along with expectations that 
the  central  banks  of  developed  countries  would  tend  to  increase  interest  rates,  and  global  liquidity 
abandoned  developing  countries  and  shifted  to  developed  countries.  Along  with  all  developing 
countries, Turkey was significantly affected by the changes in international liquidity conditions, as well. 
The impact observed in Turkey was stronger compared to other countries because the domestic risk 
perceptions about inflation, current account deficit and political issues increased in this period.  
As a result of these impacts, capital outflow took place over a two-month period. At this point, it should 
be underlined that a major part of the said outflow was met by the foreign exchange sales of residents. 
The process of structural change in the Turkish economy, in other words, the background of the steps 
taken to strengthen macroeconomic fundamentals and to normalize the economy took only five years.  
A  5-year  period  is  very  short  for  the  structural  achievements  made  in  a  country  with  a  30-year 
inflationary past to repair the fragility in expectations in a permanent way. 
Therefore, in a period where financial fluctuations were observed in all developing countries, the short-
term market fluctuations originating from foreigners’ exits were perceived to be much more negative in 
Turkey, although there was not a permanent deterioration in macroeconomic fundamentals.  
As  seen  in  the  table  in  the  slide,  there  have  been  eight  fluctuations  since  the  year  2001  when  the 
floating exchange rate regime was put into practice, and exchange rates have even surpassed the top 
value  that  was  recorded  in  the  recent  fluctuation.  However,  to  the  extent  that  the  program  was 
implemented decisively and policies were conducted without any interruption, there had always been a 
return to the main trend where the Turkish lira appreciated. It should be kept in mind that this process 
is also the process for the Turkish lira to gain credibility. As long as macroeconomic fundamentals are 
strengthened and structural reforms are achieved, this process is likely to continue.  
 
Table. Rapid changes in exchange rates* 
Beginning Date  Ending Date  Duration
(days) 
Value at the 
beginning  Top value % Change 
15.04.2002 
30.07.2002 
106 
03.12.2002 
09.01.2003 
03.03.2003 
25.03.2003 
24.09.2003 
10.11.2003 
05.04.2004 
24.05.2004 
20.07.2004 
21.09.2004 
08.03.2005 
04.05.2006 
30.03.2005 
26.06.2006 
37 
22 
47 
49 
63 
22 
53 
1.2928 
1.5200 
1.5962 
1.3545 
1.3076 
1.4293 
1.2601 
1.3167 
1.6966 
1.6825 
1.7548 
1.5048 
1.5582 
1.5388 
1.3905 
1.7016 
31.2 
10.7 
9.9 
11.1 
19.2 
7.7 
10.3 
29.2 
* CBRT indicative USD selling rate 
   6 
 Standard 
deviation 
(Daily 
change%) 
1.11 
1.00 
1.53 
0.80 
1.18 
0.74 
1.14 
1.61 
BIS Review 89/2006
In this period of fluctuations, in order to ensure the continuation of the downward trend of inflation, the 
Central Bank used policy interest rates effectively on the one hand, and took the necessary market 
measures with a view to stopping the fluctuations in the market on the other.  
First of all, in order to prevent declining foreign exchange liquidity from increasing volatility in the level 
of  the  exchange  rate,  the  Central  Bank  suspended  foreign  exchange  purchase  auctions  and 
intervened directly in the market by selling foreign exchange where deemed necessary.  
The Central Bank followed an effective liquidity management strategy and started to hold New Turkish 
lira  deposit  purchase  auctions  with  the  aim  of  withdrawing  the  TL-denominated  excess  liquidity 
gradually. At this point, the excess liquidity has been brought down to such an extent that it does not 
require daily auctions.  
As a result of these measures, the fluctuation in the markets was restrained. From end-June onwards, 
the Turkish lira appreciated by 16.7 percent while the indicative GS (government securities) interest 
rates and the average interest rate that is formed in CBRT deposit purchase auctions dropped by 3 
points and 3.1 points, respectively. The volatility in both exchange rates and interest rates decreased 
significantly.  
In  this  regard,  I  should  say  that  frankly  the  impacts  of  such  shocks  would  have  been  much  more 
severe  under  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  At  present,  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime  is 
performing its shock-absorbing function.  
This process has shown once more how important it is for economic agents to manage the risks on 
their balance sheets under the floating exchange rate regime.  
As  similar  volatilities  may  be  observed  in  the  future  under  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime,  all 
economic agents should protect themselves in the framework of modern risk management principles, 
against interest rate or exchange rate risk on their balance sheets. The Izmir Derivatives Exchange 
provides an important opportunity in this respect.  
After  focusing  on  the  monetary and  exchange rate  policies conducted  by  the  Central  Bank and  the 
developments  in  inflation  and  financial  markets,  now  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  strong  growth 
performance that has been displayed by the Turkish economy since 2001 and the growth outlook.  
As you all know, in the first quarter of 2006, the Turkish economy grew by 6.3 percent in real terms. 
Hence,  cumulative  real  growth  has  been  36.9  percent  since  2001.  The  Turkish  economy  has  been 
growing for the last 17 quarters consecutively.  
I would like to draw your attention to the first point that is related to this growth process; the dynamics 
and actors of growth has changed parallel to the structural changes in the economy. 
Today, growing with public resources is no longer the case. The determinant of the growth rates is the 
consumption and investment of the private sector.  
While private sector real investment expenditures increased by 118.2 percent in the period between 
2001 and the first quarter of 2006, the said increase in the public sector was realized as 18.6 percent. 
On the consumption side, expenditures of the private sector and the public sector increased by 32.8 
percent  and  7.5  percent,  respectively,  during  the  same  period.  Meanwhile,  machinery-equipment 
expenditures of the private sector have increased cumulatively by 217.7 percent since 2001. These 
figures underline the fact that investment-based growth has also been increasing.  
The  main  contribution  of  the  public  sector  to  growth  no  longer  comes  through  its  expenditures,  but 
through the role it undertakes as a strong supervisory and regulatory agent in the framework of good 
governance principles and also from its policies focusing on the goal of increasing competitiveness.  
The  public  sector’s  need  for  borrowing  from  financial  markets  declined  due  to  tight  fiscal  policies, 
which provided the private sector the opportunity to find lower-cost and longer term resources.  
Another change observed in growth dynamics in line with the structural transformation in the economy 
is  that  productivity  increases  have  become  the  most  significant  factor  in  growth.  The  cumulative 
productivity increase in the private manufacturing industry for the period between 2001 and the first 
quarter of 2006 reached 35 percent.  
While the said productivity increases support the growth process on the one hand, they improve the 
quality and contribute to the sustainability of growth on the other.  
BIS Review 89/2006 
 7
The last issue I will touch on about growth factors has to do with the increased level of integration of 
the  Turkish  economy  with  the  world.  In  this  framework,  exports,  which  rose  by  151.5  percent 
cumulatively from 2001 to July 2006, made a critical contribution to the rapid growth observed for the 
last four years.  
Domestic and foreign competition, which increased due to the increased number of firms that took up 
export activities and entered international markets as a result of integration with the world, led to a 
decrease in profit margins in these sectors. In such an environment, productivity increases become 
the  main  factor  in  competition.  Sectors  with  the  highest  productivity  increases  became  the  sectors, 
which grew most rapidly and increased their exports the most.  
Studies  to  increase  productivity  and  specialization  in  technology  and  capital-intensive  sectors  that 
create high value added are more critical for the sustainability of increases in exports in the long term, 
than the advantage of exchange rate movements.  
In  order  to  be  able  to  persevere  in  such  a  strong  competitive  environment,  medium  and  long-term 
strategies – rather than short-term perspectives – are needed. To this end, public and private sectors 
should act in cooperation and harmony. In this framework, the public sector should try to create an 
environment for the private sector, in which it can compete with competitors in international markets 
under market conditions. In the meantime, the public sector should continue to take measures in order 
to increase its productivity, build robust and transparent balance sheets, turn towards capital markets, 
attend  to  risk  management  principles  and  try  to  allocate  resources  for  research  and  development 
activities.  
When we look at the course of growth in 2006, we see that indicators of consumption and investment 
expenditures  provide  signals  for  a  rapid  course  of  growth  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  year. 
Meanwhile, it is anticipated that the environment of uncertainty created by the fluctuations in financial 
markets in the second quarter will affect domestic demand in a slightly unfavorable manner and hinder 
the  rapid  growth  process,  starting  from  the  third  quarter  of  the  year  onwards.  The  declines  in  the 
Central Bank Business Tendency Survey indicators and domestic sales of automobiles as well as the 
fall in the Consumer Confidence Index also support this anticipation. Thus, it seems likely that the rate 
of growth will decelerate to a certain extent in the second half of 2006 and the first half of 2007.  
At this stage, I would like to draw your attention to the following point: What Turkey needs is to sustain 
growth at levels close to its potential. The uninterrupted course of growth in recent years is just the 
beginning. This process is a dynamic one. Structural reforms are extremely important and should be 
reinforced with micro measures, and a strategic vision should be adopted in line with changing needs 
and new structures. The Ninth Development Plan provides significant ground in this regard and should 
be put into implementation immediately.  
I  would  also  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  employment,  which  is  another  important  issue  on  the 
agenda of Turkey.  
The number of people employed is gradually increasing in line with the high growth performance in our 
country.  In  the  last  one-year  period,  nine  hundred  seventeen  thousand  (917,000)  new  employment 
opportunities  were  created  in  sectors  excluding  agriculture.  Moreover,  in  accordance  with  the 
structural transformation process in the economy, the sectoral distribution of employment is changing 
and a rapid shift is observed from the agricultural sector to other sectors. While employment in the 
agricultural  sector  decreased  by  3.6  percentage  points  compared  to  the  same  period  last  year, 
employment  in  the  services  sector  rose  by  2.9  percentage  points.  In  this  context,  the  share  of  the 
agricultural sector in total employment fell from 38 percent in 2001 to 28.4 percent, as of May 2006. 
However, taking into account that this ratio was 3.7 percent for EU-15 countries in 2004, Turkey still 
has a long way to go. Similarly, when we look at the labor force participation rates, we see a significant 
discrepancy. The labor force participation rate, which fell by 0.7 percentage points and became 48.6 
percent in Turkey in May 2006, compared to the same period last year, was around 65 percent for EU-
15 countries by the year 2004.  
Meanwhile, a relative improvement is observed in unemployment rates. The unemployed population 
and the unemployment rate are at their lowest levels since the third quarter of 2001. Compared to the 
same  period  last  year,  the  unemployment  rate  decreased  to  8.8  percent  from  9.2  percent  in  May. 
During the same period, the unemployment rate in sectors excluding agriculture fell by 1 percentage 
point and became 11.5 percent. Similarly, it can be said that there is a relative improvement in the 
unemployment rates in urban areas. The unemployment rate, especially among the young population 
8 
 BIS Review 89/2006
taxes  affect  employment 
in  urban  areas,  decreased  by  2.3  percentage  points  and  fell  to  19.4  percent  from  21.7  percent. 
However, the improvement in the unemployment rate has not yet reached the desired level.  
When  unemployment  rates  and  the  labor  market  are  analyzed  in  detail,  it  is  observed  that 
unemployment is a structural problem in Turkey.  
A continued decline in employment in the agricultural sector due to the structural transformation in the 
labor  market  and  the  participation  of  this  unemployed  population  in  the  labor  force  in  urban  areas 
stand as factors that prevent a more significant fall in unemployment rates.  
Moreover, although it has lost pace, the rate of the population increase still remains high. In turn, the 
employable  population  is  rising  rapidly  and  unemployment  rates  remain  at  high  levels  despite  the 
increase in the number of people employed.  
Additionally,  high  employment 
figures  unfavorably  and  encourage 
unregistered  employment.  The  high  level  of  unregistered  employment  increases  the  volatility  of 
employment.  Although  the  share  of  unregistered  employment  in  total  employment  fell  in  the  recent 
period, it is still high at 49.4 percent as of May 2006.  
Another structural problem in the labor market is that the employment rate of professionally trained 
people is low. This fact shows that there is a lack of qualified labor force for structural transformation to 
take place.  
The  unemployment  problem  is  a critical  matter  and  must  by  all means  be  solved.  Finding  a  lasting 
solution to this problem and sustaining the employment increases are possible only through long-term 
and  supply-oriented  policies.  Turkey  should  follow  active  policies  that  would  create  employment 
opportunities.  In  this  framework,  the  relationship  between  the  real  sector  and  the  financial  sector 
should  be  reinforced  in  order  to  provide  the  private  sector  with  the  financing  required  for  creating 
employment,  the  investment  environment  should  be  improved,  permanent  stability  should  be 
established  in  the  macroeconomic  environment  and  the  capacity  of  growth  to  create  employment 
should be enhanced.  
Furthermore, training policies should be implemented in order to increase the qualified labor force that 
would  meet  the  labor  demand,  employment  taxes  and  other  burdens  on  employment  should  be 
reduced gradually in order to register the unregistered employment, and regional markets should be 
formed for the unqualified labor force created by the contraction in the agricultural sector.  
In  this  scope,  the  framework  drawn  up  by  the  Ninth  Development  Plan  in  consistence  with  the 
European Union Employment Strategy is a road map for what should be done.  
In the last part of my speech, I would like to say a few words about the issue of current account deficit, 
which  has  frequently  been  discussed  in  recent  years,  and  highlight  certain  points  I  consider  to  be 
significant about Turkey’s current account deficit.  
As  you  all  follow  closely,  the  current  account  deficit  has  widened  rapidly  in  recent  years  as  a 
consequence of the high growth performance observed since 2001.  
The current account deficit, which was USD 23.2 billion in 2005, rose to USD 28.7 billion by June 2006 
in  annual  terms.  Analyzed  in  terms  of  the  ratio  to  national  income,  the  ratio  of  the  current  account 
deficit was 6.4 percent by the end of 2005. The said ratio rose to 6.9 percent in the first quarter of 
2006.  
Certainly, high rates of current account deficit are not peculiar to Turkey and can also be observed in 
other transition economies that grow at similar high rates. For instance, the ratio of current account 
deficit to gross domestic product is 11.8 percent in Bulgaria, 8.7 percent in Romania, 7.9 percent in 
Hungary and 7.2 percent in the Slovak Republic, as of 20051.  
Higher  rates  of  global  and  financial  integration  enable  countries  to  sustain  higher  rates  of  current 
account deficit, to the extent that the robustness of their macroeconomic fundamentals allows. Due to 
the impact of these conditions, a current account deficit on a higher plateau has also been sustained 
in Turkey in recent years.  
                                                      
1  
IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 2006 
BIS Review 89/2006 
 9
The  recent  high  increase  observed  in  the  current  account  deficit  in  Turkey  is  not  the  result  of  the 
increase  in  consumption,  but  comes  from  the  increase  in  investments  that  boosts  the  production 
capacity.  
Crude  oil prices,  which  have  been  following  a  high  and  volatile course  in  international markets  and 
maintaining their upward trend in recent years, stand as another factor explaining the widening of the 
current account deficit. When oil prices are taken as those of the year 2000, it can be said that the 
ratio of current account deficit to national income is 1.2 percentage points lower as of the first quarter 
of 2006.  
Meanwhile, it is expected that the depreciation of the Turkish currency due to recent fluctuations in 
financial  markets,  monetary  policy  tightening  and  the  relative  decline  in  domestic  demand  will  slow 
economic activity and imports to a certain extent as of the second half of the year. As for exports, the 
upward  trend  is  anticipated  to  gain  momentum  in  line  with  increased  foreign  demand.  In  this 
framework, it is expected that the ratio of current account deficit to gross national product will fall in 
2006 compared to 2005.  
The quality of financing is very important for the sustainability of the current account deficit and for 
preventing the perception that the current account deficit is a risk. The quality of financing in Turkey 
has  improved  significantly,  especially  due  to  the  favorable  impact  of  the  structural  transformation 
process and has enhanced the macroeconomic conditions observed in the last five years.  
Long-term capital is assuming an increasingly important role in the financing of the current account 
deficit.  By  June,  82  percent  of  the  current  account  deficit  has  been  financed  with  long-term  capital 
alone. Meanwhile, the ratio of short-term capital to current account deficit stands at 29.4 percent.  
In addition, foreign direct investments peaked well beyond historic levels and reached a record-high 
level of USD 17.3 billion in annual terms in June 2006.  
No  disruption  was  observed  in  foreign  direct  investment  inflow  during  the  fluctuations  in  financial 
markets that started in May. This development is a result of the success achieved in macroeconomic 
stability  and  also  an  indicator  of  confidence  in  the  future.  The  inflow  of  foreign  direct  investment  is 
expected to accelerate further, due to increased privatizations, company mergers and takeovers.  
Meanwhile,  it  is  observed  that  hot  money  inflows,  which  lead  to  frequent  discussions  about  the 
financing of the current account deficit, have lost pace due to the change in global liquidity conditions. 
Including net errors and omissions, the ratio of hot money to current account deficit, which was 103 
percent on an annual basis by June 2005, decreased to 27.8 percent by June 2006.  
We  expect  that  the  above  mentioned  financing  structure,  which  is  composed  heavily  of  long-term 
capital and foreign direct investments, will also continue in the upcoming years in the framework of the 
structural  transformation  process  in  the  Turkish  economy  and  the  European  Union  full  membership 
process.  
While  evaluating  the  rates  of  current  account  deficit,  it  should  be  taken  into  account  that  the 
macroeconomic conditions in Turkey are different from those of the past. First of all, the short position 
of the banking sector is very limited compared to previous years and the financial sector is much more 
robust. Tight monetary and fiscal policies are decisively implemented. Foreign exchange reserves are 
high and the floating exchange rate regime is successfully fulfilling its shock-absorbing function. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  level  of  the  current  account  deficit  is  not  so  important  in 
terms  of  ensuring  that  it  does  not  follow  a  volatile  course  and  is  not  perceived  as  a  significant  risk 
factor. However, in an environment where turbulences are observed in the markets and uncertainty 
perceptions  are  increasing,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  a  surge  in  the  perceptions  of  fragility  in  the 
current account deficit, as well as the popularity of these perceptions. The current account deficit is a 
closely followed indicator. We are also aware of the risk potential of the current account deficit and 
have been carefully monitoring it in coordination with other agents responsible for the economy.  
Dear guests,  
I was most honored to be here in Malatya and to have the chance to share my views on the Bank’s 
policies and macroeconomic developments with you today.  
Thank you.  
10 
 BIS Review 89/2006
