T T Mboweni: International regulatory developments and the South African 
banking sector 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  trainee  chartered 
accountants  in  the  Western  Cape,  at  the  South  African  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants,  Cape 
Town, 2 October 2006.  
Honoured guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction  
1.  
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  address  you  today.  Financial  markets  have  become  increasingly 
globalised and our markets are no exception. Within this context, regulation according to international 
best practice, has a big part to play in ensuring the stability of the financial sector. You may be aware 
the international community has adopted some measures to harmonise the regulation of banks. Today 
I will provide a brief overview of two of these initiatives namely, the new Capital Accord and the Basel 
Core  Principles,  which  have  been  adopted  under  the  auspices  of  the  Bank  for  InternationaI 
Settlements  (BIS).  I  will  pay  particular  attention  to  how  these  initiatives  impact  on  the  regulation  of 
banks in South Africa. As future chartered accountants, these developments will have an important 
impact on your working lives. I will conclude by making some observations on the performance of the 
South African banking sector. 
The Bank for International Settlements 
2.  
Many industries and businesses have established associations, whose aims are to conduct research, 
review  important  issues  and  promote  the  development  of  these  industries  or  businesses.  The  BIS, 
established  in  1930,  could  be  described  as  a  club  or  association  for  central  bankers.  The  BIS  was 
established in the context of the Young Plan, which dealt with the issue of the reparation payments 
imposed on Germany by the Treaty of Versailles following the First World War. The name of the BIS is 
derived from this original role, and was also created to promote central bank cooperation in general.  
The  reparations  issue  quickly  faded,  focusing  the  activities  of  the  BIS  entirely  on  world-wide 
cooperation among central banks and, increasingly, other multi-lateral agencies in pursuit of monetary 
and financial stability. Today, central banks from 55 countries are members of the BIS.  
The  BIS  fulfils  its  mandate  by  acting  as  a  forum  to  promote  discussion  and  policy  analysis  among 
central  banks  and  within  the  international  financial  community.  It  is  also  a  centre  for  economic  and 
monetary research; a prime counterparty for central banks in their financial transactions; and acts as 
an agent or trustee in connection with international financial operations.  
The  most  important  meetings  held  at  the  BIS  are  the  regular  meetings  of  Governors  and  senior 
officials of member central banks. I regularly attend these meetings which are held every two months 
in Basel. These gatherings provide an opportunity for participants to discuss the world economy and 
financial markets, and to exchange views on topical issues of central bank interest or concern. Other 
meetings of senior central bank officials focus on the conduct of monetary policy, the surveillance of 
international financial markets and central bank governance issues.  
The growth of international financial markets and cross-border money flows in the 1970s highlighted 
the  lack  of  efficient  banking  supervision  at  an  international  level.  National  banking  supervisory 
authorities basically regulated domestic banks and the domestic activities of international banks, while 
the international activities of these banks were not always closely supervised. The collapse in 1974 of 
Bankhaus Herstatt in Germany and of the Franklin National Bank in the United States prompted the 
G10 central bank Governors to set up the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. This Committee, 
known as the Basel Committee, concerns itself with guidelines for international co-operation in bank 
supervision. The Committee, which includes representatives from the major supervisory agencies as 
well as from central banks, provides a forum for regular cooperation on banking supervisory matters. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 1
Over the years, the Committee has developed increasingly into a standard-setting body on all aspects 
of banking supervision.  
The Basel Capital Accord  
3.  
No  bank  can  maintain  the  public’s  trust  for  long  if  it  lacks  sufficient  capital,  so  supervisors  impose 
capital requirements to safeguard the banking system. Since capital is the last line of defense against 
bank  insolvency,  regulatory  capital  requirements  are  one  of  the  fundamental  elements  of  banking 
supervision.  
In  1988  the  Basel  Committee  issued  the  Basel  Capital  Accord.  This  introduced  a  credit  risk 
measurement framework for banks which became a globally accepted standard. South Africa complies 
with  the  Basel  Capital  Accord.  A  revision  of  this  Capital  Accord,  known  as  Basel  II,  is  due  to  be 
implemented  worldwide  from  the  end  of  2006.  Such  standards  aim  to  achieve  a  better  and  more 
transparent  measurement  of  the  various  risks  incurred  by  internationally  active  banks,  limiting  the 
possibility of contagion in cases of a crisis and strengthening the global financial infrastructure overall.  
The  new  Capital  Accord  is  based  on  three  pillars,  namely,  minimum  capital  requirements,  a 
supervisory  review  process,  and  effective  use  of  market  discipline,  through  minimum  disclosure 
standards.  With  regard  to  the  first  pillar,  a  material  development  was  the  internal  rating-based 
approach  to  credit  risk.  Since  the  board  of  directors  and  management  of  a  bank  have,  or  ought  to 
have, the most complete understanding of the risks that their bank faces, the board and management 
have primary responsibility for the management of these risks. Internal ratings are intended to become 
an  integral  part  of  a  bank's  risk-management  process  and  its  own  assessment  of  capital  adequacy 
before such ratings may be applied in the determination of the bank's statutory capital requirement.  
Supervisory  review  of  capital,  the  second  pillar  of  the  new  Accord,  will  be  a  critical  complement  to 
minimum capital requirements. Supervisors will have to evaluate how well banks are assessing their 
capital  needs  relative  to  their  risks,  including  whether  banks  are  appropriately  addressing  the 
relationship between different types of risk.  
Market  discipline,  the  third  pillar,  performs  an  essential  role  in  ensuring  that  the  capital  of  banking 
institutions  is  maintained  at  adequate  levels.  Since  effective  public  disclosure  enhances  market 
discipline  and  allows  market  participants  to  assess  a  bank's  capital  adequacy,  disclosure  can  be  a 
strong incentive for banks to conduct their business in a safe, sound and efficient manner.  
South  Africa  has  made  good  progress  with  preparations  for  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  on  1 
January  2008.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  remains  committed  to  providing  a  regulatory 
environment  that  will  allow  South  African  banks  to  adopt  international  best  practice.  South  Africa’s 
financial sector is held in high regard, and the introduction of Basel II will enable South African banks 
to maintain, if not strengthen, their international standing, to the benefit of the economy.  
The Basel Core Principles  
4.  
Countries use the Basel Core Principles as a benchmark for assessing the quality of their supervisory 
systems  and  for  identifying  future  work  needed  to  ensure  sound  supervisory  practices.  The  Core 
Principles have also been used by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in the context 
of the Financial Sector Assessment Program. Changes have occurred in banking regulation over the 
years,  however,  and  much  experience  has  been  gained  with  implementing  the  Core  Principles  in 
individual  countries.  Subsequently,  the  Basel  Committee  established  the  Core  Principles  Liaison 
Group to update the Core Principles to reflect these changes. This is to ensure their continued validity, 
usefulness and relevance as a flexible, globally applicable standard.  
The  updated  Principles  remain  focused  on  banking  supervision.  Issues  related  to  the  necessary 
infrastructure  for  effective  banking  supervision  are  discussed  as  preconditions  and  provide 
background  for  the  assessment.  The  review  also  stresses  the  importance  of  the  independence, 
accountability and transparency of bank supervisory authorities.  
Recently,  an  exercise  benchmarking  the  bank  supervisory  framework  of  South  Africa  against  the 
revised  Core  Principles  was  conducted  and  areas  of  non-compliance  identified.  An  action  plan  has 
been  initiated  to  implement  the  changes,  thereby  ensuring  that  the  South  African  bank  supervisory 
framework meets international standards.  
2 
 BIS Review 90/2006
The global financial sector  
5.  
According to the 76th Annual Report of the BIS, the main risks confronting the global financial sector 
are of a macroeconomic nature. These relate to the potential effects of higher interest rates, a turn in 
the  credit  cycle  and,  possibly,  associated  declines  in  real  estate  prices  and  aggregate  expenditure. 
The  current  global  environment  places  a  premium  on  system-wide  risk  management.  The  report 
highlights the importance of making available information about risk as well as the interplay, and need 
for  consistency,  between  financial  reporting  standards,  risk  management  practices  and  the  overall 
prudential framework.  
The South African financial sector is also exposed to these risks and the planned implementation of 
Basel II by South African banks will strengthen reporting standards and market discipline.  
The South African banking industry  
6.  
The South African banking system is sound and stable. Banks are well capitalised, and the average 
risk-weighted capital-adequacy ratio for the banking system as a whole was 12,3 per cent at the end of 
July 2006.  
Growth in the total balance sheet of banks remained strong during the past year and by the end of 
July 2006, the total assets of banks – comprising, amongst other things, money, loans and advances, 
investment and trading position and non-financial assets – had increased by 20 per cent year-on-year, 
to a level of R1 939,5 billion.  
By  the  end  of  July  2006,  the  South  African  banking  sector  had  recorded  year-on-year  mortgage-
lending growth of 30,8 per cent to a level of R608,9 billion. This growth was due to a number of factors 
including  lower  mortgage-interest  rates,  a  lower  level  of  inflation,  lower  income-tax  rates  and  an 
increase  in  the  real  disposable  income  of  households.  There  was  also  an  increase  in  speculative 
buying, known as the ‘buy-to-let’ boom. Real estate prices are currently experiencing a slow-down in 
growth, which suggests some strong resistance from consumers.  
Consumer spending through credit card lending has recorded year-on-year growth of 38,6 per cent to 
a level of R36,9 billion at the end of July 2006, while the growth in installment-sales debtors has also 
continued unabated, growing by 18,8 per cent, to a level of R201,6 billion over the same period. As 
the  regulator  of  banks,  the  Bank  Supervision  Department  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  will 
continue  to  ensure  that  banks’  risk-management  processes  are  appropriate  for  monitoring  these 
activities in the light of increasing household sector indebtedness and the increasing cost of credit.  
This high rate of credit extension has become a major cause for concern for the Bank. The high levels 
of  credit  extension  have  resulted  in  record  levels  of  household  debt,  which  have  reached  levels  of 
almost 70 per cent of household disposable income. The high levels of consumer expenditure have 
also contributed to the expanding deficit on the current account of the balance of payments. These 
developments  pose  a  threat  to  the  inflation  outlook,  and  have  prompted  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee to raise the repo rate by 50 basis points at each of the past two MPC meetings.  
Conclusion  
7.  
In conclusion, there are three points which I would like to emphasise. Firstly, the implementation of the 
new Capital Accord by our banks will result in the adoption of a globally accepted standard, which will 
lead to a more transparent risk measurement and better corporate governance practices.  
Secondly, complying with the Basel Core Principles, will ensure that banks are regulated according to 
international standards. Finally, it will be in consumers’ own interests to take note of local economic 
trends, such as the recent increases in the repo rate of the Bank, prior to incurring new debt.  
I thank you. 
BIS Review 90/2006 
 3
