Radovan Jelašić: Serbia’s individuals and institutions – adapting to become 
transition winners 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
50th Anniversary of Čačanska Banka, Čačat, 23 September 2006. 
 Today,  Čačanska  banka celebrates  its  50th  anniversary.  It  does  so  in  the  ever-changing  climate  of 
transition, in which each citizen of Serbia is faced with a range of vital questions – transition to where, 
in what manner and at what pace? And whereas all of us understand transition in our own way, I for 
one believe that transition means entering a new system of economic, social and moral values, and 
that only those who understand what the new times bring, and who manage to adapt quickly, will at 
least avoid being transition losers, if they do not become transition winners – and this holds true for 
both individuals and institutions.  
It is enough to look into the share of state, social and private capital in the portfolio of your bank to 
understand how far-reaching and inevitable these changes have been. Another significant change is 
that membership in the Board of Directors of this bank is no longer motivated by the wish to obtain 
credit under preferential terms, but by a wish to see the institution’s profits and value of its shares go 
up. Not to mention risk management, credit approval procedures, internal controls, etc.  
Although this was scarcely noticed, let alone appreciated, by most of the public, the restructuring of 
the  banking  system  brought  about  a  change  in  many  aspects  of  our  relationship  with  banks:  for 
instance, instead of having to telephone the bank several times a day in order to check our account 
balance, we now get an account statement via our cell phones; instead of complaining of short supply 
of  credits,  we  now  complain  that  “credits  are  too  expensive”.  We  also  have  a  stable  currency,  and 
although foreigners still place more trust in it than some of our own citizens, I am certain that this too 
will change in due course.  
Of course, in order for any change to happen, there must be people who know what they can and 
cannot do alone, and who ask for help in order to be able to tackle the challenges ahead. This is how 
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development acquired a stake in Čačanska banka. If there 
is one thing I appreciate in Serbia, it is when people ask for help, when they admit they cannot carry 
on on their own. This is the first, if not the most important, step towards success. At times I even ask 
myself: How is it possible that Serbia has not outstripped Switzerland long ago, when it has so many 
professing “experts” and “know-alls“ who can tell you all about future developments in exchange rate 
and policy and economy long before they have even happened?!  
As regards the speed of transition, each citizen should decide on their own whether they are happy 
with its present pace or not. One thing, however, is sure: being in transition is like being on a plane – if 
engines stop, even for a minute, the plane will crash, whatever its speed! And an absurd thing about 
transition  is  that,  while  it  lasts,  problems  need  to  be  addressed  by  stepping  things  up,  and  not  by 
slowing down.  
I have just returned from Singapore, where I attended the Annual Meetings of the IMF and the World 
Bank Group, and I would like to share with you the positive impressions from my stay in a city strewn 
with a multitude of billboards assuring visitors that they will be greeted by “4 million smiling faces of 
Singaporeans.“ And it really was so.  
The difference between Singapore and Serbia lies not only in the fact that their per capita GDP is USD 
30,000 and ours only USD 3,500, but also in the fact that the 7.5 million of our citizens do not only 
show very little optimism, if any, but some of them still live in the past. The difference, as I said, is not 
only in the smile, or absence of it, but in an unlimited optimism, social energy and self-confidence that 
Singaporeans display! I believe that we already have sufficient reasons to be satisfied more often, not 
only on important occasions, such as this, the 50th anniversary of Čačanska banka, but also each time 
we succeed, in either private or business life. But in order for Serbia to change, we must, each of us, 
change first. And this is the most difficult part of transition, which I myself, at the age of 38, still find 
hard to do!  
BIS Review 100/2006 
 1
