Stefan Ingves: The development of a modern financial sector in Sweden 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Indira  Gandhi  Institute  of 
Development Research, Mumbai, 16 November 2006. 
 I  am  honoured  and  grateful  that  you  have  invited  me  to  speak  here  today.  This  is  an  institute  of 
development research so it is appropriate for me to talk about development in the financial sector. It 
has become gradually more acknowledged by academics as well as by practitioners and policymakers 
that a well developed financial sector is necessary to a country’s overall economic growth and stability. 
It also improves the services provided to the individual citizens. A well-functioning financial services 
industry facilitates the transformation of savings into productive investments. It assumes, transforms 
and distributes risks to those willing and prepared to hold them. It facilitates payments between people 
and  companies.  The  financial  sector  is  an  instrument  to  promote  the  smooth  functioning  and 
sustainable development of the whole economy. 
Conversely,  experience  has  clearly  shown  that  a  badly-managed  or  inadequate  financial  system  is 
detrimental  to  the  stability  and  development  of  society.  It  may  provide  inefficient  and  expensive 
services and it may run hidden or explicit losses, which in the end may have to be covered by private 
and public money. It may also distort competition. 
The  conclusion  is  obvious:  Arguments  for  social  and  economic  development  speak  in  favour  of 
conducting reforms with the aim of creating a well-functioning financial system. Such a system should 
offer  a  wide  variety  of  financial  services.  Since  providing  the  necessary  financial  functions  is  more 
important than the exact set-up of institutions, we should be flexible as to the means to achieve the 
desired services.  
In practice, most countries’ financial systems contain banks, other financial institutions, markets and 
exchanges, and payment and settlement systems. I will later elaborate on why the financial system 
must  be  well  regulated  and  supervised,  in  accordance  with  modern  and  globally-acknowledged 
practices, for instance those formulated by the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision. Moreover, 
the development of a well-functioning financial system depends on a number of external factors, such 
as macroeconomic stability, an adequate legal and judicial structure, robust rules for accounting and 
auditing,  and  a  financial  safety  net  to  deal  with  problems  occurring  in  the  financial  institutions  and 
markets. 
In my presentation today I will discuss all of these components and I will base it on my experiences of 
transforming  the  Swedish  system  from  highly  regulated  and  inefficient  to  a  modern  one  that  today 
competes successfully on the international scene. The Swedish experience might in some ways also 
be  relevant  for  other  countries,  although  one  must  always  take  into  account  the  specific  domestic 
circumstances. The basic conditions underlying a sound financial system are similar for all countries. 
I  will  first  give  an  overview  of  the  regulated  system  we  used  to  have  in  Sweden  and  some  of  its 
objectives and consequences and I will then turn to deregulation and the challenges we faced. The 
second half of my presentation deals with the modernization of the banking system, of other segments 
of the financial system, and of the underlying regulation and supervision. I will also discuss some of 
the most recent developments in financial services and in regulation. 
A highly regulated financial system 
The  Swedish  financial  system  was  heavily  regulated  from  the  late  1930s  to  the  beginning  of  the 
1980s.  The  intention  was  to  ensure  a  stable  financial  system  which  could  provide  cheap  financial 
services  to  the  consumers  and  the  export  industry  and,  in  particular,  financing  prioritized  purposes 
such as the fiscal budget deficit and apartment housing construction at low cost. More than half of the 
amount available for bank lending was channelled into these prioritized fields. In addition, the pension 
funds and the insurance companies were forced to allocate large parts of their funds to similar priority 
purposes. 
Competition between the banks was curtailed; for instance, the authorities set floors and ceilings for 
bank fees and interest rates. Credit expansion was also regulated by the central bank, with the aim of 
avoiding  excessive  credit  growth  in  relation  to  the  overall  growth  of  the  economy.  There  were  also 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 1
strict liquidity and cash reserve requirements as an instrument of the central bank’s monetary policy. 
The establishment of new banks was decided by the authorities only if they found that there was a 
“need”  for  the  proposed  bank.  The same  type  of  test  was  conducted  before a  Swedish  bank could 
receive a permit for opening branches within Sweden. 
Capital  movements  and  certain  current  account  transactions  in  and  out  of  Sweden  were  restricted. 
Companies were only allowed to transfer funds abroad in order to finance their overseas investments 
if they could prove sound economic reasons for doing so, such as if the investments might eventually 
lead to increased exports from Sweden. Companies were allowed to borrow abroad, but only in foreign 
currency and there were also requirements from the Riksbank on the minimum maturity of the loan.  
Physical persons were only granted a small foreign currency allowance for travel, and had to apply to 
the central bank for any additional sums such as for acquiring a house or apartment abroad. Foreign 
companies were generally not allowed to issue securities in the Swedish markets.  
Foreign banks were not allowed to operate in Sweden and Swedish banks had to obtain permits when 
they wanted to establish subsidiaries abroad; branches were not allowed at all.  
These restrictions on capital movements had several aims.  
One was to ensure a stable Swedish currency, with a fixed exchange rate, insulated from any sudden 
capital  flows.  Originally,  and  in  particular  during  and  immediately  after  the  Second  World  War  the 
restrictions supported the rationing of the scarce foreign currency revenues available to the Swedish 
economy.  The  restrictions  also  ensured  orderly  conditions  on  the  securities  markets:  The  Riksbank 
arranged  a  queue  for  the  issuance  of  new  securities  and  monitored  the  timing  and  sequencing  of 
issuance  in  order  to  match  it  with  the  available  liquidity  and  investor  appetite.  Another  aim  of  the 
restrictions was to make it more difficult to circumvent the domestic restrictions on the credit market 
through  overseas  transactions.  Finally,  I  must  admit  that  there  was  a  degree  of  protection  of  the 
Swedish financial institutions from foreign competition. 
The regulations on the domestic credit market as well as of capital movements resulted in a highly 
rigid and underdeveloped Swedish financial sector. However, given the oligopoly situation the sector 
was rather profitable. You might conclude that the priority purposes were subsidized at the expense of 
the banks’ savers. 
Regulation, policy mistakes, and their consequences 
Starting from the late 1970s it became gradually more obvious that the restrictions did not function as 
planned. The financial sector became gradually more inefficient since it could not progress in line with 
external developments and it could thus not provide the necessary new financial services to support 
the  overall  economy  which  was  undergoing  modernisation.  The  restrictions  were  in  various  ways 
circumvented  by  the  institutions  themselves  and  by  other  market  participants.  Instead  of  promoting 
financial  stability  the  restrictions  led  to  increasing  vulnerabilities,  for  instance  when  the  share  of 
lending  provided  by  less  regulated  entities  increased.  The  restrictions  on  capital  movements  meant 
that  imbalances  in  the  Swedish  economy  were  not  always  identified  as  early  as  they  should  have 
been.  In  addition,  the  large  Swedish  exporting  companies  learnt  how  to  evade  the  restrictions  on 
capital  movements  which  gave  them  a  competitive  advantage  over  smaller  competitors  also  in  the 
domestic market. 
The increasing deficits in the fiscal budget and in the current account made the restrictive system non-
operative. The government finally decided to abolish them, although in a careful and gradual fashion 
to minimise disturbances to the markets and the economy. During a period spanning the late 1970s 
and  the  early  1980s  the  domestic  regulations  and  the  restrictions  on  capital  movements  were 
gradually  scrapped.  The  credit  market  restrictions  were  finally  rescinded  in  1985  and  the  capital 
movements’ restrictions in 1989. This was very late compared to most other European countries. 
However, domestic policies were not adjusted to an environment of free capital flows and a free credit 
market. The fiscal policy and the tax system induced borrowing and monetary policy could not act as a 
brake  since  it  was  geared  to  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  Consequently,  a  few  years  after  the 
completion of the deregulation, a financial crisis broke out. In today’s presentation, I will not go into 
detail about the manifold reasons leading to the crisis but instead focus on the aspects relevant to the 
financial sector.  
2 
 BIS Review 111/2006
First,  the  earlier  strict  regulations  on  lending  meant  that  banks  did  not  really  acquire  the  skills  to 
evaluate  the  creditworthiness  of  customers  and  loan  projects  –  only  those  with  very  high 
creditworthiness had had access to the limited amounts available for bank lending to non-prioritised 
purposes.  The  restrictions  on  lending  to  other  purposes  led  to  a  large  unsatisfied  demand  from 
potential borrowers. After deregulation, bank lending increased extremely rapidly without banks’ credit 
managers really  having  much  experience on  how  to  evaluate borrowers’ creditworthiness.  A  similar 
weakness  applied  to  the  supervisory  authority  –  they  had  supervisors  with  good  skills  to  check  the 
banks’ formal compliance with laws and regulations but not to evaluate credit decisions. At the outset, 
the central bank took the erroneous view that the loan expansion in the banks could to a large degree 
be explained by old loans moving out of the former “grey sector” and into the banks. Since this had 
different implications than an extension of new loans, the central bank found that there was no need 
for the authorities to worry. 
Second, a large share of bank lending went into the real estate and commercial property business. 
There was a building boom in Sweden during the 1980s and prices rose rapidly – paving the way for 
additional lending. When real estate prices collapsed in the early 1990s the value of the collateral for 
many bank loans fell sharply and banks suffered huge credit losses from non-payments. 
Third, the industrial sector had also borrowed heavily during the export boom period of the 1980s, but 
when  the recession occurred  in 1990,  they  had  overextended  themselves  and  in  many cases were 
unable  to  repay  their  debts.  Many  borrowers  had  their  loans  denominated  in  foreign  currencies  but 
earned their main revenues in the domestic currency. Their debt payments increased drastically in the 
end of 1992, when the Swedish currency was suddenly and sharply depreciated by some 25 percent. 
This led to further loan repayment problems. 
Losses for these and other reasons led to a severe and systemic banking crisis in Sweden. The costs 
to bank owners and to the general public to re-stabilize the banking system were huge, and in addition 
the overall macroeconomic development and welfare of the citizens suffered for several years. As an 
example, unemployment soared rapidly from 2½ to some 14 percent. But the crisis is not the main 
theme for today’s presentation so I will only make a few observations. 
The crisis was clearly not a result of deregulation. However, shortcomings in the deregulation process 
did contribute to the crisis. As I mentioned, bank managers and also the supervisory authority were not 
prepared for the transition from strictly regulated banks to a situation in which banks were allowed to 
assume more risks. Thus they did not recognise, manage and monitor the risks properly, which led to 
problems. Another shortcoming was that no authority had taken on the responsibility to oversee the 
financial sector as a whole, to promote overall financial stability, which is different from the supervision 
of individual institutions and markets. If we had had such an authority, the events and developments 
outside the financial sector that eventually undermined its stability might have been detected earlier. 
Corrections might have been implemented that could have prevented or at least reduced the impact of 
the crisis. Monitoring overall financial stability has now become one of the primary tasks of the central 
bank, the Riksbank. 
Let me stress this again: The fact that deregulation in some countries, also in South East Asia, was 
followed by banking problems does not imply that you should not deregulate. The conclusion is rather 
that deregulation must be carefully planned, succeeded by other and more modern types of regulation 
and monitoring, and supported by a sound macro economic policy. I will speak more about this in the 
following. 
The development of the banking sector in Sweden 
For  many  years  there  has  been  consolidation  in  the  banking  sector  in  Sweden  as  well  as  in  other 
countries; this development was accelerated by the crisis. Banks merged and larger banks acquired 
smaller banks. For instance, the large network of co-operative banks merged into a single bank which 
later merged with the bank that emanated from the network of the major savings banks – forming one 
large bank. In this way, several hundred banks became one very large bank. 
Is bank consolidation a good or a bad development? The answer is not clear-cut. Sometimes the large 
resources  in  manpower  and  funds  that  are  available  in  large  banks  are  needed  to  develop  and 
manage  the  complex  activities  which  are  part  of  modern  banking.  Large  institutions  have  a  better 
chance  of  diversifying  their  risks  by  entering  into  different  activities  and  geographical  areas;  hence 
they become more stable. But on the other hand – if there is a problem in a large bank rather than in a 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 3
small bank, this may threaten the overall financial stability and become a problem also for society at 
large. 
In my view, there is room for large as well as small institutions, which could be specialised in certain 
activities  and  services.  Anyway,  the  composition  of  the  banking  sector  is  generally  not  for  the 
authorities to decide by regulation as long as the institutions are safe and sound. 
An issue in geographically vast countries with remote villages such as India but also Sweden is how to 
ensure that people in remote and small villages also have access to basic financial services. We have 
tried to solve this in different ways. Internet and telephone banking improve access for some people 
and  services.  Payment  orders  may  be  sent  through  the  ordinary  mail.  Another  method  might  be  to 
allow “authorised retail shops” to act as intermediaries for taking deposits and receiving simple loan 
applications on behalf of a bank.  
In fact, after the consolidation phase we have witnessed a period in which the number of banks and 
bank-like  institutions  in  Sweden  is  increasing.  The  new  ones  have  mostly  been  small  banks 
specialising  in  certain  activities  and  services,  for  instance  linked  to  major  retail  store  chains  and 
benefiting from the cash flow from the stores’ customers. We call them “niche banks”. 
Sweden never had a large share of state-owned banks in its financial system. In the crisis one bank 
had  to  be  nationalised  during  the  resolution  phase  but  that  bank  was  rapidly  merged  with  another 
bank. Another of the banks which suffered during the crisis was state owned already at the outset but 
the shares of this bank were gradually sold to private investors as soon as the bank had recovered its 
financial  health.  The  Swedish  government  remains  a  shareholder  in  the  bank  but  holds  only  19 
percent of its total equity capital. Today, this bank which is named Nordea, is highly profitable and has 
formed a large group which has significant market shares in the countries in the Nordic region. 
As a government official deeply involved in the banking crisis, I took the decision that although some 
banks  had  to  be  rescued  by  public  funds,  the  management  of  the  banks  should  be  left  to 
professionals, without undue operational interference from the government. The banks should be run 
in accordance with market conditions just like any other bank.  
This brings me to the trend of the Swedish banks in recent years to open branches and subsidiaries in 
other countries, foremost in the Nordic and Baltic region but also elsewhere such as in Germany and 
the UK. At the same time foreign banks operate in Sweden – the restriction on foreign banks which I 
mentioned  earlier  was  abolished  many  years  ago  -  and  a  Danish  bank  has  acquired  a  significant 
market share in Sweden of more than ten percent in some activities. This leads to the question: Which 
are the benefits and challenges from cross-border banking? 
From a stability view, diversification is a benefit. The bank group can diversify its risks between several 
countries and thus protect itself against volatilities in macro economic and other developments among 
its  customers.  Hopefully,  if  there  is  an  economic  downturn  in  one  country  or  sector,  this  can  be 
compensated  for  by  good  economic  conditions  in  another  country  or  sector  where  the  bank  group 
operates. 
A  cross-border  bank  may  become  more  profitable  because  of  “economies  of  scale”.  Many  bank 
investments in new products and systems, in particular IT systems, are initially very expensive, but the 
cost of adding more customers to the same product or system is marginal. Of course, the bank can 
obtain the same benefits by growing domestically, but the major Swedish banks have already reached 
so large market shares that further domestic growth is limited. 
A  bank  can  also  profit  if  it  is  more  competent  than  its  competitors  in  some  areas,  for  instance  in 
offering certain services or if its organisation runs smoother and more efficiently or if it is regarded as 
being more reliable or customer-friendly than other banks. For various reasons, Swedish banks have 
rapidly gained market shares in other markets. It has proved more difficult for foreign banks to gain 
inroads into the Swedish market, with the exception of the Danish bank I mentioned.  
The main challenge from cross-border operations comes from the new risks to the bank. It will start 
operating  in a  new  legal environment and  in  a  new  customer market.  If  the bank  has  not  prepared 
itself  carefully,  it  may  run  into  unexpected  problems  because  it approaches  the  new  situation  in  an 
erroneous way.  
A  challenge  for  the  cross-border  banks  as  well  as  the  authorities  is  to  monitor  the  activities  on  a 
consolidated basis for the whole bank group in all countries where it operates. It is important for the 
head office and the supervisor to identify early any indication of problems in the entities abroad and to 
take the necessary measures. If this does not take place, the problems may grow and threaten the 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2006
survival of  the  bank.  In  a crisis  situation,  the  bank  together with the  authorities  must decide  on  the 
appropriate course of action. This can lead to difficult questions such as whether a bank branch or 
subsidiary  abroad  should  be  closed  or  rescued.  The  issue  is  all  the  more  difficult  since  the  host 
authorities of the bank branch or subsidiary may have a different view. For them, the bank may have 
an important role in the market, whereas the bank group is fairly insignificant in the home country. 
Sweden and other EU member states grapple with these issues. Some steps have been taken, for 
instance  to  sign  Memoranda  of  Understanding  so  that  central  banks  and  supervisors  in  different 
countries undertake to inform one another and cooperate in problem bank situations. But talking and 
sharing  information  is  not  enough  to  solve  the  problems.  This  is,  of  course,  not  only  an  issue  for 
Europe  and  I  believe  that  the  issue  of  solving  crises  in  cross-border  financial  groups  should  be 
discussed more on the global level, such as in the Financial Stability Forum. 
Before  concluding  this  part,  I  wish  to  say  a  few  words  on  deposit  guarantee  systems.  This  topic  is 
relevant both for domestic banks and for cross-border banks.  
For  a  long  time  there  was  no  unanimous  view  on  the  benefit  of  such  systems.  Those  who  argued 
against them said that depositors might become lazy in their screening of banks and would put their 
money only in the banks which offered the highest returns, even if these banks took excessive risks in 
their activities. There would be a lack of discipline on the banks from the depositors. Also the bank 
owners and managers might venture into excessive risk-taking knowing that the depositors would be 
taken care of under a guarantee system. This would be bad for financial stability.  
The general view has now shifted and speaks clearly in favour of countries implementing an explicit 
deposit  guarantee  system,  inscribed  in  legislation  with  all  its  terms  and  conditions.  Such  a  system 
should  focus  on  the  small  depositor.  A  major  reason  for  such  systems,  apart  from  the  aspect  of 
protecting the small depositor, is that they greatly facilitate the resolution of problem bank situations 
and they may even prevent problems from occurring.  In a situation where depositors hear negative 
rumours about their bank, guaranteed deposits might make them less inclined to “make a run on the 
bank” - to withdraw their cash and thus exacerbate the bank’s problems. A further major reason for 
introducing explicit guarantee systems is that experience from many banking crises has shown that 
the authorities feel obliged to reimburse depositors anyway, for political reasons. This is often done in 
an unpredictable and sometimes unfair manner favouring certain segments of the population. The cost 
of such implicit deposit protection is often higher than that of explicit guarantees. 
A guarantee system makes it easier for the authorities to close problem banks. Where such a system 
is lacking, the authorities tend to delay the unpleasant decision of closing a bank since they are afraid 
of  the  negative  repercussions  on  depositors  and  other  counterparties.  But  such  supervisory 
forbearance only leads to growing problems and costs. It will always be difficult to close banks, but 
with a deposit guarantee at least the issue of the depositors is partly solved. 
What I just described fits in with the development in Sweden. When the bank crisis came, we had no 
deposit  guarantee  system  but  the  government  found  it  necessary  instead  to  issue  a  general 
guarantee,  sometimes  referred  to  as  a  blanket  guarantee  protecting  all  depositors  but  also  other 
counterparts  to  Swedish  banks,  with  the  exception  of  the  shareholders.  This  guarantee  was  in  fact 
much  broader,  and  potentially  more  expensive,  than  a  limited  deposit  guarantee.  After  the  crisis, 
Sweden  has  introduced  legislation  on  a  system  of  explicit  limited  deposit  protection.  All  current 
deposits up to a certain amount, approximately 35 000 US dollars, are covered. For this, the banks 
pay a yearly premium, currently 0.10 percent on average of the total amount of deposits. 
Other parts of the financial sector 
In my presentation I have focussed on the banks, but an efficient financial sector must also contain a 
broad range of institutions and markets. They can specialize in certain activities and instruments and 
improve competition and diversity. They may also reduce the risk concentration on the banking system 
which implies that the overall economy will be less gravely hit if there ever is a systemic banking crisis. 
Compare for example Thailand in 1997, where the banks played a dominant role and Russia in the 
same  year  where  banks  played  a  minor  role.  Both  countries  were  hit  by  financial  problems  but  the 
overall effects on the economy were much worse in Thailand. 
In Sweden many different types of institutions and markets perform specialized roles alongside with 
the banks. There are also rapid developments in these in the form of volume growth but also in new or 
improved activities and instruments.  
BIS Review 111/2006 
 5
The insurance sector which was as restricted in its activities as the banks during the regulation years 
has  grown  strongly  in  Sweden  after  deregulation,  both  for  non-life  and  life  insurance  products.  The 
demography of Sweden is such that we have an ageing population. Thus savings for retirement, for 
instance in the form of pension schemes, have become increasingly important. Some of the insurance 
companies are owned by banks, forming financial conglomerates, but others are independent. 
Mortgage banks have always played a strong role in Sweden. Most of them are owned by the major 
banks,  but  a  few  remain  independent.  The  banks  themselves  are  also  allowed  to  extend  mortgage 
credits so there is open competition. The market for mortgage loans is highly competitive because the 
product is simple and comparable so it is difficult to argue for a higher interest rate. 
Credit  market  companies,  leasing  companies,  factoring  companies,  and  card  companies  provide 
specialised  financial  services.  Some  of  them  are  linked  to  the  bank  groups  while  others  are 
independent. Many of them are quite small.  
Equity  and  bond  markets  and  exchanges  for  specialised  products  such  as  derivatives  have  grown 
tremendously both in volume terms and in terms of offering a wide variety of instruments ever since 
the  first  Treasury  bills  were  issued  in  Sweden  in  the  early  1980s.  Equity  and  bond  financing  have 
gained  in  importance  relative  to  lending  from  banks.  This  diversification  of  funding  is  positive  for 
financial  stability,  since  the  dominating  role  of  the  banks  in  providing  loans  is  reduced.  From  the 
issuers and also the investors’ viewpoint the existence of active markets ensures good competition, 
leading to efficiency and favourable loan terms. 
To sum up, the Swedish financial sector contains many different types of institutions and markets and 
competition is strong. This is fine, because our crisis taught us the problems of being overly reliant on 
the banking system. 
The  tendency  is  that  the  other  institutions  take  markets  shares  from  the  banks,  for  instance  in 
providing channels for saving. But since many of those institutions form part of bank groups, the bank 
groups’ overall share of the financial system is not reduced to the same extent. 
Recent developments in the composition and structure of financial services 
In addition to the developments in the institutions and markets, we are also witnessing new trends in 
financial  services.  Mutual  funds,  money  market  funds,  equity  funds  etcetera  are  growing  rapidly. 
Depositors seek higher yields than those offered by bank deposits and they invest in various securities 
and asset funds. Banks and other asset managers, including hedge funds, make large profits from this 
business.  The  effects  on  financial  stability  are  unclear.  On  the  one  hand,  the  growth  of  the  funds 
means  more  liquidity  to  the  equity  and  securities  markets  so  they  can  provide  more  financing  of 
investments hence reducing the reliance on bank lending. The risks to the banks, particularly credit 
risk, will diminish. But on the other hand, the risks will instead be assumed by the institutions and the 
general public which  invests  in  these  funds.  In  the  event  that  the  value  of  the  funds decreases  the 
investors will suffer. This may in turn affect their behaviour in the economy, for instance it may reduce 
their  consumption  and  also  the  value  of  property.  We  have  not  yet  seen  any  such  situation  so  the 
outcome is unclear, but we should not neglect the risks. 
Another  form  of  transferral  of  risks  is  taking  place  in  the  financial  sector.  Through  the  use  of  new 
instruments and structures it has become easier to transfer and redistribute risks. For instance, a bank 
may deem that it has too much exposure to one customer or to a sector. It could then divest itself of 
this  risk  through  credit  risk  derivatives  or  by  securitisation.  The  advantage  from  a  financial  stability 
view  is  that  the  risks  become  more  widely  dispersed  between  the  various  holders  and  that  the 
individual bank can build a well-balanced portfolio. But at the same time a new risk has emanated – 
the risk that the new holder of the risk cannot fulfil his obligations. In the event that there is a credit 
default, the seller of the derivative to the bank may not have the necessary financial means. Or, there 
could be an unclear legal position about the risk transfer agreement. Such events might mean that the 
bank would have to suffer a loss although it thought it had protected itself. The conclusion is that the 
authorities  must  force  the  banks  to  assess  whether  the  risk  buyers  have  adequate  financial  and 
organisational capabilities and whether the legal arrangements are robust. 
As in many other countries, there is a strong tendency in the Swedish financial sector to move from 
“bricks  and  mortar”,  such  as  having  many  branch  offices,  to  providing  their  services  through  the 
Internet and telephone. About half of all payments of companies and physical persons in Sweden are 
made  through  the  Internet  and  by  phone.  This  has  made  it  possible  to  increase  bank  efficiency  in 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2006
terms of staff numbers and branches. Each Swedish bank branch now services an average of 4,700 
persons in the population compared to, for instance, only 1,900 being serviced by the German banks’ 
branches in Germany. Of course, each country is free to choose its own service level and may prefer a 
higher level, although it brings higher costs. 
Modern regulation 
In  my  view,  Sweden  abolished  its  old-fashioned  regulations  for  good  reasons.  Using  the  banks  for 
directed  lending  and  for  other  non-commercial  purposes  may  seem  handy  for  the  government,  but 
entails large risks and costs. If you want to subsidize some activities, regions or parts of the population 
you should at least do it in a transparent manner, so the costs become explicit in the fiscal budget, 
implying  an  open  debate  and  decision  by  the  Parliament  or  government.  Our  regulation  was  also 
erroneous in trying to micro-manage the banks in their own business decisions on lending rates, fees, 
liquidity management and so on. Experiences from many countries have clearly shown that the banks 
themselves,  guided  by  market  forces  make  better  decisions  than  outside  parties.  Finally,  the 
restrictions on the capital flows were wrong because they hid the signals from Swedish and overseas 
investors  and  other  actors  and  also  because  they  led  to  an  unsound  protection  of  the  Swedish 
financial system and markets. With hindsight it is easy to see these shortcomings but when they were 
in force, the regulations represented the flavour of the day. 
As I have shown, there are forms of regulation which are harmful and should be terminated. Should 
there be any regulation at all? Yes, I think so. Let me explain why by using the example of banks, 
which in most countries dominate the financial sector. 
Banks  offer  several  unique  and  valuable  services  to  society.  As  I  noted  in  the  beginning  of  my 
presentation,  they  receive  deposits  and  transform  them  into  lending.  They  assume,  distribute  and 
transform various risks. They facilitate payment transactions by the use of accounts in other banks and 
payment  systems.  However,  performing  these  activities  makes  banks  vulnerable,  in  particular 
receiving short-term deposits and transferring them into long-term loans. At worst, banks may fail and 
destabilize  the  whole  financial  sector  and  even  the  whole  economy.  To  avoid  such  calamities  from 
happening, society is willing, under certain specified circumstances, to rescue banks from failure by 
providing  exceptional  lending  from  the  central  bank  or  solidity  enhancements from  the  government. 
Depositors may be protected by a deposit insurance scheme. But the willingness of the authorities to 
assist the banks and their customers must be matched by regulation and monitoring to ensure that the 
bank owners and others do not use, or I might say “abuse”, the possibility of public support to further 
their own purposes. 
Hence, there must be some regulation and supervision to make sure that banks behave in ways which 
are  consistent  with  the  overarching  goals  of  society,  such  as  financial  stability  and  consumer 
protection. Regulation must also provide the necessary incentives for banks to act prudently and in fair 
competition with other banks and other financial institutions. An adequate level of domestic regulation 
is also necessary if you want your banks to do business internationally or if you allow foreign banks to 
do business in India. You should welcome foreign institutions but you should not open your markets to 
unregulated and unsupervised institutions. 
Ideally, regulation should be limited to what is really necessary to obtain these overarching goals. In 
practice,  authorities  have  a  tendency  to  over-regulate  since  they  are  risk  averse.  In  order  to  avoid 
excessive regulation you should always ask yourself if the benefits from introducing a new regulation 
are greater than the costs of implementation. Here I include both financial and non-financial costs and 
benefits  in  a  broad  sense.  Admittedly,  this  is  often  very  difficult  to  measure  with  any  degree  of 
precision. 
Regulations  should  also  conform  to  the  way  financial  institutions  and  markets  operate  in  practice. 
Hence, regulation should have a functional rather than an institutional approach. This implies that the 
same  financial  function  should  receive  similar  treatment,  whether  it  is  conducted  in  a  bank  or  in 
another  institution  or  market.  Market-oriented  regulations  will  cause  the  least  interference  to  the 
regulatees and to the development of financial instruments and activities. As an example of modern 
regulation, the new framework for banks’ management of risks and capital from the Basel Committee, 
the  so  called  Basel  II,  allows  the  banks  to  apply  their  own  risk  measurement  methods  and  other 
internal bank processes. But the rules also grant strong powers to the supervisors to take remedial 
action if the banks step outside the boundaries of the allowed framework. 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 7
Obviously,  regulations  must  be  transparent.  There  are  still  many  examples  of  legislation  where  the 
institutions and even the authorities themselves must frequently call on legal advice to interpret their 
meaning.  This  causes  uncertainty  and  undermines  efficiency.  Speaking  about  transparency,  there 
should  also  be  consultations  between  the  authorities  and  other  involved  parties  when  drafting  the 
regulations.  Although  the  authorities must  have  the  final  say,  the  views  of industry  and  the  general 
public will enrich the process and prevent the regulation becoming a theoretical concept, which does 
not reflect the way business is conducted in practice. 
Modern supervision 
Modern  regulation  must  be  accompanied  by  modern  forms  of  supervision.  You  may  remember  me 
saying  that  the  Swedish  supervisors  during  and  just  after  the  deregulation  did  not  have  adequate 
knowledge of how to evaluate credit risks in our banks. But they fulfilled their given mandates, which 
focussed on checking the formalities – that bank operations were adequately recorded and reported; 
that legal requirements had been duly fulfilled; and that the required documentation was in place.  
Modern supervision is risk-based. Given today’s size and complexity of banking operations it would be 
impossible to give equal emphasis to all banks and to all operations and risks; the supervisor has to 
prioritize. This is done on several levels. Priority is given to supervising large banks and banks which 
pose  high  risks  to  the  society,  even  if  they  are  small.  For  each  individual  bank,  priority  is  given  to 
check  the  material  risks,  which  often  are  different  from  one  bank  to  the  next.  Today,  the  focus  of 
supervision is much more on the substance and less on the formalities of a bank’s business. 
Supervision should be based on a combination of offsite observations, where the supervisor analyses 
financial and prudential reports and other information; onsite visits where the supervisor verifies the 
information  it  has received  and  focuses  on  the  governance and control processes  in  the bank; and 
personal contacts with banks’ auditors, owners, boards, management and staff in order to gain a good 
understanding of the bank’s business and of the competencies of the leading personalities. Recently, 
more stress has been given to this latter issue because the increased complexity of banking makes 
the importance of good corporate governance and efficient control functions even more evident.  
Supervisors should avoid trying to micro-manage the banks. When supervisors go too much into the 
details of the running of the bank, they will be seen to assume – in the eyes of the bank and also of 
the general public – a responsibility for the bank, which they should not have. 
The  operational  independence  of  supervisors  has  lately  become  even  more  important.  The  higher 
degree  of  interdependence  between  the  institutions  and  markets  combined  with  their  increased 
complexity and thus vulnerability implies that supervisory decisions and measures must be based on 
purely prudential grounds without listening to non-relevant arguments. Such operational independence 
is  inscribed  in  the  statutes  of  the  Swedish  supervisory  authority.  However,  independence  must  be 
tempered by accountability so the supervisors will have to explain their decisions publicly in various 
ways, such as reports to the Parliament, and they must be prepared to take responsibility for them 
afterwards. Banks, their managers and owners, which are affected by supervisory measures must be 
able to appeal the decisions, although in some circumstances the measure must remain in force while 
the judicial process is underway. 
We should not forget the importance of the so called preconditions, the major external factors which 
fundamentally affect the supervisors’ ability to conduct efficient supervision. The preconditions are, for 
example, a stable and sustainable macro economic environment; adequate laws and a good judicial 
system; good accounting and auditing rules; and an adequate system to deal with problem banks and 
other  institutions.  In  the  Swedish  pre-crisis  situation  there  was  macro-economic  instability  with 
excessive  price  volatility.  Inflation  had  been  high  and  fluctuating,  and  current  account  and  fiscal 
deficits  had  remained  high  for  many  years.  This  made  it  difficult  for  the  authorities  to  assess  the 
underlying financial stability of banks and other institutions. 
Recent important regulatory issues for the financial institutions 
As you are aware, countries around the world are presently preparing their banks and authorities for 
the implementation of the Basel II capital requirements. It implies huge financial costs and workloads, 
but  is  expected  to  provide  benefits  in  the  form  of  better  managed  banks,  lower  losses  and  more 
precise capital requirements. Swedish banks will start implementing the Basel II from 1 January 2007 
so their preparations are now at full steam. We at the central bank stand ready to analyse the new 
8 
 BIS Review 111/2006
capital requirements’ effects on financial stability, in particular in situations when there is volatility in 
the macro economy and banks’ credit losses may increase. 
There  is  also  the  issue  of  implementing  the  new  international  accounting  standards,  IAS.  A  highly 
controversial  but  also  interesting  development  is  that  the  standards  promote  a  higher  degree  of 
market-related  valuation  of  many  more  categories  of  assets  and  liabilities  in  banks  and  other 
institutions.  Banks  are  already  used  to  market  valuation  for  highly  tradable  assets,  but  the  new 
standards  go  further  and  request  banks  to  value  also  non  tradable  assets  and  even  liabilities  to 
assumed market prices. In general, and although I recognize the problem of market-valuation of items 
for  which  there  is  no  ongoing  market,  I  support  the  idea  of  more  transparent  and  market-oriented 
valuation. I accept that it may lead to more fluctuations in the banks’ balance sheets and also in their 
profits  and  losses.  Although  the  financial  strength  of  a  bank  in  the  long  run  will  not  be  affected  by 
using the new accounting principles there is a risk that the analysts and other readers of the financial 
reports will not understand the difference between the reported temporary results and the underlying 
issues.  They  may  then  panic  because  of  seemingly  bad  short-term  bank  results  or  become 
excessively optimistic over temporary good results. I see a need for us in the authorities to explain the 
issues  of  market-based  valuation 
international 
recommendations  to  only  gradually  introduce  the  new  market  valuation  principles  for  certain  items, 
such as some assets and bank liabilities. 
I have taken you on the journey from old-fashioned regulation to a modern banking system. Let me 
end with a few concluding remarks. 
the  general  public. 
I  also  support 
the 
to 
Concluding remarks 
The development in Sweden from a highly restricted and limited financial system to a system which is 
quite open and flexible took more than twenty years and is still going on. The financial services sector 
has now become a source of strength to the overall economy.  
We found, and we paid a high price for this experience in the form of the crisis, that the correct way to 
move is to go gradually and carefully, but not too slowly because you then lose momentum. The side 
effects of your actions must be considered in advance and mitigating measures may be needed, for 
instance in updating legislation and other regulations or the capacity and mandate of the authorities. 
Modernising the financial system requires considerable effort and but it is well worth the price. Simply 
put:  The  industrial  and  service  sectors  of  any  economy  can  not  run  and  develop  smoothly  and 
efficiently unless supported by a modern financial sector.  
In  my  presentation  I  have  focussed  on  the  domestic  aspects  of  having  a  sound  and  developed 
financial  system.  There  are  also  wide-ranging  international  implications,  not  least  in  today’s  highly 
globalized institutions, markets and capital flows. Weaknesses and vulnerabilities in one country may 
affect other countries and financial systems. The benefits of having a globalized financial system are 
indisputable as long as it is well structured and managed, but the contagion risks of a weak or badly 
managed  system  are  large.  To  create  a  stable  and  efficient  international  system  we  need  good 
domestic systems but also strong international institutions and good cooperation. 
I know that the authorities in India during recent years have taken major steps in modernising your 
finance sector and I wish you good luck in your future endeavours. I am confident that they will prove 
to be very worthwhile. 
BIS Review 111/2006 
 9
