T T Mboweni: Monetary policy and South African bond market developments 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the South African Bond 
Market Conference organised by the Debt Issuers Association, Johannesburg, 5 October 2006. 
Honoured guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1.  
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to open this conference on the South African Bond Market. 
There  are  several  reasons  for  developing  debt  markets.  The  most  fundamental  reason  is  to  make 
financial markets more complete by generating market interest rates that reflect the opportunity cost of 
funds  at  each  maturity.  This  is  essential  for  efficient  investment  and  financing  decisions.  If  bond 
markets do not exist, firms may have to finance the acquisition of long-term assets by short-term debt, 
and investment policies may be biased in favour of short-term projects. Furthermore, debt markets can 
help the operation of monetary policy as prices in the long-term bond market give valuable information 
about  expectations  of  likely  macroeconomic  developments  and  about  market  reactions  to  monetary 
policy moves. In my opening remarks today I will touch briefly on monetary policy and bond market 
issues. 
Monetary policy developments 
2.  
As you are all no doubt aware, monetary policy does not determine bond market yields. Nevertheless, 
monetary policy and the bond markets do impact on each other in important ways. Expected monetary 
policy developments are reflected in bond yields and we, in turn, get a lot of information from the bond 
market  about  market  expectations  concerning  future  monetary  policy,  inflation  and  growth.  More 
recently, the development of the inflation-linked bond market has provided us with further insights into 
longer-term inflation expectations in the market.  
Not surprisingly, the change in the monetary policy stance in recent months has been felt in the local 
bond  markets.  The  repo  rate  had  been  unchanged  for  14  months,  but  in  June  of  this  year,  the 
Monetary Policy Committee decided to raise the repo rate by 50 basis points, and this was followed by 
a further increase of the same amount in August. Although capital market rates reflect expectations, 
these expectations are not always correct. At the time of the first increase, these changes were not 
fully reflected in bond yields, but we have seen a significant adjustment since then. 
Although our actions took many by surprise, for some time we had been sounding warnings that we 
perceived the risks to inflation to be on the upside. Our warning remains the same today, as we still 
see significant upside risk to the inflation outlook. 
Our major concern remains the growth of household consumer demand which grew at an annualised 
rate of 8 per cent in the second quarter of this year. This expenditure is still being driven by credit 
extension growth in excess of 25 per cent, and household debt as a proportion of disposable income 
has  risen  to  an  historically  high  level  of  70  per  cent.  Despite  the  obvious  dangers  of  such 
developments and the recent hikes in interest rates, there are no indications of any meaningful change 
in consumer behaviour. It is hard to imagine that such trends, if unchecked, will not have inflationary 
consequences. 
Another area of concern has been the current account deficit, which although narrowing from the 6,4 
per cent of GDP registered in the first quarter of 2006, still stood at a high of 6,1 per cent of GDP in the 
second  quarter.  As  we  have  noted  in  the  past,  current  account  deficits  are  not  in  themselves 
inflationary. There is however a possible risk to the exchange rate if the deficits are perceived by the 
markets to be unsustainable, particularly if the deficits are reflecting higher consumption expenditure. 
On  numerous  occasions  we  have  pointed  out  the  possible  implications  of  the  deficit  for  investor 
sentiment and for the rand. The recent exchange rate reaction to the higher deficit is indicative of this, 
but it is also part of the adjustment process. Nevertheless the adjustment in the exchange rate has 
reached levels which may pose a further threat to the inflation outlook. 
BIS Review 93/2006 
 1
Fortunately it is not all doom and gloom, and there has been at least one significant improvement in 
the risk factors affecting the inflation outlook. International oil prices have offered some respite and 
come down from their highs of almost US$80 per barrel in early August, to levels below US$60. We 
are aware that this positive development can change at any time, given the delicate balance between 
supply  and  demand  in  the  oil  market,  and  the  acute  sensitivity  of  the  oil  price  to  changes  in  risk 
perceptions. We are nevertheless fortunate regarding the timing of this respite. 
Domestic  economic growth  averaged 4,5  per cent  and  4,9  per cent  in  2004 and 2005 respectively. 
Despite the change in the monetary policy stance, we do not anticipate that growth prospects will be 
significantly  undermined.  The  exchange  rate  developments  are  expected  to  be  positive  for  export 
growth,  and  it  will  not  be  a  bad  thing  if  domestic  growth  is  driven  by  exports  and  infrastructural 
spending, rather than by consumer spending as has been the case in the past two years. Our focus, 
however, remains on the inflation target, and we will continue to strive to maintain CPIX inflation within 
the 3-to-6 per cent target range. The credibility of our actions will of course be reflected to some extent 
in the bond market. 
Domestic bond market developments 
3.  
The South African bond market has for some time had an important role in the financial system, and it 
is particularly pleasing to note the significant developments in the corporate bond market. It is also of 
interest  to  note  the  burgeoning  literature  on  bond  market  development  internationally.  A  recurring 
theme in the literature is the ability of governments or corporates to borrow from non-residents in their 
own currency. The inability to borrow in ones own currency, referred to in the literature as ‘original sin’, 
often  leads  to  currency  mismatch,  and  ultimately  to  balance  sheet  vulnerability  in  the  event  of 
significant  exchange  rate  changes.  South  Africa  stands  out  as  one  of  the  few  emerging  market 
economies that does not suffer from ‘original sin’, given the long history of resident and non-resident 
participation  in  the  domestic  bond  market.  The  development  of  the  corporate  bond  market  adds  a 
further important dimension to the market.  
It is common knowledge that the South African bond market is highly developed and very deep. There 
are continuous innovations as is witnessed by the listed products offered by both the Bond Exchange 
of  South  Africa  and  the  Yield-X  of  the  JSE.  Whereas  in  its  infant  stages  the  Bond  Exchange  was 
dominated  by  government  and  parastatals,  in  the  recent  past  corporate  issuances  have  been 
increasing.  Since  the  South  African  bond  market  has  historically  been  a  predominantly  government 
and government-related debt market, the use of credit ratings has been limited. With the introduction 
of  corporate  bonds  in  recent  years,  this  has  changed  as  a  need  has  emerged  for  a  better 
understanding of credit risk. 
The  corporate  bond  market  is  today  the  fastest-growing  segment  of  the  bond  market,  as  new 
issuances of corporate bonds have overtaken those of government bonds. Government has also been 
borrowing  less  because  of  fiscal  discipline  and  more  efficient  tax  collection  by  the  South  African 
Revenue Services. Securitisation issuances have also picked up considerably, and while the banks 
are  major  issuers  in  this  market,  there  are  other  active  players  as  well.  The  number  of  issuers 
accessing the debt capital markets has grown from a single issuer in the period prior to 2000 to 14 
issuers in 2005.  
The  secondary  market  for  bonds  in  general  is  developing  very  slowly.  Contributing  to  this  state  of 
affairs  is  that  buyers  tend  to  buy-and-hold  due  to  the  attractiveness  of  these  instruments  in  their 
portfolios. However, there are early signs of a more active secondary market beginning to resurface as 
turnover has increased in the past year. 
Conclusion 
4.  
The stable inflation environment means that the fixed income structure of bonds has become relatively 
more attractive to investors with risk profiles that demand a steady real rate of return. Also, economic 
growth has been more robust in recent years amid heightened investor optimism about the country's 
future  prospects.  Improved  economic  fundamentals  translate  into  enhanced  growth  prospects  for 
South African corporates and a concomitant need for long-term debt financing. The development of 
this sector of the bond market offers borrowers in the private sector access to long-term finance from 
the capital markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2006
I am aware that some of South Africa’s important corporates are here to participate in this conference. 
We look forward with keen interest to your contributions to the growth of this sector of the market. I 
wish you well during your deliberations. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 93/2006 
 3
