T T Mboweni: South Africa's financial markets within the Southern African  
sub-region 
Address  by Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Namibian  Stock 
Exchange, Windhoek, 7 October 2006. 
 Honoured guests, 
Finalists of the schools competition, 
Teachers of finalists of the competition, 
Sponsors of the competition, and 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction 
It is with great pleasure that I present this address at your annual dinner. The initiative of the Namibian 
Stock Exchange (NSX) to enhance awareness of its activities in the countryside through the Scholar 
Investment Challenge is indeed a commendable one. This competition raises awareness of financial 
markets  and  investment  in  listed  shares  among  the  many  participants  drawn  from  a  broad 
cross-section of the Namibian population. I am sure we have amongst the finalists in our midst today 
some of the stockbrokers of the future. 
Common membership of regional initiatives 
Namibia and South Africa share common membership of a number of regional co-operation initiatives. 
Three  of  these  that  come  to  mind  are  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC);  the 
Southern  African  Customs  Union  (SACU);  and  the  Common  Monetary  Area  (CMA).  Moreover,  the 
Bank  of  Namibia  and  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  are  active  participants  in  the  Committee  of 
Central Bank Governors in SADC and the Association of African Central Banks. 
Of these regional co-operation initiatives, the CMA is the smallest in terms of the number of member 
countries.  However,  it  is  the  initiative  with  the  most  direct  bearing  on  monetary  policy  and  financial 
market  issues.  The  CMA  comprises  South  Africa,  Namibia,  Lesotho  and  Swaziland.  Previously  it 
existed as an informal arrangement and included Botswana. In 1976 the arrangement was formalised 
in a series of bi-lateral agreements. At this point Botswana chose not to join the monetary area and 
Namibia  joined  after  independence  in 1990.  Although  member countries have  their own currencies, 
these currencies trade at par and are pegged to the South African rand. Member countries also apply 
broadly  similar  exchange control  measures.  This currency  arrangement  has  various  implications  for 
the CMA countries and their central banks. I wish to mention three of these today. 
First, the South African Reserve Bank leads the way in setting monetary policy for the CMA countries. 
However we do take cognisance of the views of the partner banks in periodic meetings of the CMA 
governors prior to the meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Secondly,  South  Africa  has  adopted  inflation  targeting  as  its  nominal  anchor  for  monetary  policy  in 
February  2000.  The  target  is  to  keep  CPIX  inflation  (that  is,  headline  inflation  excluding  mortgage 
interest costs) within a range of 3 to 6 per cent. This policy has served the interests not only of South 
Africa, but also of its CMA partners, as is evidenced by the fact that the South African rate of inflation 
used for targeting purposes has remained inside the target range since September 2003. The CMA 
partner  countries  have  also  reaped  similar  benefits;  for  example,  the  inflation  rate  in  Namibia  has 
declined from 9,3 per cent in 2000 to 2,3 per cent in 2005. I will say a bit more about South Africa's 
monetary policy later on. 
Lastly, the possibility of establishing a central bank for the CMA countries is raised from time to time. A 
study was conducted in 2005 under the auspices of the CCBG outlining the costs and benefits of the 
creation of a common central bank for the CMA countries. However, decisions in this regard will be 
taken by the political leaders of the CMA countries, rather than by central bankers. This is probably a 
matter of particular importance for our younger audience, as they might perhaps find employment at 
this institution one day. 
BIS Review 93/2006 
 1
Exchange controls and related tax amnesty 
In view of the high degree of regional co-operation discussed above, it is necessary to make mention 
of  the  successful  exchange  controls  and  related  tax  amnesty  of  South  Africa.  This  amnesty  was 
announced by the South African Minister of Finance, Trevor Manuel, in February 2003. 
The amnesty was announced against the background  of an extensive system of exchange controls 
that have been in place in South Africa for a considerable period of time. Since democratic elections in 
South Africa in 1994, considerable progress has been made with the gradual liberalisation of controls. 
Measures included the abolition of the financial rand and the introduction of liberal foreign investment 
allowances  for  South  African  companies.  This  was  particularly  the  case  for  investment  in  Africa.  In 
addition,  the  foreign  investment  allowances  for  South  African  individuals  have  been  increased  over 
time to the current level of R2 million per individual. 
The announcement of the amnesty was a next step in the gradual relaxation of exchange controls. 
The  amnesty  had  as  its  four  goals  the  broadening  of  the  domestic  tax  base;  provision  of  an 
opportunity  to  South  Africans  to  regularise  their  affairs  without  fear  of  prosecution;  provision  of 
updated information to the South African Reserve Bank and the South African Revenue Service; and 
facilitation of repatriation of foreign assets to South Africa without fear of recrimination. 
The amnesty succeeded beyond all expectations of the authorities. More than 42 000 people applied 
for amnesty and more than 99 per cent of these applicants were granted amnesty. All four stated goals 
of the amnesty were achieved. 
First,  amnesty  applicants  disclosed  undeclared  receipts  and  accruals  amounting  to  R1,36  billion, 
which will increase the personal income tax base by an estimated R400 million. Secondly, applicants 
who disclosed previously unauthorised assets are shielded from prosecution. Moreover, the amnesty 
legislation  also  relieved  banks  and  financial  advisors  from  reporting  responsibilities  in  terms  of  the 
South African Financial Intelligence Centre Act, thus protecting the applicants. 
In terms of the third objective, applicants disclosed around R 68,9 billion in foreign assets, of which R 
45  billion  constituted  unauthorised  foreign  assets.  Fourthly,  the  amnesty  process  facilitated  the 
repatriation of funds to South Africa. 
Applicants paid a total of R 2,87 billion in amnesty levies in respect of unauthorised foreign assets. 
These  levies  amount  to  some  0,7  per  cent  of  total  tax  collections  of  the  central  government  in  the 
2005/06 fiscal year, and to some 2,3 per cent of personal income tax for the same period. 
The successful completion of the amnesty in South Africa is a further step in the direction of complete 
exchange control  liberalisation.  The stated  objective  of  the  South  African  government  is  to  proceed 
with  a  gradual  relaxation  of  controls.  Relatively  few  controls  remain,  so  much  so  that  when  full 
abolition is announced, it will most likely be a non-event. 
The South African financial markets 
Financial market developments in South Africa have significant implications for financial markets in the 
region.  I  would  therefore  like  to  share  with  you  some  key  features  of  the  South  African  financial 
markets. Starting with the equity market, the JSE is one of the oldest stock exchanges in the world, 
having been established as far back as 1886. In its 120 years of existence, it has developed into the 
17th biggest stock exchange in the world - a remarkable achievement for an emerging market country 
like South Africa. 
Over  recent  years,  there  have  been  a  number  of  important  developments  in  the  JSE,  which 
contributed  to  its  efficiency  and  global  standing.  Trading  is  fully  automated  through  an  electronic 
clearing  and  settlement  system,  the  STRATE  system  (Share  TRAnsactions  Totally  Electronic).  The 
product base of the JSE has also expanded to include not only shares, but also a range of equity, 
commodity and interest rate derivatives. 
In 2002, the JSE entered into a strategic alliance with the London Stock Exchange (LSE). This alliance 
led to a number of further improvements, such as the implementation of a new trading system and an 
indexing system that is aligned to that of the JSE, as well as the adoption of listing requirements that 
are in line with international best practice. These developments enhanced the profile of the JSE, in 
particular to international investors. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2006
The latest development in the history of the JSE was its own demutualisation in 2005. It became a 
public unlisted company on 1 July 2005, and listed on its own exchange a year later. 
At the end of 2005, the JSE had a market capitalisation of R3,6 trillion, with 388 companies listed on 
the  exchange.  Just  over  60  of  these  companies  are  listed  on  at  least  two  other  stock  exchanges. 
Some have up to seven listings, including listings on the major exchanges of the world. Turnover on 
the JSE has shown strong growth over recent years, increasing from an annual turnover of R22 billion 
in 1992 to R1 279 billion in 2005. 
Alongside the equity market, the South African bond market is also formalised in the form of the Bond 
Exchange of South Africa (Besa), which was established 10 years ago, in 1996. As at 31 December 
2005, Besa had granted a listing to 493 debt securities, issued by 71 borrowers, with a total nominal 
value of R637 billion - equal to just over 40 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP). All bonds have 
been dematerialised and trading has been fully automated. 
Government bonds comprise around 60 per cent of the bonds listed on Besa, with the rest consisting 
of bonds issued by parastatals and corporates. Corporate bond issuances are currently increasing at a 
much faster rate than government bond issuances. The annual turnover on Besa has increased from 
R2,1 trillion in 1995 to R8,1 trillion in 2005. The annual turnover is currently about 38 times the market 
capitalisation, indicating good overall liquidity. In the current year to date, the turnover on Besa has 
already exceeded that of the full year of 2005. 
Developed  domestic  bond  markets  not  only  provide  for  an  additional  channel  for  domestic  savings 
mobilisation,  they  also  provide  valuable  information  to  the  MPC.  Expected  monetary  policy 
developments  are  reflected  in  bond  yields  and  we,  in  turn,  get  a  lot  of  information  from  the  bond 
market about market expectations concerning future monetary policy, inflation and growth. 
Non-residents are active participants in the South African capital markets, accounting for around 20 
per  cent  of  daily  turnover  on  both  the  JSE  and  Besa.  In  the  year  to  the  end  of  September,  non-
residents  have  bought  a  net  R59  billion  worth  of  South  African  equities  compared  to  R50  billion  in 
2005. Net purchases of bonds have amounted to R20 billion, compared to net sales of R11 billion last 
year.  In  addition  to  improving  the  liquidity  of  our  capital  markets,  these  purchases  help  to  finance 
South Africa's current account deficit. 
The participation of non-residents in the domestic financial markets is facilitated by a liquid market for 
foreign  exchange.  The  average  daily  turnover  against  rand  in  the  South  African  foreign  exchange 
market  is  around  USD10  billion,  and  non-residents  account  for  around  65  per  cent  of  these 
transactions. However, one downside of such a liquid market is that it tends to make the rand (and, of 
course, the Namibian dollar with it) much more volatile than the currencies of other emerging-market 
currencies with less liquid foreign exchange markets. 
The NSX and the JSE Limited 
Compared to the JSE, the NSX is still young, as it was established 14 years ago in 1992. However, 
the  establishment  of  an  exchange  represented  an  important  step  forward  for  Namibia  in  the 
development  of  its  capital  market,  and  in  providing  an  important  avenue  for  domestic  savings 
mobilisation. 
The success of the NSX is illustrated by the fact that by 2005 it was the second largest African stock 
exchange in terms of total market capitalisation and the fifth largest in terms of traded value. Currently, 
28 companies are listed on the NSX; a high number of which have a dual listing on the JSE. The NSX 
was  also  the  first  exchange  in  SADC  to  start  using  the  JSE's  electronic  trading  system  (the  Jet 
system)  in  November  1998.  Share  trading  on  the  NSX  of  dual-listed  South  African  companies  is 
settled  through  STRATE.  The  existence  of  dual-listings  improves  the  liquidity  and  turnover  on  the 
NSX,  making  these  shares  more  attractive  to  investors.  While  benefiting  from  its  close  relationship 
with the JSE, the NSX retains control over its own listing requirements, regulations and supervision 
over compliance, and can adapt these according to the requirements of the domestic economy. 
The  NSX  and  the  JSE  are  both  founder  members  of  the  Committee  of  SADC  Stock  Exchanges 
(COSSE). The Committee of SADC Ministers for Finance and Investment agreed to recognise COSSE 
as a private sector association at their meeting held on 18 July 1997 in South Africa. In terms of the 
aims of COSSE, the NSX and the JSE play an important role in the institutional structures of stock 
exchanges in SADC. Among others, COSSE has set itself the challenging goal of establishing by 2008 
an  integrated  real-time  network  of  the  national  securities  markets  within  SADC,  thus  facilitating 
BIS Review 93/2006 
 3
progress  with  the  process  of  financial  integration  within  the  SADC  region.  This  will  pave  the  way 
towards  cross-border  listings  and,  therefore,  trading  and  investments  among  the  different  Member 
Exchanges of SADC. However, like all successful developments in market infrastructure, this should 
also be driven by market participants, who will seek the optimum balance between cost and risk. 
Recent monetary policy developments in South Africa 
As  I  indicated  earlier,  the  existence  of  the  CMA  implies  that  South  Africa  effectively  determines 
monetary  policy  for  the  whole  CMA.  CPIX  inflation  has  been  within  the  inflation  target  range  since 
September 2003 and averaged 4,3 per cent and 3,9 per cent in 2004 and 2005 respectively. Since 
March of this year, CPIX inflation has been steadily rising, mainly as a result of rising energy and food 
prices, and in August inflation increased at a year-on-year rate of 5 per cent. 
Buoyant consumer demand, which increased at an annualised rate of 8 per cent in the second quarter 
of this year, has been posing a further risk to the inflation outlook. This demand has been fuelled by 
credit extension growth in excess of 25 per cent. These developments contributed to the expanding 
current account deficit which measured in excess of 6 cent of GDP in each of the first two quarters of 
this year. This is turn has contributed to the recent weakness in the rand, which has depreciated on a 
trade weighted basis by approximately 23 per cent since early May. This degree of depreciation, in 
turn, poses a further risk to the inflation outlook. 
In  response  to  these  developments,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank has raised the repo rate by 50 basis points at each of the past two meetings of the Monetary 
Policy Committee. This change in the monetary policy stance has occurred against the backdrop of a 
strongly growing domestic economy. South Africa's economic growth averaged 4,5 per cent and 4,9 
per cent in 2004 and 2005 respectively. Despite the change in the monetary policy stance, we do not 
anticipate that growth prospects will be significantly undermined. Our focus, however, remains on the 
inflation target, and we will continue to strive to maintain CPIX inflation within the 3-to-6 per cent target 
range. 
Conclusion 
The NSX Scholar Investment Challenge is similar to the competition introduced 34 years ago by the 
JSE for South Africa schools. The competition is a major success in South Africa, and it seems to me 
that the same can be said about the Namibian competition. This competition teaches participants the 
fundamentals  of  investment  strategies  and  financial  markets  and  encourages  them  to  develop  an 
interest in the trading of shares on the NSX. I trust that participation in this competition has introduced 
new possible career choices to the participants. 
The  teachers  accompanying  the  participants  also  deserve  special  recognition.  Your  care  and 
commitment has laid an important foundation in the lives of the finalists. Likewise, the sponsors of the 
competition  have  made  it  possible  for  the  finalists  to  be  here  today  and  they  have  also  assisted  in 
broadening the intellectual horizon of the participants in the competition. We trust that the knowledge 
gained about financial markets will spur many of them to greater heights in the corporate world in the 
future. 
Naturally,  only  one  team  can  win  this  competition,  but  I  must  stress  that  all  participants  attending 
tonight  should  really  be  regarded  as  winners.  To  make  it  to  one  of  the  top  five  positions  in  this 
competition is a major accomplishment. My best wishes accompany all of you in your careers ahead of 
you, as you have already shown your dedication to the achievement of your goals. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2006
