Ardian Fullani: Regional financial markets and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  6th 
International  Conference,  “Regional  financial  markets  and  financial  stability  –  a  concept  between 
national sovereignty and globalisation”, Tirana, 30 October 2006. 
 Honorable Mr. Prime Minister,  
Honorable Colleagues,  
Honorable participants! 
It’s a great pleasure and a privilege to open the proceedings of the Sixth Annual Conference of the 
Bank of Albania and to welcome you in Tirana. 
This conference will focus on financial stability. The analysis and understanding of imbalances in the 
financial markets and of their causes is essential in central banking. The extent of social benefits and 
advantages that money, as a public good, creates for the society is dependent on the efficiency and 
capacity of financial markets to facilitate trade, production, capital accumulation , economic growth and 
social welfare.  
Therefore,  financial  stability  may  be  regarded  as  a  “public  good”  and  hence  represents  a  public 
economic  policy  objective.  The  question  is  who  is  in  charge  of providing  this  good?  Personally,  my 
attention has been drawn by Paul Volker who describes the natural role of central banks in ensuring 
the financial stability. The central bank’s traditional role, as lender of last resort on one hand, and as 
monetary  policy  authority  on  the  other,  requires  that  central  banks  ensure  financial  stability  in  both 
standpoints as a provider and a beneficiary. Our role of monitoring the contagion process and financial 
and  monetary  crises,  illustrates  this  idea  very  well.  At  the  same  time,  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism is another factor that witnesses the vested interest of the central bank in preserving the 
soundness of the financial system.  
The developments observed in the last decades, and particularly in the ’90, brought the importance of 
financial stability to the fore and highlighted its key position among the most important economic policy 
objectives assigned to monetary authorities across the world. in spite of the emphasis and the vast 
literature on the issue, it is difficult to give a widely accepted definition of “financial stability”. Definitions 
of well-known academics and colleagues describe financial stability as a set of decisions and policies 
that deal with macroeconomic, monetary, supervisory aspects of economy and regulations of financial 
markets.  I  am  confident, that  those characteristics of  financial stability  will be  widely  covered  in  the 
proceedings of this conference. 
After a long deliberation of literature, I chose Garry Schinasi (2005) to define the financial stability, and 
I  quote  him:  “Financial  stability  is  a  condition,  in  which  an  economy’s  mechanisms  for  pricing, 
allocating, and managing financial risks are functioning well enough to contribute to the performance 
of  the  economy”1.  This  definition  implies  that  the  financial  system  is  capable  of  accomplishing 
appropriately  its  three  main  roles.  Firstly,  the  financial  system  is  capable  to  achieve  effective 
distribution  of  economic  resources  over  time.  Secondly,  it  identifies  and  manages  appropriately 
financial risks. Thirdly, it can softly absorb shocks and surprises that occur in the financial system and 
the real economy. 
I  think  that  the  goal of  this  conference  is  to  analyze financial  markets concentrating  on  these  three 
aspects,  and  to  steer  our  efforts  towards  evaluating  and  guaranteeing  the  achievement  of  financial 
stability  in  our  region.  Our  economies  are  quickly  developing,  and  they  are  experiencing  rapid 
changes, and we, as representatives of central banking in our countries, must adapt to these changes 
and promote growth without losing sight of prudential supervision. Latest trends towards expansion, 
liberalization and privatization of the financial system in the context of a fast-paced globalization of the 
world economy have put the goal of financial stability on top of the priorities in our region. 
During the last few years, the financial sector has recorded positive growth rates in all countries in our 
region. However, I think that the merit for such a growth goes to the most vital segment of the financial 
                                                      
1   Safeguarding Financial Stability, Theory and Practice (2005), International Monetary Fund, page 83, last paragraph. 
BIS Review 103/2006 
 1
system, that is, the banking system. The key factor to the successful growth and consolidation of the 
banking system has been the rapid privatization of banks, which is, at present, almost complete. This 
process has opened the way to the arrival of well-known international banks that have brought foreign 
capital, expertise and confidence in the region. The entry of those banks, besides the positive aspect 
of fostering growth and development, calls for higher prudence in the supervisory role of the central 
banks. 
As a result of the above developments, the degree of financial intermediation in our region has further 
increased.  Credit  to  economy  has  played  a  considerable  role  towards  the  deepening  of  financial 
intermediation.  Albania  has  recently  joined  the  group  of  countries  experiencing  a  credit  boom,  as 
annual growth rates have been in the range of 60-70 per cent in the last two years.  
An  interesting  indicator  of  banking  system  transformation  is  the  EBRD  indicator  regarding  “banking 
system  reform  and  liberalization  of  interest  rates”,  which  combines  the  quality  of  supervisory  and 
regulatory base, the ownership structure of banking system and the degree of public access into the 
banking system. Based on latest data, Southeastern European Countries have progressed admirably 
with  regard  to  their  banking  systems.  It  is  crucial  to  understand  that  transformation  of  the  banking 
system has been a key element in the long transition to a market economy. I want to emphasize that 
this  process  has  brought  development,  has  strengthened  the  macroeconomic  stability,  by  positively 
influencing institution built-up and its consolidation, by encouraging faster structural reforms and the 
set up of regulatory frameworks related to economic policies. 
Giving  a  glance  at  the  Albanian  banking  system,  I  would  emphasize  that  qualitative  developments 
have taken place during 2006. The banking system assets during eight first months of the year have 
been increased by 12 percent and are estimated at about 60 percent of Gross Domestic Product. The 
banking system results in profit, is liquid and capitalized. I would like to mention the entry of a new 
bank in our system, the Sao Paolo IMI Bank, which, besides its shares at the Italian-Albanian Bank, 
has  preliminary  agreed  with  the  owners  of  American-Albanian  Bank  to  buy  its  80  per  cent  of  the 
shares. This opens the way to further consolidation of the banking system in Albania.  
Now, let us give a glance at the rest of the financial system. It should be accepted that it still manifests 
problems of development and consolidation. The concerns relate to the magnitude of operators, the 
regulatory  framework  and  particularly  the  supervision.  In  this  way,  their  contribution  to  financial 
intermediation is low.  
It  should  be  understood  that,  besides  our  role,  the  establishment  and  consolidation  of  the  financial 
stability  can  not  be  ensured  only  through  banking  supervision.  Therefore,  further  to  FSAP 
recommendations for a more updated supervision and regulation, the new public agency of financial 
sector  supervision  is  established.  We  as  the  Bank  of  Albania  are  deeply  open  to  provide  our 
assistance,  so  that  the  financial  vigilance  precedes  the  development.  This  will  precede  the 
expected developments in the insurance companies, pension funds, financial mediators in general.  
Elaborating this matter further, I would briefly bring up some weaknesses of the financial systems in 
the region. 
Financial  systems  in  all  countries  of  the  region  are  still  dominated  by  commercial  banks.  Other 
segments play a second hand role. Capital markets, despite the recent developments, are still lagging 
behind.  The  number  of  banks  in  our  region  is  relatively  high.  Taking  into  consideration  the  size  of 
economies  in  our  region,  there  is  space  for  further  consolidation,  mainly  through  mergers  and 
acquisitions. On a regional level, notwithstanding the credit growth rates, outstanding credit as a share 
of GDP is small compared to that of the new members of EU. This shows that banking sectors have a 
limited role in financing the needs of the economies for investments. One of the main factors slowing 
financial  intermediation growth  is  the  high  intermediation  margin of  interest  rates  between  loan  and 
deposit rates.  
This phenomenon could be the result of several developments, among which we can mention the lack 
of efficiency and competition among banks, the crediting risk that still remains high, problems with the 
collateral, and problems in the functioning of the rule of law as well as other issues of similar nature. 
The low level of efficiency and competitiveness in banking activities is also reflected even by the high 
capital adequacy ratios. .The injection of foreign capital in our countries has remained low, showing, 
among  other  things,  the  inability  of  our  financial  systems  to  facilitate  the  absorption  of  foreign 
investments  in  our  national  economies.  The  absorbing  capacities  can  be  improved  significantly,  if 
investors  and  banks  conceive  their  strategies  in  regional  level  and  not  fragmented  in  separate 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2006
countries. In this way, the financial system may serve as an accelerator of the inevitable process of the 
region’s integration to the European Union.  
Dear honorable participants, 
I believe our mission is vital to our future. What I have just said should not be linked only to the issues 
already mentioned above but to a greater goal, to that which for the moment has become the main 
aspiration of each country in the region, to the European integration. Mr. Trichet has emphasized that 
“the speed at which South-East European countries progress towards accession to the EU depends 
on the policies followed. It is the culture of stability and the exercise of the responsibility in economic 
policy  making  that  are  the  crucial  ingredients  to  achieve  the  bright  prospects  that  lie  ahead  for  the 
region”. 
Personally, I have often mentioned in my public speeches that the opportunities of the region for quick 
and stable prosperity are linked, among other things, to our capability to act as a team. In line with 
that, we do not exclude financial stability in all its complexity. 
It is a pleasure for me to observe that in the field of central banking, through our activity in the last 
couple of years, we have achieved a fruitful and productive cooperation. The presence of the regional 
Governors in the Conference of the Bank of Albania makes the case evident. 
I am confident that I share the same opinion with my colleagues present in this room, that financial 
stability is a delicate matter that must always be part of our agenda. Today, the Bank of Albania is 
honored to act as the host of this event, but I am sure that in the future this forum will be hosted by 
other countries in the region. 
I  believe  that  this  conference  today  opens  a  door,  which  I  consider  a  door  of  the  region.  On  this 
occasion, I would like to ask you to consider this conference not only as a sign of the willingness for 
cooperation.  I  think  that  it  is  our  obligation  and  responsibility  to  identify  future  priorities  for 
consolidating the financial stability in the region,  as an important precondition towards its European 
integration.  
BIS Review 103/2006 
 3
