Rakesh Mohan: Reserve Bank of India archives – some reflections and the way 
forward 
 
Inaugural address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Silver 
Jubilee Inaugural Function of the Reserve Bank of India Archives, Pune, 29 September 2006. 
 It is a real pleasure to be here today on the occasion of the Silver Jubilee Inaugural Function of the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  Archives  (RBIA),  earlier  known  as  the  Central  Records  and  Documentation 
Centre (CRDC). The Reserve Bank of India established its Central Archives on August 24, 1981 with 
twin objectives to serve as (i) repository of non-current permanent records and (ii) the Central Archives 
of the Reserve Bank of India for research purposes. I am pleased to inform you that the RBI was one 
of the few organisations to have a corporate archive in the 1980s. It is a tangible sign of our active 
interest in archives in general and our archival heritage in particular. 
This past year has been an important year for the Reserve Bank in terms of historic milestones. The 
Third Volume of its History, covering the period 1967-1981 was released by the Prime Minister, Dr. 
Manmohan  Singh,  also  our  former  Governor,  on  March  18,  2006.  Since  the  Reserve  Bank  also 
completed  70  years  of  its  existence  in  2005,  our  annual  publication  the  Report  on  Currency  and 
Finance 2004-05 reviewed the Reserve Bank’s evolution as a Central Bank as its theme. But with all 
these milestones, we should not merely be stuck in the past. We should use these occasions to look 
ahead as well. In reviewing our own evolution as a Central Bank, we also had occasion to look into the 
evolution  of central  banking  in  general.  The  general  image  of  central  banks  is  that  of  conservative, 
stodgy, rigid institutions. It therefore came as a surprise to us that the Reserve Bank, along with other 
central  banks,  has  been  changing  quite  significantly  in  practice  and  function  as  the  economic 
conditions and needs have changed over time. There has been a continuous process of change. It is 
therefore  of  the  utmost  importance  that  we  lay  appropriate  emphasis  on  the  presentation  of  our 
archives,  so  that  all  these  changes  are  well  documented  and  available  for  interpretation  by  future 
historians. 
Archive  is  not  a  new  concept.  Archives  constitute  the  memory  of  people  and  organisation  and 
collectively that of the world. Archives help in forming our destiny to come together like individual parts 
of  a  musical  score  that  create  the  symphony  of  history,  past  journeys  which  reveal  our  nature  and 
origin and provide understanding of the past to illuminate the future. It is reported that, as early as the 
5th – 4th centuries BC, the Athenians kept valuable documents in the temple of the mother of the Gods, 
known as, 'Metroon'. A great number of documents are said to have been kept in the temple: treaties, 
laws, minutes of the assembly, statements of the political philosopher Socrates in his own hand, plays 
of Sophocles and Euripides, list of victors in Olympic Games, and the life. In Ancient India the records 
were engraved as edicts as well as kept in Buddhist monasteries. Ancient archives are usually literally 
cast in stone. Now we etch them on microfilm. We hope that these will last as long as the stone edicts. 
And, perhaps, people 2000 years from now will refer to the RBI archives as a temple! 
But Archives are not only about long term memory about history and culture. Archivists are also of 
immediate help to their organisations in ensuring proper management and presentation of information 
and devising policies for systematic destruction of records that are of no value. Archives see to it that 
the  organisation  keeps  a  corporate  memory,  and  preserves  only  valuable  records  that  become 
manageable, retrievable and usable. In doing so the Archives help to ensure better decision making 
and promote proper accountability. Thus, Archives contribute to efficiency and economy in their own 
administration  while  nurturing  the  collective  memory  without  which  people,  research  scholars, 
administrators and organisations would otherwise grope in the dark of amnesia. 
It is the records that tell us about our past and guide us for the future. Without records, past mistakes 
would be no longer lessons for the future. Citizens would not have any source material for writing past 
history. Indeed, without records, our sense of continuity as a people would be jeopardised. A nation 
must believe in three things: it must believe in the past; it must believe in the future; it must, above all, 
believe in the capacity of its own people to learn from the past so to gain judgement in creating their 
own future. 
Our records are created for business purposes but with passage of time these records become the 
documentary  heritage  of  the  Bank.  Our  heritage  goes  back  to  1935.  With  our  current  records  and 
those that we have inherited, we have approximately 35,143 records in the custody of our archives. 
These records include files, registers, photographs, press-clippings, publications and CDs. Some of 
BIS Review 107/2006 
 1
the  important  documents  include  letters  from  Sir  Osborne  Smith,  first  Governor  of  RBI  to  Sir  J.B. 
Taylor,  first  Deputy  Governor  (1935)  on  authorising  the  latter  to  preside  over  the  meetings  of  the 
Committee of Central Board (CCB) during his tour to London; Now this instruction is contained in a 
standing CCB resolution recorded whenever a new Deputy Governor is appointed. There is another 
letter  from  Shri  Jawaharlal  Nehru,  first  Prime  Minister  of  India,  to  Shri  C.D.  Deshmukh,  first  Indian 
Governor of RBI, requesting him to send an analytical report on the deteriorating economic condition 
and  suggest  remedies.  We  now  do  a  regular  economic  assessment  every  quarter  along  with  the 
quarterly monetary policy statements. We also send a weekly report to the Prime Minister’s office as a 
routine.  The  records  include  the  instructions  for  elimination  of  pies  from  the  banking  accounts  and 
cheques (1945); devaluation of Indian rupee and the new parity rate with foreign currencies (1966); 
division of assets between India and Pakistan on the partition of India, among others. 
To  facilitate  research  on  the  RBI  and  banking,  RBIA  also  has  an  archival  library  wherein  all 
publications  brought  out  by  the  RBI  and  other  sister  organisations  are  available.  RBIA  is  not  only 
preserving  these  records  but  also  making  them  available  for  research  purposes.  According  to  the 
Reserve Bank of India Archives Historical Research Rules (2001) the non-current records which are 
more  than  30  years  old  are  open  for  research  purposes.  Access  to  records  is  open  to  students, 
research scholars and members of the staff of the Reserve Bank of India and other banks. I hope that 
we become more pro-active in the usage of these archives for scholars’ purposes. We have decided to 
devote significant resources for the maintenance of RBI Archives. They should therefore be used more 
regularly by schools than they are currently. May I urge the Archives managers and RBI administration 
to  give  special  consideration  on  how  the  Archives  can  be  used  better?  One  idea  could  be  the 
institution of scholarships and fellowships for students and researchers for this purpose. 
A new technological development available to us now is the possibility of archiving oral histories of key 
participants in policy developments in both digital audio and video form. Being deeply conscious of the 
need to use the past to inform the future, I am glad to inform you that the Reserve Bank has initiated a 
process of making such recordings by interviewing some key policy makers in both the Reserve Bank 
and the Government who were continue in the 1980s and 1990s. As this project is completed, this will 
be a new form of archive that will be available for future historians. 
I understand that the Reserve Bank of India Archives has been formulating and implementing scientific 
procedures and guidelines for sharing, preserving and utilising our documentary heritage. The first and 
foremost requirement for such a programme to be successful is that it should be based on sound and 
result oriented professionalism. I feel that all concerned must ensure professionalism in their work of 
keeping archives. There are three aspects to the issue of proper up-keep of archives: (i) the physical 
preservation of the valuable records; (2) their proper organisation so that they may be easily retrieved 
and consulted; and (3) prevention of their improper use. 
Physical preservation of its record holdings based on the scientific principle is one of the priority areas 
of  emphasis  in  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Archives.  Some  new  initiatives  in  the  scientific 
preservation of paper records have been undertaken by RBI Archives. These include fumigation and 
deacidification of records. If the paper is stained, it is cleaned; if torn, it is repaired; if weakened, it is 
reinforced,  and  finally  loose  papers  are  bound  properly.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  through  scientific 
means  efforts  are  being  made  to  preserve  the  heritage  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  for  future 
generations.  
All of us assembled here intensely feel and experience that knowledge is essential to understanding 
and interpreting what is going on. There is also increasing understanding that right to information is as 
fundamental  as  any  other  fundamental  democratic  right.  The  main  constituent  of  knowledge  being 
information, we are to be cautiously diligent in preserving information through compatible technological 
means.  Archival  contents and  information  shall  have  to  be  preserved  through  either  microfilming  or 
digital means thus preserving our archival heritage. I am happy to inform you that the Reserve Bank of 
India  Archives  has  taken  up  an  ambitious  project  of  microfilming  and  scanning  of  its  records  as  a 
disaster management programme and as well as to have electronic document storage and retrieval 
system for instantaneous access. 
In spite of rapid developments in information technology, the basic involvement of human beings in the 
process of information generation in files and records cannot be entirely ruled out. To facilitate record 
management  activities,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  established  Record  Rooms  in  all  its  Central 
Office Departments and the Regional Offices. Efforts are being made to train the staff deployed in the 
Record Rooms so as to enable them to up-keep records properly. We must understand that slip-shod 
record management activities may cause loss, dispersal and dilution of information content of a file 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2006
which  may  in  the  long  run  may  prove  detrimental  to  the  interest  of  the  Bank.  Hemmed  in  by  local, 
national and global network we cannot ignore and neglect the records management activities – the 
basic feeder to all information systems. 
I am happy to share with you that the Reserve Bank of India Archives has been playing a proactive 
role  in  streamlining  records  management  in  the  Bank  by  providing  on  the  spot  advice  on  records 
management  to  the  Offices,  providing  professional  expertise  in  appraisal  and  review  of  non-current 
records.  I  firmly  believe  that  for  success  of  any  records  management  programme,  participation  and 
efforts at all levels are required. Though no one can go back and make a brand new start but any one 
can start from now and make a brand new ending. 
After  the  enactment  of  the  Right  to  Information  Act  (RTIA)  we,  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  have 
welcomed it with enthusiasm. As other central banks, we strive to be transparent in our work and show 
that communication is essential to our work. However, as our Chief Public Information Officer (CPIO) 
will confirm, some of our departments sometimes have difficulty in retrieving information that is asked 
for.  We  therefore  need  better  documentation  and  retrieval  systems.  This  has  become  even  more 
important  with  computerisation.  I  would  like  to  request  the  RBIA,  in  consultation  with  our 
Administration to consider appointing a group to look afresh into our documentation procedure in light 
of the new developments. 
While talking about professionalism we cannot forget the incredible progress that has been made in 
the area of information technology in the recent times. Computers have revolutionised the traditional 
concept  of  storage  and  retrieval  of  records.  Progressive  research  in  miniaturisation  has  made  it 
possible to reduce vast quantities of records on a few computer chips making storage and retrieval of 
data  exceedingly  easy  and  the  daunting  shelves  of  records  have  finally  become  user  friendly.  The 
pace  with  which  we  are  creating  new  records  is  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  mankind,  but 
fortunately we have also given to ourselves the ability to handle and manipulate this ever increasing 
corpus of records for our benefit. In the Reserve Bank of India we have to equip ourselves with these 
skills so that we are not only able to preserve those valuable records which have been handed-over to 
us  from  the past  but  also  we  are  able  to  process  and  streamline  the  infinite  number  of  records  we 
generate.  When  I  speak  of  professionalism  I  mean  this  very  skill,  which  must  be  acquired  by  our 
Archives and Information Technology specialists if they want to cope up with the demands of future. A 
Central Bank is a giant information processing machine. Our website bears testimony to this as does 
our Central Database Management System (CDBMS). A great deal of information is available in our 
website, as in other central bank websites: circulars, policy statements, reports, market information, 
economic  data  and  the  like,  the  CDBMS  is  a  data  warehouse  already  available  to  the  public.  The 
website is expanding almost every day by leaps and bounds. 
Distinguished bankers, academicians, scholars and archivists would agree with me that establishing 
physical, administrative and intellectual control over our documentary heritage is the most challenging 
job because of sheer variety of media on which records are stored which includes paper, microfilms, 
CD's,  DVD's,  magnetic  tapes,  floppies,  etc.  It  is  a  really  challenging  job  to  integrate  all  information 
within  an  organisation  on  various  media  and  store  and  retrieve  the  information  when  required.  At 
present, the RBIA is preserving, storing and providing access to paper based records but in future all 
computer  generated  records  would  also  have  to  be  preserved  and  transferred  to  Archives.  In  this 
connection  it  may  be  noted  that  there  is  pertinent  need  to  establish  systems  and  procedures  for 
creation,  maintenance,  transfer  and  migration  of  all  records  of  vital  importance  created  by  various 
offices  and  departments  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  in  electronic  form  to  be  preserved  for 
administrative, evidential and historical purposes. 
I  have  just  now  mentioned  that  professionalism  is  indispensable  for  any  successful  archival 
management  programme  -  so  are  functional  archival  building,  shelving  systems  and  disaster 
management  programmes.  As  you  are  aware,  properly  built  archival  buildings  alone  can  facilitate 
protection of records of national importance and historical value from the vagaries of weather and fire. 
The Reserve Bank of India Archives has four large size records rooms each measuring about 3,800 
square feet. The records are kept in centrally air-conditioned rooms. The building is well equipped with 
fire fighting equipment like smoke detectors with alarm alert system and fire extinguishers. The digital 
Access Control System is being installed in the record rooms to prevent unauthorised entry. Recently, 
Reserve Bank of India Archives has installed a Compactus Shelving System which protects records 
from dust and enables considerable saving of space. Overall it can be said that records are kept in 
ambient storage conditions in order to increase their longevity.  
BIS Review 107/2006 
 3
I am pleased to share with you that for proper development and to meet the challenges of future the 
Reserve Bank of India Archives has chalked out Future Plan for 2006 – 2011. 
Although the Reserve Bank of India has systems and procedures for records management in place but 
a need for a proper Archival Policy has always been felt. Recently, the Committee of the Central Board 
of  RBI  has  also  emphasised  the  need  for  clear-cut  Archival  Policy  of  the  Bank.  This  policy  would 
enumerate the sound records management practices followed in the Bank in respect of creation and 
preservation  of  records,  preservation  schedule,  maintenance  of  records,  weeding  and  appraisal  of 
records and transfer of non-current permanent records to the RBIA. This policy would, no doubt, try to 
streamline the records management systems in the Bank. 
It has been our experience that in some of the Central Office Departments and the Regional Offices, 
records management is not being accorded due priority resulting in non-transfer of permanent records 
the to RBIA. The geometrical growth of records puts a limitation on space that can be provided for 
storing them and on funds that could be made available for their proper maintenance and on servicing 
personnel  required  for  their  care  and  processing.  In  view  of  this,  RBIA  will  now  initiate  action  on 
appraisal  or  review  of  non-current  records  in  the  custody  of  the  Central  Office  Departments  and 
Regional Offices in consultation with the creating agencies. 
We all are aware of the challenges posed by electronic records. The disappearance of physical entity 
of record is one of the most intriguing and fascinating aspects of digital era. The present generation of 
Archivists and Record Managers have a challenging job to make these records available whenever 
required.  RBIA  would  shortly  initiate  steps  for  digitisation  of  records  in  its  custody.  At  present  vital 
records  in  electronic  form  are  kept  at  various  locations  in  decentralised  form  and  it  is  felt  that  if 
appropriate steps are not taken in this direction these records would 'fade away' from the memory of 
the  Bank.  It  is,  therefore,  essential  that  guidelines  in  this  regard  are  formulated  and  scrupulously 
implemented. 
I am happy to inform you that during the Silver Jubilee Year a number of initiatives are being taken by 
RBIA  to  enhance  its  image  and  utility.  A  Currency  Display  Unit  would  be  added  in  the  RBIA.  The 
currency display and archival exhibition would be open to visitors so as to make people aware of the 
role  of  RBI  in  country's  economy  and  monetary  policy.  Last  but  not  the  least,  RBIA  would  make  a 
Disaster  Preparedness  and  Reaction  Plan.  Emphasis  should  be  placed  on  the  need  for  fast  and 
efficient  reaction  to  even  small  incident  as  they  have  potential  to  grow  into  something  bigger  if  not 
contained.  I  am  sure,  when  ready,  the  plan  would  provide  RBIA  with  guidelines  to  combat  the 
emergency efficiently and effectively. 
Before  I  end,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  urgent  need  for  adopting  proactive  approach  in 
streamlining records management in the Bank. With the enactment of Right to Information Act (2005) 
the  records  management  system  needs  closer  look  so  that  systems  are  evolved  for  instantaneous 
storage and retrieval of information for dissemination purposes. I once again congratulate RBIA and its 
staff  on  Silver  Jubilee  and  hope  that  they  would  be  able  to  tackle  future  challenges  efficiently  and 
effectively. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2006
