Lucas Papademos: Integration and development of financial markets – a key to 
faster sustainable growth in Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Institut International d’Etudes Bancaires, Athens, 20 October 2006. 
 Introduction 
I. 
This impressive gathering of the Presidents and Chairpersons of Europe’s top banks brings to mind a 
statement made by a famous economist: “People of the same trade seldom meet together even for 
merriment  and  diversion,  but  on  those  occasions  when  they  meet  the  conversation  ends  in  a 
conspiracy against the public or some contrivance to raise prices”. It was Adam Smith who expressed 
this view in the 18th century. If he could have seen this gathering of top bankers from across Europe, 
would he have expressed such an opinion, which would also be a cause of alarm for a central banker 
because of the potential “contrivance to raise prices”? I very much doubt it. I am in no position to judge 
the  degree  of  “merriment  and  diversion”  you  have  experienced  during  this  annual  meeting  of  the 
Institut International d’Etudes Bancaires – the 111th meeting since the Institute’s establishment. I am 
sure, however, that today’s sessions must have provided very useful opportunities to exchange views 
on current banking matters and major economic policy issues. It is a privilege for me to be here with 
you tonight and I would like to thank you for inviting me to be the speaker at this gala dinner. At the 
same time, I am aware that it is a challenging task to stand between an audience and the first course 
of the meal. However, this is not necessarily an unfamiliar position for a central banker to find himself 
in. After all, it is said that it is the very job of the central banker to take the punchbowl away just when 
the party starts to get going. 
The nature of your meeting and the current favourable prospects for a sustained recovery in Europe 
suggested to me four issues on which I would like to share some thoughts with you:  
First, how can financial markets – and the banking system in particular – promote faster and 
sustained economic growth in Europe? 
Second, and more specifically, how can increased integration, competition and development 
in Europe’s financial markets foster innovation and productivity growth, which are crucial for 
enhancing Europe’s growth performance? 
Third, how far have we advanced in reaping the benefits of a more integrated and developed 
financial system? And, what can we do to speed up this process? 
And,  finally,  can  the  current  supervisory  arrangements  in  Europe  function  effectively  and 
efficiently  in  a  rapidly  changing  financial  environment  and  help  to  promote  integration  and 
efficiency while safeguarding financial stability? 
Let me give you the general message of my remarks first: we have good news to report in answering 
these  questions  and  we,  the  European  Central  Bank  in  particular,  are  committed  to  making  further 
progress in the areas of our responsibility. 
The contribution of financial markets to growth – what do we know?  
II.  
While  the  outlook  for  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  the  coming  quarters  appears  to  be  very  positive 
indeed, we cannot deny that the growth performance of the continental European economies over the 
past decade has been rather disappointing – especially if we compare this to the impressive growth 
rates recorded in the United States over that period. A plethora of analyses of the causes of Europe’s 
less-than-satisfactory performance has been presented, and I am sure that in your discussions on the 
various features of European social models – the theme of this year’s annual session – you certainly 
touched  upon  many  of  the  explanations  put  forward  in  this  regard:  inadequate  labour  utilisation; 
insufficient  competition  in  product  and  services  markets;  excessive  bureaucracy  and  administrative 
burdens;  tax  and  benefit  systems  that  create  the  wrong  incentives;  insufficient  investment  in 
education, research and development, etc. I think we can all agree on the diagnosis – the supply side 
of our economies is less than optimal. Thankfully, we also have a shared understanding of what the 
remedies should be. The necessary measures and policies are laid down in the so-called Kok report 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 1
and  the  revised  and  refocused  Lisbon  strategy  of  the  EU:  structural  reforms  in  labour,  product  and 
services  markets  to  improve  flexibility;  removal  of  obstacles  to  cross-border  competition  and  the 
completion of a genuine Single Market in the EU; policies to improve education and training and to 
boost (both public and private sector) research and development; measures to improve the business 
climate. Last, and by no means least, we should tackle the obstacles to competition and innovation in 
our “trade” and the area of our responsibility – the financial sector – and we should promote financial 
integration and development. It is this last point – financial integration and development as a key to 
faster sustainable growth – that I will explore next. 
As  you  know,  the  fundamental  function  of  financial  markets  and  intermediaries  is  to  channel  funds 
from economic agents who have a surplus of savings to those who have a deficit. If financial markets 
are  functioning  efficiently  and  are  supervised  effectively,  they  contribute  to  an  optimal  allocation  of 
resources,  reduce  the  cost  of  capital,  and  allow  for  risk-sharing  and  risk-diversification.  But  are 
markets  sufficiently  efficient  and  effectively  regulated  in  Europe?  Do  they  perform  their  tasks  as 
optimally as they should? These questions can be addressed from various perspectives: allow me to 
concentrate on two angles, that of financial integration and that of financial development.  
Intuitively,  it  seems  obvious  that  segmented  markets  –  with  higher  transaction  costs  and  reduced 
possibilities for risk-sharing and optimal resource allocation – are not efficient and hence are hindering 
growth. Financial integration could thus be conducive to growth. What I mean by financial integration is 
the establishment of a fully integrated market, in which all potential market participants with the same 
relevant characteristics face a single set of rules, have equal market access and are treated equally 
when they are active in the market.  
Moreover, the process of financial development can also further improve the performance of already 
well-integrated markets and thus enhance growth. What I call financial development is the process of 
introducing financial innovations and organisational improvements in the financial system that reduce 
asymmetric  information,  increase  the  completeness  of  markets  and  the  contracting  possibilities  of 
agents, reduce transaction costs and increase competition. Both financial integration and development 
are therefore crucial in contributing to the efficiency and stability of the financial system. 
This  is  the  theory.  But  what  do  we  make  of  this?  What  are  the  practical  consequences  and  policy 
implications  of  the  theoretical  perspective?  Leonid  Brezhnev  –  a  man  not  usually  remembered  for 
scholarly discourse – is said to have stated that “there is nothing more practical than a good theory”. 
Well,  this  is  definitely  not  good  enough  for  me.  We  should  try  to  assess  the  facts  and  take  the 
necessary  action  to  improve  the  situation  if  this  is  warranted.  Can  we  measure  the  degree  of 
integration  and  the  state  of  development  of  financial  markets  in  Europe?  Can  we  estimate 
quantitatively  the  effects  of  further  integration  and  enhanced  financial  development  on  economic 
growth? The answers to these questions are important in order to know where we stand, to assess the 
expected  benefits  of  further  progress  and  to  implement  the  appropriate  policies  to  achieve  our 
objectives. 
At the European Central Bank we are making a systematic effort to measure and assess the extent of 
financial integration and the degree of development of Europe’s financial markets and to estimate the 
impact  of  the  associated  processes  on  the  economy.  To  this  end,  we  have  developed  a  set  of 
indicators of financial integration and we are also monitoring and evaluating the process of financial 
development in Europe on the basis of another wide-ranging set of indicators measuring the degree 
and  process  of  development  of  financial  markets.  Let  me  briefly  report  on  some  of  the  results  and 
findings of this work. 
Overall, the good news is that we now have some solid evidence to prove the theoretical propositions I 
previously  mentioned  and  their  quantitative  implications.  For  example,  there  is  strong  empirical 
support, based on the analysis of data for many countries and many sectors, that the size and depth 
of capital markets has a significant positive impact on economic growth – the larger, more liquid and 
also  more  integrated,  the  better.  Financial  development  is  good  for  productivity  growth  and  capital 
accumulation, and financial liberalisation generates sizeable growth benefits.  
Why is this the case? There are several reasons. But a central explanation is that well-developed and 
efficient financial markets are better at channelling capital from sectors in decline to those with growth 
opportunities,  in  a  process  of  Schumpeterian  “creative  destruction”  that  ultimately  drives  economic 
growth. It is particularly beneficial for firms with good investment prospects, which depend more on 
external  finance,  especially  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  and  start-up  companies.  The 
practical implication of this empirical analysis is that it demonstrates – quantitatively – that productivity 
improvements  and  economic  growth  will  be  fostered  by  a  more  integrated  and  efficient  European 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2006
financial system, in which private capital is more easily channelled into financing innovations and in 
which risk-taking and venture capital markets are better developed. 
An  equally  strong  message  can  be conveyed  about the  beneficial  effects  of  financial  integration  on 
growth  from  the  American  experience.  It  has  been  estimated  that  the  removal  of  restrictions  on 
branching and cross-state ownership for US banks contributed to an increase in real per capita growth 
by  between  0.6%  and  1.2%,  mainly  as  a  result  of  enhanced  productivity.  Moreover,  the  “quality  of 
banking” improved. For instance, the share of non-performing loans and write-offs declined by 0.3% to 
0.6%  after  the  removal  of  these  restrictions.  Deregulation,  which  allowed  for  financial  integration 
across states, also fostered bank consolidation, thus allowing banks to realise economies of scale and 
specialisation benefits. The result was not only lower borrowing rates for firms and households, but 
also positive spillover effects in other markets, enhancing competition and fostering entrepreneurship. 
Finally, and quite interestingly for us central bankers, banking deregulation and the increased financial 
integration it entailed played a significant role in reducing output volatility in the United States and in 
improving risk-sharing.1  
Of  course,  these  findings  cannot  be  applied  exactly  to  Europe.  Moreover,  deregulation  and  the 
removal of legal barriers is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for more integration, as there 
remain other obstacles, not least those of a prudential or tax nature. Nevertheless, the general and 
practical  message  of  the  evidence  available  is  clear:  if  we  further  pursue  financial  integration  in 
Europe,  we  can  realistically  expect  significant  tangible  benefits  in  terms  of  higher  productivity  and 
economic growth.  
Improving the functioning of the European financial system 
III.  
The  good  news,  the  second  piece  of  good  news,  is  that  this  message  is  better  and  more  widely 
understood. The creation of a true single financial market in Europe is a clear priority. And the euro, of 
course, plays its part. If the original justification for the single currency was neatly encapsulated in the 
title  of  the  European  Commission’s  Report  “One  Market,  One  Money”2  that  set  out  the  potential 
benefits and costs of an economic and monetary union, we should now aim, more specifically, to fully 
complete the process and achieve the twin objectives.  
Are we there yet? Again, let me mention a few hard facts. The ECB’s research and its monitoring of 
financial integration portrays a somewhat mixed integration picture. Recently, a few weeks ago to be 
precise,  we published our  second  report  on  financial  integration  indicators3  and  a  study  on  interest 
rates across the euro area countries4. One of the findings, perhaps unsurprisingly, is that there is a 
close link between the degree of market integration and the available underlying market infrastructure. 
The euro money market is essentially fully integrated, thanks to the integration of large-value payment 
systems. By contrast, retail banking continues to be fragmented for various reasons, but an important 
one  is  that  there  are  too  many  retail  payment  infrastructures.  This  is  one  reason  why  the  ECB  is 
strongly  supporting  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA)  as  quickly  as 
possible.  The  completion  of  SEPA  will  not  only  have  direct  benefits  for  the  consumer,  but  will  also 
further  promote  integration  in  retail  banking.  More  generally,  the  further  and  faster  integration  of 
clearing and settlement systems in Europe is an essential motive behind the ECB’s initiative to offer in 
the  future  securities  settlement  services  in  central  bank  money  in  euro  –  the  so-called  TARGET2-
Securities  system.  Yesterday,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  decided  to  further  investigate  the 
feasibility of this project, and to take a final decision in February next year. Afterwards, we intend to 
launch a broad public consultation of all interested parties. 
Another  sign  of  incomplete  integration  is  that  bank  interest  rates  still  vary  considerably  across 
countries. I should stress, though, that such differences are also partly the consequence of various 
other  factors,  such  as  product  characteristics  and  business  practices.  Some  press  commentators 
concluded  from  the  ECB’s  report  that  these  high  cross-country  differences  reflected  insufficient 
                                                      
1   See  Morgan,  P.,  Rime,  and  E.  Strahan  (2004).  “Bank  Integration  and  State  Business  Cycles”,  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, 119(4), pp. 1555-85. 
2   Commission of the European Communities (1990) “One Market, One Money” European Economy 44. 
3   European Central Bank, “Indicators of financial integration in the euro area”, September 2006. 
4   European Central Bank, “Differences in MFI interest rates across euro area countries”, September 2006. 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 3
competition.  This  is  only  part  of  the  explanation.  Market  fragmentation  also  affects  the  financial 
system’s  efficiency.  Again,  a  comparison  between  Europe  and  the  United  States  is  quite  revealing. 
Whereas the cost-to-income ratio of banks in the euro area is 64% on average, it is only 58% on the 
other side of the Atlantic. This superior US performance can be explained, at least partly, by a more 
integrated market and a more harmonised regulatory environment. 
Many  of  you  experience  first  hand  the  obstacles  that  continue  to  hamper  financial  integration  and 
cross-border banking in Europe. Some of these obstacles are related to legal and fiscal differences, 
while  others  may  relate  to  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  The  latter  are  of  particular 
interest to us considering that a task of the ECB, which is enshrined in the Treaty, is to contribute to 
the smooth conduct of policies by national authorities in the field of supervision and financial stability. 
Financial regulation and prudential supervision have a significant role to play in the financial system: to 
address market failures and safeguard financial stability. However, it is also true that in an evolving 
and integrating financial system, banking regulation and supervision need to evolve in order to keep 
up with developments.  
This, of course, begs the question whether the European regulatory and supervisory framework has 
kept pace with the development and integration of European financial markets. There are two aspects 
to  this  question:  first,  whether  the  current  framework  may  be  an  obstacle  to  further  financial 
integration.  Bankers  often  see  the  decentralised  institutional  set-up  in  Europe  as  a  major  hurdle  to 
efficient  cross-border  operations.  Much  has  already  been  done  to  alleviate  the  concerns,  though 
perhaps not to the extent some of you would have wished. The second issue is whether the current 
institutional  framework  is  able  to  effectively  maintain  financial  stability  in  a  context  of  increased 
financial integration. Allow me to touch upon both issues. 
Since  March last  year,  the  Lamfalussy framework  for  financial  regulation  and supervision  has  been 
formally extended to the banking sector. I see this extended Lamfalussy framework as a major step to 
achieve  the  objective  of  consistent  supervisory  action  across  the  EU  and,  in  this  way,  to  further 
promote financial integration. In its young existence, the Committee of European Banking Supervisors 
(CEBS) has already delivered an impressive amount of work in this area. Rightfully, the Committee 
has  focused  extensively  on  defining  common  approaches  in  the  supervisory  tools  and  practices 
(mainly  relating  to  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  Framework)  as  well  as  on  the  cooperation 
between home and host supervisors. Both aspects are clearly of great interest to banks with cross-
border presence. Looking ahead, what I see as the main challenge is the consistent implementation of 
the agreed standards and guidelines by the national supervisors. In this respect, I consider the recent 
decision  of  CEBS  to  establish  operational  networks  (or  colleges  of  supervisors)  for  specific  cross-
border groups and to create a coordination mechanism among them to be two important steps in the 
right direction.  
But there is more. Work is underway which aims at the development of a common supervisory culture; 
the adoption of a non-binding mediation mechanism among supervisors; the possible use of the cross-
border  delegation  of  supervisory  tasks  and  responsibilities;  and  a  further  streamlining  of  banks’ 
reporting requirements.  
The  ECB  very  much  supports  both  the  work  of  the  CEBS  and  the  concrete  measures  I  have  just 
mentioned  in  order  to  achieve  the  necessary  convergence  in  supervisory  practices.  The  aim  is  to 
exploit  the  opportunities  offered  by  the  existing  institutional  framework  to  the  maximum  possible 
extent. 
Is this enough? I am aware that for some of you the present arrangements and initiatives do not go far 
enough,  and  a  number  of  much  more  far-reaching  proposals  have  been  put  forward,  such  as 
extending the coordinating role of the consolidating supervisor, the establishment of a lead supervisor 
or the move towards a federal system for supervision. But, in my view, it is essential that the existing 
framework should be given sufficient time to show that it can indeed deliver on its promises. By the 
end of next year, we will have the findings of the review that is currently underway of the processes 
and  procedures.  It  would  seem  reasonable  to  me  to  await  this  before  embarking  on  another  major 
assessment. 
Ladies and gentlemen, before I close, let me make a couple of brief remarks on the nexus between 
financial integration and financial stability. You are undoubtedly aware that only a few weeks ago, we 
witnessed the largest ever loss incurred by a hedge fund, 6.4 billion US dollars, suffered by the US-
based fund Amaranth Advisors. Fortunately, there was little market disruption. I mention this, because 
this episode should serve as a solitary reminder that the channels through which financial innovation, 
development  and  integration  can  potentially  affect  the  financial  system’s  resilience  are  manifold, 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2006
diverse,  and  complex.  One  could  expect  financial  integration  to  affect  financial  stability  in  two 
directions: on the one hand, there is an increased risk of contagion and a larger exposure to common 
shocks; on the other hand, there are more opportunities for funding as well as for risk-sharing and risk-
transfer. The net effect is difficult to gauge. In my view, it is likely to be positive for the stability of the 
financial system. What is certain, however, is that, in the case of banking strains, the likelihood that 
they will remain confined within domestic borders is less in comparison with the past. 
Therefore, it is necessary for the supervisory framework as well as for the arrangements for financial 
stability in the EU to be able to cope effectively with the management of a possible crisis of cross-
border  banking  groups.  These  issues  are  a  central  main  topic  of  discussion  at  the  moment  in  the 
policy-making circles in the EU and, indeed, globally. In Europe, a lot of progress has been made in 
clarifying the roles of, and the procedures to be followed by, the competent authorities (central banks, 
banking  supervisors  and  ministries  of  finance)  in  crisis  situations.  In  addition,  the  degree  of 
preparedness  of  the  authorities  to  manage  a  situation  of  stress  can  be  enhanced  through  crisis 
simulation  exercises.  However,  there  are  other  areas,  such  as  deposit  insurance  schemes  and  the 
winding-up  of  financial  institutions,  where  there  is  room  for  regulatory  intervention  at  the  EU  level. 
Reflections on possible legislative proposals in this regard are underway. 
The general conclusion from all these observations is that any future modification to the supervisory 
framework  should  follow  a  holistic  approach,  carefully  considering  all  the  implications  of  any  such 
change for all the components of the financial safety net. The stakes are indeed high, as an efficient 
and  effective  supervisory  framework  for  a  more  integrated,  competitive  and  developed  financial 
system is crucial for Europe’s growth.  
Concluding remarks 
IV.  
Ladies and gentlemen, a “holistic” approach to this gala dinner should also mean combining the food 
for thought, which I hope to have provided, with our attention to the more tangible nutritional elements, 
that is, our dinner. Let me conclude by returning to Adam Smith and some pertinent views of his, as 
assessed by Alan Greenspan: “Modern economic analysis has confirmed much of what Adam Smith 
inferred from a far less impressive set of data. Today’s economists generally point to three important 
characteristics  influencing  growth:  (1)  the  extent  […]  of  a  country’s  integration  with  the  rest  of  the 
world, (2) the quality of a country’s institutional infrastructure, and (3) the success of its policy-makers 
in implementing measures necessary for stability”. As I have highlighted tonight, each of these three 
elements – integration, institutional infrastructure and stability (both for macroeconomic and financial) 
– remain of crucial importance to Europe’s economic growth and prosperity. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 99/2006 
 5
