Stanley Fischer: Israel’s economy and the challenges facing its banking 
system 
Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the AGM of the Association 
of Banks in Israel, Tel Aviv, 23 November 2006. 
 Mr President of the Association of Banks in Israel and Chairman of Bank Leumi, Eitan Raff; Executive 
Director, Association of Banks in Israel, Freddy Wieder; my banker colleagues and colleagues from 
the Bank of Israel; ladies and gentlemen: may I start by thanking the Association of Banks in Israel for 
inviting me and giving me the opportunity to speak before you today. 
I would like to relate first to the current state of Israel’s economy, in which the banking system plays an 
important  role,  both  as  an  active,  influential  participant  and  as  an  entity  affected  by  economic 
developments.  I  will  then  address  the  challenges  facing  the  new  Supervisor  of  Banks  and  Israel’s 
banking system. 
The economic situation 
Israel’s  economy  today  is  doing  very well,  even after  the war  in  the  north. Although activity  slowed 
during the war - reflected by a negative rate of growth in the third quarter - the latest indicators point to 
a relatively rapid recovery of economic activity after the war. 
The economy has enjoyed three years of rapid growth. In the light of the National Accounts data of the 
third quarter published recently by the Central Bureau of Statistics, the Bank of Israel assesses that 
GDP will grow by 4.8 percent in 2006. This is a high rate of growth by international standards, and 
reflects a rise in investment and in exports, a surplus in the balance of payments, a very high rate of 
foreign investment, increased productivity and an improvement in employment - and all this despite 
the war’s adverse impact on growth. 
Budget  data  show  that  tax  revenues  have  revived.  The  government’s  budget  deficit  in  2006  is 
expected to be about 1.8 percent of GDP. 
Inflation in Israel is low, and in 2006 is expected to be below the target, mainly due to the fall in oil 
prices  and  the  appreciation  of  the  shekel.  In  accordance  with  the  Bank  of  Israel’s  flexible  inflation 
targeting approach, our intention is to bring inflation back gradually to within the target range of 1–3 
percent a year. 
Ten-year interest rates in Israel are below 6 percent a year, and this is important to everyone who has 
to take a mortgage. The markets are robust and stable. 
Three main factors account for the economy’s success and its ability to withstand the negative impact 
of the war: 
1. 
2. 
The structural changes that the economy has undergone in the last fifteen years. 
The macroeconomic policy pursued by the government and the Bank of Israel before, during, 
and after the war. 
The  background conditions  that affect all  of  us,  i.e.,  developments  in  the  global  economy, 
and the security situation 
3. 
Having  said  that,  the  economy  is  currently  facing  two  important  challenges:  reducing  the 
government debt, and tackling the problem of poverty. I have spoken in the past, and will speak 
again in the future, about the solutions to these problems. Today, however, as it is my intention to deal 
with the problems currently facing the banking system, I will end this part of my address by saying that 
Israel’s economic situation is very good, but we must try to ensure that this continues and not rest on 
our laurels. To you, the bankers, I would like to quote the English saying, “bad loans are made in good 
times;” from a macroeconomic standpoint, we are now in good times. 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 1
The targets facing the new Supervisor of Banks 
In the second part of my address I would like to talk about the banking system. The banking system 
plays  a  very  important  role  in  every  economy,  and  of  course,  in  Israel’s  economy  too.  What  is 
important, of course, is that the banking system be stable, competitive, and fair, and that it serve all 
its customers - households and the business sector - well. 
First, I would like to thank the outgoing Supervisor of Banks, Yoav Lehman, for his 28 years of service 
to the Bank of Israel and to Israel’s economy, and I would also like to congratulate the new Supervisor, 
Rony Hizkiyahu, and wish him success in confronting the important challenges facing him within the 
Bank of Israel and vis-a-vis the banking system. 
Within the Bank of Israel the Supervisor faces the vital and difficult task of managing a large, complex 
department. The task is far from a simple one, particularly as it involves a transition to a new system of 
supervision, i.e., Basel II. 
The implementation of Basel II constitutes a major objective for the new Supervisor and the banks. 
Although  we  gave  high  priority  to  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  guidelines  by  the  banking 
supervision and the banks, insufficient progress has been made so far. I must stress that Basel II is 
not just a new rule book, but it entails a whole new approach - with the supervision of management 
systems, and in particular risk management, taking the place of setting detailed rules. It is easy to tell 
the banking supervision to determine general principles instead of detailed rules, but it is difficult to 
carry  this  out.  This  also  presents  a  challenge  to  the  banks,  who  sometimes  find  it  comfortable  to 
operate according to specific rules and even ask for them. 
I  have  discussed  Basel  II  with  bankers,  and  I  note  that  in  Israel  they  all  want  to  adopt  advanced 
internal  models.  Operating  according  to  such  models  requires  sophisticated  and  costly  data  and 
management  systems  and  an  extensive  database,  which  are  not  within  reach  of  small  banks.  For 
comparison,  in  the  US  it  is  thought  that  only  the  largest  twenty  banks  need  to  adopt  the  most 
advanced models. We are aware of the efforts by the smaller banks to cooperate in the formulation of 
statistical systems and appreciate their endeavors. 
More intense efforts to align the system for the implementation of Basel II and for the adoption of the 
“SOX 404” rules for internal controls will lead to the improvement of the whole system of management 
and control in banks. This will instill high standards into Israel’s banking system that are on a par with 
the most advanced in the world. 
The  second  external  goal  for  the  Bank  of  Israel  and  the  new  Supervisor  of  Banks  is  strengthening 
competition  in  the  banking  system,  particularly  retail  banking.  Making  the  banking  system  more 
competitive  is  one  of  the  major  objectives  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  and,  I  would  assume,  of  every 
government in Israel. 
The Bachar Committee dealt with the issue of competition in the areas of credit and the capital market, 
and  there  is  a  need  to  increase  competition  in  banking  services  provided  to  households  and  small 
businesses. 
In this context, I would like to refer to the latest occurrence in which one bank increased its fees, and 
the other banks followed, creating a distinctly uncompetitive impression. It is not surprising, therefore, 
that  the  public  and  its  representatives  in  the  Knesset  reacted  critically  as  they  did.  Here  too, 
competitive conduct would be beneficial to customers, to the bank, and to the banking system. 
Another factor that does not add to the degree of competition is the long, and perhaps even ridiculous, 
list of fees. I fail to understand why in Israel the banking system operates thus, while in other countries 
banks make their money essentially from the spread between their lending and their borrowing interest 
rates. 
It would be a very good thing if a foreign bank were to enter the field of retail banking in Israel, and I 
hope this will happen. 
I would also like to speak about the need to improve the level of customer service. There are too many 
justified  complaints,  and  the  banks  must  invest  resources  to  avoid  such  situations.  I  would  like  to 
clarify  the  position  of  the  Bank  of  Israel  on  the  matter  of  consumer  protection.  I  am  in  favor  of  our 
involvement in this area, but I would like to place the responsibility where it belongs, and that is with 
the banks. To clarify my position: the situation should be that a dissatisfied customer first turns 
to the bank with his complaint, and only then, if he feels the complaint has not been dealt with 
properly,  does  he  approach  the  Banking  Supervision  Department.  In  a  competitive  banking 
system the banks must deal with most complaints against them, with the central bank acting only as 
the customer’s last resort and not his first port of call. 
In this context I would like to share with you a conversation I had. I was asked how I am settling down 
in Israel, and if I understand what goes on here. I answered that the hardest thing to understand was 
my pay slip, but the truth of the matter is that there is something even harder to understand, and that is 
my bank statement. 
The  last  topic  I  would  like  to  talk  about  is  the  cooperation  between  the  various  supervisors  of  the 
financial  system.  The  supervisors  currently  cooperate  with  each  other,  and  it  is  our  intention  to 
institutionalize this cooperation in an MOU (memorandum of understanding). I view this step as a first 
stage in closer cooperation between the supervisors and the financial system. 
Finally, the new Supervisor faces enough challenges to stop him from being bored. His approach will 
be  one  of  less  detailed  regulation,  and  more  regulation  according  to  principles.  His  success  in  this 
depends not only on him, but on responsible and competitive conduct by the banks. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 119/2006 
 3
