 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Opening remarks at the presentation of the  
Inflation Report – August 2019  
Dr Željko Jović, Vice Governor 
          Belgrade, 14 August 2019 
Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues, 
Welcome  to  the  presentation  of  the  August  Inflation  Report,  where  colleagues  from  the  Economic 
Research and Statistics Department will present to you in detail the current macroeconomic trends and 
our latest projections. 
In my introductory address I will touch on the key macroeconomic conditions in which monetary policy 
was  implemented  and on the  decisions  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  has made in  the  period  since  our 
previous Report.  First of all, I would like to say that favourable macroeconomic trends  continued into 
2019  –  inflation is low  and stable,  macroeconomic and financial stability  has  been preserved, and the 
costs of financing have stayed low, feeding through into higher economic and investment activity.  Over 
the past six years inflation has been low and stable, at around 2%, and is expected to remain so in 2019 
and  2020.  Financial  stability  has  been  maintained  and  the  issue  of  inherited  non-performing  loans 
resolved in a sustainable way – their level has been reduced by more than 70% over the last four years 
and  their  share  in  total  loans  cut  to  5.2%.  Relative  to  May  2013  when  we  embarked  on  the  cycle  of 
monetary  easing,  the  interest  rates  on  dinar  loans  for  households  are  now  twice  lower  and  for 
corporates as many as three times lower. This served as a fillip to investments, which remain one of the 
key drivers of economic growth this year as well. The sustained positive fiscal trends, with a surplus of 
0.7%  of  GDP  in  the  first  half  of  the  year,  are  a  reflection  of  the  successfully  implemented  fiscal 
consolidation and full coordination of monetary and fiscal policies. 
All of this has been achieved in the face of unfavourable effects of some factors from the international 
environment,  notably  the  slowing  of  global  economic  growth  amid  announcements  of  additional 
protectionist measures and heightened geopolitical tensions. At the same time, this is a proof that by 
strengthening  our  economy,  primarily  through  the  reduction  of  external  and  internal  imbalances  and 
through favourable macroeconomic prospects, we have increased its resilience to unfavourable effects 
from the international environment.  
Since  the  May  Report,  external  financial  conditions  have  been  largely  affected  by  the  shift  in  the 
monetary policies  of leading central banks,  which are  not only  slowing the  normalisation process, but 
also announcing additional monetary stimuli. Thus, the Federal Reserve System  lowered its policy rate 
for the first time since 2008, while the European Central Bank announced it would keep its main rates at 
current or lower levels at least through mid-2020. This should sustain favourable financial conditions for 
longer than expected, as well as capital inflows to emerging markets.      
As  monetary  easing  by  leading  central  banks  appeared  more  certain  and  positive  macroeconomic 
developments at home continued, the National Bank of Serbia decided to lower the key policy rate in 
two  instances,  July  and  August,  by  25  bp  each,  to  2.5%,  i.e.  its  lowest  level  in  the  inflation  targeting 
regime yet. Thus, in conditions of subdued inflationary pressures, the National Bank of Serbia continued 
to provide additional support to economic growth and a sustainable rise in employment. 
As  so  far,  monetary  policy  decisions  will  continue  to  be  made  in  consideration  of  the  effects  of  past 
monetary easing on the future inflation profile, as well as of the effects of other domestic and external 
factors.  Given  that  the  key  risks  to  the  projection  are  still  mostly  associated  with  the  international 
environment,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  will  keep  a  close  eye  on  developments  in  the  international 
commodity and financial markets and assess their impact on economic movements in Serbia. As before, 
monetary policy will be predictable and consistent in delivering low and stable inflation in the medium 
term. This will at the same time help maintain macroeconomic and financial stability and contribute to 
sustainable  economic  growth.  Owing  to  this,  there  is  a  constant  rise  in  the  number  of  domestic  and 
1 
foreign investors who are investing at a longer horizon, having recognised the stability and prospects of 
our economy.    
Current economic trends and the results achieved thus far are a good basis for further sustainable and 
dynamic  economic  growth.  This  is  confirmed  by  our  latest  projections  and  key  macroeconomic 
developments,  which  will  now  be  presented  to  you  in  detail  by  our  colleagues  from  the  Economic 
Research and Statistics Department. 
2 
