Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Finance
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, before the House
of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 30 April 2019.
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Once again, Senior Deputy Governor
Wilkins and I are pleased to be with you to talk about the Bank’s Monetary Policy Report (MPR),
which we published last week.
Six  months  ago,  when  we  last  appeared  before  this  committee,  we  talked  about  some  very
positive  developments.  The  Canadian  economy  had  solid  momentum  and  had  essentially
completed  its  journey  home—that  is  to  say,  it  was  operating  very  close  to  its  capacity,  and
inflation was running near our target. At the same time, we were monitoring the risks posed by
protectionist trade measures and elevated levels of household debt. 
Unfortunately,  since  then,  there  have  been  a  couple  of  negative  developments.  These  have
caused a detour for the economy and are delaying its return home. Our forecast is based on the
belief  that  the  impact  of  these  developments  will  be  temporary,  and  that  once  the  associated
adjustments  take  place,  stronger  economic  growth  will  resume.  So,  in  the  MPR,  we  marked
down our forecast for economic growth this year to 1.2 per cent, and we project growth of near 2
per cent for both 2020 and 2021.
Let me give you some details. First, the global economy slowed toward the end of last year. To
be clear, some slowing was expected as the stimulative impact of US fiscal measures fades.
But the slowdown was deeper than most forecasters projected and has persisted into 2019.
A  major  factor  behind  this  global  slowdown  has  been  the  US-led  trade  war.  This  is  delaying
business  investment  decisions  in  many  countries  around  the  world.  Uncertainty  about  future
trade  policies  has  risen—here  in  Canada,  doubts  about  the  ratification  of  the  Canada-United
States-Mexico Agreement have increased, and these remain a downside risk to our outlook for
investment.
It is certain that an escalation of trade conflicts would be a blow to the global economy. However,
the  global  economy  could  receive  a  significant  lift  if  there  were  progress  in  resolving  these
conflicts.  I  should  emphasize  that  businesses  and  economies  will  ultimately  adjust  to  the
heightened  level  of  uncertainty  around  trade,  by  adjusting  their  investment  plans  lower.  Once
those adjustments are complete, however, economic growth can pick up again.
The other major development since October was another sharp decline in oil prices late in 2018,
which put Canada’s oil sector under considerable stress. More recently, oil prices have firmed,
including  the  prices  our  western  producers  receive.  But  transportation  constraints  on  future
growth remain a significant source of drag and uncertainty. This has led to another downward
revision to investment intentions in the sector. Some of this downgrade is likely more structural
than cyclical in nature, as it represents the continued adjustment of the sector to global oil prices
of US$50–60 per barrel, rather than the much higher prices of five years ago. This adjustment
process is also being reflected in wages and other costs, and in developments in the housing
market in Alberta.
It  is  important  to  note  that  as  investments  in  the  oil  patch  are  pared  back,  Canada’s  growth
slows. But when those investment levels stop falling, Canada’s growth will pick up again, even if
oil sector investment does not, because other areas of growth will come to dominate the data.
We saw this same dynamic following the oil price shock of 2014–15.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition to concerns about global trade and oil prices, we have continued to watch how the
Canadian  housing  market  is  adjusting  to  the  combination  of  provincial  and  municipal  housing
policy  measures,  the  revised  guidelines  for  mortgage  lending,  and  past  increases  in  interest
rates.  The  adjustment  of  the  housing  market  is  particularly  important  given  the  context  of
elevated levels of household debt.
Our analysis has been complicated by activity in some previously frothy markets—the greater
Toronto and Vancouver areas, in particular. Research by Bank staff shows that the sharp rise in
housing resales above fundamental levels in Ontario and British Columbia—and the subsequent
fall—correlates  strongly  with  house  price  expectations.  This  suggests  that  provincial  and
municipal housing policy measures have had a much stronger impact on housing activity than
changes  to  mortgage  lending  guidelines  and  past  increases  in  interest  rates.  Supporting  this
analysis is the fact that many other markets across the country are seeing solid activity even
though they have the same mortgage lending guidelines and interest rates. This is what would be
expected in an economy that is growing, with a rising population and strong labour market. The
implication is that as the situation in Toronto and Vancouver stabilizes, the Canadian housing
sector should return to growth overall later this year.
Finally,  I  would  note  that  the  federal  government  and  several  provinces  have  made  fiscal
announcements  during  budget  season.  Our  analysis  suggests  that  the  combined  impact  of
adjusted spending plans announced to date would lead to a downward revision for our growth
outlook of about 0.2 percentage points in 2020.
In sum, the Canadian economy is currently facing some headwinds, but there is good reason to
believe that the economy will accelerate in the second half of this year. In this context, the Bank’s
Governing Council judges that an accommodative policy interest rate continues to be warranted.
We will continue to evaluate the appropriate degree of monetary policy accommodation as new
data arrive. In particular, we are monitoring developments in household spending, oil markets and
global trade policy to gauge the extent to which the factors weighing on growth and the inflation
outlook are dissipating.
With that, Senior Deputy Wilkins and I would be happy to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
