Elvira Nabiullina: Review of recent inflation developments in Russia
and economic outlook
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in the follow-up to the Board
of Directors meeting, Moscow, 14 June 2019.
 Today, the Bank of Russia has decided to cut its key rate to 7.50 % per annum.
We also revised our end-2019 inflation forecast downwards by 0.5 pp, to 4.2-4.7%.
Should our baseline forecast materialise, we hold open the possibility of a further rate cut at one
of  the  upcoming  Board  meetings.  We  assume  that  we  may  shift  to  neutral  monetary  policy
before mid-2020.
I will now highlight the factors we considered while making today’s decision.
First.  There  is  a  stable  trend  towards  inflation  slowdown.  It  is  attributed  to  the  Bank  of
Russia’s key rate decisions including the preemptive hike in the second half of last year. We
passed the inflation peak of 5.3%, slightly lower than we expected, in March. Inflation slowing
down from this lower peak is overall in line with our forecast. In the February-May period, prices
rose  by  approximately  0.3-0.4%  a  month,  seasonally  adjusted.  That  means  that  the  monthly
growth pace has returned to the lowest readings since last August and stands near 4% in annual
terms. Annual inflation fell to 5.1% in May, and came in at 5% precisely as at the beginning of this
week. This dynamics is attributed to the following factors.
The effect of the VAT increase on inflation has run its course.
The  ruble’s  strengthening  since  the  beginning  of  the  year  made  an  additional
contribution  to  inflation  slowdown.  Higher  oil  prices  and  overall  favourable  conditions  in
financial  markets  helped.  International  investors’  interest  in  Russian  assets  recovered,  which
was the most distinctive in the OFZ market.
The agreements on retail fuel prices between the Russian Government and oil majors
are continuing to play a significant role. Consumer petrol prices rose in May by 2.8% year on
year, and their growth is likely to be moderate in the near future. That said, the new regulation in
this market, in particular, the offsetting mechanisms (including reverse excise duties), is rather
complicated.  Currently, 
its  medium-term  economic
effectiveness, especially for scenarios providing for tangible oil price fluctuations.
Moderate domestic demand is also curbing inflation.
This calls for a deeper insight into the economy. This is the second most important factor
that we took into account. Economic growth in the first half of the year has been lower than
expected. We predicted that business activity might slow down somewhat at the beginning of the
year on the back of the following factors: the VAT hike, a likely slowdown in growth of the global
economy and demand for Russian goods and services, and the implementation period of the
major national projects scheduled for the second half of the year. Some of these factors had a
stronger effect than expected. In particular, budget expenditure dynamics.
to  accurately  estimate 
is  hard 
it 
We will be able to take a deeper insight into the economic growth slowdown after detailed GDP
statistics  are  released.  However,  the  2018  data  released  in  April  and  preliminary  Q1  2019
estimates  allow  us  to  update  our  GDP  forecast  for  this  year.  In  particular,  the  revision  is
associated  with  lower  export  growth  rates  and  a  tempered  outlook  for  growth  in  the  global
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy and external demand. We have left the forecast for consumer and investment demand
unchanged in view of the expected rise in public expenses in the second half of the year. As a
result, we have updated the 2019 economic growth forecast from 1.2-1.7% to 1-1.5%.
Third.  Proinflationary  risks  have  declined  over  a  one-year  horizon.  First,  we  no  longer
expect any deferred effects of the VAT hike. Second, the US Fed consistently eased it rhetoric
since the year start amid the expected slowdown of global economic growth. All else being equal,
this constrains the risks of considerable capital outflow from emerging markets.
In March-April, we noticed that the risks of accelerated growth in prices of certain food products
diminished. Overall, they remain moderate, though current food inflation was somewhat higher in
May than in the previous three months, seasonally adjusted.
Moving forward, we expect that record crop areas, early spring, and overall favourable weather
will bring a good harvest of vegetables, grains and other crops. Domestic and global grain prices
have  been  down  since  the  beginning  of  the  year.  This  contains  proinflationary  risks  for  food
products.
As regards monthly growth in prices of non-food goods and services, it held close to or below 4%
in annual terms in March-May.
Fourth. We factored in that inflation expectations of households and businesses remain
elevated against both the inflation target and the minimum levels reached in the opening
months  of  2018. Inflation  expectations  show  mixed  dynamics.  Business  price  expectations
continued to decline in April-May. Inflation expectations of households came in at 9.3-9.4% during
this period. However, we expect that inflation decline to 4% will bring down inflation expectations
of households and businesses.
Analysts’ expectations remain anchored at the inflation target of close to 4%.
Fifth. Monetary conditions are softening. This is driven by changing expectations of domestic
and external financial market players. First, this is enabled by revised expectations as to the path
of  the  Bank  of  Russia  key  rate;  second,  by  an  adjustment  in  expectations  and  yields  in  the
external financial market against the background of changes in major central banks’ rhetoric –
which  I  have  mentioned.  OFZ  yields  are  declining  in  this  environment,  enabling  a  potential
reduction in deposit and lending rates. Between April and May, a number of major banks revised
downwards  their  interest  rates  on  several  deposit  products;  interest  rates  on  mortgage  loans
were also beginning to trend down. Today’s decision to cut the key rate alongside the signal we
have sent out will work to solidify these trends.
Medium-term outlook.  The  outcome  of  OPEC+  negotiations  remains  uncertain.  We  look  to
further concerted actions by deal parties to warrant smooth oil price dynamics over the forecast
horizon. Based on their actual movements since the year start, we have upgraded the average
annual Urals crude price in our baseline scenario from $60 to $65 per barrel in 2019 and from
$55 to $60 per barrel in 2020. We retain our conservative assumptions for 2021 whereby the oil
price is expected to reach $55 per barrel.
Key balance of payments figures in the baseline scenario have also been adjusted to oil price
movements  and  the  expected  dynamics  of  the  global  economy.  This  year’s  current  account
balance is estimated to total $98 billion (approx. 6% of GDP) and drop subsequently to $50 billion
(approx.  3%  of  GDP)  in  2021.  This  is  attributed  to  downward  oil  price  trends  and  expanding
imports as economic growth accelerates.
The private sector’s financial account balance in 2019 is set to amount to approx. $50 billion (3%
of GDP). Financial transactions of private sector balance already reached $35 billion in the first
five  months  of  the  year.  We  expect  it  to  drop  substantially  in  the  second  half  of  the  year
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
compared to both the past year’s last six months and the first six months of this year. The main
reasons behind this outlook are as follows. First, it comes as a reflection of the seasonality which
is typical of balance of payments figures. Second, we look to normalisation in the accumulation
of  foreign  assets,  which  has  quickened  considerably  since  the  middle  of  the  past  year  in  the
context of strengthened external, including geopolitical risks.
Our medium-term economic growth outlook is essentially the same. 1-1.5% GDP growth in
the  current  year  is  expected  to  accelerate  gradually  to  2-3%  in  2021.  Having  said  that,  our
forecast  will  largely  depend  on  the  timeframes  and  successful  implementation  of  the  national
projects along with other fiscal policy decisions.
Discussions  are  currently  underway  about  possible  options  of  spending  the  liquid  part  of  the
National  Wealth  Fund  in  excess  of  the  7%  of  GDP  cap. As  we  look  into  such  options,  it  is
imperative that we remember the key objective of the fiscal rule, which is to reduce the reliance
of  the  economy,  of  the  real  exchange  rate  and  of  public  finances  on  a  volatile  energy  price
environment so that they all become stabilised in a state equivalent to the oil price cut-off. We
have largely delivered on this objective, with the impact of oil price fluctuations on the Russian
economy  having  considerably  weakened.  Current  suggestions  are  essentially  focused  on
changes  to  the  rule.  They  could  result  in  either  direct  or  indirect  change  in  the  cut-off  price,
entailing a strengthening of the real ruble exchange rate and undermining competitiveness of our
products. Alternatively,  the  stabilising  mechanism  of  the  fiscal  rule  could  be  undermined,  yet
again adding to the vulnerability of the Russian economy to fluctuations in external environment.
More so, the 7% of GDP cap was set a long time ago; yet another review is needed to establish
whether this volume of liquid assets is adequate to resist to sharp and lengthy change in external
conditions.
As  we  review  these  and  similar  suggestions,  we  urge  to  fully  consider  the  benefit  and  loss
balance driven by change in macroeconomic conditions which may be tangible enough.
Approaches to fiscal and structural policies will have a significant impact on both our forecast
and estimates of the balance of risks for inflation. This will in turn determine the monetary policy
path.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
