Address by Governor
Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders
Rome, 29 March 2019
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In 2018 the Bank of Italy continued its capital reallocation, a process 
that began with the reform of the Bank’s ownership structure (Law 5/2014). 
As at 17 February 2019, the last date by which a shareholder could acquire 
shares with the right to dividends for 2018, 33.3 per cent of the capital 
had been transferred. Of the Bank’s 124 shareholders at the above date,  
92 became shareholders after the reform: 6 insurance companies, 7 pension 
funds, 9 social security institutions, 24 banking foundations and 46 banks. 
Shareholdings that exceeded the 3 per cent threshold introduced by Law 
5/2014 amounted to €2.5 billion, out of a total of €7.5 billion.
Increasing the number of shareholders was one of the goals of the reform. 
On behalf of the Board of Directors and the Governing Board, I would like 
to welcome those who are attending their first Shareholders’ Meeting. While 
the reform confirmed that the Bank is a privately-held company, it did not 
change the nature of the Bank of Italy itself: it remains a public-law institution 
that performs its functions in the general interest conferred upon it by Italian 
and European legislation.
The  Bank  performs  its  functions  autonomously  and  independently 
within the guidelines established by the Governing Council of the European 
Central Bank (ECB), being accountable for its operations in accordance with 
the principle of transparency. Based on the treaties signed by Italy and by 
the other member states of the European Union, the members of the Bank’s 
bodies may not seek or take instructions from national or European public 
entities or from private parties. Law 5/2014 confirms that the Shareholders 
and  the  Board  of  Directors  may  not  intervene  in  the  Bank’s  institutional 
functions and limits shareholders’ ownership rights to the value of the capital 
and to the dividends. Shareholders have no claim whatsoever on the Bank’s 
gold and foreign currency reserves, the holding and management of which 
constitutes one of the fundamental roles assigned to a central bank under 
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Irrespective of the 
specifics of national legislation, the Treaty refers to the task of holding and 
BANCA D’ITALIA
Address by Governor
Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders
3
managing reserves: in our legal system this is implemented through the right 
of ownership. 
The annual accounts presented today for your approval show a net profit 
of  €6.2  billion.  This  amount  is  significantly  higher  than  the  €3.9  billion 
reported last year, which was nevertheless the highest level ever recorded by 
the Bank. The improvement was partly due to the further increase in the 
amount of securities held for monetary policy purposes and the decline in 
transfers to financial buffers to offset balance sheet risks.
In December 2018, after four years of uninterrupted growth, the extended 
asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  was  terminated.  During  that  four-year 
period, the balance sheet of the Bank of Italy and that of the Eurosystem both 
doubled  in  size.  The  securities  held  for  monetary  policy  purposes  increased 
approximately tenfold. Gross profit before taxes and transfers to the provision 
for general risks increased by about 50 per cent to stand at €8.9 billion. 
Looking forward, balance sheet profits will continue to be affected by 
the general state of the economy, by changes in monetary policy measures 
and by the riskiness of assets.
The Eurosystem’s expansionary monetary policy and the Bank of 
Italy’s annual accounts
In 2018 the Eurosystem’s monetary policy stance remained expansionary 
in order to encourage the gradual convergence of inflation rates to below, but 
close to, 2 per cent over the medium term.
The ECB Governing Council kept key interest rates unchanged at 
0.0 per cent for the main refinancing operations and at -0.40 per cent for 
the deposit facility. Rates are expected to remain at these levels at least 
until the end of 2019 and, in any case, for as long as necessary to ensure 
that inflation moves towards the stated objective.  
In the euro area, net purchases of public and private-sector securities 
were halved, falling to €30 billion per month at the start of 2018; that amount 
was further reduced to €15 billion from October. As mentioned earlier, these 
purchases were terminated in December. Central banks are re-investing the 
principal payments from maturing securities, a measure that is expected to 
continue  for  an  extended  period  of  time  and,  in  any  case,  for  as  long  as 
necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of 
monetary accommodation. 
4
Address by Governor
Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders
The Council also announced that it would assess the possibility of taking 
further measures to ensure that the banking system had the liquidity necessary 
for the smooth functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.
Hence, on 7 March 2019 the Governing Council decided to launch a new 
series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO3), each with a 
maturity of two years, carried out on a quarterly basis starting in September 
2019 and ending in March 2021. Counterparties will be entitled to borrow up 
to 30 per cent of the stock of eligible loans as at 28 February 2019. The interest 
rate will be indexed to the interest rate on the main refinancing operations 
over the life of each operation. Like the outstanding TLTRO operations, the 
new operations will feature built-in incentives for credit conditions to remain 
favourable. 
The balance sheet
At  the  end  of  2018,  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  assets  amounted  to 
€968 billion, €37 billion more than at the end of 2017. The growth was 
much smaller than that registered in 2017 and was almost entirely due 
to securities purchased for monetary policy purposes, which amounted to 
€393 billion. Most of these securities were Italian government securities, 
whose value reached €320 billion last year.  
Refinancing operations declined by €8 billion, falling to €244 billion, 
owing  to  maturing  and  voluntary  repayments  of  targeted  longer-term 
operations. Overall, assets held for monetary policy purposes represented 
two thirds of total balance sheet assets.
The value of the gold reserves stood at €88 billion, €3 billion more 
than  in  2017.  In  line  with  Eurosystem  accounting  rules,  the  unrealised 
gain was prudently allocated to the revaluation accounts – which record the 
unrealized gains with respect to the purchase price – in order to offset the 
negative effects of any future declines in the price of gold. 
On the liability side, the Bank of Italy’s negative balance in connection 
with  the  TARGET2  payment  system  reached  €482  billion  at  the  end  of 
2018, an increase of €43 billion compared with 2017. The widening of the 
negative balance occurred mainly in May and June and largely reflected net 
sales of Italian securities by foreign investors. In the last few months of the 
year, capital outflows decreased and the Bank’s negative TARGET2 balance 
improved,  with  inflows  peaking  in  December.  In  the  first  few  months  of 
BANCA D’ITALIA
Address by Governor
Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders
5
2019, the balance has fluctuated significantly, but has remained on average at 
the level recorded at year end. 
Deposits held by credit institutions with the Bank fell from €143 billion 
to €89 billion. Banknotes in circulation, disclosed in the balance sheet in 
proportion  to  the  Bank’s  share  in  the  ECB’s  capital,  grew  by  €10  billion 
to  stand  at  €198  billion.  The  euro-denominated  deposits  held  by  general 
government increased from €7 billion to €32 billion. 
Profitability, risks and organizational measures
As  mentioned  earlier,  gross  profit  before  taxes  and  transfers  to  the 
provision for general risks amounted to €8.9 billion in 2018.
The increase of €0.5 billion over the previous year is mainly due to the 
growth in net interest income, which benefited from greater interest income on 
securities purchased for monetary policy purposes and lower interest expense 
on longer-term refinancing operations. The growth in net interest income 
was partly offset by the fall in realized gains arising from financial operations 
and higher write-downs on securities and foreign currency holdings. 
In the light of both the expansion of the balance sheet and the Bank’s 
overall  risk  exposure,  assessed  under  even  the  most  adverse  scenarios,  the 
Bank continued to gradually strengthen its financial buffers, increasing the 
provision for general risks by €1.5 billion (€2.9 billion in 2017). Taxes for 
the year amounted to €1.2 billion (€1.6 billion in 2017).
Operating expenses fell by 2.5 per cent, mainly owing to the decrease 
in  staff  severance  payments  and  the  decline  in  transfers  relating  to  staff 
severance pay and pensions. As a result, costs for in-service and retired staff 
fell by €54 million; the remaining costs increased by €4 million overall. 
At the end of 2018, the Bank had less than 6,700 employees, 1,000 fewer 
than in 2008. This decrease reflects the reorganization implemented over the 
years, largely on account of technological advances, to contain operating costs 
without compromising the effective performance of institutional functions. 
During  the  year  the  reorganization  of  the  banknote  production 
function became fully effective. Reflecting the changes underway in Europe, 
this resulted in a more streamlined organizational structure that makes the 
Bank’s printing works more efficient, productive and competitive within 
the euro-area public sphere.
6
Address by Governor
Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders
The closure of the last ten territorial service units (TSUs), which were 
set up on a temporary basis in 2015, marked the completion of the plan for 
the reorganization of the Bank’s branch network that was first implemented 
in 2008. The number of branches declined to 39, 58 branches fewer than in 
2008. The current branch network is more agile and efficient in performing 
the Bank’s institutional functions and it plays a larger role in the protection 
of bank customers, financial education, prudential supervision of non-bank 
financial intermediaries and communication campaigns.
The reorganization of the Financial Supervision and Regulation function 
was finalized at the end of 2018. The aim of the reform was to enhance the 
Bank’s participation in the decision-making processes of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism, intensifying coordination with other supervisory authorities and 
strengthening the branches’ supervisory activities, taking account of changes 
to the geographical distribution of financial intermediaries in Italy. 
Further  information  on  the  activities  of  the  Bank  and  on  the 
organizational and management measures implemented in 2018 is available 
in the Report on Operations and Activities of the Bank of Italy which will 
be published on 31 May 2019, on the occasion of the presentation of the 
Annual Report.
Proposal for the allocation of the net profit
Shareholders,
Pursuant to Article 38 of the Statute, acting on a proposal of the Governing 
Board and after hearing the opinion of the Board of Auditors, I present for 
your approval the Board of Directors’ proposal for the allocation of the net 
profit. On behalf of the Board of Directors and the Governing Board, I would 
like to take this opportunity to thank the members of the Board of Auditors, 
who have reached the end of their term, for their valuable contribution.
As you may recall, under the dividend policy in force, the amount paid 
to the shareholders is kept within a range of €340 million to €380 million, 
provided that the net profit is sufficient and without prejudice to the Bank’s 
capital adequacy. The difference between the upper limit of the range and the 
dividend paid to the shareholders is allocated to the special item for stabilizing 
dividends, until such item reaches a maximum amount of €450 million. 
Accordingly, from the net profit of €6,240 million, we propose allocating 
€340 million as a dividend to the shareholders, equal to 4.5 per cent of the 
BANCA D’ITALIA
Address by Governor
Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders
7
capital. As a result, €40 million would again be allocated to the special item for 
stabilizing dividends, which would amount to €120 million. 
Pursuant to the Statute, shares exceeding the 3 per cent threshold are not 
entitled to a dividend. The corresponding dividend, equal to €113 million, is 
allocated to the ordinary reserve. Therefore, the dividend actually due to the 
shareholders would amount to €227 million.
We propose transferring €150 million to the ordinary reserve. Taking 
into account the dividends withheld on shares exceeding the threshold, the 
total allocation would amount to €263 million.
With  the  transfer  of  €1.5  billion  to  the  provision  for  general  risks, 
together with the share of profits allocated to the ordinary reserve, the total 
amount allocated to the financial buffers would be €1.8 billion. 
As a result, €5,710 million of the Bank’s net profit would be allocated to 
the State, an increase of €2,344 million compared with 2017.
8
Address by Governor
Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders
Designed by  
the Printing and Publishing Division  
of the Bank of Italy
