   12.07.2019 
Youth knowledge and financial education in Spain 
BBVA EduFin Summit 2019 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
I would like to begin my address by expressing my satisfaction at the organisation of this 
conference. Its aim is to make society and market participants aware of the significance of 
financial education and of the importance of improving citizens’ financial literacy. I also wish 
to thank the organisers for this invitation. It gives me the opportunity to set out the Banco 
de España’s view on such a relevant topic. 
It is not overstating matters to say that, in my opinion, the level of financial literacy directly 
affects citizens’ welfare, their capacity to choose, and the capacity of the financial sector to 
offer their products and to strengthen their reputation. 
The  goal  of  financial  education  is,  precisely,  to  ensure  that  people  are  able  to  take 
responsible  financial  decisions  throughout  their  lives,  in  awareness  of  their  rights  and 
obligations as financial product users. 
Financial  education  is  thus  a  vital  tool  for  the  authorities  that  oversee  the  protection  of 
financial users. It adds to and complements the traditional tools of bank regulation and the 
supervision of  bank  solvency  and  conduct.  And  ultimately  it  also  contributes  to  financial 
stability. 
I  would  like  to  focus  today  on  certain  aspects  of  financial  literacy  in  Spain,  from  an 
internationally comparative perspective. Further, I would like to offer some conclusions in 
relation to youth in society. This group is closely tied to some of the initiatives that are part 
of the Financial Education Plan (FEP), about which I will also speak. 
I  shall  be  beginning  in  a  somewhat  dismal  tone,  “dismal”  being  the  label  that  has  been 
attached to those of us practising as economists since the times of Thomas Carlyle, back 
in the 19th century. And the situation is that, despite all the efforts made in terms of private 
initiatives (as exemplified by this EduFin Summit, now in its third edition) and by the public 
sector [specifically the FEP initiatives under way since 2008 jointly launched by the Banco 
de España, the CNMV (National Securities Market  Commission) and other collaborators], 
and also despite the general increase in the educational level in Spain, we have not managed 
to instil the youngest cohorts with better financial literacy than we have the population as a 
whole. 
Adult financial literacy in Spain, from an international perspective 
We are, at least, now in a position to make this diagnosis. This is thanks to the information 
drawn  from  the  recent  Survey  of  Financial  Competences,  an  initiative  of  the  Banco  de 
España  and  the  CNMV,  as  part of  the  FEP. Thus,  since last  year,  our  knowledge on the 
status of Spaniards’ financial literacy and on their interaction with the financial system has 
improved decisively. 
The Survey is a very extensive study in which over 8,000 people were interviewed and asked 
–  among  other  issues  –  about  their  financial  knowledge;  their  holding  and  acquiring  of 
saving, credit and insurance products; their work-related expectations; and their attitudes 
to consumption and saving. It is the most comprehensive, representative and internationally 
comparable information source available on Spanish citizens’ financial competences. 
 3/8 
 It is, therefore, a most useful survey. And it is novel regarding the additional information it 
provides  on  the  social  and  economic  context  in  which  Spaniards  take  their  financial 
decisions.  In  this  connection,  it  measures  competences  which,  without  being  strictly 
financial,  can  indeed  affect  peoples’  decisions,  such  as  their  degree  of  reading 
comprehension and their ability to understand specific graphics. 
The Survey thus provides us with a sound database for assessing our efforts to increase 
financial literacy. I encourage you, as specialists in this area, to exploit it by using both its 
aggregate  findings  and  its  microdata,  which  are  available  for  research  on  the  Banco  de 
España’s Internet portal.1 
With regard to the population’s financial knowledge, the Survey shows that an extensive 
group of Spaniards are not familiar with basic concepts such as inflation, interest rates or 
risk diversification. 
To answer correctly the question on inflation in the Survey requires understanding that an 
amount of money loses purchasing power when prices rise. 42% of interviewees are not 
able to answer this question correctly. 
To  answer  correctly  the  question  on  compound  interest  rates,  the  interviewee  must 
understand that the changes in an amount saved in an account depends not only on the 
annual  interest  rate  applied  to  the  amount  saved  the  first  year,  but  also  on  the  interest 
accumulated  thereafter.  54%  of  interviewees  do  not  manage  to  correctly  answer  this 
question. 
The question on risk diversification measures whether the interviewee understands that 
the risk associated with investing in variable income diminishes if a broad range of shares 
is purchased instead of a single type of share. In this case, 51% of interviewees are unable 
to answer this question correctly. Even if analysis is confined solely to the one-third of the 
population that holds some type of financial asset (which, in Spain’s case, usually involves 
investment funds, pension schemes, shares and bonds), the percentage of incorrect replies 
to this question is still 40%. This result would be indicative of the fact that a high number of 
financial market participants appear not to be aware of the advantages of a fundamental 
aspect for reducing risk in financial decision-making, namely diversified investment. 
In any event, the low level of the Spanish population’s financial literacy evidenced by the 
Survey is not something exclusive to Spain; rather, it is seen worldwide.2 
However,  in  the  particular  case  of  knowledge  on  diversification,  and  unlike  the  other 
questions,  the  percentage  of  correct  replies  in  the  population  as  a  whole  is  significantly 
lower  than  that  in  other  developed  countries  (49%  in  Spain,  compared  with  62%  in  the 
OECD or EU countries). 
                                                                                              
1 The Survey microdata are freely accessible for scientific research purposes and are available on the Banco de España 
website at: https://app.bde.es/gnt_seg/controlAccesoEmail.jsp?pas=ecf&lang=en. 
2 OECD (2017), G20/OECD INFE report on adult financial literacy in G20 countries, http://www.oecd.org/dat/fin/financial-
education/G20-OECD-INFE-report-adult-financial-literacy-in-G20_countries.pdf. 
 
4/8 
  The results reveal some sex and age-based heterogeneity in the degree of familiarity with 
these basic financial notions. This heterogeneity in financial knowledge has been related in 
some international studies to actual financial decision-making in households3, such that the 
level of financial literacy would be higher in the individuals that actually take these decisions. 
That  might  suggest  either  some  specialisation  in  this  area  within  the  household,  or  that 
financial literacy is acquired through practice. 
The results of the Survey also show that the level of financial literacy in Spain increases in 
step with the level of educational attainment4, as occurs in other developed countries. 
The  age  profile  observed  is  also  relatively  common.  In  Spain,  the  percentage  of  correct 
replies increases with age up to 54 years. Above that age, the percentage of correct replies 
falls  and  the  percentage  of  interviewees  replying  “Don’t  know”  increases.  Moreover,  the 
percentages of correct replies are particularly low among youths. Allow me to focus on this 
particular group. 
Youth financial literacy 
According to the results of the Survey, one in five adults in Spain answers the three above-
mentioned questions correctly. This proportion is lower among the young. Specifically, only 
one in eight of those aged 18-34 correctly answers the three questions. 
This gap in knowledge between youths and the total population is somewhat wider in Spain 
than  in  other  developed  countries5,  and  is  particularly  significant  in  the  case  of  their 
familiarity with the effects of inflation6. Regarding this latter question, a high percentage of 
youths do not know the effects of the change in the inflation rate on the real value of fixed-
rate mortgage payments. Given that, at that age, mortgages are frequently taken out, doubts 
arise once more as to whether all the relevant financial factors are being taken into account 
when financing a house purchase. 
The Survey information also lets us know that both the under-35s and those who live with 
their parents tend to delegate their financial decisions to others.7 Specifically, in the total 
                                                                                              
3 See the results in “Own your worth”, UBS. 
4 The percentage of correct replies is 13-22 percentage points higher among interviewees with a university qualification 
than among those with a primary education. 
5  In  Spain  the  percentage  of  the  under-35s  who  answer  the  three  questions  correctly  is  72%  compared  with  the 
population as a whole. The figures for other countries are: 
 
aged 18-34. Gap 
 In Canada: 28% of the population answer the three questions correctly. The percentage is 23% for youths 
  18-34/total: 82% 
 In The Netherlands: 34% of the population answer the three questions correctly. The percentage is 26% for 
youths aged 18- 
   34. Gap 18-34/total: 76%. 
 In the United Kingdom: 14% of the population answer the three questions correctly. The percentage is 11% 
for youths aged  
  18-34. Gap 18-34/total: 78%. 
 
6 In  terms of the specific questions, those showing the biggest differences are that on inflation (compared with 58% of 
correct answers in the total population, 49.5% of individuals aged 18-34 reply correctly) and that on risk diversification 
(compared with 49% of correct answers in the total population, 43% of individuals aged 18-34 reply correctly). 
7  Specifically,  individuals  are  defined  as  delegating  when,  in  the  Survey,  they  have  answered  “No”  to  the  following 
question: "We wish to know whether you are familiar with your household’s finances. We refer not only to whether you 
are familiar with the household’s properties, financial products and debts,  but also the reasons for specific spending 
and investment decisions.” 
 
 5/8 
 population,  6%  of  individuals  state  they  are  not  familiar  with  their  household’s  finances, 
while this figure triples for youths aged 18-35. 
These results might be influenced by the high percentage of Spanish youths that live with 
their parents compared with other developed countries. Indeed, among the under-35s who 
live with their parents, one in three is not familiar with the household’s finances. 
One novel characteristic of the Survey is that, in those cases in which an interviewee says 
he/she is not familiar with household finances, the financial competences of an informed 
member of the household have been measured along with the financial competences of the 
interviewee. It is seen that, although the percentage of those aged 18-34 who answer the 
three questions on inflation, interest rates and risk diversification correctly is scarcely 11% 
among  the  non-informed,  the  percentage  of  informed  individuals  to  which  the  decisions 
have been delegated who respond correctly to these three questions is 22%. 
These results point, firstly, to the importance of bearing in mind household structure and, 
specifically, the different patterns of communal living arrangements of youths in different 
countries when making international comparisons in financial literacy. 
Secondly, they illustrate the importance of the moment in the life cycle as regards individuals 
acquiring financial knowledge. 
Moreover, these results, along with those from other available studies, suggest that one of 
the main sources of financial literacy in the population is derived from their actual experience 
with financial and credit markets, and with economic phenomena. Evidently, the risk is that 
the acquiring of knowledge through practice also entails economic costs associated with 
inappropriate decisions, or a lack of decisions, derived from an insufficient understanding 
of the main financial elements at play. Hence the importance of the initiatives to raise the 
population’s knowledge and financial education. 
Initiatives  to  raise  youth  knowledge  and  financial  education  in  Spain,  and  the 
evaluation thereof 
Since 2012, various international OECD and G-20 initiatives have given expression to the 
importance of implementing national financial education strategies. 
Hence, since the end of the last decade, various initiatives have been launched in Spain in 
this area in the public and private sectors alike. Since 2008, the Banco de España and the 
CNMV  have,  in  collaboration  with  other  public  and  private  agencies  and  institutions, 
committed themselves to contributing to improving citizens’ financial literacy through the 
National Financial Education Plan. The Plan has three basic features: i) generality, so as not 
to exclude any segment of the population and to cover all financial products and services; 
ii) cooperation, within both the public and private spheres; and iii) continuity over time, given 
the very nature of the objectives. 
As earlier stated, one of the population groups showing the lowest levels of financial literacy 
is that of young adults. A key element of the FEP is, then, the promotion of financial literacy 
in  schools.  In  the  case  of  schoolgoers,  the  notion  of  “financial  education”  refers  to  the 
teaching  of  knowledge,  skills,  behaviour,  values  and  aptitudes  that  help  students  take 
6/8 
  informed and sensible financial decisions in their everyday life, preparing them to better face 
the basic financial challenges they will encounter throughout their adult life. 
Starting in the 2012-2013 academic year, and following the pertinent evaluation of a pilot 
scheme8, a programme aimed at secondary education students has been developed. It has 
been rolled out in educational centres that voluntarily decide to participate in this initiative 
and to impart financial education. Indeed, some 500 centres each year throughout Spain 
have  taken  part.  The  participant  centres  have  educational  material  provided  by  the  Plan 
itself, through the Gepeese portal, so they may be used by teachers according to their own 
criteria and programmes. 
Complementing this is specific training for teachers, who are provided with supplementary 
educational resources (such as games and workshops). There is also an annual competition 
for participating pupils. In fact, on 1 October 2018 I had the opportunity to congratulate the 
winners of this competition from a school in Plasencia. 
In order  to gauge  the impact  of  this school  programme,  inform  society of it  and  seek  to 
continually improve it, an exhaustive evaluation  of the programme was conducted in the 
2014-2015 academic year.9 
The evaluation of the short-term impact of the programme showed that: 
  Pupils  following  the  financial  education  course  obtained  better  results  in  financial 
 literacy tests at the end of the year than pupils who did not. 
In terms of theme-based content, it was found that the financial education course 
especially increased pupils’ knowledge in “bank relations” (e.g. opening and closing 
bank  accounts,  the  consequences  of  an  overdraft  and  knowledge  of  bank  fees, 
along with the notion of interest rates and their calculation). The impact of the course 
was  less  evident  on  matters  such  as  saving,  means  of  payment  and  responsible 
consumption. 
  The financial education course was not detected, however, to have any significant 
impact on  pupils’  decision  to  have  a  bank  account  or  card,  or  on  the  amount  of 
money they report they save weekly. 
  The financial education course did significantly raise the proportion of pupils who 
talk to their parents about economic matters. 
  After having followed the course, the percentage of pupils doing a job at home to 
obtain income also increased, which suggests that financial education may lead to 
greater pupil involvement in their household’s financial matters. 
  A change in pupils’ attitudes was detected regarding their temporary consumption 
preferences six months after the financial education course, with their “patience” 
increasing when it came to hypothetical money choices. This observed result did 
not disappear in an exercise performed three months afterwards, in which it was 
                                                                                              
8 An initial pilot programme was carried out in 2010-2011. 
9 Bover, O., L. Hospido and E. Villanueva (2018): "The Impact of High School Financial Education on Financial Knowledge 
and Choices: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Spain", Banco de España WP 1801. 
 7/8 
proposed to students that they distribute their present and future consumption with 
real payments.10 
These results point to the pertinence of monitoring over time the pupils evaluated, with 
the aim of analysing the effects of financial education in the long term. This is in light of 
the potential significance of consumer attitudes in financial decision-making throughout 
the life-cycle of individuals. Indeed, such monitoring has already been implemented and 
will result in the improved implementation of the programme at educational centres and 
the improvement, in turn, of the evaluation of the Survey as a whole. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to draw some conclusions. 
The results of the Survey of Financial Competences show that a very broad group of 
Spaniards are not familiar with basic financial concepts that are essential for informed 
decision-making in respect of investment and debt. 
The  lack  of  financial  knowledge  is  particularly  high  among  youths  and  the  over-65s. 
These results justify financial education actions focusing particularly on these groups, 
as has been the case with the Financial Education Programme developed by the Banco 
de España and the CNMV in recent years. 
In any event, it is crucial to systematically evaluate the measures adopted in order to 
identify and prioritise those which are most evidently effective. The regular and rigorous 
evaluation  of  public  policies  is  vital  for  a  better  definition  of  their  effectiveness,  and 
access  to  reliable  statistical  sources  is  an  essential  step  for  performing  these 
evaluations. All institutions should contribute, within the scope available to us, to making 
progress in this area. 
In any event, I should clarify that the Financial Education Programme is only a part of 
the  set  of  basic  training  actions  in  market  conduct,  reporting  transparency,  good 
practices,  consumer  information,  financial  education,  conflict  resolution  and  other 
similar  areas  that  the  Banco  de  España,  the  CNMV  and  other  public  and  private 
institutions are developing. I would thus like to thank BBVA for all its contributions over 
the  years  towards  achieving  this  objective  which,  as  I  have  said,  is  so  important  for 
society and its future. The organisation of this conference testifies to this. It allows us to 
learn from the experiences of others and, in that way, to better pursue the joint effort of 
raising citizens’ financial literacy. 
Thank you. 
                                                                                                
10  Specifically,  pupils  were  asked  to  assign  €6  among  various  present  and  future  consumption  options,  with  three 
different interest rates (0%, 100% and 150%) and three different time horizons (today as opposed to a week’s time, 
today as opposed to two weeks, and one week from now as opposed to two weeks from now). In recompense for the 
different options, USB memories with different capacities were used. In each class, a pupil was randomly selected to 
obtain, also randomly, one of the options chosen. 
8/8 
 