François Villeroy de Galhau: New Year wishes to the Paris financial
centre
New Year wishes to the Paris financial centre by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the
Bank of France, Paris, 16 January 2019.
 I would like to wish you all a very warm welcome to this magnificent Golden Gallery, which has
just celebrated its three hundredth anniversary. The Banque de France and the ACPR have also
established  long-standing  ties  with  the  other  public  authorities  and  the  players  involved  in  the
financing of the economy, and this cooperation plays a crucial role in ensuring financial stability
and consumer protection. In view of this long-established relationship, I am all the more happy to
extend to you our warmest personal wishes, for yourselves, your loved ones, and for all your
staff.
First, a word on the economic situation. Although it is less glorious than what was expected a
year  ago,  it  is  still  relatively  satisfactory:  according  to  our  surveys  and  despite  the  slowdown
resulting  from  the  yellow  vests  movement,  economic  activity  in  France  increased  by  1.5%  in
2018.  We  expect  the  same  figure  for  2019.  However,  we  face  three  challenges:  uncertainty,
impatience  and  isolationism  –  which  can  feed  on  each  other  at  the  dawn  of  this  new  year:
uncertainties,  from  Brexit  to  Chinese  growth;  the  impatience  that  weighs  everywhere  on  the
sustainable reform efforts, and the isolationism embodied by the US protectionist postures. This
year will also be the year of the European elections on May 26, which are essential for Europe,
and  of  the  French  Presidency  of  the  G7,  which  may  be  an  opportunity  for  furthering  effective
solutions at the international level.
Tonight, however, I would like to focus on three wishes for the smooth financing of the economy:
for the euro, for financial stability, and finally for inclusive finance.
1 -  My first wish is for the euro, which has just celebrated its 20th anniversary
The euro is an undeniable success. Average annual inflation has been brought down from 4.9%
over  the  two  decades  preceding  the  euro  to  1.7%  over  the  past  two  decades.  This  has
contributed  to  preserving  the  purchasing  power  of  European  citizens.  Financing  costs  are
significantly  lower.  Our  currency  is  now  supported  by  75%  of  euro  area  citizens,  and  72%  of
French citizens: it is the highest level ever achieved since 2003.
In 2019, euro area growth – although down – is expected to remain above its potential. In this
environment,  the  normalisation  of  our  monetary  policy,  which  started  with  the  successful
termination of our net asset purchases in December, remains desirable. It must be gradual –
according  to  the  sequencing  that  we  specified  –  and pragmatic -  in  the  implementation
timeframe where we must keep our options open in the face of uncertainty. At the same time, we
need to finally strengthen our Economic Union, particularly if we are to face a downturn. The
achievements of the December agreement must resolutely be built upon: regarding the Banking
Union, a common backstop that would be available rapidly and remain in place for a sufficiently
long period is an essential element, even more than the deposit insurance scheme, to ensure
that  the  single  resolution  mechanism  is  solid  and  effective. The Capital Markets Union,  on
which everyone agrees in principle, must finally forge ahead to better channel our EUR 350 billion
private  savings  surplus  towards  the  concrete  needs  of  our  economy:  digital  innovation,  the
energy  transition  and  SMEs’  capital.  Finally,  the  progress  achieved  on  the public  solidarity
mechanisms – preventive intervention of the European Stability Mechanism, fiscal capacity – is a
promising prospect but it needs to be translated into action.
2 – My second wish is for financial stability
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I would first like to acknowledge the soundness of our financial institutions. In June 2018, the
Tier 1 capital ratio of the main French banks stood at 13.5%, i.e. 7.7% higher than in 2008. The
liquidity  situation  has  improved,  with  an  average  LCR  of  127%.  The  share  of  non-performing
loans has continued to decline to stand at 3.1% in June 2018, i.e. close to the pre-crisis level,
compared  with  a  European  average  of  3.6%.  The  same  holds  true  for insurers.  Their
capitalisation is good, and their solvency has improved, with the average coverage ratio of the
major insurers rising by 9 percentage points to reach 241%. However, insurers are also sensitive
to the risk of prolonged low interest rates, and, together with Bernard Delas, I can only call for
further moderation in the rates on life insurance contracts.
As regards financial stability, we must draw all the consequences of a rejection by the British
Parliament of the draft Brexit agreement. There is strong political uncertainty in Britain: we can
still hope for the best, but we must actively prepare for the worst scenario, that is a “No Deal
Brexit". I would like to welcome the efforts that you have made to anticipate these consequences.
The Banque de France and the ACPR, in liaison with the European authorities, will by the end of
March  take  all  necessary  measures  in  the  framework  of  the  draft  law  “empowering  the
Government  to  take  steps  to  prepare  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  United  Kingdom  from  the
European Union”, which will be re submitted to the French Senate tomorrow.
Beyond Brexit, each sector faces its own regulatory issues: Basel III and Solvency II. For banks,
the key issue of the CRR/CRD package is the transposition into European law of the Basel III
agreement,  which  was  obtained  after  much  wrangling  on  7  December  2017  and  properly
completed  with  market  risks  on  Monday  in  Basel.  It  will  have  to  take  into  account  European
specificities  –  including  those  of  French  banks  –  while  maintaining  the  principle  of  maximum
harmonisation,  which  is  essential  to  the  deepening  of  the  Banking  Union.  For  insurers,  the
challenge for this first half of 2019 is to prepare the 2020 Solvency II review. The ACPR and the
Ministry of the Economy and Finance will coordinate an open and comprehensive assessment in
order to identify avenues for reform: on equity holdings and long-term investment, on excessive
volatility, on simplifications of the prudential framework, including its reporting, etc. However, this
supposes  a  collective  involvement  of  professionals,  which  I  call  for  tonight,  and  European
convergences, which we will endeavour to achieve.
I  would  like  to  come  back  to  a  2018  innovation,  which  contributes  to  financial  stability:  the
decision taken in June to introduce a “countercyclical buffer” for banks at the minimum rate of
0.25%. It is not a matter of curbing credit today, but rather of building up reserves that would be
available in the event of a reversal of the cycle tomorrow. Fortunately, annual credit growth has
remained very dynamic since June – at 5.5% of which 6.1% for SMEs: the French High Council
for Financial Stability is therefore ready to raise this “buffer” moderately as soon as necessary.
However, the new risks are technological as well as financial. Cybersecurity must be a concern
for all public and private players. This will be a priority of the French Presidency of the G7.
3 – My third and last wish is for inclusive finance
The yellow vests movement has given rise to unacceptable violence – including against bank and
insurance company branches – and strong demands for greater economic and social justice. In
this context, I know that I can count on French banks to strictly comply with their commitments
made to the President of the Republic on 11 December regarding the capping of bank charges
at EUR 25 a month for 3.5 million vulnerable customers. These measures apply now – at the
latest  in  February  –  and  they  will  be  controlled  throughout  the  year.  The  ACPR  has  made
honouring this commitment a priority for its on-site and off-site inspections in 2019. The French
Observatory for Banking Inclusion (OIB), which I chair, with the participation of consumer and
social integration associations, will monitor the figures and take any necessary action. The OIB
will  also  ensure  that  banks  meet  their  commitments  regarding  the  diffusion  among  these
vulnerable customers of the “specific offer”, and its lower cap on bank charges (EUR 20/month
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and EUR 200/year).
2019 will also mark the 30th anniversary of the Neiertz Act: we welcome the decrease in the
flow of newly overindebted persons whose number has finally returned to its 1989 level, since it
stood at 90,000 “first-time applicants” in 2018, against 140,000 five years ago!
A more recent yet very promising development is our mobilisation in favour of green finance. In
the  first  quarter  of  2019,  the  ACPR  will  publish  the  results  of  its  survey  on  climate  risk
management by banks and insurance companies. The Network of central banks and supervisors
for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), launched by the Banque de France in early 2018, is a
considerable  success.  It  has  grown  from  eight  to  24  participants  on  five  continents.  Its  first
report, which will be presented at a conference in Paris on 17 April, will provide new proposals for
action.
I would like to end with a few words about the Banque de France. Our institution is strongly
committed  to  improving  its  performance.  In  2018,  the  Banque  de  France  cut  back  its  net
operating expenses by 8% compared to 2015, which represents an annual saving of EUR 100
million. And we are innovating in-house: the Lab, the Madre blockchain, or the success of our
dematerialised ACPR  authorisation  procedure,  which  came  into  effect  in  November  2018.  In
these more turbulent times, our first responsibility is to stay the course both in serving the French
economy and in pursuing our transformation. You can count on it: Happy New Year to you all and
to our country!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
