 January  17,  2019 
Bank  of 
Japan 
Opening Remarks at the G20 Finance and Central Bank 
Deputies Meeting 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Good afternoon. It is a great honor  for me to work with you and to serve as co-chair with 
Minister Aso at the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meetings this year. 
 The  G20  was  established  in  1999,  twenty  years  ago.  It  was  the  year  when  the  euro  was 
introduced and two years after the Asian Financial Crisis. I attended the inaugural meeting in 
Berlin as Vice-Minister of Finance for International Affairs. The main objective of the G20 
was to promote cooperation among systemically significant economies including emerging 
market  economies,  in  order  to  achieve  stable  and  sustainable  global  growth.  Later,  the 
leaders' summit was initiated in response to the global financial crisis in 2008, and the G20 
played  a  significant  role  in  coordinating  policy  responses  to  the  crisis.  Since  then,  as  the 
world economy has recovered from the crisis, the G20 has discussed a wide range of issues to 
promote strong, sustainable, balanced, and inclusive growth. 
 While the role and agenda of the G20 have evolved over time, I would like to point out three 
important  values  that  have  been  emphasized  consistently,  based  on  my  long-time 
involvement in the G20 since its inauguration.  
 First,  we  recognize  that the expansion  of  cross-border transactions  of  goods,  services, and 
finance will benefit all countries. We need to conduct policies so that many people can enjoy 
the positive effects of international trade and capital flows on growth and productivity gains, 
while minimizing their potential negative impacts.  
 Second,  we  need  to  be  forward-looking  in  preparing  for  policy  responses  to  medium-  to 
long-term challenges. For instance, under Japan's presidency this year, we will discuss policy 
responses  to  aging.  Japan  is  currently  the  most  aged  society  in  the  world.  Sooner  or  later, 
however, other economies will face a similar situation. Many issues must be considered in 
our efforts to cope with an aging society, including fiscal, monetary, and structural policies. I 
believe the G20 provides a valuable forum for discussion and mutual understanding of these 
issues.  
 Third, we value the importance of inclusive growth, that is, the dividends of economic growth 
should  be  distributed  fairly  and  equally  across  the  whole  society.  The  G20  has  discussed 
 1 
policy  agendas  to  enhance  the  overall  living  standards  of  low-income  countries  in  a 
sustainable  manner.  In  addition,  we  need  to  address  the  increasing  inequality  in  advanced 
economies as well, taking account of the recent developments. 
 I hope you will have fruitful discussions at this two-day meeting and subsequent meetings of 
the  G20,  leading  up  to  the  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  Meeting  in 
Fukuoka in June. I look forward to meeting you all again later this year. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
  2 
