Luis  de  Guindos:  Concluding  remarks  -  "Inflation  in  a  changing
economic environment"
Concluding remarks by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the
ECB  conference  “Inflation  in  a  changing  economic  environment”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  24
September 2019.
Introduction
 You have now been discussing issues related to inflation for two days, covering a wide variety of
topics. Conferences of this kind are very helpful to us as central bankers, as they enable us to
advance our thinking about policy-relevant questions, particularly if they are related to our core
mandate. In concluding this conference, let me say a few words about economic slack in the
euro area and the wage-inflation pass-through. I think these are interesting topics at the moment,
because, as you know, euro area inflation has been persistently low for several years, and more
recently we have observed some decoupling of wage inflation from price inflation.
Current situation
Euro  area  consumer  price  inflation  currently  stands  at  1%  (August  2019,  year-on-year  HICP
inflation)  and  is  thus  considerably  below  our  inflation  aim.  Unfortunately,  this  low  inflation  has
been a persistent phenomenon. Since November 2011, when euro area inflation peaked at 3%
(year-on-year HICP inflation), the average rate has been less than 1.2% per annum.
Long-term  inflation  expectations  are  also  low.  Market-based  indicators  are  stagnating  at
historically low levels. The five-year five-year inflation-linked swap rate has been hovering around
1.25% in recent weeks. Survey-based measures have also fallen recently, to 1.7%. While these
numbers  are  higher  than  those  for  market-based  indicators,  we  shouldn’t  take  comfort  from
them. International evidence shows that survey expectations can react very slowly to persistently
low inflation (as was the case in Japan, for example).
Wage inflation, on the other hand, has behaved quite differently to consumer price inflation. Since
2017,  wage  inflation,  as  measured  by  compensation  per  employee,  has  overtaken  consumer
price inflation, peaking at 2.4% in the third quarter of 2018.
These  developments  raise  important  questions.  Is  the  euro  area  economy  hitting  its  capacity
constraints?  Or  is  there  still  economic  slack  that  is  holding  headline  inflation  down?  How  will
wage inflation pass through to price inflation?
How to measure economic slack
There are signs of a tight labour market. In addition to the wage dynamics I just mentioned, we
have observed the unemployment rate moving close to its pre-crisis low, with participation rates
being higher than ever.
At the same time, assessing the tightness in labour markets is not straightforward, for several
reasons. First, these aggregate statistics hide substantial cross-country heterogeneity. Second,
and more fundamentally, the natural rate of unemployment is unobservable.
Furthermore,  tightness  in  the  labour  market  provides  only  a  partial  picture  of  slack  in  the
economy, as slack can vary across different parts of the economy. It is therefore risky to infer it
from just a few economic variables. And for each measure of slack the same issue applies as
for slack in the labour market: it cannot be observed directly, because the potential (or “trend”)
levels of economic variables are unobservable and time-varying. Accordingly, there are various
 1 / 3
1
BIS central bankers' speeches
estimates of the aggregate slack and these estimates differ from one another.  Some of them
are also subject to substantial ex post revisions. For all of these reasons, we need to be cautious
when  assessing  economic  slack  and  look  at  many  economic  indicators  to  achieve  a  robust
assessment.
The wage-inflation pass-through
1
Let us turn to the wage-inflation pass-through. Given the recent growth of wages, it is crucial to
understand  how  this  will  pass  through  to  inflation.  But  coming  to  a  robust  assessment  is  not
straightforward. Both economic theory and the empirical evidence tell us that this pass-through
depends on many different factors.
One consideration is that the structure of the economy is not constant over time. Over the past
few decades, we have been witnessing gradual changes in the economic environment, many of
which  can  be  traced  back  to  the  ongoing  IT  revolution.  These  changes  have  important
implications for inflation and pass-through, too.
One such change is the growth of e-commerce, or, as some call it, the “Amazon effect”. Many
commentators argue that increased price transparency when shopping online has contributed to
keeping inflation low in advanced economies.  Whether the growth of e-commerce makes prices
less  responsive  to  wages  is  more  debatable.  Research  suggests  that  the  algorithmic  pricing
technologies of online retailers make retail prices more sensitive to aggregate, economy-wide
3
shocks – which would imply that pass-through should eventually occur.
2
However,  while  the  optimistic  view  is  that  e-commerce,  and  the  IT  revolution  more  generally,
contributes  to  more  competition  and  economic  dynamism,  there  are  also  concerns  about  its
more pernicious longer-term effects, such as: rising market concentration, a falling labour share
and slower long-term growth.
One of the factors behind these negative effects is that IT makes it easier for highly productive
“superstar” firms to expand into new markets, generating efficiency gains in the short run, but
4
leading to more concentration in the long run.
5
A  more  general  trend  leading  in  the  same  direction  is  the  rise  of  intangible  inputs,  such  as
brands,  software,  technologies  and  databases.  Investment  in  these  types  of  input  is  steadily
increasing as a share of overall investment, and they are becoming increasingly important for
firms’ success.  The key feature of intangible inputs is that they can be deployed on a larger
scale at almost zero additional cost. In other words, they primarily contribute to firms’ fixed costs.
The  increase  in  the  role  of  fixed  costs  and  the  diminishing  role  of  variable  costs  can  have
important implications for the structure of an industry: these changes contribute to an increase in
concentration, a long-term decline in productivity (after an initial surge) and a fall in the labour
share.  The lesson for our discussion is that the rise of intangibles implies that marginal costs
(such as wages) may be playing a decreasing role in price-setting decisions, thereby leading to a
lower wage-inflation pass-through.
6
7
Some theories suggest that the wage-inflation pass-through might also fluctuate depending on
the level of inflation.  They start from the empirical observation that, at lower levels of inflation,
price fluctuations are less persistent. In such an environment, firms are less inclined to match
cost  increases  with  price  increases.  Hence,  low  inflation  leads  to  lower  pass-through  and  a
reduction in the expected persistence of cost and price changes.
Turning to the euro area data, we can observe that the recent decoupling of wages and prices is
not unprecedented. We have  seen  a  similar  decoupling  before,  in  1999-2000  and  in  2005-06.
Formal  econometric  exercises  confirm  this  observation  and  suggest  that  the  wage-inflation
pass-through is state-dependent. One finding is that the pass-through depends on the type of
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
shock  hitting  the  economy:  it  is  stronger  for  demand  shocks,  and  weaker  for  supply  shocks.
8
 Another finding that is particularly relevant now and confirms the theories I have just discussed,
is that the pass-through is lower in times of low inflation.  Other research has also found that the
pass-through is lower in times of economic slack.
Conclusion
10
9
To  sum  up,  the  current  low  unemployment  rate  and  the  recent  wage  increases  do  not
necessarily imply that higher inflation is around the corner. First, measuring economic slack is
fraught with well-known difficulties. Second, both theory and empirical studies suggest that the
wage-inflation  pass-through  varies  over  time  and  depends  on  many  factors.  Arguably,  the
structural changes under way in advanced economies imply that the pass-through may be on the
decline. The bottom line is that monetary policy decisions need to be based on a wide array of
economic indicators, not just the unemployment rate and wages.
I have touched upon some of the economic effects of the IT revolution. While there might be
dangers ahead, I have no doubt that, with appropriate regulation, this revolution will contribute to
growth and prosperity in Europe and the world. It will also change the way we work in central
banks. We are actively trying to foster this change.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
For alternative estimates of the euro area output gap, see research from the European Commission and the
IMF, or Jarociński, M. and Lenza, M. (2018), “An inflation-predicting measure of the output gap in the euro area”,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 50, No 6, pp. 1189–1224.
See, for example: Trainer, D. (2016). “How the Internet Economy Killed Inflation,” Forbes, 28 September; and
Cohen, P. and Tankersley, J. (2018), “E-Commerce Might Help Solve the Mystery of Low Inflation”,  The New York
Times, 11 June.
Cavallo, A. (2018), “More Amazon effects: online price competition and pricing behaviors”, paper presented at
the 2018 Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium.
Aghion, P., Beragaud, A., Boppart, T., Klenow, P and Li, H. (2019), “A theory of falling growth and rising rents”,
Working Paper Series, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Haskel, J. and Westlake, S. (2017), Capitalism without Capital: The Rise of the Intangible Economy, Princeton
University Press; Corrado, C., Haskel, J., Jona-Lasinio, C. and Iommi, M. (2012), “Intangible Capital and Growth
in Advanced Economies: Measurement Methods and Comparative Results”, Discussion Paper Series, No 6733,
Institute of Labor Economics, July.
De Ridder, M. (2019), “Market Power and Innovation in the Intangible Economy”, Cambridge Working Papers in
Economics, No 1931, University of Cambridge, March.
Taylor, J. (2000), “Low inflation, pass-through and the pricing power of firms”, European Economic Review, Vol.
44, No 7, pp. 1389–1408; and Head, A., Kumar, A. and Lapham, B. (2010), “Market Power, Price Adjustment and
Inflation”, International Economic Review, Vol. 51, No 1, pp. 73–98.
Bobeica, E., Ciccarelli, M. and Vansteenkiste, I. (2019), “The link between labor cost and price inflation in the
euro area”, Working Paper Series, No 2235, ECB.
Ibid.
Lenza, M. and Perez Quiros, G. (2019), “Overall slack in the euro area economy and the wage-inflation pass-
through”, ECB note; and Peres Quiros, G. (2019), “Some results on the estimation of the non-linear Phillips
curve for the euro area”, ECB, mimeo.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
