 Central Bank of Chile 
March 2019 
 CBC-IADB Joint Workshop on “Basel III in the Context of the Macroprudential Approach” 
Opening Remarks by Mario Marcel, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
Ritz-Carlton Hotel, Santiago, Chile – March 29, 2019 
  Good  morning  and  welcome  to  the  “Basel  III  in  the  Context  of  the  Macroprudential  Approach” 
workshop which is co-organized by the Central Bank of Chile and the Inter-American Development 
Bank.   
 
It is a pleasure to host this event in Santiago, at a very appropriate timing. After a year and a half 
of legislative discussion, on January 12th of this year, the new General Banking Law was enacted. 
This  is  the  most  significant  change  to  solvency  regulations  since  1986,  setting  the  basis  for  the 
implementation of the Basel III framework in Chile.  
 
A  second  reason  goes  back  35  years.  In  a  few  more  days,  the  Central  Bank  will  receive  the  last 
repayment of the subordinated debt originated in the rescue of the Chilean financial system of the 
early 1980s. It has been a long way since this episode, and the fact that only now can we  finally 
put  it  behind  us,  highlights  the  importance  of  doing  everything  in  our  reach  to  prevent  the 
occurrence of major financial disruptions.  
 
Allow me to go briefly over the history of the Chilean financial system over the last five decades, 
and how regulation has reacted and evolved over time.  
 
Some  50  years  ago,  banks  where  almost  the  only  source  of  financing  for  companies  and 
households.  The  Chilean  economy  was  closed  to  international  trade  and  capital  flows,  interest 
rates  were  regulated,  credit  was  restricted,  and  banking  activity  was  largely  controlled  by  the 
State.  
 
In the second half  of  the  1970s  the  banking  sector  was  privatized  and  liberalized.  However,  this 
was  not  accompanied  by  adequate  regulation  and  supervision;  and  a  relatively  small  financial 
system  built  major  vulnerabilities.  When  macro  policy  missteps  and  external  shocks  hit  in  1982, 
the banking  sector was not just a weak link,  but amplified  them into  the  deepest economic and 
financial crisis in a generation.   
 
The Chilean financial crisis of the 1980s and the origins of the subordinated debt 
 
Financial crises are abrupt, costly and protracted affairs, and the Chilean financial crisis of the early 
eighties was  no exception. This  crisis is  often quoted as one of the top 25  most severe financial 
crises in modern history. In 1981, annual output growth went from positive 9% in the first quarter, 
                                                            
 I thank the comments and suggestions in preparing this speech to Solange Berstein and Mauricio Calani.  
 Page 1 of 5 
Central Bank of Chile 
March 2019 
 
to 0% in the fourth quarter, and to minus 14% in 1982. That same year, unemployment reached a 
record of 25%, and businesses all over the country were seriously hampered, ultimately affecting 
their  payment  compliance.  Banking  profitability  went  quickly  to  negative  territory  and  the 
delinquency  rate  quadrupled  to  15%  of  the  total  portfolio,  putting  several  banks  solvency  and 
operations at risk. 
 
Several  factors  contributed  to  the  deterioration  of  the  macroeconomic  environment  in  1982. 
External  interest  rates  rose,  the  availability  of  external  credit  decreased,  and  terms  of  trade 
worsened in the wake of the escalation of oil prices. This put enormous pressure on the Chilean 
peso—which had been under a fixed exchange rate scheme since 1979—. This regime broke down 
dramatically  and  spread  to  almost  all  business  sectors,  given  large  FX  exposures,  and  heavily 
leveraged  financial  conglomerates.  All  these  factors  interacted  with  one  another  to  become  an 
outright  banking  crisis.  But,  whatever  the  causes  of  the  crisis,  unsustainable  debt  was  mostly 
explained  by  internal  vulnerabilities:  inappropriate  regulation,  weak  supervision,  and  lack  of 
attention to excessive credit growth, leveraged on a fixed exchange rate scheme. 
 
Although  the  first  aid  took  the  form  of  “emergency  loans”  by  the  Central  Bank  to  commercial 
banks,  during  the  following  year  conditions  deteriorated  rapidly  enough  to  lead  to  the 
intervention of 11 banking institutions.  Another 8 were added in 1983,  including the two largest 
banks in the system. In all, the intervened institutions represented 60% of total credit. All directors 
and executives of these institutions were, removed from their posts, and replaced by provisional 
administrators. 
  
Measures to fight the crisis aimed at the liquidation of non-viable banking entities, improvement 
of  balance  sheets  of  viable  entities  through  the  purchase  of  deteriorated  portfolios,  and  the 
reduction  of  financial  burden  of  bank  borrowers  through  debt  reprogramming  and  preferential 
exchange rates. In 1985, this extended to the recapitalization of the intervened banks, through the 
so-called “popular capitalism” program. 
  
Perhaps the most important program was the purchase of deteriorated portfolios by the Central 
Bank  under  a  variety  of  schemes,  including  repurchase  agreements,  and  in  exchange  of  debt 
instruments, liquid resources, and a new liability called “Subordinated Obligation”. The impact of 
these programs on the assets side of the Central Bank balance sheet was huge, and so were the 
costs of the complete rescue plan. Altogether, it is estimated that only the direct fiscal cost of the 
Chilean Financial Crisis of 1982 reached 41% of GDP. 
 
The aftermath of the crisis  
  
The  lessons  learned  from  this  crisis  highlighted  the  fact  that  banking  regulation  and  supervision 
needed to be substantially upgraded. In 1986, the General Banking Law introduced limitations on 
currency  mismatch,  constraints  on  related  party  lending,  and  restrictions  for  banks  to  receive 
 Page 2 of 5 
Central Bank of Chile 
March 2019 
 
goods instead of liquid resources; all of them, elements which were common practice before the 
1982 crisis.  
 
Paradoxically,  what  could  be  considered  harsher  regulation  did  not  hamper  financial  deepening. 
Instead,  it  fostered  solvency  and  credibility  of  the  banking  system  and  allowed  its  healthy 
development in the ensuing decades. 
 
Regulation and Financial Development  
 
Credit has a valuable role in the economy. Financial intermediaries channel resources from agents 
that save,  to  agents  that  need  to  borrow  to  smooth consumption or  finance  profitable projects. 
Intermediaries contribute to link both sides and bridge gaps of incentive and information frictions, 
by  managing  credit  risk,  liquidity  risk  and  transforming  maturities;  thus  contributing  to  a  better 
resource allocation and fostering growth.  
 
Proper regulation, with a sound balance of risks assessment, can help prevent unsustainable and 
irresponsible  credit  growth,  reducing  the  probability  of  insolvency  while  allowing  banking 
institutions develop profitable businesses. So, it is not a question on whether or not to regulate, 
but  rather  how  much  to  regulate,  and  how  to  do  it  without  impairing  efficient  allocation  of 
resources.  
 
Regulation  has  not  been  an  obstacle  to  financial  development  in  Chile  in  the  35  years  since  the 
debt crisis. Chilean capital markets—broadly defined—evolved in tandem with economic growth. 
The  1986  Banking  Law  was  key  in  fostering  this  process,  but  it  was  hardly  the  only  piece  of  the 
financial  architecture  that  changed  significantly.  Notably,  the  creation  of  a  defined  contribution 
pension system, and subsequent capital market reforms, together with capital  market openness, 
have  dramatically  changed  the  size,  composition,  depth,  and  strength  of  the  financial  sector  in 
Chile.  
 
By funneling household savings into capital markets, Pension Funds were especially important to 
the early development of a deep debt market; and their contribution to market-making benefited 
from a stable macroeconomic environment with controlled inflation, extensive use of the UF, and 
the  restructuring  of  Central  Bank’s  debt  into  longer  maturities.  A  deeper  and  more  liquid  debt 
market also facilitated the pricing of debt issued by private companies in local markets.  
 
External  financing  for  the  banking  and  corporate  sectors  has  evolved  as  well.  Macroeconomic 
stability  under  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  together  with  regulatory  changes,  have  fostered  the 
development  of  overseas  bond  market  for  Chilean  companies.  Corporations  have  learned  to 
operate  in  a  flexible  FX  environment  by  using  both,  natural  and  market-based  FX  risk  hedging 
instruments. This, in turn, has also been supported by the development of the derivatives market, 
in which Pension Funds have been key counterparts as well.  
 
 Page 3 of 5 
Central Bank of Chile 
March 2019 
 
By  now,  the  Chilean  financial  sector  is  one  of  the  most  developed in  the emerging world.  It has 
transited from being largely dominated by traditional banking to being composed by several other 
market  participants,  including  Pension  Funds,  General  Fund  Administrators  and  Insurance 
Companies; among others. Assets under management of these non-bank investors went from less 
than 1% of GDP in 1984, to 65% in 2000, and to almost 100% of GDP in 2018. This development 
has  translated  in  improved  access  to  alternative  sources  of  funding  by  Chilean  corporations. 
Currently, around 85% of total corporate bonds  are held by institutional investors,  as a result of 
which  reliance  on  banking  credit  of  these  corporations  has  gone  from  91%  of  financial  debt  in 
1986 to around 25% in the recent years1.  
 
Financial development has been important not only for firms but also for  the country. A  deeper 
and  far-reaching  financial  system  contributes  to  building  financial  and  economic  inclusion,  and 
financial stability against external shocks. In this respect, the Chilean financial system shows better 
performance  than  other  Latin  American  and  Emerging  economies,  in  dimensions  like  market 
capitalization, number of branches per inhabitant, use of derivatives, and participation in domestic 
credit to the private sector, to name a few.   
 
Nonetheless,  increased  development  and  complexity  of  financial  markets  also  means  that  risks 
may be higher, and that a stronger and more sophisticated regulatory framework is required.   
 
The New General Banking Law and future challenges  
 
The  New  General  Banking  Law,  takes  important  steps  in  this  direction,  by  embracing  the 
recommendations of Basel III on banking capital and reserve requirements, as well as on corporate 
governance.  Supervision  is  also  improved  under  the  new  law,  by  merging  SBIF  into  the  new 
Financial  Markets  Commission  (CMF)  in  order  to  have  a  system-wide  oversight  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities in financial markets.  
 
Through  the  day,  the  different  panels  will  discuss  the  role  of  macro  prudential  policies  and  the 
implementation challenges in adopting Basel III standards. The main goal of these standards is to 
increase  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector,  by  increasing  quantity  and  quality  of  capital 
requirements. This framework combines bank-specific measures with macro prudential actions to 
contain potential systemic risk. In this respect, one of the new tools is the countercyclical capital 
buffer: an additional  capital requirement that  could be activated and deactivated by the Central 
Bank  depending  on  the  state  of  the  financial  cycle,  and  whose  main  goal  is  to  preclude  the 
incubation of systemic risks and increase the resilience of the system as a whole. 
 
Still,  there  are  a  few  challenges  ahead  that  we  need  to  address  to  have  an  even  more  robust 
financial  system.  In  particular,  two  tasks  seem  more  urgent  than  others.  Namely,  Resolution  of 
Financial Institutions and Deposit Insurance. While the new Banking Law includes some provisions 
in  this  respect,  by  introducing  stronger  early-intervention  measures,  these  need  to  be  further 
                                                            
1 Based on Agosín et al. (1999) and Espinosa and Fernandez (2015).  
 Page 4 of 5 
Central Bank of Chile 
March 2019 
 
developed to provide a comprehensive framework to deal with banks in trouble or on the brink of 
insolvency.  
 
Once  the  preparatory  phase  of  the  General  Banking  Law,  including  a  unified  supervisor,  is  fully 
completed,  we  hope  that  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Government  can  advance  in  drafting  a  legal 
proposal  on  these  issues.  Certainly,  these  areas  will  be  important  points  in  the  IMF’s  Financial 
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) update of 2020, and it is important that we get there with the 
job well advanced.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Finally, allow me to thank the presenters for sharing their interesting research insights here with 
us in Santiago. I also thank the organizers from the Central Bank of Chile and the IADB in putting 
together  this  rich  agenda  from  which  we  will  certainly  distill  conclusions  to  guide  our  work 
forward.  
 
In  particular,  I  would  like  to  thank  Alejandro  Jara,  Markus  Kirchner,  Andrés  Fernández,  Victoria 
Nuguer, and Liliana Rojas-Suarez for setting up the agenda, and to Tomás Gómez, Paloma Navarro 
and María  José Reyes  for  the excellent  organization of the event. I wish everyone a very fruitful 
discussion and a pleasant stay in Santiago.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
References  
 
Espinosa, C. and J. Fernández (2015). “Comparación Histórica de Resultados en el Sector 
Corporativo en Chile”. Economía Chilena, Vol. 18, No. 1.  
 
Agosin, M., G. Crespi, and L. Letelier (1999). "Explanations for the Increase in Saving in Chile", in C. 
Reinhart (ed.), Accounting for Saving – Financial Liberalization, Capital Flows and Growth in Latin 
America and Europe, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, D. C.  
 
 Page 5 of 5 
