    NGFS  
Network for Greening the Financial System- conference,   
Paris, 17 April 2019 
Central banks and supervisors taking action on climate change 
 Introductory remarks by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
Risque Climatique – Call to Action 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you to the Banque de France’s premises 
to kick off this public session of the NGFS conference. We have been waiting for 
this moment for a  while, and  here  we are. The NGFS  is releasing today its first 
comprehensive 
report,  entitled 
“A  call 
for  action”, 
including 
its  six 
recommendations. 
Thomas Paine, an English-born political philosopher and citizen of the world, said 
in The American Crisis (circa 1776): “If there must be trouble, let it be in my day, 
that  my  child  may  have  peace.”  Climate  change  is  real,  it  is  global  and 
irreversible.  Even  if  policymakers  bear  the  primary  responsibility,  we  need  all 
hands  on  deck  to  tackle  climate  change,  as  demonstrated  today  with  this  wide 
audience. Indeed, “preventing the airplane from crashing” remains a continuous 
endeavour, which is now undertaken by many more institutions every day. 
In  mainstreaming  sustainable  finance,  finance  cannot  replace  policymakers  but 
finance can help. And as a central banker and supervisor, the Banque de France 
is determined to help. Last year, in Amsterdam, I even said that this challenge is 
our  “new  frontier”.  This  is  why  we  initiated  the  Network  of  central  banks  and 
  
supervisors  for  Greening  the  Financial  System  (NGFS),  during  the  One  Planet 
Summit  on  December  2017.  And,  in  16  months,  our  club  of  the  willing  has 
increased  almost  fivefold,  from  8  founding  members  to  over  40  members  and 
observers  with  its  Chair  Frank  Elderson  and  the  Banque  de  France  as 
Secretariat.  We  are  now  represented  on  the  five  continents;  NGFS  members’ 
jurisdictions  cover  44%  of  global  GDP  and  45%  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions. 
We collectively supervise two-thirds of systemic financial institutions, banks and 
insurers alike. What appears obvious to most of us today was not previously set 
in stone.  
With  our  global  effort  to  ensure  that  the  Paris  Agreement  produces  results,  the 
NGFS’ first “A call for action” report has the potential to lever the financial system 
and I hope that it will pave the way for a “paradigm shift” in the wider community 
of central bankers.   
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  (i)  take  stock  of  central  bankers  and  supervisors’ 
achievements  towards  tackling  climate  change,  which  are  significant  and  (ii) 
discuss four important tasks that still lie ahead. 
I. 
Central banks and supervisors are promptly moving ahead regarding 
the snapshot of risks 
In  its  first  progress  report,  released  in  Bali  in  October  2018,  the  NGFS 
unanimously concluded that “climate-related risks are a source of financial risks. 
It  is  therefore  within  the  mandates  of  Central  Banks  and  Supervisors  to  ensure 
the financial system is resilient to these risks.” So what do we do? 
a.  Integrating climate-related risks into micro-supervision 
This  is  an  ambitious  but  complex  task,  on  which  progress  has  been  made  in 
many  countries.  Looking  at  the  potential  courses  of  action  for  supervisors,  I 
believe  that  our  main  priority  should  be  the  disclosure  of  existing  exposures  in 
the  financial  sector,  what  I  usually  call  “the  snapshot  of  risks”.  A  number  of 
supervisors  have  paved  the  way,  including  the  DNB,  the  Bank  of  England/PRA 
and the French supervisory authority (ACPR). The ACPR published last week a 
second  report  on  the  exposures  of  French  banks  and  insurers  to  climate  risks. 
This  report  gives  a  clearer  view  on  climate  risks  and  opportunities:  asset 
exposures  of  financial  firms  to  physical  risks  remains  non-material  in  France 
  
thanks  to  investments  in  very  low  risk  zones;  banks’  exposures  to  transition-
related  risks  were  slightly  reduced  between  2015  and  2017  and  now  represent 
roughly  12%  of  credit  risk’s  exposures  at  default.  Our  supervisor  also  has  a 
clearer  view  on  the  blind  spots  in  the  risk  management  framework,  which  must 
be addressed: executive bodies are committed to embracing further climate risks 
at  the  highest  level  of  decision-making  but  the  degree  of  implication  across  the 
French  financial  sector  is  still  heterogeneous;  the  granularity  of  the  analysis 
provided by banks and insurance companies is not sufficient. 
This  step  should  be  widely  promoted  among  NGFS  members,  who,  I  believe, 
need  to  leverage  best  practices  throughout  its  membership.  I  therefore  very 
much  welcome  the  supervisory  handbook  that  will  be  prepared  as  a  NGFS 
technical deliverable for 2019-20. 
b.  Integrating sustainability factors into own-portfolio management 
Central banks must send the right signal and lead by example in their investment 
and  disclosure  policies.  The  DNB  has  signed  up  to  the  UN  Principles  for 
Responsible Investment. Norges Bank, which manages the Norwegian sovereign 
wealth fund, has advocated a diversification of the portfolio and is implementing a 
divestment strategy dedicated to selling off some oil and gas stocks. We, at the 
Banque  de  France,  adopted  in  March  last  year  a  Charter  on  Responsible 
Investment for the management of our own funds and our pension portfolios: this 
means  allocating  them  to  socially  and  environmentally  responsible  investment 
funds. With respect to disclosure, in March 2019 we were the first central bank to 
publish our climate-related risks’ exposures. We are also working to further align 
our reporting with a TCFD-like approach that would fit the specificities of central 
banks.  We  trust  our  experience  will  be  useful  to  the  NGFS  membership  in 
defining  some  best  practices  as  far  ESG  investment  for  central  banks  is 
concerned. 
 We can be proud of what we have achieved in 16 months, but it is “time to roll up 
our sleeves”: the merciless perspective of a more than 2°C world requires us to 
strive to do better and to do it now. Developing practical solutions now tops the 
agenda of the NGFS “Season 2”. 
   
II. The road ahead for central banks/supervisors and other players too 
a.  Disclosures and taxonomies, two faces of the same coin 
We are currently facing a chicken and egg dilemma. In order to bridge the data 
gaps,  we  must  rely  on  enhanced  disclosures  that  need  to  be  built  on  sound 
taxonomies. But we need some data to set out a proper taxonomy! 
It  is  time  to  follow  the  path  set  by  the  TCFD  on  one  side  and  the  European 
Commission  on  the  other  to  address  all  issues  at  the  same  time.  It  means 
working jointly on disclosures and taxonomies. It will notably help to enhance the 
quality  of  disclosure  and,  ultimately,  its  relevance  in  internalising  the  current 
climate change externality for all firms. 
We will then be in a position to move gradually towards compulsory transparency 
based on a “comply or explain” principle, such as that of Article 173 of the French 
Energy Transition Law that could usefully serve as a reference. 
b.  Integrating climate-related risks into financial stability monitoring 
Substantial work remains to be done to achieve “the video of risks”. Our feeling is 
that risk premia do not currently appropriately reflect climate risks. And therefore 
I  believe  that  we,  as  central  banks  and  supervisors,  must  push  for  a  forward 
looking  vision  of  the  impacts  of  climate  risks.  In  order  to  properly  size  the 
financial effects of climate change, our goal is clear: we should be able to design 
some comprehensive climate stress tests.  
What  does  it  mean  in  practice?  The  snapshot  of  risks  provides  information  on 
exposures.  But  achieving  a  forward  looking  scenario  analysis  implies  bringing 
together three “bricks”: 
-  A  handful  of  severe  enough  but  realistic  transition  path  scenarios  all  the 
way  to  2050.  The  NGFS  is  working  on  those  and  plan  to  publish  some 
technical papers soon. 
-  Macroeconomic  assumptions  to  capture  the  impact  of  climate  change  on 
macroeconomic variables (productivity, inflation, unemployment, etc.) 
-  The  direct  and  indirect  exposures  of  the  financial  system  to  climate  risks. 
Here of course, disclosure can help. 
We are not there yet, climate risk analysis needs to rely on new methodological 
tools in order to deal with challenges related to long-run impacts, accounting for 
technological  change  and  shifts  in  political  priorities  and  social  behaviour  for 
  
instance,  non-homogeneity  and  non-linearity  of  impacts,  and  irreversibility  of 
effects.  We  need  to  look  beyond  the  standard  one-year  horizon  for  default 
probabilities that does not fit the climate agenda. 
c.  The green economy is still in its infancy and needs to mature 
As  time  goes  by  and  our  ability  to  achieve  a  1.5  to  2°C  scenario  is  seriously 
challenged,  the  amount  needed  to  finance  the  transition  is  increasing  steadily. 
The demand for green assets is high, but the supply of green assets fails to keep 
up.  This  quantitative  challenge  to  match  demand  is  linked  to  the  massive 
investment  required  to  promote  further  development  of  technologies  and  to 
accompany  shifts  in  social  behaviour.  The  amounts  at  stake  vary,  but  as  an 
illustration,  the  last  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC)  report, 
published  last  October,  estimates  that  until  2050,  the  energy-related  mitigation 
investments  to  limit  warming  to  1.5°C  amount  to  USD  900  billion  per  year 
whereas  climate-aligned  bonds  issued  in  2018  reached  USD  149  billion.  Green 
financing  requires  an 
innovation-friendly 
framework:  green 
loans,  green 
securitisation,  green  covered  bonds,  green  derivatives,  green  crowdfunding 
platforms  and  green  private  equity  should  all  be  promoted,  keeping  in  sight  our 
heading, which is preserving financial stability. The work of the Technical Expert 
Group  on  Sustainable  Finance  of  the  European  Commission  on  green  bond 
labels  and  sustainable  benchmarks  should  be  well  understood  as  a  game 
changer by the financial system: green finance should definitely mature, upgrade 
its professional standards and be “greenwashing proof”. 
Green finance has actually the ability to be a powerful transformational force but 
there will be no transition to a low-carbon future without further engagement from 
corporates,  from  large  companies  to  SMEs.  Financial  institutions  can  provide  a 
trickle-down  effect,  thanks  to  comprehensive  CO2  disclosures  or  divestment 
strategies.  But  the  real  economy  must  embrace  the  transition  on  its  own.  Once 
again, appropriate public policies, like a credible carbon price, will set the proper 
incentives.  
d.  Further developing the climate agenda in an inclusive manner 
Climate change will trigger strong distributive effects: agriculture in Sweden might 
benefit  from  an  increase  in  global  mean  surface  temperature  while  145  million 
  
people  in  China  are  threatened  by  sea  rise  in  a  +4°C  scenario.  There  will  be 
winners and losers internationally but also within countries. 
This calls for a deeper international cooperation which will promote a globally fair 
transition to a low-carbon economy. And each and every one of us – civil society; 
States  and  regional  regulators;  academics,  NGO’s  and  think-tanks;  corporates 
and financial institutions; central banks, supervisors and standard setters – has a 
part to play: it is a shared challenge that no one can tackle alone. 
We  should  also  focus  our  efforts  and  attention  on  emerging  countries  and 
developing economies. They are usually hit harder by climate risks and on top of 
that also face environmental risks at large, (such as air pollution, water pollution 
and  scarcity  of  fresh  water,  land  contamination,  harming  biodiversity  and 
deforestation).  In  2017  alone,  almost  5  million  people  worldwide  died  due  to  air 
pollution. Even if environmental  degradation and associated  (financial) risks are 
often more local in their reach, there are nevertheless compelling reasons for the 
NGFS  to  look  at  environmental  risks  relevant  to  the  financial  system  and 
differentiate  more  in  the  recommendations  provided  between  the  types  of 
financial systems. 
  Conclusion: 
The success of the Paris Agreement will depend on our ability to move forward in 
an  inclusive  manner.  The  world  is  in  the  hands  of  all  of  us.  But  certainly  some 
have a greater influence on its fate than others. Central banks and supervisors, 
within  the  NGFS  and  alongside  men  and  women  of  good  will,  are  playing  their 
part  in  mitigating  the  disruption  caused  by  climate  change.  If  we  want  our 
children to have peace, I am calling on all of you to act too. 
  