Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour:  Solutions  for  safe,  adequate,  affordable
housing for all
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Cagamas - World Bank Affordable Housing Conference
"Solutions for Safe, Adequate, Affordable Housing for All", Kuala Lumpur, 2 April 2019.
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  opening  remarks  for  this  conference.  The  issue  of
housing affordability is close to everyone’s heart. Having a family myself, I can truly understand
the need and desire to own a safe, comfortable and affordable home. As such, I am pleased that
the public discourse on this issue around the world and in Malaysia has been gaining traction
over the past few years. This reflects the significance, concern and gravity of the situation.
To  ensure  a  fair  standard  of  living,  the  United  Nations  recognises  the  provision  of  adequate
housing as a necessary objective to pursue. Adequate housing includes ensuring affordability,
habitability and accessibility, all of which are issues that this conference seeks to address. In my
remarks  today,  I  will  touch  on  the  responsibilities  of  individuals,  the  private  sector  and
policymakers to realise the agenda of affordable housing, mainly from Malaysia’s perspective.
For  any  individual,  irrespective  of  income  level,  one  of  the  biggest  investments  he  or  she  will
make in life is the purchase of a home. The downpayment and monthly mortgage represents a
significant commitment, where for many, may even span a lifetime.
As such, it is of utmost importance that we consider the principles of sound and prudent financial
management in this undertaking. We cannot in good conscience, overburden and cause anyone
to enter into financial difficulty in pursuit of owning a home. This fundamentally goes against the
intention of owning a house. Therefore, based on the principles of fairness, justice and prudence,
it is necessary for us to be absolutely clear on what ‘affordable’ means. This will influence both
the diagnosis of the issue and the solutions to be implemented. We must be fair and just to the
needs of the ordinary person.
At its core, affordability is a function of two things; the income of the individual and the price of the
house. A house is affordable if its price does not overburden the person’s finances and reflects
its true value. It is crucial that the percentage of income spent to service the mortgage does not
go beyond the person’s financial capacity, and that they are able to pay for other obligations on
top of this commitment.
To this end, at the individual level, we need to put emphasis on the value of financial literacy and
financial education. For example, the Credit Counseling and Debt Management Agency recently
launched the “Rumahku” portal to help potential borrowers in Malaysia to understand the financial
commitments associated with owning a house. It also helps them to understand their capacity to
meet these commitments.
So far, more than 3600 people have completed the modules and a substantial number of them,
one in five, have decided not to proceed with the purchase. This points to two things. Firstly, the
module  is  successful  in  nudging  participants  to  reassess  their  existing  financial  obligations
before  they  can  take  on  more  than  what  they  can  handle.  Secondly,  it  reinforces  the  need  to
continue pushing for financial education. Individuals need to know their capacity, and what they
can afford before undertaking a commitment of this magnitude.
We have established that every individual needs to play their part to ensure that they are fully
aware  of  and  are  able  to  undertake  the  commitment  of  buying  a  house.  However,  the
responsibility does not reside with the buyers alone. Industry players in the private sector also
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
have a role to play to support the national agenda of affordable homes.
As one of the core players in the housing market, developers have a significant role to play. In
providing the supply of homes for the public, developers should seek to provide homes at an
affordable price point. Using international affordability metrics, houses in Malaysia are considered
to be “seriously unaffordable” with a median multiple of five times. This, in turn, affects home
ownership.  Take  the  latest  data  of  unsold  residential  properties  of  about  171,000  units. About
74% of them are priced beyond what ordinary Malaysians can afford.
It is, therefore, imperative for developers to adjust their product offerings and consider bringing
their costs down. One of the ways would be to seriously explore leveraging on more advanced
and cost-efficient construction technology, such as Industrialised Building System (IBS). As cost
of construction remains one of the major determinants of house prices, increasing efficiency and
lowering  costs  can  lead  to  a  more  inclusive  housing  market.  Beyond  considerations  for  price
points  that  reflect  greater  affordability  for  the  buyer,  developers  also  have  the  responsibility  to
build houses that cater to the modern needs of the public. Aspects of quality, sufficient amenities
and safety must be considered as critical elements of modern living.
Financial institutions also play an important role in the housing market through the provision of
financing.  The  effective  intermediation  role  of  financial  institutions  is  equally  critical  for  a  well-
functioning housing market. In the provision of financing, financial institutions need to ensure that
they  lend  responsibly  to  those  who  are  deserving,  capable  and  able  to  repay.  Financial
institutions need to protect the public interest by ensuring that buyers do not borrow beyond their
means and fall into financial hardship. To this end, the financial institutions should also continue
to provide effective and transformative financial services to ensure that society at large would
benefit and thus, improve their quality of life. I take note that there are a few interesting sessions
during this conference related to innovations in finance, including one on fintech. 
At the recent release of the 2018 Financial Stability and Payment Systems Report, Bank Negara
Malaysia reported that financial institutions in Malaysia will continue to support economic activity,
including  to  households  for  affordable  housing.  Loan  disbursements  and  net  financing  to
households grew healthily last year by around 6.7% and 4.7% respectively. The approval rate
stood  at  71.3%,  with  around  70%  of  loans  for  first  time  buyers  of  properties  priced  below
RM500,000.
Finally, for policymakers, our  role  is  to  continue  pursuing  greater  coordination  with  the  private
sector  to  build  a  sustainable  housing  market.  In  Malaysia,  various  initiatives  have  been
announced  to  support  this  agenda,  including  the  launch  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  Fund  for
Affordable  Homes,  the  National  Home  Ownership  Campaign,  stamp  duty  exemptions  and
provision of mortgage guarantees and rent-to-own schemes.
While  we  are  seeing  a  gradual  rebalancing  of  housing  supply  towards  the  more  affordable
segments in Malaysia, it is important that future supply is tailored to the needs of future demand.
As  such,  moving  forward,  it  will  be  critical  for  Malaysia  to  accelerate  the  establishment  of  an
integrated housing database. The database would be important to provide timely information to
help build an efficient housing market through greater transparency and lead to better planning by
policymakers  and  developers.  The  newly  established  single  authority  for  affordable  housing
should  play  a  proactive  and  strategic  role  in  managing  affordable  housing  in  Malaysia.  Local
authorities and developers should also work together to reduce the cost of building houses. Last
but not least, there is a need to build a healthy rental market.
Policymakers need to be clear that the drive for affordable housing is not necessarily equivalent
to  the  drive  for  “home  ownership”  alone.  Adequate  housing  is  about  access,  which  can  be
achieved not only through outright ownership, but also through the ability to rent a decent home at
affordable prices. The overriding policy priority should not be ownership at all costs. We need to
learn  from  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  on  the  importance  of  a  sustainable  housing  market.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Policymakers need to protect the interests of the public and the stability of the economic and
financial system. It is also in the interest of the public that they do not buy homes that they cannot
afford  and 
to
socioeconomic stability.
financial  hardship,  which  will  have  detrimental  consequences 
into 
fall 
More broadly, we need to remember that one of the best ways to achieve the affordable homes
objective is to promote  employment  opportunities  and  income  growth  for  the  people.  This  will
strengthen their economic capability and financial position for home ownership. To some extent,
we  have  observed  some  encouraging  trends,  including  the  fact  that  house  prices  are  now
growing more in line with income growth.
Another important avenue for policymakers is the exchange of information and ideas. Through
the sharing of experiences,  especially  with  policymakers  from  other  countries,  we  are  able  to
learn  and  explore  new  frontiers.  Platforms  such  as  this  contribute  to  the  rich  marketplace  of
ideas that will spur us to think of innovative policies and effective ways to implement them.
Tackling the issue of affordable housing requires us to be creative, proactive and holistic in our
solutions. This will require collaboration and commitment from all parties involved; policymakers,
the private sector, developers and the public at large. It will not be easy, but it is necessary for us
to build a better future not just for our families, but for our future generations.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
