Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Corriere della Sera
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in  Corriere  della  Sera,  conducted  by  Mr  Danilo  Taino  on  7  March  2019  and  published  on  11
March 2019.
 At its meeting on Thursday, 7 March, the ECB decided to add to the monetary stimulus
already in place. What happened? Did the extent of the economic slowdown in the euro
area take you by surprise?
The slowdown didn’t come as a surprise. Economic activity was exceptionally strong in 2017,
thanks to global economic conditions. We knew that euro area growth would adjust towards its
potential  rate.  The  slowdown  has  been  stronger  than  expected  and  started  sooner,  which
motivated the decisions we took. But those decisions don’t represent a turnaround in our policy;
they have been carefully calibrated to this diagnosis. We are adjusting to the new reality rather
than  reversing  our  course;  we  don’t  see  signs  of  a  recession  at  present.  The  ECB  staff
projections  have  been  revised.  They  previously  envisaged  that  growth  would  be  consistently
above potential, which would have pushed inflation towards our objective of lower but close to
2%, whereas they now foresee that actual output will be initially equal to or below potential output,
which means it will take longer for inflation to reach 2%.
In the event of external shocks, could the ECB go back to buying bonds on the market?
We don’t see the need. We are still seeing robust economic growth, although it’s less strong
than  before.  It  will  take  longer  for  inflation  to  reach  our  objective,  but  it  will  get  there.  We  are
reacting to the developments we have seen so far, so we will keep rates at zero for longer, we
will  continue  to  reinvest  payments  from  maturing  securities  in  our  portfolio,  and  we  will  grant
banks  liquidity  at  favourable  conditions  provided  that  they  finance  the  real  economy.  If  you’re
asking me about another asset purchase programme, all I will say is that this instrument is now
part of our toolbox, but it is not needed now.
Do you think that European governments are pursuing appropriate fiscal policies under
the circumstances?
It’s difficult for a central banker to give detailed advice on fiscal policy, since fiscal policy is a
matter for democratically elected governments. What I can say generally is that the current fiscal
stance in the euro area as a whole is slightly expansionary and supports economic activity. The
European Commission has invited those countries that have fiscal space, such as Germany, to
use it in the way they consider most appropriate for their economies. Those who don’t have any
fiscal space shouldn’t use it or pretend to have it. This applies not just to Italy, but also to France.
Both countries still have some way to go to rebuild their fiscal buffers.
Many market participants believe that Italy could be a source of crisis in Europe…
It’s not for me to talk about politics. But it’s true that, economically speaking, Italy is a in a difficult
juncture. It is the only euro area country that is experiencing a technical recession. And it has not
seen an improvement in the labour market, which is another thing that sets it apart from other
euro area economies. In the longer term, Italy’s problem is well known: it is productivity growth. I
don’t believe that any of this has to do with the euro, otherwise it would be a general problem
across the euro area. The response is to focus on the country’s strengths, such as its small and
medium-sized enterprises. And to use the Single Market to leverage their strength and help them
export  to  global  markets.  Isolation  and  protectionism  don’t  work.  Europe  is  an  asset  for  our
economies.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
It  seems  to  be  difficult  at  the  moment  to  undertake  the  much  discussed  reforms  to
complete  the  banking  union  and  the  capital  markets  union.  Do  you  share  this
impression?
Yes, I do, and it’s a concern for the ECB. We firmly believe that Europe is part of the solution in
dealing with the problems faced by European citizens. Many citizens in many countries are angry
because economic results are not what they should be, because it has taken too long to recover
from the financial crisis, because unemployment especially among the youth – is still high and
because  globalisation  has  not  lived  up  to  its  promises,  instead  increasing  inequality  and
marginalising parts of society. The measures needed to respond to these issues can only be
effective at the European level. Not everything is working well in Europe and it begs a discussion.
Italy, as a founding member of the EU and as the third economy of the euro area, needs to be
part of it.
What do you think of the proposals for reform made by Macron?
I don’t want to comment on what the French President says. He has sparked a debate on the
future  of  Europe,  and  every  country  should  get  involved.  If  European  leaders  focus  only  on
domestic politics, this inward-looking attitude can only make Europe weaker.
A return to the previous era of globalisation without barriers is unlikely, isn’t it?
This is indeed unlikely. And that’s good news, since the reason we are experiencing problems
today  is  that  globalisation  didn’t  deliver  on  its  promises. As  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  once
said: “Those people who complain that we won’t get back to the pre-crisis path forget that it was
the very path that led to that crisis”. We are currently undergoing a very disorderly transition and
there is a temptation to turn to nationalist ideas, when one of the great successes to emerge in
the aftermath of the Second World War was the creation of an international order based on trust.
Change is needed; for instance, we were naive about opening up international financial flows.
There was too much financial globalisation, and this led to volatility and systemic risk and it has
eroded  fiscal  resources  because  multinationals  have  become  footloose.  To  a  certain  extent,
financial openness cancelled out the benefits of trade openness. We need to come up with a
new international order that can overcome these problems. But returning to a system based on
domestic priorities alone will clearly not work.
Don’t  you  think  that  central  banks  have  been  charged  with  too  many  roles  and
responsibilities?
Yes,  I  do.  People  expect  too  much  from  central  banks,  considering  what  we  can  do  and  the
mandate they have given us in the first place. If you give a central bank too many objectives, you
transform it from an apolitical entity with a narrow mandate into a political institution. We have a
duty to deliver on our mandate, that is price stability. But giving us too many objectives would
make us political, which we certainly don’t want to be.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
