Gent Sejko: Albania's economic and financial developments in 2018
Introductory statement by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, presenting the Annual
Report 2018 to the Parliamentary Committee on Economy and Finance, Tirana, 23 April 2019.
 Honourable Chair,
Honourable Members of the Committee,
Thank you for your invitation!
The Annual Report and the financial statements are the key instrument for the accountability of
our institution. In this light, the Bank of Albania considers the presentation of this Report as an
opportunity to foster and enhance the dialogue with the Assembly.
During 2018, the work of the Bank of Albania focused on three main aspects:
First,  on  the  objectives  and  duties  set  out  in  the  legal  and  sublegal  framework,  which
regulates the work of the Bank;
Second, on the objectives set out in our Medium-term Development Strategy; and,
Third, recommendations left by the Assembly of the Republic of Albania in the Resolution
“On the assessment of the activity of the Bank of Albania for 2017”.
The results of our work show that the Bank of Albania marked progress in all the three above-
mentioned aspects. Let me present a brief overview of developments.
In accordance with the applicable legal framework, the Bank of Albania: strives to maintain price
stability,  as  a  precondition  for  sustainable  and  long-term  growth  in  the  country;  licences,
supervises and regulates the activity of the banking sector, hence promoting financial stability;
administers the issue and circulation of the Albanian currency; contributes to the development of
the payment system; and performs a number of other specific duties, which affect the economic
life and financial system in Albania.
Based on the available information, the Bank of Albania finds that in 2018 the Albanian economy
and finances marked progress. Economic activity and employment continued to expand, wages
and  domestic  inflationary  pressures  trended  upward,  main  banking  sector’s  soundness
indicators  improved,  and  a  series  of  indicators  of  domestic  and  external  economic  balances
strengthened.  This  dynamics  of  developments  reflects,  significantly,  the  effect  of  policies,
measures and instruments we have adopted on continuous basis.
Concretely, in 2018 the Bank of Albania has:
1.  implemented an accommodative monetary policy, which has boosted economic growth and
the convergence of inflation toward the target, and has contributed to improving the balance
sheets of enterprises, households, public sector and financial institutions in Albania.
2.  strengthened and improved the policy, regulatory and operational framework for supervising
the banking sector, mindful of the administration of the consolidation process; and
3.    created  incentives  for  the  development  of  the  payment  system  and  expansion  and
deepening of the financial market.
With  regard  to  fulfilling  strategy  objectives,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  worked  intensively  for
adopting  best  central  banking  practices  and  standards.  Thus,  we  have  made  progress  with
regard to improving statistics; research; compliance with EU integration criteria, strengthening
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the governance; and in many other aspects.
Lastly, I would like to underline that the Bank of Albania has fulfilled all the recommendations left
by the Assembly.
The Annual Report presents in greater detail the activity of the Bank of Albania in 2018, across all
the  dimensions  of  its  activity.  I  will  present  first  an  overview  of  the  activity  of  the  Supervisory
Council, the decision-making body, which also monitors the activity of the Bank of Albania. I will
then continue to present the activity of the Bank of Albania, in accordance with the main domains
of its activity.
Activity of the Supervisory Council
 The Supervisory Council exercises its powers in accordance with the provisions of the organic
law and the procedures established in the internal regulation on its organisation and functioning.
In 2018, the Supervisory Council met 15 times and approved 76 decisions, of which 55 were acts
approved for the first time and 21 were amendments to existing acts. These decisions affect the
activity of the Bank of Albania across the board. In addition to the monetary policy decisions and
revisions to regulations that govern the activity of the banking sector, other important decisions
include: (i) approval of the policy and measures for increasing the use of the national currency in
the  activity    of    banks;  (ii)  approval  of  the  policy  for  the  oversight  of  payment  and  settlement
systems;(iii)  approval  of  the  accounting  policy  in  accordance  with  the  International  Financial
Reporting Standards; and, approval of the Medium-term Development Strategy of the Bank of
Albania for 2019–2021. The strategy upheld the existing mission, vision, and values and updated
the list of duties for fulfilling them.
Beyond the realisation of the legal objectives of the Bank, the Supervisory Council has monitored
continuously the governance of the institution and has worked towards its improvement.
As the body responsible for the financial reporting and internal audit system, the Council has
been informed regularly, by internal and external audit functions, on the compliance with the
legislation and other acts that govern the activity of the institution.  The Council has been
informed also about the institution’s management policies and the use of financial assets for
the realisation of the operational activity of the Bank of Albania. Information was presented
regularly  on  the  financial  position  and  result  of  the  Bank  of Albania  and  the  international
reserve management.
The  internal  audit  has  been  monitored  through  the Audit  Committee,  established  in  2015.
The  committee,  has  discussed  issues  such  as:  (i)  annual  work  plan  and  internal  audit
engagements  for  the  year;  (ii)  periodic  reporting  by  the  Inspector  General  on  the  auditing
activity; (iii) financial statements; and, (iv) performance of operational risk management at
the Bank of Albania. It has met regularly, without the presence of the administrators, with the
Inspector General.
Lastly, I would like to emphasise that the Council has regularly complied with Bank of Albania’s
accountability obligations to the Assembly and its transparency obligations to the public, and the
financial system.
 Albanian economy and monetary policy in 2018
The monetary policy maintained, even strengthened, the accommodative stance in 2018. The
policy  was  in  line  with  our  inflation  target  convergence  objective,  consistent  with  the  cyclical
position of the Albanian economy, and aligned with the consolidation trend of the fiscal policy.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Albanian  economy  performed  positively  throughout  2018. Aggregate  demand  increasingly
expanded,  enabling  thus  a  further  increase  in  production,  employment  and  wages,  and
contributing to the improvement of the main economic and financial balances of the country’s
economy. A few figures to illustrate it.
According  to  INSTAT  data,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  accelerated  to  4.1%  in  2018.
Economic growth was broad based; it reflected positive contributions from the expansion of
the consumption of households and enterprises, and of exports.
According to INSTAT data, employment in the economy rose by 1.6% in the previous year,
whereas the unemployment rate fell to 12.3% from 13.4% a year earlier.
The  current  account  deficit  decreased  at  6.7%  of  the  GDP  in  2018,  from  7.5%  in  the
previous year. Its improvement reflected to a large extent the increase in the tourism-related
activity.
Budget  deficit  and  public  debt  continued  to  record  a  downward  trend,  reflecting  both  the
consolidation path of the fiscal policy and the economic growth as well as the exchange rate
appreciation.
The  main  banking  sector  soundness  indicators,  in  particular  liquidity,  profitability  and
capitalisation, remain at satisfactory levels.
Against  this  backdrop,  annual  inflation  averaged  2.0%,  remaining  unchanged  from  2017  and
below our 3% target. Inflation stood stable owing to two effects of opposite directions. The build-
up  in  domestic  inflationary  pressures,  generated  by  the  rise  in  employment,  wages  and
production costs was offset by the rapid appreciation of the domestic currency over the first half
of the year.
The exchange rate appreciation was a decelerating factor for achieving the inflation target.  The
exchange rate has moved along a slight appreciation path over the last three years, driven by
fundamental  factors  that  dictate  its  behaviour  such  as:  improvement  of  the  balance  of  trade
exchanges with abroad, high levels of foreign direct investments, and reduction of risk premia in
domestic financial markets. Yet, beyond these effects, the exchange rate was subject to certain
shocks in the first half of 2018. These shocks led to a temporary imbalance of the demand and
supply for foreign currency and contributed to creating expectations for further appreciation of the
exchange rate, and were accompanied also by a change in the behaviour of certain operators in
the  economy.  They  initiated  a  fast  appreciation  spiral  in  the  second  quarter  and  were
accompanied by a disorder of the functioning of the domestic foreign exchange market.
Under these circumstances, the Supervisory Council judged that the rapid appreciation of the
exchange rate jeopardised the achievement of our inflation target in the medium-term horizon.
Consequently, in full compliance with the price stability objective and without affecting the free
exchange rate regime, in June the Council decided:
To  lower  the  policy  rate  from  1.25%  to  1.00%.  In  parallel,  overnight  loan  and  overnight
deposit rates were also reduced; and,
To  initiate  a  foreign  currency  purchasing  programme,  aimed  at  decelerating  the  pace  of
exchange  rate  appreciation  and  creating  the  premises  for  a  normal  trading  activity  in  the
domestic foreign currency market.
Lowering  the  policy  rate  was  aimed  at  further  reducing  the  costs  of  financing  and  mitigating
appreciation pressures on the exchange rate. The intervention in the domestic foreign exchange
market, as a temporary and extraordinary instrument of the monetary policy, was considered as
necessary under the conditions when the space for further lowering the policy rate was limited.
Interventions in the foreign exchange market were concentrated in the summer months. Further
on, Bank of Albania market interventions have been practically inexistent and the exchange rate
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
reflected  the  supply  and  demand  situation  in  the  market.  Insofar  results  show  that  Bank  of
Albania interventions have accomplished the objectives. The appreciation pace of the exchange
rate  has  diminished  and  the  activity  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  returned  to  normal
parameters.
In  line  with  these  developments,  the  Bank  of  Albania  kept  the  direction  and  intensity  of  the
monetary  stimulus  unchanged  over  the  second  half  of  the  year.  The  policy  rate  remained
unchanged  at  1.0%  while  the  financial  market  was  supplied  with  the  necessary  liquidity  and
informed through the forward guidance on the future path of the monetary policy stance.
The accommodative monetary policy implemented by the Bank of Albania has proven successful
for boosting economic growth, inducing better utilisation of production capacities and building up
inflationary pressures in the  economy.  The  transmission  of  the  monetary  stimulus  is  noted  in
several aspects:
First, the monetary stimulus has led to the reduction of financing costs for households and
enterprises.  Interest  rates  are  close  to  historical  lows,  across  all  the  range  of  financial
instruments.
Second, the accommodative monetary policy has led to the expansion of credit in lek, and to
the  reduction  of  existing  debt  service  costs.  Lek  credit  to  the  private  sector  increased  at
6.7%, on average, in 2018. In parallel, the reduction by 5.6 percentage points of the interest
rate  on  lek  credit  compared  to  2011  –  when  the  monetary  policy  easing  started  –  helps
Albanian firms and households to save around ALL 15 billion per year.
Third,  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  supported  Albania’s  financial  stability.
Growth  of  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  reduction  of  debt  costs  led  to  the
improvement  of  the  solvency  of  firms  and  households,  and  has  encouraged  loan
restructuring. Also, the orientation of lending toward lek credit has reduced the exposure of
the economy and of the financial system against exchange rate volatilities.
Monetary  policy-related  measures  undertaken  by  the  Bank  of Albania  have  contributed  to  the
expansion of aggregate demand and boosting economic growth. Our assessments suggest that
the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  has  contributed  positively,  on  average  by  0.5
percentage point, to economic growth in the last two years. Also the accommodative monetary
policy  stance  has  contributed  to  the  stability  of  the  domestic  currency.  Both  transmission
channels have contributed and will continue to contribute to price stability in Albania. The current
trends in the development of the economy and our projections suggest that inflation will converge
toward the target within a two-year horizon.
Banking supervision and financial stability
The main aspects of our work for safeguarding financial stability were strengthening the stability
of the banking system, enhancing its resilience to shocks, adopting international standards on
supervision and regulation, and administration of consolidation processes in the banking sector.
The Bank of Albania judges that the ability of the banking sector to withstand risks is high.
The  activity  of  the  banking  sector  in  2018  was  stable  with  good  performance  and  resilience
indicators.  The  financial  result  was  positive:  Return  on Assets  (RoA)  stood  at  1.3%  and  the
Return  on  Equity  (RoE)  reached  13%.  Capitalisation  and  liquidity  levels  were  above  the
respective regulatory requirements. Credit risk continues to represent the main risk to the activity
of the banking sector, but the credit quality has improved from the previous year. At the end of
2018,  the  non-performing  loans  ratio  was  11.1%  from  13.2%  a  year  earlier,  whereas  the
outstanding non-performing loans reduced by 20%.
The  Bank  of Albania  remains  committed  to  fulfilling  all  its  obligations  in  the  framework  of  the
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
national plan for the reduction of non-performing loans. In view of this goal, it has: (i) prepared a
draft-regulation on the out-of-court addressing of borrowers; (ii) expanded the requirements for
using official financial statements in the assessment of credit risk for all categories of borrowers;
(iii) initiated measures for improving the Credit Registry, and has started work for harmonising
credit reporting in accordance with international standards.
With respect to safeguarding financial stability, the Bank of Albania has continued to work for
establishing  and  developing  macro-prudential  policy  instruments  and  for  establishing  early
warning  systems  for  systemic  risks.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  point  out  to  two  key
developments.
First  one  is  about  measures  in  the  framework  of  increasing  the  use  of  the  domestic
currency  as  an  instrument  for  increasing  the  effectiveness  of  economic  policies  and
decreasing  financial  risks.  In  2018,  the  Bank  of  Albania  approved  some  regulatory
amendments  in  this  aspect:  (i)  decreasing  the  required  reserve  for  deposits  in  lek  and
increasing  the  required  reserve  for  foreign  currency  deposits,  (ii)  raising  the  required
minimum level for the ratio of liquid assets to short-term liabilities in foreign currency, and (iii)
setting  out  requirements  to  enhance  transparency  related  to  risks  to  the  borrower  in  the
case of foreign currency loans.
Second one is about preparing the regulatory basis for setting up macro-prudential capital
buffers,  in  accordance  with  best  international  standards  and  practices.  Capital  buffers
mitigate  cyclical  and  systemic  risks  in  the  banking  activity,  designed  with  a  view  to
preventing a fast credit growth and build-up of indebtedness; restricting direct and indirect
exposure concentration; and, restricting excessive risk in financial institutions.
With  regard  to  improving  the  supervisory  processes,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  worked  for
appraising  internal  risk  assessment  procedures,  reviewing  individual  recovery  and  capital
adequacy plans of banks; adapting the regulatory framework with the legal and regulatory acts of
the European Union and Basel documents.
Financial system monitoring has been supported by on-site inspections. In 2018, full-scope and
partial examinations were carried out in 7 banks, 10 non-bank financial institutions, and 31 foreign
exchange bureaus. Particular attention has been paid to the examination of banks with a major
share in the activity of the financial market, those subject to acquisition or merger processes, or
banks experiencing rapid growth. Overall, the monitored institutions have responded duly to the
recommendations, by undertaking the relevant measures.
Increased attention has been paid to the supervision for the implementation of measures for the
prevention of money laundering, in cooperation with the Directorate General on the Prevention of
Money  Laundering  (DG  PML).  Cooperation  with  the  DG  PML  was  more  intensive  in  the
framework of the evaluation process for Albania by the Committee of Experts on the Evaluation
of Anti-Money Laundering Measures and the Financing of Terrorism (MONEYVAL). The Bank of
Albania participated actively in fulfilling the comments related to the technical and effectiveness
questionnaires. In the final MONEYVAL report, the effectiveness level of financial institutions was
rated as “substantial/considerable”. In particular, banks show better awareness of the AML/CFT
risks  and  of  legal  obligations,  and  have  generally  taken  due  measures  in  a  way  that  is
commensurate  to  the  assessed  level  of  AML/CFT  risk.  The  evaluation  process  was
accompanied by a plan of measures for addressing the main problems identified in the report;
their realisation will continue in 2019 as well.
In the framework of consolidation in the banking sector, in 2018 some changes took place in the
ownership structure of the banking system. As a result of these changes, 14 banks operated in
the Albanian  banking  system  as  at  the  end  of  the  year.  Intesa  SanPaolo  Bank  acquired  and
merged  with  Veneto  Bank,  and  the American  Bank  of  Investments  acquired  and  merged  with
NBG Bank Albania. I would like to underline that these changes were dictated by developments in
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the banks’ home country or their international strategies rather than by domestic issues in the
Albanian  market.  Moreover,  at  the  beginning  of  2019,  changes  in  ownership  were  rendered
possible in the case of International Commercial Bank and Societe Generale Albania. Changes in
ownership took place also in two other banks, with one of them reflected in a higher share for
domestic capital in the market. The Bank of Albania deems that the consolidation of the banking
system is a welcomed development, which will revitalise the banking activity, will enhance the
efficiency of the banking industry and will bolster development and innovative policies with regard
to credit and payments.
In the capacity of the Resolution Authority, in 2018, the regulatory and procedural framework for
resolution planning was prepared for harmonisation with international standards. In addition, the
initial phase for the preparation of individual resolution plans has started.  Also, during 2018 was
established  the  Resolution  Fund  and  the  procedures  for  monitoring  its  management  by
deepening the cooperation agreements with the Deposit Insurance Agency.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate that safeguarding financial stability is a responsibility not only of the
Bank of Albania but also of other regulatory agencies and the Government of Albania. Policies
and measures for safeguarding financial stability and strengthening banking system’s resilience
require all parties to continue the coordinated, inter-institutional and multi-dimensional efforts.
Functioning of safe and efficient payment systems
The Bank of Albania has dedicated particular attention to guaranteeing the security and efficiency
of the core infrastructure of payments in lek, through its role as both operator as well as overseer
and  catalyst  of  the  payment  systems.  Both  systems  operated  by  the  Bank  of  Albania,  the
Albanian  Interbank  Payment  AIPS)  and  Albanian  Electronic  Clearing  House  (AECH)  have
operated with no disruptions, efficiently and safely. In 2018, the Bank of Albania undertook a set
of measures to further improve the legal and regulatory framework on the oversight of payment
systems and payment instruments. The changes are aimed at adopting the European practices
for promoting innovation in the field of payments and establishing premises for private initiatives.
One of the main achievements on the improvement of the legal framework is the finalisation of
the draft-law “On Payment Services” (PSD 2) which transposes the relevant EU Directive. Its
approval  and  implementation  will  promote  competition  and  innovation  in  retail  payments,  will
enhance transparency of these services and will provide a framework on consumer’s protection.
The National Payment System Committee (NPSC), which is chaired by the Bank of Albania and
brings together public and private stakeholders in the field of payments, approved the Albanian
National Retail Payments Strategy (2018–2023). The purpose of the strategy is to improve the
retail payments market, promoting the use of electronic payment instruments and broadening the
financial inclusion of the population. The strategy will be implemented through the improvement
of the legal and the regulatory frameworks, through improvements in infrastructure and financial
education.
Other activities
In  the  field  of  statistics,  the  Bank  of  Albania  continued  its  work  for  the  methodological
approximation  of  statistics  with  international  standards  and  their  alignment  with  the  acquis
communautaire. In cooperation with INSTAT and with expertise from the European Union, the
Bank of Albania coordinated the work to develop indicators of macroeconomic imbalances for
Albania. During 2018, the EUROSTAT carried out an evaluation mission of the Statistical System
in Albania, which assessed that the statistics of the Bank of Albania are in line with the principles
of the European statistics Code of Practice.
As at the end of 2018, the international reserve reached EUR 3.4 billion, sufficient to cover 6.7
months of imports of goods and services and 156% of the short-term external debt. In order to
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
increase the flexibility of managing the needs for foreign currency liquidity, an agreement was
finalised  with  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  for  a  foreign  currency  credit  line.  The
agreement constitutes an important mechanism available to the Bank of Albania in the event of
an emergency situation.
Research continued to support the decision-making process for formulating and implementing
Bank of Albania’s policies. During 2018, the focus of scientific research was on issues related to
monetary  policy,  safeguarding  financial  stability,  and  coordinating  these  two  objectives.  The
results of the research are shared with national and international experts in scientific panels and
are published in discussion papers.
An important part of Bank of Albania’s development strategy is the establishment of transparent
and long-standing relations with the public. The Bank of Albania has fostered its communication
with the public to provide its opinion on economic and financial developments, as well as on the
Bank’s role in keeping macro-financial balances. Also, it complied with the obligations under the
law “On the right to information” duly informing the public, as requested.
During  the  year  several  national  and  international  conferences  and  forums  were  organized,
discussing topics that are at the centre of the current debates and of interest for the country’s
development. Notably, the annual conference organized in cooperation with the London School of
Economics and Political Science this year was dedicated to new approaches in the framework of
monetary policy and the challenges to economic integration. This conference brought together
distinguished personalities of central banking from advanced economies and regional countries,
central  bank  governors,  academics  and  representatives  of  international  regulatory  authorities.
Conferences and discussion forums served to foster cooperation with our key partners such as
the Albanian  financial  system,  central  banks  of  European  countries  and  international  financial
institutions.  Fostering  co-operation  was  rendered  more  concrete  with  several  agreements
concluded,  notably  with  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Single  Resolution  Board.  These
agreements pave the way for the Bank of Albania’s full participation in the supervisory colleges of
relevant  European  banks  present  in  the  country  and  for  exchanging  information  on  resolution
planning for cross-border banking groups.
Financial education is an important tool for enhancing the effectiveness of the transmission of
Bank’s decisions to the economy. In addition to educational publications, various activities were
organized  throughout  the  year,  mainly  targeting  the  younger  generation.  Also,  the  Museum
situated  within  the  Bank  of Albania  has  facilitated  the  logistics  arrangements  for  undertaking
educational campaigns.
Last but not least, the Bank of Albania remains a serious partner in the national commitments for
joining  the  European  Union.  The  Bank  of Albania’s  obligations  under  the  European  integration
process  are  included  in  the  medium-term  development  objectives  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  It
coordinates  Chapter  4  “Free  movement  of  capital”  and  Chapter  17  “Economic  and  monetary
policy”, and it contributes to 6 other chapters of the acquis. The Bank of Albania has fulfilled the
obligations  deriving  from  the  Stabilization  and  Association  Agreement,  the  National  Plan  for
European  Integration  and  the  recommendations  of  the  European  Commission.  Specifically,  it
continued to implement measures to (i) reduce the level of non-performing loans, (ii) reduce the
level of euroization in the financial system; (iii) harmonise the regulatory supervisory framework
with the requirements of Basel III and Basel IV; (iv) approximate directives on payment services;
and (v) increase the transparency of monetary policy.
As  part  of  this  report,  I  would  like  to  highlight  an  important  aspect  for  guaranteeing  good
governance at the institution: the internal audit systems. The internal audit is independent from
the management, guaranteed through the Inspector General, appointed by the Parliament.
  7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fostering internal control and monitoring systems and procedures
In  2018,  the  operational  risk  management  function  –  a  new  function  at  the  Bank  of Albania  –
consolidated and matured. It is based on the international risk management standards as well as
on  the  best  practices  of  central  banks.  In  the  last  assessment,  the  level  of  Operational  Risk
Management  has  shifted  from  ‘ad-hoc’  to  ‘managed’,  thus  overcoming  the  ‘basic’  level.  This
assessment exceeds the Bank of Albania’s objective.
This year, the project for “Drafting and Implementing the Bank of Albania’s Business Continuity
Management  Program”  continued  and  is  currently  in  the  final  phase  of  its  completion.  The
purpose  of  this  project  is  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  critical  processes  and  to  restore  normal
business as soon as possible in the event of a crisis or emergency situation.
Audit engagements in 2018 focused on: (i) giving an opinion on the adequacy of internal audits
set by the Management for the audited functions / processes, including supporting applications
for  the  activities;  and  (ii)  other  not  planned  audit  and  non-audit  engagements  upon  special
request by Administrators or other external institutions.
Honourable Chairman,
Honourable Members of the Committee,
 At the end of my presentation, I would like to assure you that the Bank of Albania will continue to
be committed to complying with our legal objectives, and to implement our institutional duties and
commitments.
The  perspectives  on  country’s  development  remain  positive,  yet  challenges  lie  ahead.
Addressing them requires the attention and the commitment of all policy makers and regulatory
agencies in the country.
The  economy,  the  financial  system  and  the  Albanian  public,  as  well  as  our  domestic  and
international  partners  will  continue  to  find  in  the  Bank  of Albania  a  reliable,  professional  and
transparent partner.
Thank you for your attention!
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
