Haruhiko Kuroda: Our future in the digital age
Closing remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the G20 High-level
Seminar on Financial Innovation, Fukuoka, 8 June 2019.
 I am delighted to be given this opportunity to speak to you at the end of this important seminar.
Today, we discussed two topics on the theme of “Our Future in the Digital Age.” The first session
explored potential benefits and risks arising from financial and technological innovation. As a key
to achieving a better society, speakers highlighted the importance of leveraging emerging digital
technology in financial services. At the same time, they also pointed out the build-up of risks in
the financial and economic system. The second session examined blockchain technology. The
panel laid out key factors to facilitate a sound expansion of decentralized financial ecosystems.
Ongoing financial innovation is anticipated to further impact the financial and economic system.
Although it is difficult to predict the outcomes, we can learn from the progress and issues arising
from financial innovation in the past decades. For example, credit and market risk management
tools along with risk transfer technology enhanced financial intermediation. On the other hand,
however, the global financial crisis was partly attributable to such progress in technology, which
is  still  fresh  in  our  minds.  How  then  can  we  mitigate  risks  while  benefiting  from  innovative
technology?
A good clue to that would be to interpret financial and economic activities as interactions within a
system as well as among multiple systems. Examples include portfolio insurance strategies on
Black  Monday,  which  led  to  an  unexpectedly  sharp  drop  in  equity  prices  through  interactions
among  market  participants.  The  recent  financial  crisis  displayed  a  feedback  loop  between
deteriorated  liquidity  in  securitization  markets  and  severe  funding  conditions  in  the  banking
sector. Historically, the financial system has carried risk-amplifying mechanisms in an insidious
manner that would pose serious threats to the system as a whole. People realized their mistakes
only  after  unexpected  disasters  took  place.  The  modern  financial  system  has  repeated  such
experiences.
Innovative  financial  services  and  new  entrants  have  begun  to  transform  the  structure  of  the
financial system. We should reap the benefits of innovation while carefully assessing risks that
build up unintentionally.
Recent innovation also provides us with policy tools to address these issues. Incorporating big
data into analytics reveals how individual market transactions and payment flows make up the
entire  financial  network.  Evolution  in  computing  capacity  and  computational  technology  has
brought  changes  to  existing  analytical  approaches,  which  requires  the  simplification  of  the
financial and economic system for applying theoretical models. Emerging technology allows us
to observe details and model the system as it really is, helping assess interactions among firms,
individuals, and market participants. Technology that deals with unstructured data, including text,
images, and audio, has evolved quite rapidly. It could also be applied to broader areas, such as
the analysis of market sentiments and expectation formation.
Paradoxically, the more technology evolves, the more human aspects draw attention. These are
closely  linked  to  the  actions  of  individuals  and  institutions.  A  deeper  understanding  of  micro
behaviors would help us better predict macro-economic and financial outcomes.
I hope this G20 high-level seminar has provided you valuable insights to shape the future of the
digital age.
Thank you for your attention.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
