Yves  Mersch:  The  possible  triangle  -  frictionless  movement  of
payments, securities and collateral across Europe
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  2019 Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  International  Capital  Markets Association's  European
Repo and Collateral Council, Luxembourg, 31 January 2019.
Introduction
 This year, we celebrate the 20th anniversary of the euro, the single currency of 19 EU countries
and over 340 million Europeans.
But the euro is not only important for European citizens and businesses; it also has a global role.
In fact, it is the second most used currency in the world. More than 50 countries or territories in
the world use or link their currency to the euro. More than 20% of the international reserves held
by central banks outside the euro area are in euro  – a percentage that exceeds the euro area’s
share in global production. Furthermore, the euro has become a widely accepted currency for
international payments. In 2017 about 36% of international transactions – in value terms – were
invoiced or settled in euro.
1
The status of global currency is a double-edged sword. Having more weight as an international
currency comes with pros and cons. The list of traditional benefits includes higher seigniorage
and lower transaction and hedging costs. And – following the experience of recent decades – we
can now add the better protection of domestic inflation and reduced dependence on monetary
policy decisions of other major central banks.
But  the  euro’s  role  as  an  international  currency  also  comes  with  increased  responsibilities.
International currencies must be backed by large, stable and efficiently functioning economies
and financial systems that are attractive to international users and investors. And last but not
least, the effect of monetary policy on import prices is reduced.
The ECB has always held that the international role of the euro develops as a result of market
forces.  Accordingly,  the  internationalisation  of  the  euro  as  such  has  never  been  a  policy
objective.
In  December  2018,  however,  the  European  Commission  presented  a  set  of  action  points  to
strengthen the euro’s global role. To this end, the euro should become even more compelling as
a means of payment and a trustworthy investment currency.
These action points include the completion of Economic and Monetary Union, banking union and
capital markets union. Moreover, and without prejudice to the ECB’s independence, we take note
of  the  Commission’s  support  for  our  initiatives  on  market  infrastructure  and  payments,  which
help to increase efficiency and financial market integration in the euro area.
Although it is not in our mandate to establish or promote the euro as a global currency, the ECB’s
responsibility  for  promoting  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  systems  indirectly  supports  the
international standing of the euro.
Since  the  launch  of  the  euro,  the  Eurosystem  has  indeed  contributed  to  reshaping  and
consolidating the infrastructure for large-value payments, for post-trading services for financial
instruments and, most recently, for instant retail payments. The goal is to create a truly single
financial market in Europe. In such a single market, payments, securities and collateral could be
moved safely and efficiently between market participants in different countries without friction or
restrictions.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today I will briefly look back at what has been achieved so far and discuss how the Eurosystem
will move forward over the next two or three years by taking measures to consolidate TARGET2
and  TARGET2-Securities  (T2S),  in  particular  by  delivering  a  centralised  liquidity  management
function.  Furthermore,  to  increase  efficiency  in  the  mobilisation  and  management  of  collateral
and further level the playing field for Eurosystem counterparties, the Eurosystem is developing a
single  collateral  management  system  that  will  be  capable  of  managing  the  assets  used  as
collateral  in  Eurosystem  credit  operations  for  all  euro  area  countries.  In  a  complementary
initiative,  the  Eurosystem  has  launched  comprehensive  work  on  collateral  management
harmonisation.
TARGET consolidation: strengthening the backbone of the European financial market
TARGET2  and  its  predecessor  are  the  longest-standing  components  of  the  Eurosystem’s
financial market infrastructure. Today, TARGET2 is one of the biggest payment systems in the
world, processing 90 % of the total value settled by large-value payment systems in euro.
T2S,  the  integrated  IT  platform  which  processes  the  real-time  settlement  of  securities
transactions against central bank money across Europe, was launched in 2015. Full migration
took place in waves over the following two years to ensure a smooth transition. T2S facilitates
the establishment of a single pool of collateral for banks and intermediaries to settle their entire
European  business  in  central  bank  money,  thereby  optimising  settlement  and  triparty
procedures.
With the introduction of T2S, the average cost per transaction at market infrastructure level has
decreased  significantly  –  in  particular  for  transactions  between  central  securities  depositories
(CSDs).  Our  cost  estimates  indicated  that,  before  T2S  was  launched,  the  average  fee  per
domestic CSD settlement in the euro area was 73 cent, while cross-border transactions were up
to  ten  times  more  expensive.  T2S  has  brought  the  transaction  fee  per  instruction  down  to  a
much  lower  level.  Initially,  the  delivery-versus-payment  price  for  T2S  was  set  at  15  cent  per
instruction. However, the effects of the financial crisis and delays in the migration of certain T2S
markets reduced T2S volume and income in the first few years of its operation. As a result, the
T2S pricing structure was adjusted, and fees per instruction were increased from 15 cent to 19.5
cent, plus a temporary surcharge of 4 cent. This is still substantially lower than the average fees
of 73 cent observed before the launch of T2S.
T2S  has  also  been  a  catalyst  for  harmonising  the  post-trade  market  in  the  EU  and  beyond.
Faced initially with a wide variety of different practices across European markets, the sound T2S
governance  structure  fostered  collaboration  between  stakeholders,  who  soon  recognised  the
added value of harmonisation for their business models. The integration of ancillary processes
and  legal  frameworks  to  a  large  extent  dismantled  several  of  the  barriers  that  had  hitherto
hindered efficient cross-border clearing and settlement arrangements in the EU. These barriers
were identified as early as 2001.
Last  but  not  least,  in  November  2018  the  Eurosystem  delivered  TARGET  Instant  Payment
Settlement  (TIPS),  a  truly  domestic  market  infrastructure  for  pan-European  instant  payments
with  settlement  in  central  bank  money.  TIPS  enables  payment  service  providers  to  offer  fund
transfers to their customers in less than ten seconds around the clock, every day of the year.
The upcoming technical and functional convergence of TARGET2 and T2S will further optimise
liquidity management and generate new cost efficiencies. In particular, the consolidation project,
which  will  run  until  2021,  will  introduce  a  central  liquidity  management  system  that  will  allow
participants to monitor and manage their liquidity for all TARGET services. More specifically, it
will  provide  a  central  liquidity  overview  on  a  single  screen  with  easy  access  to  more  detailed
information. It will enable centralised management and control over the payment capacity with a
clear  allocation  of  liquidity  for  the  different  settlement  purposes.  Real-time  gross  settlement
participation will be segregated from interaction with central banks for monetary policy purposes.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The minimum reserve calculation and automatic marginal lending facility will take into account
balances  in  other  Eurosystem  market  infrastructures,  such  as  TIPS.  In  summary,  the
introduction of central liquidity management within the new TARGET services makes the use of
central bank money even more efficient for market participants.
Thanks  to  the  joint  public-private  efforts,  major  steps  have  been  taken  to  overcome  the
fragmentation in the European securities trade and post-trade market over the last decade. At the
front end of the process chain, however, there is still much to be achieved. For instance, the
issuance  and  distribution  of  securities  still  hinges  on  fragmented  legacy  standards,  structural
constraints  and  complex  market  practices  at  the  national  level.  Furthermore,  facilitating
interactions  and  procedures  between  some  participants  still  entails  high  costs  and  risks.
European issuers and in particular EU institutions needs to collect funds from investors across
the continent deserve fair consideration. Reflection on pan-European issuance and distribution
channel in the most efficient manner would be in line with the endeavour to deepen the single
capital market in the EU. This could have a positive impact on the establishment of a domestic
yield curve for the euro money market. Should market participants propose solutions in this area,
the ECB will certainly take them into consideration in our own investigation.
Collateral management harmonisation
The second element of the process of pushing for a truly single financial market is the further
harmonisation  of  collateral  management.  Following  the  successful  harmonisation  of  market
practices in the context of T2S (which I alluded to earlier), the Eurosystem, together with key
European  financial  market  stakeholders,  is  working  towards  extending  such  harmonisation
benefits  to  the  field  of  collateral  management.  The  core  innovation  in  this  work  is  that  all
interaction  will  be  based  on  ISO  20022  standards.  A  single  model  for  triparty  collateral
management based on these standards will allow market participants to benefit from enhanced
features. This will also facilitate improved reporting capabilities to support the needs of treasurers
and to meet regulatory requirements. Furthermore, the harmonised handling of corporate actions
will ensure that securities can remain part of the collateral pool in the event of a corporate action,
thus obviating the need for their substitution. Further collateral management harmonisation work
will cover, for example, bilateral collateral management and margin calls.
To facilitate implementation, we are working together with the market on a single rulebook for
collateral  management  in  Europe  which  we  plan  to  publish  later  this  year,  together  with  a
roadmap for harmonised post-trade services in Europe. The ECB is counting on the continued
support of market participants in this work. Early engagement is needed, and it is critical that
preparations for the implementation of these – as yet to be developed – standards start now.
The Eurosystem has taken advantage of the progress made so far in collateral harmonisation
when  designing  the  Eurosystem  collateral  management  system  (ECMS),  which  is  currently
being  built.  The  system  is  due  to  go  live  in  2022.  It  will  –  if  agreed  –  replace  the  individual
collateral  management  systems  currently  in  use  by  Eurosystem  national  central  banks.
Counterparties,  central  securities  depositories  and  triparty  agents  in  different  countries,  which
today interact with national central banks through those national collateral management systems,
will  in  future  be  able  to  use  the  same  harmonised  system.  This  will  simplify  processes  that
involve multiple jurisdictions, notably the mobilisation of cross-border collateral. The ECMS has
considerable potential to trigger a wider harmonisation of collateral management practices.
Given  that  the  demand  for  collateral  and  the  interest  in  collateralised  transactions  has  grown
substantially in recent years, for example owing to the increased need for collateral as a margin
for centrally cleared and bilateral derivative transactions, collateral mobility has become an even
more valuable attribute. This is why we are taking action.
Potential issues in the repo market
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me make a few remarks on potential issues in the repo market.
The secured segment is the largest segment of the euro money market, representing two-thirds
of the total money market turnover, and is an important contributor to the overall resilience and
efficiency of financial markets. Several factors explain the resilience of the secured segment to
the crisis:
1.  the  demand  for  high-quality  and  liquid  securities  for  regulatory  purposes  and  for  covering
margin calls at CCPs;
2.  the protection against counterparty risk through collateral;
3.  the  impact  of  the  asset  purchase  programme,  which  reduced  the  supply  of  collateral
effectively  available  to  the  market  and  boosted  the  supply  of  excess  liquidity,  offering
business opportunities for those with access to the Eurosystem deposit facility.
Turnover in the secured segment has increased significantly since the third quarter of 2016. In an
environment  of  excess  liquidity,  and  with  a  purchase  programme  acquiring  large  quantities  of
euro-denominated  securities,  the  activity  is  mainly  driven  by  the  demand  for  securities  rather
than by funding needs. This demand for securities is fuelled by regulatory requirements, by the
need for collateral to cover margin calls in order to trade over-the-counter interest rate derivatives
via CCPs, and by the supporting role of security financing transactions for fixed income desks.
The evolution of prices in the last two years also highlights how the repo market has become
largely a platform for collateral exchange.
Rates move from above to below the deposit facility. For many securities, demand has become
so  strong  that  counterparties  searching  for  that  security  agree  on  a  repo  rate  that  is  less
2
favourable than the central bank’s deposit rate.
Let me briefly touch upon our asset purchases. Certain factors, most notably new regulations,
have led to increased bond scarcity and consequently to an increased share of bonds that trade
“special”, especially ahead of reporting dates. In order to support the smooth implementation of
the public sector purchase programme as well as the liquidity and functioning of the euro area
repo market, in December 2016 we introduced the option of borrowing securities against cash
collateral.  This  technical  amendment,  along  with  some  others,  made  our  facilities  more
accessible  and  was  one  of  the  contributing  factors  to  the  subsequent  improved  repo  market
conditions.  In  2017,  and  even  more  so  in  2018,  we  generally  observed  lower  repo  market
tensions ahead of quarter-ends and futures delivery dates. The ERCC’s recent report concluded
that the 2018 year-end in the repo market was relatively uneventful, and we at the ECB share this
assessment.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
In just 20 years, the euro has become the second most used currency in the world. Its global
success relies on a large, stable and efficient economy, as well as a financial system that is
attractive to international users and investors. In its provision of safe and efficient financial market
infrastructure services, the Eurosystem plays an integral role in strengthening the international
role  of  the  euro.  Our  current  activities  –  the  consolidation  of  TARGET2  and  T2S  and  the
mobilisation  and  management  of  collateral  through  the  development  of  the  ECMS  –  are  the
cornerstones of the Eurosystem’s ambitious agenda up to 2022.
All these enhancements will help improve the functioning of the repo market, responding to some
of  your  concerns  on  the  post-crisis  context,  with  the  effect  of  allowing  greater  and  more  fluid
movement of payments, securities and collateral across Europe.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  therefore  strongly  encourage  the  post-trade  industry  to  embrace  the  collateral  management
harmonisation  agenda  and  to  start  preparing  already  for  its  implementation.  Efforts  will  be
required from all of us, but the ultimate goal of efficient harmonised collateral management will
greatly  benefit  Europe  at  large  and  support  a  truly  single  financial  market  in  Europe  that  will
underpin European autonomy in the globalised world.
1
2
See ECB (2018): The international role of the euro – Interim report; June 2018.
For instance, the price of German sovereign collateral is fuelled by the strong demand for high quality and liquid
assets and the impact of the asset purchase programme on collateral supply. Moreover, around the year-end,
repo rates on the securities with higher ratings decline further to levels significantly below the deposit facility.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
