Ed Sibley: Towards a more resilient insurance industry
Opening remarks by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central Bank
of Ireland, at the Central Bank Insurance Conference “Thriving in Challenging Times”, Dublin, 15
February 2019.
Introduction
 Good  morning  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  here  on  behalf  of  the
Central Bank of Ireland to this insurance conference with the theme of “Thriving in Challenging
1
Times”.
Today’s  conference  brings  together  domestic  and  international  thought  leaders  and  policy
makers with a rich understanding and experience of the insurance industry. I would like to thank
them for their participation and all of you for attending. I would also like to thank the Central Bank
staff who have organised today’s event.
The  aim  of  today’s  conference  is  to  provide  a  forum  for  discussing  some  of  the  strategic
challenges the insurance industry faces. These short and longer term challenges are as diverse
as the insurance sector itself, but equally so are the opportunities. This must be the case, given
the raison d’étre for insurance in mitigating the risks of uncertainty.
In my brief opening remarks this morning, I will touch on some of these challenges. I will focus
my remarks on resilience, one of the key Central Bank priorities outlined in our strategy for 2019
to 2021 , and how it pertains to insurance.
The Central Bank strategy 2019–2021
2
The Central Bank serves the public interest by safeguarding monetary and financial stability and
by working to ensure that the financial system operates in the best interests of consumers and
the wider economy. A core element of our approach is to ensure that the financial system is
sufficiently resilient to withstand future shocks and that the impact of these shocks is mitigated.
This  public  service  mandate,  together  with  the  specific  responsibilities  laid  out  in  legislation,
underpins  all  that  we  do,  and  connects  our  five  strategic  priorities  for  the  next  three  years.
Specifically:
Resilience
Brexit
Strengthening consumer protection
Engaging and influencing
Enhancing organisation capability
Resilience
We recognise that the only way that the financial system can serve the needs of the economy
and  its  consumers  is  for  its  participants  to  take  risk.  In  other  words,  risk-taking  benefits  the
economy and consumers. But poorly understood or insufficiently controlled risk-taking is clearly
undesirable,  given  the  associated  negative  consequences  of  uncontrolled  failure.  No  one  in
Ireland should need reminding of the costs of systemic failure.
So  the  work  of  regulation  and  supervision  is  complex.  While  it  must  be  evidence-based  and
outcomes  focused,  it  does  require  finely-balanced  judgement  to  operate  in  the  grey  areas
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
between the two ends of this spectrum of risk.
Insurers  must  operate  in  line  with  the  domestic  and  international  regulatory  regime.  Our  risk-
based  supervision  of  insurance  firms  is  delivered  in  line  with  this  regime,  anchored  by  our
PRISM   methodology. It strives to deliver effectively in ensuring that the system as a whole is,
and individual firms operating within it are, appropriately resilient. It seeks to ensure that regulated
firms:
3
have  sufficient  financial  resources  (capital  and  liquidity),  including  under  a  plausible  but
severe stress;
have sustainable business models to allow them to prosper through the economic cycle;
are well run, appropriately governed, have effective risk management and control functions
and appropriate cultures; and
can recover if they get into difficulty, and we can resolve them without significant externalities
or taxpayer support if they cannot.
A more resilient system is better able to withstand shocks and continue to support the economy
and its customers in good times and bad. It becomes less of a transmission mechanism for
shocks  and,  potentially,  plays  more  of  a  smoothing  role  in  reducing  volatility.  In  recent  years,
volatility  in  the  cost  of  insurance  in  Ireland  has  undoubtedly  caused  challenges  for  insurance
customers.
I expect the boards and management of regulated firms to ensure that their firms are sufficiently
resilient.  I  also  recognise  and  support  system  wide  efforts  to  address  some  of  the  factors
causing volatility and higher insurance costs than in other comparable countries. These efforts
include the work of the Cost of Insurance Working Group. An associated recommendation of the
Personal Injuries Commission , chaired by Nicholas Kearns, is for the establishment of judicial
guidelines for appropriate general damages for various types of personal injury. Such guidelines
should lead to greater levels of consistency in the assessment of general damages in Ireland,
which  should  help  in  better  enabling  the  domestic  non-life  insurance  sector  to  support  its
customers.
Recovery & Resolution Planning
4
Recovery and resolution planning for insurance firms also requires further work. The regulatory
regime  for  insurance  is  not  sufficiently  robust  or  consistent  across  Europe.  This  issue  is
accentuated  by  the  inconsistency  in  insurance  compensation  schemes  across  Europe  –  an
issue  for  both  home  and  host  supervisors. As  well  as  pushing  for  further  developments  at  a
European level, the Central Bank is driving firms to improve how they execute recovery planning
as well as advancing our own approach to resolving insurance firms.
Culture
Culture is also important for a firm’s resilience. As you all know, the culture of a firm is pervasive,
and  relevant  to  all  aspects  of  how  the  firm  is  run,  how  decisions  are  made,  how  risks  are
considered, how customers are treated, and so on. It is therefore of interest to both prudential
and  conduct  supervisors.  And,  as  is  well  documented,  a  cause  of  legitimate  concern  both
domestically and internationally. Diversity can also be seen in the same light.
Rightly, a lot of focus has been on the need for cultural change in banks . However, this need for
change goes beyond the banking system. Certainly, our focus on culture and the lack of diversity
at senior levels in the financial system extends beyond banks. It will include work in the insurance
sector in 2019.
5
It  is  noteworthy  that  a  recent  Central  Bank’s  enforcement  investigation   found  that  certain
6
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
individuals were: 
manipulating  claim  reserve  estimates  by  recording  claim  reserve  estimates  that  were
significantly lower than that recommended by the claim handlers; and/or
significantly delaying the recording of the claim reserve estimate increases recommended
by the claims handlers in relation to certain large loss claims.
In  order  to  manage  the  large  loss  claims  subject  to  the  under-reserving  process,  a  list,  was
maintained. The list detailed, amongst other things, the existing claim reserve estimate recorded
on  the  firm’s  claims  database,  as  well  as  the  claims  handlers’  recommended  claim  reserve
estimate. Frequent, undocumented meetings were held between those individuals involved in the
under-reserving process to discuss the large loss claims.
There were multiple associated governance and control failings in the firm, as well as issues
around  the  presence  and  effectiveness  of  challenge  and  so  on,  all  of  which  speaks  to  the
prevailing  culture  within  the  firm  at  that  time.  I  recognise  the  work  that  the  firm  has  done
subsequently to address those failings. These issues are relevant to all firms, and it is important
that the lessons are learned by all.
If we look internationally, the Hayne report, published in Australia by the Royal Commission into
Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and Financial Services Industry ,  identified  issues
across banking, financial advice, pensions and insurance. The report outlines the damage done
to individuals and to the overall health and reputation of the financial services industry. The report
found  that  apologies  and  promises  to  do  better,  have  not  prevented  recurrence.  The  report
advises  that  because  it  is  the  entities,  their  boards  and  senior  executives  who  bear  primary
responsibility  for  what  has  happened,  close  attention  must  be  given  to  their  culture,  their
governance and their remuneration practices.
7
8
The  recent  G30  report  on  “Banking  Conduct  and  Culture  – A  permanent  mind-set  change”
reminds us that management focus needs to become a permanent, fundamental, and integral
part of how business is invariably done rather than being addressed through a series of ad-hoc
initiatives. 
Brexit
As  I  and  others  have  spoken  about  Brexit   on  multiple  occasions  recently,  and  it  will  be
discussed in later sessions, I will only cover it briefly now.
9
We are only in the foothills of the potential testing of the resilience of the financial system that a
hard Brexit will cause. It has short-term and long-term implications for the structure of the Irish
economy and the Irish financial system. Any form of Brexit will be damaging for Ireland, with a
hard Brexit especially so. Recognising these risks, the Central Bank has been focused on Brexit
risks since before the 2016 UK referendum. In recent months, we have stepped up our work on
mitigating the most material ‘cliff-edge’ risks of a hard Brexit.
From a financial regulation perspective, our work has sought to ensure:
the financial system is resilient enough for a hard Brexit not to cause significant financial
stability risks;
that financial services providers are discharging their responsibilities by taking all necessary
steps to protect their businesses and customers to the risk of a hard Brexit;
that risks to consumers are mitigated to the greatest extent possible; and
we are delivering a proportionate, robust, efficient and effective authorisation process in line
with European regulatory norms, for those firms seeking authorisation in Ireland as a result
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of Brexit.
For  insurance,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  majority  of  firms  covering  the  vast  majority  of  policies
written  are  taking  appropriate  action.  However,  there  are  some  remaining  risks  of  consumer
detriment. The Central Bank has worked with the Department of Finance to support the drafting
of  legislation  to  protect  customers  of  insurance  products  in  event  of  no  deal  Brexit.  The  draft
legislation provides for a temporary run-off regime, which will allow certain UK/ Gibraltar insurers
and  brokers  to  continue  to  service  existing  insurance  contracts  with  Irish  policyholders  in  the
event of a “no deal’’ Brexit.
Even with this mitigation, there will be negative consumer impacts. For example, the supply of
niche insurance products may reduce or end altogether, given the increased costs and frictions
of serving EU customers from the UK.
Finally, Brexit is not the only uncertainty that we face. To touch on three others:
1.     Firstly, the effects of climate change, in the form of more frequent and severe storms,
floods  and  droughts,  have  already  affected  insurers.  Further  increases  in  the  number  and
severity of disruptive climatic events look certain.
Furthermore,  as  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  recently  remarked ,  the  financial  system
(including the insurance industry) has a crucial role to play in the transition to a lower carbon
economy.
10
2.    Secondly, insurance is also at the forefront of the opportunities and challenges that arise
from disruptive technology change both in how services are provided and the services that are
needed.
3.     And thirdly, demographic changes across Europe are profound, with an increasingly aged
population needing to be served for a longer period of time.
To conclude on resilience, as risks evolve, so should the insurance industry. I expect insurance
firms  to  be  anticipating  future  significant  risks  and  opportunities  to  ensure  that  they  remain
resilient over the long term. Through this, I expect that you will not only be rising to the challenges
that  are  in  front  of  us  today,  but  are  also  resilient  enough  and  sufficiently  future-focused  to
successfully support the needs of the economy and your customers long into the future.
Regulatory regime
I have touched on our work and expectations on the necessary enhancements to recovery and
resolution planning for insurance firms. I would also note that we are undertaking work in 2019 on
PRISM, to ensure that it continues to evolve and remains fit for purpose as our approach and the
risks in the financial system change.
It is over three years now since Solvency II came into effect. I am very pleased to welcome Karel
Van  Hulle  here  today  who  was  instrumental  in  the  introduction  of  the  Solvency  II  regime.  The
introduction of Solvency II represented a significant milestone for the insurance industry. We can,
and  must  continue  to  develop  the  Solvency  II  regime,  to  ensure  it  remains  relevant  and
appropriately protects policyholders and beneficiaries.
Solvency  II  will  be  reviewed  in  2020.  This  review  will  provide  the  opportunity  to  examine  the
practical implementation of Solvency II, ensure it remains fit for purpose, adapts to changes in
market  conditions  and  evolving  business  models,  while  continuing  to  meet  its  fundamental
objectives.
Input to the 2020 review of Solvency II will be a key area of focus for the Central Bank this year. I
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
look forward to hearing Karel’s contribution on this critically important topic. For my part, I will be
interested in recovery and resolution and the insurance guarantee schemes. Two areas that are
not included in the scope of the Call for Advice but could be considered by EIOPA in the call for
advice are i) When an insurance firm holds a large reinsurance asset that is not collateralised,
the firm is exposed to significant credit risk which may not be fully reflected in the capital charge
and ii) the ability for national supervisory authorities to apply a capital add on where there are
prudential concerns.
Thank you for your attention this morning. I will now pass you to our first keynote speaker of the
morning, the Chairperson of EIOPA, Gabriel Bernardino. I am delighted to be introducing him at
our  conference.  Gabriel  will  address  “Challenges  and  Opportunities  for  the  Insurance  Sector:
The European Perspective”.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
With  thanks  to  Brian  Balmforth,  Jenny  Minogue,  Attracta  Jennings,  Jade  Crofton,  Chris  Joyce  and  Tim
O’Hanrahan for their assistance in preparing these remarks.
Central Bank of Ireland Strategic Plan 2019 – 2021 (2019).
The Probability Risk and Impact System (PRISM) is the Central Bank’s risk-based framework for the supervision
of  regulated  firms.  It  supports  our  challenging  firms,  judging  the  risks  they  pose  to  the  economy  and  the
consumer and mitigating those risks we judge to be unacceptable.
Personal Injuries Commission: Second and Final Report of the Personal Injuries Commission (July 2018)
Central Bank of Ireland: Behaviour and Culture of the Irish Retail Banks (2018)
Central Bank of Ireland: Enforcement Action (2018)
Royal  Commission  into  Misconduct  in  the  Banking,  Superannuation  and  Financial  Services  Industry: Final
Report (2019)
Group of 30: Banking Conduct and Culture - A Permanent Mindset Change (2015)
Lane, Philip R.: The Brexit Discontinuity (2019); Sibley, Ed: Safety and soundness – Strategic priorities for the
next three years (2019)
Lane, Philip R.: Economic Letter – Climate Change and the Irish Financial System (Vol. 2019 No. 1)
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
