Benjamin E Diokno: Strengthening the BSP’s collaboration with the
academic community
Opening remarks by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Signing of Memorandum of Understanding between the
Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  and  Carnegie  Mellon  University  - Australia,  Manila,  2  September
2019.
 Prof.  Ramayya  Krishnan,  Dean,  Heinz  College  of  the  Carnegie  Mellon  University;  Prof.  Emil
Bolongaita,  Head  of  the  Carnegie  Mellon  University  – Australia;  my  BSP  colleagues  …  good
morning.
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has been known as one that continuously ensures the continued
learning and capacity building of its people. The need to pursue this has become more relevant
given the ever changing landscape of central banking and the growing complexity and increasing
demands of the banking and financial industries as it embraces digital transformation.
Currently, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas is pursuing the Strategy for Technology Adoption in
Regulatory  Supervision  (STARS)  Program,  which  covers  real-time  market  surveillance,  digital
supervision and examination, data analytics, data collection, and distribution.
We  are  also  pursuing  the  National  Retail  Payment  System  (NRPS)  modernization  initiatives,
Financial Technology (FinTech) innovations to promote financial inclusion, Cashless Purchase
Card initiatives, among others. 
The card production for the Philippine Identification System (PhilSys) and use of Government e-
Receipts are BSP’s contribution to the e-Government Master Plan of the National Government. 
Internally,  the  BSP  is  strengthening  and  updating  its  systems  and  processes  through  the
Integrated  HR  Information  System  and  strengthening  its  information  security,  including  data
privacy and cybersecurity.
These initiatives — to be successful — would require the up-skilling or re-tooling of BSP staff
and the re-engineering of the systems and processes of the BSP.  However, we cannot do this
alone, and this brings me to our activity, and why we are all here, today.
The  digital  transformation  initiatives  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  requires  collaborations
with  leading  practitioners  and  experts  and  globally  recognized  centers  of  excellence  like  the
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) – Australia, to ensure its success.
The campuses of the CMU have all been acclaimed to be leaders in their respective fields of
specialization.  In  fact,  the  Times  Higher  Education  has  ranked  CMU  as  24th  among  the
thousands of universities in the world.  CMU has also been ranked by various organizations to be
among the top two universities in the fields of Information and Technology Management, School
of Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence, and Information Systems.
When I was still Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management, I had the opportunity to
work with CMU – Australia when we identified and awarded scholarships to very promising DBM
employees. And in a similar context, I am glad to know that the relationship between the Bangko
Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  and  the  CMU  –  Australia  has  taken  root  over  a  decade  ago,  and  has
produced five master’s degree graduates in the fields of Public Policy and Management and in
Information Technology. 
Today, the BSP and CMU-Australia collaborate on another milestone. Through it, we will not just
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
enhance the knowledge and skills of its employees, but also benefit from the guidance of the
CMU-Australia on how we can improve or develop the needed systems and tools to ensure that
the BSP’s digital transformation journey will be a productive and a successful one.
With this partnership, it is also my hope that through the Memorandum of Understanding, we can
strengthen the collaboration of the BSP and the academic community, both here and abroad. 
Mabuhay ang Carnegie Mellon University – Australia!  Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas!
Salamat po at Magandang umaga sa inyong lahat!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
