Luis de Guindos: The euro area economy and our monetary policy
stance
Remarks by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at Asociación
para el Progreso de la Dirección (APD), Madrid, 18 March 2019.
Recent economic developments
 In recent months, incoming euro area data have continued to be weak and the economy has
grown below expectations.
That is, euro area real GDP increased by 0.2% quarter-on-quarter in the fourth quarter of
2018 (according to preliminary estimates), which was slightly up from 0.1% in the quarter
before, but well below the 0.4% growth observed in the first half of 2018.
The continued weakness, particularly in the manufacturing sector, reflects the slowdown in
external demand, compounded by some country and sector-specific factors.
The  global  economy  is  expanding  at  a  more  modest  pace. According  to  IMF  estimates,
global  growth  has  moderated  to  3.7%  in  2018  (from  3.8%  in  the  previous  year),  and  is
expected  to  slow  to  3.5%  in  2019.  Important  euro  area  trading  partners,  such  as  China,
show  signs  of  a  maturing  economic  cycle,  and  this  has  affected  euro  area  exports.  Net
exports  recovered  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2018  (according  to  preliminary  estimates),  but
weaker  exports  were  the  main  factor  behind  the  steep  growth  slowdown  observed  in  the
third quarter.
In the euro area, the slowdown in growth has been particularly visible in the manufacturing
sector. Euro area industrial production, excluding construction, declined by 1.4% quarter-on-
quarter in the fourth quarter of 2018, with the slowdown being widespread across sectors
and  most  major  economies.  Purchasing  managers’  survey  data  on  manufacturing
production  also  moved  into  contractionary  territory  last  month.  Growth  in  services,  in
contrast, proved to be more resilient.
Country and sector-specific factors have been playing a role as well. Temporary issues in
the automotive sector due to new regulation, for example, caused industrial production to fall
particularly strongly in some euro area countries. These idiosyncratic factors are only fading
slowly, and have been weighing on growth for longer than anticipated.
Meanwhile,  persistent  uncertainties  have  left  their  mark  on  business  and  consumer
confidence. These uncertainties relate to geopolitical factors, such as the state of play of the
Brexit  negotiations,  the  continued  threat  of  trade  protectionism  and  vulnerabilities  in
emerging markets. By denting confidence, uncertainty might affect real economic variables,
such as capital goods production, which declined strongly last quarter, possibly as a result
of this reduced confidence.
All  these  elements  indicate  that  the  moderation  in  the  pace  of  the  euro  area  economic
expansion  will  likely  extend  into  the  current  year.  This  is  also  reflected  in  our  staff
macroeconomic  projections.  In  fact,  growth  for  this  year  has  been  revised  downwards  to
1.1%, which is 0.6% lower than anticipated in the December forecast.
The  fundamental  factors  supporting  the  euro  area  expansion  remain  broadly  in  place,
however.
Looking  ahead,  the  effects  of  the  idiosyncratic  factors  currently  weighing  on  economic
growth are expected to unwind, albeit at a slower pace than initially foreseen. For instance,
recent  data  on  motor  vehicle  production  show  signs  of  normalisation,  and  consumer
confidence recently edged up again.
Beyond more temporary fluctuations, the euro area expansion will continue to be supported
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
by favourable financing conditions, further gains in employment and rising wages. Also, the
ongoing yet somewhat more modest expansion in global activity should continue to support
euro area growth.
In fact, bank lending rates to euro area firms and households remain close to their historical
lows. The euro area unemployment rate currently stands at its lowest level in more than a
decade, and the wage increases that result from tightening labour markets should continue
to underpin household income and private consumption. On the external side, preliminary
estimates for the fourth quarter of 2018 point to a pickup in net exports after a very weak
third quarter.
For these reasons, GDP growth in the euro area is expected to remain sound in the medium
term. Accordingly, our staff projections expect euro area GDP growth to reach 1.6% in 2020
and 1.5% in 2021, which is largely unchanged from the December forecast round.
The risks surrounding euro area growth are still considered to be tilted to the downside, on
account of the persistence of the uncertainties related to geopolitical factors, the threat of
protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
Turning  to  inflation,  HICP  inflation  increased  to  1.5%  in  February,  from  1.4%  in  January
(according  to  preliminary  estimates).  This  slight  increase  was  mostly  driven  by  higher
energy  and  food  price  inflation,  while  measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally
muted.  Headline  inflation  is  likely  to  remain  around  current  levels  in  the  coming  months,
before declining towards the end of year on the basis of the financial market’s outlook for oil
prices.
In line with this, our latest projections foresee annual HICP inflation declining to 1.2% in 2019,
before recovering to 1.5% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2021.
Compared  with  the  December  forecast  round,  the  outlook  for  HICP  inflation  has  been
revised  downwards  across  the  projection  horizon.  This  downward  revision  reflects,  in
particular, the more subdued near-term growth outlook, which is delaying the adjustment of
inflation to our aim.
Also for inflation, supportive factors continue to be in place that will lift inflation above this
year’s muted levels in the more medium term. Labour cost pressures have strengthened
and  broadened  amid  high  levels  of  capacity  utilisation  and  tightening  labour  markets.
Together with the economic expansion, these forces are expected to trickle through to wage
growth and support underlying inflation.
Finally, in addition to the factors mentioned, the monetary policy measures we announced at
the last Governing Council meeting will add to our already accommodative stance, which will
continue  to  underpin  the  economic  expansion  and  the  convergence  of  inflation  to  our
medium-term aim.
The monetary policy stance
The sizeable moderation in the euro area’s expansion and the downward revisions to the
near-term growth outlook and inflation projections have led the Governing Council to take a
number of decisions in pursuit of its price stability objective.
One decision was to adjust our forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates. We now
expect these to remain at their present levels at least through the end of 2019, and in any
case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to
levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
This formulation consists of two parts. There is a date-based element – that interest rates
are expected to remain at their present levels “at least through the end of 2019”. And there is
a state-contingent element – that rates will remain unchanged “in any case for as long as
necessary  to  ensure  the  continued  sustained  convergence  of  inflation  to  levels  that  are
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term”.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
By  shifting  the  date-based  part  of  our  rate  guidance  further  into  the  future,  from  “at  least
through  the  summer”  to  “at  least  through  the  end”  of  2019,  we  ensure  that  our
accommodation  is  not  weakened  by  premature  expectations  of  a  rate  hike.  Market
participants who were factoring in the probability that our rates could increase before this
date should no longer do so.
On top of that, the state-contingent element ensures that the stance will continue to evolve
gradually and in a data-dependent manner.
Second,  the  ongoing  full  reinvestment  of  the  stock  of  assets  purchased  under  the  asset
purchase programme will continue to provide a significant degree of stimulus. And this will
hold true for an extended period of time past the date when we start raising the key ECB
interest  rates,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity
conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
By linking the reinvestment horizon to the date when we start raising the key ECB interest
rates,  we  are  reinforcing  the  stimulative  effects  of  our  forward  guidance,  as  market
expectations for the reinvestment horizon should evolve in line with expectations for the date
on which we start raising rates.
Third,  we  decided  to  launch  a  new  series  of  quarterly  targeted  longer-term  refinancing
operations, namely TLTRO-III, starting in September 2019 and ending in March 2021, each
with a maturity of two years.
Although  bank  funding  conditions  remain  favourable,  the  moderation  in  the  growth
momentum and the persistence of several uncertainties could affect these conditions in the
future. We need to remain vigilant.
By offering long-term funding at attractive conditions to banks, the new series of TLTROs
will help to preserve favourable bank lending conditions and support the smooth and efficient
bank-based transmission of monetary policy.
More specifically, under TLTRO-III, counterparties will be entitled to borrow up to 30% of the
stock of eligible loans as at 28 February 2019 at a rate indexed to the interest rate on the
main refinancing operations over the life of each operation.
Similar to the outstanding TLTRO programme, the “targeting” feature of the operations will
offer built-in incentives for credit conditions to remain favourable. We will communicate the
precise terms of these operations in due course.
A fourth decision was to continue conducting all our lending operations as fixed rate tender
procedures  with  full  allotment  for  as  long  as  necessary,  and  at  least  until  the  end  of  the
reserve maintenance period starting in March 2021. This measure ensures that we continue
providing banks with a liquidity backstop against sufficient and adequate collateral.
Finally, as always we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments, as appropriate, to ensure
that inflation continues to move towards the Governing Council’s inflation aim in a sustained
manner.
Taken  together,  this  set  of  decisions  should  ensure  that  inflation  remains  on  a  sustained
convergence  path  towards  our  medium-term  aim,  while  also  preserving  favourable  bank
lending conditions and supporting the smooth transmission of our monetary policy.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
