Jens Weidmann: Monetary and economic policy challenges
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  before  the  Industrie-Club
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, 2 May 2019.
1 Introduction
Dear Mr Scheele, ladies and gentlemen,
 Thank you for your invitation, and I am glad to be here with you in Düsseldorf —  on this first
working day of my second term of office.
The title of my speech is a dead giveaway regarding what is in store for you, but, as my former
UK counterpart Mervyn King once said of central bankers, “boring is best”.
Monetary and economic policy challenges are on the agenda. In this regard, there is no shortage
of  topics.  I  wish  to  begin  by  focusing  on  competition  and  digitalisation  as  challenges  facing
economic policy before turning to monetary policy.
But first, let me take you on a short trip back in time, to the sunset of the 19th century in the
United States. This was the era of the rise of the major industrial tycoons whose names bear
historical resonance, such as the shipping and railway magnate Cornelius Vanderbilt, the steel
magnate Andrew Carnegie and the oil baron John D. Rockefeller. They controlled their respective
markets and accumulated massive stockpiles of wealth.
At the same time, however, the social disparities widened, and large segments of the population
were living under precarious conditions. Many took umbrage at these developments, including a
certain Ms Elizabeth Magie, a stenographer and inventor who lived near Washington, DC.
In  her  view,  one  of  the  reasons  for  tensions  in  society  was  that  property  ownership  was
concentrated in the hands of a very few. She wanted to show people the consequences of the
unequal  distribution  of  land.  The  medium  she  chose,  however,  was  not  a  pamphlet  or  a
newspaper opinion piece. Instead, she created a board game which she called “The Landlord’s
1
Game”. In 1904, Ms Magie’s invention was patented.
The  game  gained  some  popularity  among  university  students  and  was  even  used  by  some
professors as teaching material, but failed to take off.  Its complexity might have been one of the
reasons.  Over  time,  various  versions  of  the  game  were  in  circulation,  and  in  1935  a  major
manufacturer marketed a similar game. Its packaging bore the name that you all now know as
“Monopoly”. It would soon become one of the most successful board games of all time.
The bitter irony of the story is that little remained of Elizabeth Magie’s pedagogical purpose of
illustrating the negative repercussions of monopolies – on the contrary: the game is often seen
as the outgrowth of unbridled capitalism.
What is true is that Monopoly shows what can happen if markets are left entirely to their own
devices. Once all other players have been eliminated, Monopoly is over, and with it the fun. In the
real  world,  the  actual  monopoly  status  would  be  just  the  beginning. As  the  only  provider,  you
could raise your prices and margins – gouging consumers without having to fear any annoying
competition.
2. Competition – heart and soul of the social market economy
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  illustrates  impressively  that  functioning  competition  is  the  heart  and  soul  of  our  social
market economy. It prevents the concentration of welfare gains in the hands of a very few and
instead allows consumers and workers a share of the spoils. Competition for customers leads to
lower prices; competition for labour to higher wages.
As Ludwig Erhard put it succinctly: “‘Prosperity for all’ and ‘Prosperity through competition’ are
2
inseparable; the first postulate indicates the objective, the second the way to this objective.’”
It  is  not  only  a  matter  of  distribution,  however.  Competition  also  guarantees  the  ability  of  our
market economy to perform. Unlike in a board game, however, the result does not hinge on the
luck  of  the  dice.  For  competition  motivates  firms  to  develop  new  products  or  more  efficient
production processes. This enhances their productivity and boosts long-term economic growth.
Andreas  Mundt,  president  of  Germany’s  Federal  Cartel  Office,  boiled  it  down  to  this:  “The
innovative power of competition is at its most apparent where competition is absent.” He cited as
an example the market dominance of a software giant in web browsing at the beginning of the
2000s; its browser did not evolve for a full five years: “Five years of stasis in one of the most
3
innovative areas of our time.”
It is all the more disconcerting to see more and more studies which find evidence for the United
States  of  firms  acquiring  growing  market  power  and  set  them  in  relation  to  various
macroeconomic trends.
4
First,  US  firms  have  successfully  raised  their  mark-ups  over  their  marginal  costs  sharply:
according  to  a  widely  discussed  study,  from  an  average  of  21%  in  1980  to  61%  in
2016.  Increasing market concentration has been identified as a key factor in this expansion of
margins. The OECD estimates that a 1% increase in the largest firms’ market share will raise
5
the price mark-up by 1.1% to 1.7%.
Second,  the  labour  income  share,  i.e.  workers’  share  in  national  income,  has  dropped  in  the
United States. Around one-third of the total decline in the services sector can be attributed to the
6
increase in market concentration.
Third,  productivity  gains  have  suffered:  if  price  mark-ups  attributable  to  market  power  are
eliminated,  according  to  one  calculation  this  could  increase  what  is  known  as  total  factor
7
productivity in the United States by up to 20%.
The  results  of  these  studies  should  undoubtedly  be  taken  with  the  proverbial  grain  of  salt.
Estimating profit margins is always fraught with uncertainty. And it is not always possible to infer
the actual intensity of competition in the market from observed market concentration. In addition,
other factors, such as the globalisation-induced outsourcing of activities, could have contributed
8
to higher price mark-ups.
However, these findings do indicate the potential impacts of diminishing competitive intensity and
rising market power. Even though the conclusions are not readily applicable to Europe, we do
need to keep these factors in mind.
Some  time  ago,  the  Bundesbank  already  investigated  mark-up  trends  in  firms  in  individual
European countries (including France, Germany and Italy). It found no evidence of a long-term
9
increase in price mark-ups.
The process of European integration is likely to have made a contribution to this, as the single
European market has led to intensified competition. European competition law and its rigorous
application are an additional factor. These factors have collectively borne fruit: our markets today
often appear less concentrated than those in the United States.
10
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Despite these successes, some see the European Commission’s controls on mergers as being
too strict and are proposing, for instance, giving national policymakers the right to veto bans on
mergers. At all events, the numbers do not indicate excessive strictness: in the past ten years,
some 3,000 mergers were approved and only a mere nine blocked.
11
As I see it, European competition oversight is an attainment which should not be rashly called
into question. It is particularly in the interests of Europe’s consumers and thus helps all to benefit
from the single market.
3 Digitalisation: a challenge for...
3.1 ...competition policy
But  it  is  equally  clear  that  an  effective  competitive  framework  cannot  be  carved  in  stone  but
needs  to  adapt  to  changes  in  the  environment.  Competition  law  therefore  needs  to  evolve  in
order to be effective in the digital age as well.
Platforms  are  a  central  business  model  of  the  digital  economy.  Nearly  all  major  internet
companies  have  transformed  themselves  into  platform  providers,  be  they  Google,  Facebook,
Amazon  or Alibaba.  Markets  in  the  platform  economy,  however,  have  a  tendency  to  become
concentrated. For two reasons.
Returns to scale are one reason. Most of the time, the goods being sold are information-based
goods  sold  globally  via  the  internet.  This  involves  substantial  fixed  costs  but  minimal  variable
costs. Consider search engines, for example. Once they have been set up, they can serve tens
of thousands of users inexpensively. There are certainly some costs associated with any search
query. However, the total costs rise relatively slowly compared with the number of users.
Network effects are another factor. The more people use it and the more data it contains, the
greater the attractiveness of a platform. Both properties favour the market leader and make it
difficult for new entrants to gain a foothold in the market.
Such network effects occur even in cases where the platform’s users are not in direct contact
with one another. For example, consumers are drawn to platforms offering an attractive array of
goods and services. Sellers in turn flock to those platforms in large numbers where they can find
a broad base of possible purchasers of their products. The economist Jean Tirole has therefore
compared digital platforms to large cities: Even though most of their residents don’t know each
other, they all benefit from the fact that cities are home to many firms and offer a rich cultural
life.
12
Network  effects  and  returns  to  scale  in  the  digital  sphere  enable  individual  firms  to  prevail.
Mention  is  often  made  in  this  connection  of  the  rise  of  “superstar”  firms  which  can  use  their
market  power  to  reap  higher  profit  margins  and  make  it  difficult  for  competitors  to  enter  the
market.
In  future,  policymakers  and  antitrust  regulators  will  need  to  pay  particular  attention  to  these
problems of digitalisation to prevent the markets from becoming a real-life game of Monopoly in
which only one player wins and all others lose. Indeed, such steps towards modernisation are
being investigated. The European Commission, for instance, has just received an expert report,
and Germany’s Federal Government has created a commission for Competition Law 4.0.
On the other hand, digitalisation also provides opportunities to boost competition: vendors from
all over the world are located in online marketplaces and are thus competing with bricks-and-
mortar merchants. Price comparison websites allow consumers to scan the entire market in just
a  matter  of  clicks,  thus  enhancing  transparency. Although  only  around  10%  of  German  retail
sales are transacted online, 86% of consumers use the internet to obtain information on goods
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
and services. All in all, this enhances competition and potentially reduces the margins of online
and  offline  vendors,  as  well  as  consumer  prices.  Thus,  for  instance,  a  study  by  the  ECB
concludes that the increasing use of online trade in the EU has reduced non-energy industrial
goods inflation by 0.1 percentage point each year since 2003.
13
The bottom-line impact on inflation of the contrary effects of digitalisation cannot yet be quantified
with any real certainty. Current research indicates a dampening but relatively low impact.
3.2 ... economic policy
14
Digital  transformation  has  thus  far  failed  to  result  in  a  significant  acceleration  in  productivity
gains, either. That is why some refer to this as a paradox. An academic debate is still raging
between optimists and pessimists as to whether the new technologies simply need more time
for  their  impact  to  fully  unfold  or  whether  their  growth  potential  is  smaller  than  during  earlier
waves of innovation.
It is also clear, however, that digitalisation involves profound structural change which presents
both  risks  and  opportunities.  In  order  to  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities  in  Germany,
policymakers need to plot the right course.
For  example,  many  digital  technologies  require  access  to  a  fast  internet  connection.  And
Germany  is  lagging  behind  other  industrialised  countries  in  this  respect.  In  particular,  the
expansion of the fibre optic network is making only slow progress. To wit, in mid-2018 fibre optic
lines made up nearly 80% of all stationary broadband connections in Korea, just over 50% in
Spain,  but  a  mere  2½%  in  Germany  –  more  than  20  percentage  points  below  the  OECD
average. High time, therefore, for Germany to vigorously expand its digital infrastructure.
In  other  areas,  too,  Germany  is  not  stacking  up  well  against  the  rest  of  the  world.  The
bureaucratic  hurdles  to  starting  a  business  are  relatively  high. According  to  the  World  Bank’s
current Doing Business Report, in this category Germany comes in at 114th place – behind Mali,
the Bahamas and Nepal. Starting a business in this country requires nine separate procedural
steps. New Zealand, the leader in this category, can get it done in a single administrative act.
Reforms to make it easier for start-ups to enter the market would also enhance competition and
spur innovative power. Lower barriers to market exit would have a similar effect. Both types of
reforms  are  decisive  elements  of  the  economic  process  of  change,  namely  what  Joseph
Schumpeter once described as “creative destruction".
It is certainly a core task of general government to eliminate competitive distortions and repair
market failure. Moreover, economic policy-making overall needs to create an environment which
is conducive to growth.
Research  is  one  area  in  which  general  government  can  provide  a  boost  through  targeted
promotional measures. Basic research is often the first step in the chain of innovation. It yields
new knowledge on which firms can later build. This area of research is not only expensive but
also entails a high degree of uncertainty. Most of the time, it is impossible to tell at first whether
such research will yield commercially marketable results. However, once new knowledge has
entered  the  world,  it  can  be  used  by  others  without  having  to  bear  the  costs  and  risks  of
research. Under these conditions, less research is conducted by the private sector than would
make sense from an economic perspective. This is where the state has to step in.
The  state,  of  course,  can  itself  invest  in  basic  research,  for  instance  through  its  universities.
However,  firms  have  to  become  active  in  transforming  academic  knowledge  into  marketable
innovations.  The  state  can  create  the  appropriate  framework  conditions  for  this  to  happen,
particularly by protecting intellectual property rights.
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
And tax breaks for research can also help to create an environment conducive to innovation. The
Federal  Government  has  now  addressed  this  issue  specifically  by  putting  forward  draft
legislation. As  the  legislative  process  rolls  on,  it  will  of  course  be  vital  that  the  rules  are  not
worded in a way that is overly detailed, not least in order to keep the effort required of firms and
tax administrations within manageable parameters. On the other hand, the “free rider problem”,
amongst other issues, needs to be avoided.
That  notwithstanding,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  corporate  taxation.  Tax  reform  in  the  United
States has stoked international tax competition. Other countries, such as France and Belgium,
have since initiated tax cuts.
When it comes to taxes on corporations, Germany is edging its way to the top of the international
league table. In 2018, the effective tax rate in this country was, on average, 29%. To put that into
proportion, France’s rate will be around 25% going forward, and the US rate will be even slightly
lower than that thanks to immediate depreciation of investments.
A  case  can  be  made  for  slightly  above-average  tax  rates  in  Germany,  since  Germany  also
provides  better-than-average  framework  conditions,  such  as  infrastructure  or  the  skills  its
workforce possesses. But if the difference between Germany and other similarly high-performing
economies becomes too great, our attractiveness as a business location will suffer.
The  Scientific Advisory  Board  at  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  therefore  recommends  that
improvements be made to the tax conditions for investment in Germany.
  Such  conceivable
improvements might include funding for research or  a return to the declining-balance method of
depreciation This would benefit all firms investing in Germany.
15
The solidarity surcharge also weighs on firms. Transfers to the east German states will expire
this  year,  which  would  actually  make 
this  surcharge
  This  will  naturally  lead  to  tax  shortfalls,  and,  as  is  always  the  case,  has  to  be
altogether.
weighed  against  other  fiscal  policy  objectives.  Yet  a  competitive,  growth-friendly  and
employment-friendly tax system is also an important goal.
to  do  away  with 
it  advisable 
16
Provided  there  is  a  will  to  undertake  a  fundamental  reform  of  corporate  taxation,  a  European
approach would be helpful, in my view. EU-wide rules for the tax base have the potential to make
taxation in the internal market more transparent and efficient. The European Commission has
already presented proposals to this effect, and Germany and France have expressly thrown their
weight behind this initiative.
4. Monetary policy
Ladies and gentlemen,
As  you  see,  there  are  various  levers  with  which  the  long-term  outlook  for  growth  can  be
improved. They all have one thing in common, though: they are in the hands of policymakers and
beyond the reach of central banks. It is up to economic policy to strengthen potential growth.
This would also ease the pressure on monetary policy. For stronger potential growth correlates
with  a  higher  level  of  the  natural  real  interest  rate  and  –  with  given  inflation  expectations  –  a
correspondingly higher nominal interest rate level. An increase in the gap between the nominal
interest rate and its lower bound will widen the scope for conventional interest rate policy. This
reduces the likelihood – all else being equal – of monetary policymakers having to resort to non-
standard measures to remain capable of effective intervention.
The topic of monetary policy flexibility has acquired growing importance in the euro area over the
past few years, given that low inflation has been an after-effect of the crisis. In order to ensure
that  inflation  returns  towards  its  target  over  the  medium  term,  monetary  policy  became
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
extraordinarily  accommodative  –  including  by  means  of  non-standard  measures  such  as  the
asset purchase programme.
One  thing  is  clear  to  me:  monetary  policy  will  need  more  water  under  its  keel  again  going
forward.
In  December  of  last  year,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  decided  to  discontinue  its  net
purchases  of  assets.  This  first  step  towards  monetary  policy  normalisation  was  only  logical
because the price outlook at that time was largely consistent with our medium-term definition of
price stability.
In the meantime, the short-term economic outlook in the euro area has taken a perceptible turn
for the worse. In early March, the ECB staff projected economic growth of 1.1% this year. For the
next two years, however, the experts are predicting growth to accelerate to around 1½% for each
of those years.
A weak economy in Germany has contributed in major share to the dip in euro area growth this
year. It cannot be explained merely by the oft-cited problems in the automotive industry. Owing to
dampened foreign demand, exports have likewise provided no meaningful stimulus since early
2018. In addition, household consumption went on to grow at only a sluggish pace.
However, given the excellent situation in the labour market and rising incomes, I expect private
consumption in Germany to overcome its slump. Initial signs of this are already visible: in the first
quarter, retail trade saw a sharp increase in sales. As things stand today, there are many signs
that the economy is only suffering a temporary slump and that, once it gets over its setback,
growth will accelerate.
Such soft patches have occurred time and again in the past without culminating in a recession.
For  the  euro  area,  the  ECB  has  counted  a  total  of  50  soft  patches  since  1970  but  only  four
recessions.
 An earlier study by the Fed counted 69 soft patches – and ten recessions – for the
United States from 1950 to 2011.
17
18
Owing, above all, to weaker short-term growth, in its latest projections the ECB staff has forecast
euro  area  inflation  to  rise  somewhat  more  slowly  than  initially  expected  up  until  2021.  These
projections explain the relatively cautious overall approach to monetary policy at present. For this
reason,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  announced  new  measures  back  in  March  and
reaffirmed this cautious stance in April.
It  is  the  task  of  monetary  policy  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  This  means
responding to weak domestic price pressures but also continuing along the path of normalisation
and not prolonging it unnecessarily, the inflationary outlook permitting.
An extremely accommodative monetary policy stance cannot be allowed to go on forever, not
least as it entails risks and side-effects. One is that, in a setting of low interest rates, financial
market actors will tend to take greater risks in search of higher yields. If this produces overvalued
asset markets, this could end up leading to abrupt price corrections.
And even in the real economy, too, the long-run effects of low interest rates are not only positive.
Thus  far,  studies  have  shown  that  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions  can  keep  afloat
unprofitable  firms  which,  if  interest  rates  were  higher,  would  have  to  exit  the  market.
 As  a
result, this would mean valuable resources being stuck in unproductive uses.
19
However, current research is also warning that low interest rates could be a potential feeding
ground for higher market concentration. One reason could be that large firms are more highly
leveraged.
  They  therefore,  so  the  reasoning,  would  benefit  in  particular  measure  from  low
interest rates and would be able to expand their market position and make it difficult for start-ups
20
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
to enter the market.
5. Conclusion
Board games and speeches have one thing in common: at the beginning, nobody knows exactly
how long they will take. The longest-ever game of Monopoly is said to have lasted over 1,680
hours,  or  70  days.  Don’t  worry  –  my  speech  will  not  be  that  long  –  for  I  am  coming  to  the
conclusion now.
Monopoly may be a fun game to play, but in the end there can be only one winner and many
losers. Thankfully, this is not how our social market economy works. However, it needs clear
rules and a fair referee. This is where the state comes into play. It has to take on a key role, and
not  only  in  competition  policy,  but  also  in  the  spheres  of  infrastructure,  education  and  social
protection.
21
At the same time, competition is – as Hayek puts it – a discovery procedure whose “results are
unpredictable  and  (...)  different  from  those  that  anyone  would  have  been  able  to  consciously
strive  for”.
  In  other  words,  The  state  should  not  attempt  to  pre-empt  the  outcome  of  this
“discovery procedure”. Instead, it should give people like Elizabeth Magie the opportunity to use
their  creativity  in  a  continuous  process  of  invention,  to  be  successful  in  their  efforts  and  to
partake in the prosperity of our society.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
M. Pilon, The Monopolists – Obsession, Fury, and the Scandal Behind the World’s Favorite Board Game, 2015.
L. Erhard (1957), Wohlstand für alle, 8th edition, 1964, Ludwig-Erhard-Stiftung, Bonn, p. 9.
A. Mundt, Mehr Wettbewerb wagen, ifo Schnelldienst, 20/2017, 26 October 2017.
J. De Loecker and J. Eeckhout (2017), The rise of market power and the macroeconomic implications, NBER
Working Paper No 23687, November 2018.
OECD, OECD Economic Surveys: United States 2016, June 2016.
D. Autor, D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson and J. Van Reenen, The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of
Superstar Firms, NBER Working Paper 23396, May 2017.
D. R. Baqaee and E. Farhi, Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium, NBER Working Paper 24007,
December 2018.
J.  Van  Reenen,  Increasing  Differences  between  Firms:  Market  Power  and  the  Macroeconomy,  CEPR
Discussion Paper No 1576, September 2018.
Deutsche Bundesbank, Mark-ups of firms in selected European countries, Monthly Report, December 2017, pp.
53–67.
G.  Gutiérrez  and  T.  Philippon,  How  EU  Markets  Became  More  Competitive  Than  US  Markets: A  Study  of
Institutional Drift, NBER Working Paper 24700, June 2018.
ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/statistics.pdf (as at 31 March 2019).
J. Tirole, Regulating the Disrupters, www.project-syndicate.org/onpoint/regulating-the-disrupters-by-jean-tirole-
2019–01?barrier=accesspaylog, 9 January 2019.
European Central Bank (2017), Low inflation in the euro area: causes and consequences, ECB Occasional
Paper, No 181, Box 3.
Bank of Canada, Digitalization and Inflation: A Review of the Literature, Staff Analytical Note, 2017–20.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Wissenschaftlicher  Beirat  beim  Bundesministerium  der  Finanzen  (Scientific Advisory  Board  at  the  Federal
Ministry  of  Finance),  US-Steuerreform  2018  –  Steuerpolitische  Folgerungen  für  Deutschland,  Commentary
01/2019.
For the Bundesbank’s stance on the solidarity surcharge, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly
Report, November 2018, p. 60.
M. Draghi, Monetary policy in the euro area, speech delivered on 27 March 2019.
R. G. Anderson and Y. Liu, On the road to recovery, soft patches turn up often, The Regional Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, January 2012.
R. Banerjee and B. Hoffmann, The rise of zombie firms: causes and consequences, BIS Quarterly Review,
September 2018, pp. 67–77.
S. Chatterjee and B. Eyigungor, The Firm Size and Leverage Relationship and Its Implications for Entry and
Concentration  in  a  Low  Interest  Rate  World,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  Working  Paper  19–18,
March 2019.
F.A. von Hayek, Competition as a discovery procedure, 1968.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
