Some Reflections on Micro Credit and How a Public Credit Registry Can Strengthen It 
By 
Viral V Acharya, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India (RBI)1 
 Sometimes when I sit down to write down a new set of remarks, the same old thoughts cross 
my mind, a bit like one’s favorite songs that are so deeply entrenched in the psyche that at the 
end  of  a  long  day  when  one  is  reflecting  on  the  subject,  they  start  playing  all  over  again, 
without any reason and without any conscious decision to rewind to them.  In my case, a few 
striking images flash across my eyes. I have tried in what follows to describe these images and 
what their collage means for me.  They also convey how I try to think about economics and 
finance more generally – as the media to understand daily situations of households around us 
and to derive insights on how these situations could be made better, most often in some small 
ways and occasionally with a big bang… After all, the origin of the word ‘economics’ is in the 
ancient  Greek  term  ‘oikonomía’,  meaning  ’management  of  a  household’.    Based  on  careful 
research,  many  [notably  Professors  Abhijit  Banerjee  and  Esther  Duflo  of  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology  (MIT)]  contend,  that  it  is  the  poor  who  often  practice  the  best 
economics as the costs they face from mismanaging their households can be rather high. 
So let me describe these images that flash across my eyes one by one.  
                                                             
1 I dedicate these remarks to my favorite school teacher, Shailesh Shah Sir, of Fellowship School 
in  Mumbai,  who  breathed  his  last  on  the  morning  of  January  5,  2019;  he  taught  me  Indian 
languages, social sciences, and the art of compositional writing; he truly lit all his students with 
ambition and set us on fire with imagination.  
Parts of these remarks were first prepared in 2017 for a book launch, followed by delivery at 
several  student  gatherings  and  a  few  convocations.  This  final  version  represents  the 
accumulation  of  my  observations  at  these  talks,  which  culminated  at  Indian  Institute  of 
Technology, Bombay (IITB) Tech Fest on December 15, 2018.  I am grateful to Anujit Mitra, Jose 
Kattoor and Vineet Srivastava for their valuable inputs.  
 1 
Image One. Many evenings or nights when I stroll with my brother on our terrace in Mumbai, 
we are greeted on one side by the Pawan Hans Helipad, the sprawling slums of Nehru Nagar, 
the deafening din from the Swami Vivekananda Road (S V Road), and the serene breeze and 
waves  of  the  Juhu  Beach.  I  grew  up  on  a  crowded  street  in  Girgaum,  in  south  Mumbai. 
Observing from our first floor window how people went about their lives on the streets was a 
favorite pastime in our childhood days.  Conditioned by that, while I’m on the terrace my eyes 
invariably end up focusing on the slums of Nehru Nagar. Far into the narrow alleys, bustling and 
jostling  in  high  density  are  the  slum-dwellers,  appearing  as  diminutive  figurines,  with  much 
activity and life all around. A man is fixing dish antenna on top of his blue roof; an old couple 
are  perched  outside  a  modest  hut,  savoring  what  must  be  some  scrumptious  desi  chat;  a 
woman slamming blow after blow on the clothes she has carefully aligned to wash; and almost 
always a group of children gleefully running around, mostly playing cricket and seasonally flying 
kites.   
Some of the evenings, a plane takes off from the domestic or international airport in the east 
and heads westward on its way; and a chopper swings in and lands at Pawan Hans with much 
acoustic  fanfare.  As  these  sophisticated  means  of  modern  transportation  make  their  noisy 
presence felt, you can see the children bunch together, one of them pointing at the sky, others 
galvanising around him to marvel at the spectacle. An instant later of course, the children are 
nonchalantly back to gully cricket or running after a fallen kite. 
One cannot but hope that these children – in that brief moment of marvel – have been imbued 
with ambition; that their eyes are now set on the sky; that they will have the initiative and will 
get all opportunity to do what it takes to bridge the gap from their narrow alley to Pawan Hans 
Helipad next door and to the flight of the giant mechanical birds that fly above.  
Will these children take off?  
How will their journey be?  
Where will they land?  
 2 
I ponder for a few seconds but then switch attention to the incessant honking of the S V Road 
vehicles. 
Image Two. Until about ten years back, I used to spend a decent chunk of my time as a doctoral 
student,  and  later  as  a  professor,  working  with  an  Indian  NGO,  focused  on  pre-primary  and 
primary  education.  This  activity  had  become  my  umbilical  cord  to  India.  On  my  holiday  trips 
back  home  from  New  York  or  London,  I  would  take  out  a  few  days  to  visit  some  of  their 
baalwadis (daycares) in urban areas, and if travel plans permitted, also the delivery centers for 
accelerated reading programs in villages. These visits made my interactions with stakeholders 
more credible, engaging and vivid. But they were also personally rewarding.  
There are a few sights, if any, more uplifting than of a child figuring out the alphabet for the 
first time, reading the first book, flipping pages over and over again in boundless excitement 
and frenzy, or counting and adding up his or her collection of stones, subitizing them soon after 
– as in figuring out the exact count without counting, by merely glancing at the collection of 
treasures! It might be the innocent spark on the child’s face, or that “Aha!” or Eureka moment 
as the child discovers how to read, how to count, how to learn – whatever it is, it works like 
magic in bowling over the beholder.   
One returned from these visits with a shot in the arm to do more; one felt like nurturing the 
umbilical cord to India further; one realised that joyful learning is an essential groundwork for 
the journeys, the flights and the ascent that these children will undertake in due course.      
Image Three:  I am usually en route in car to the office at RBI or Bombay Gymkhana during early 
mornings. I need to be on S V Road before turning for the Milan subway or now the flyover, 
which connects to the Western Express Highway. Just before the turn, before one reaches the 
Hanuman temple and Santacruz bus depot, on the left sidewalk, there is – always – a mother 
toiling away no matter what time of the day. It is clear she is homeless; she has at least two 
children,  both  roughly  of  the  same  age.  Depending  on  the  time  of  the  morning,  she  has  her 
work cut out. Some days she is waking up the kids with some sternness on her face; on others 
she is bathing them with water from an ingeniously figured out water-supply; at times she is 
getting them dressed in school uniforms; and then she is often running with the kids, who have 
 3 
their backpacks on, towards the neighborhood school. From a distance, she seems to be driven 
with a single-minded focus of ensuring that her kids get their chance to fly and soar. Her role as 
a  mother  certainly  seems  a  mighty  one,  as  Yudhisthir  answered  to  the  Yaksha  Prashna  in 
Mahabharata, when asked what is heavier than the Earth.  
How does the mother make it all work?  
Can she afford the books and the supplies?  
Is she home when the kids come back?   
What job does she do during the day?  
Could she be a micro entrepreneur?  
The mind is so fickle, however; as soon as the car turns left at the traffic signal and moves onto 
the flyover, it leaves these questions in background and embarks on its daily descent. 
Image Four:  Early on a Saturday morning, already quite bright and sunny, a banker carrying his 
thela (a shoulder bag) steps into the passageway next to a series of kachcha-pukka homes. The 
surrounding  is  semi-urban.  By  the  time  you  have  blinked  an  eye,  an  army  of  about  twenty 
women, mostly in saris, of ages spanning from 20 to 50, and a few even 50-plus, have gathered 
around him. They have all borrowed certain sums of money from the banker. They make their 
repayments  one  by  one;  each  transaction  is  logged  in  a  physical  register;  it  is  also  swiped 
digitally onto their bank cards with a point-of-sale or POS-style machine. Some of the women 
are borrowing again; some taking out monies from their accounts. The registrar of this group of 
women, appointed for the month, signs off the log after checking the account entries carefully.   
Banking is now done.  Growth is about to begin.   
I am curious to hear more about what these women are doing with the money.  All of them, 
without  exception,  are  entrepreneurs.    One  has  started  a  sari  trading  business,  buying  them 
from the city and selling them in the neighborhood with a margin; she has built her enterprise 
over several years and is the recipient of the biggest loan (one lakh rupees) with the longest 
maturity (one year) in the group; her friend has acquired a sewing machine with the loan and is 
 4 
stitching  blouses  to  go  with  the  saris;  another  has  opened  a  beauty  parlor;  yet  another  has 
started  a  soft-drinks  stall  in  her  husband’s  stationery  store  as  there  is  extra,  unused  space 
therein,  well  utilised  especially  during  the  afternoons  when  customer  traffic  is  thin  for 
stationery  but  the  heat  unbearable.  There  seemed  absolutely  no  shortage  of  services  to  be 
provided in their immediate sphere of influence.   
I was especially eager to know what prompted these women to become entrepreneurs in the 
first place.  The answer I got was not entirely expected: in nine out of ten cases, women had 
become entrepreneurs to send their kids to a ‘top, English medium school’, or to have extra 
monies for private coaching so the child could excel in the state-level exams, or to get the kid to 
learn some computing and programming as that is where future jobs lie!   
Collage of the Images 
As  these 
images  flashed  across  my  eyes,  I  realised  that  rather  than  being  entirely 
compartmentalised, these images were all linked, that there was a connection between finance 
– my day job, and these images that my mind had been subconsciously gathering in mornings, 
evenings  and  during  holidays.    An  important  link  was  established  from  financial  inclusion  to 
education of children – from micro finance for women entrepreneurs to them sending children 
to schools, the children in turn having their “Aha! I did it!!” moments in reading and counting, 
and to their taking off for the limitless sky and beyond. 
Access  to  finance  is  the  lifeblood  of  an  economy.  Its  judicious  allocation  is  known  to  unlock 
opportunity and growth. It can, in fact, aid even the most fundamental reform for growth by 
supporting, directly or indirectly, the education of our children, the skilling of our youth, and 
lighting  up  of  their  minds  with  fire  and  imagination  so  they  can  propel  themselves,  their 
families, and the rest of us, forward.  Education is perceived by many families as ticket to the 
ride that will catapult them out of economic stress.  Leaving aside minor exceptions, as a rule 
education is indeed a ticket to such ride.  
A mother taking up an enterprise to shape her child’s future has all the willingness to pay her 
debt.  As the child grows, her needs too will rise.   She will need a clean credit record to be able 
to borrow again so as to finance her now bigger liquidity requirements.  This way, there is full 
 5 
incentive compatibility between her and the finance provider.  Besides her willingness to pay, 
the  deft  handling  of  her  enterprise,  induced  by  the  necessity  to  keep  buying  the  education 
ticket over time, will strengthen her ability to pay. At any rate, the financier can start with a 
small loan, use a short tenor to assess repayment ability, and open for her a bank account that 
can  help  track  other  payment  flows  and  improve  credit  assessment.  The  reputation  of  the 
woman entrepreneur as a borrower can build swiftly as she keeps repaying and enable her to 
secure more credit over longer tenors.   
Borrowing as part of a group reinforces the strong incentives to repay; default by a borrower 
when all others are repaying can lead to stigma. Conversely, encouraging of defaults by some 
can lead to vitiation of the otherwise rich credit culture.   
The  financier,  in  turn,  can  make  a  healthy  spread  over  own  cost  of  borrowing  funds,  even 
accounting for some losses from early defaults, upon whose realisation the entrepreneur can 
be rationed from future loans or offered only stricter loan terms and tenor. 
This  way,  the  availability  of  micro  finance  for  micro  entrepreneurs  thrives  and  benefits  the 
society all around.2 
So let me turn from these images to my day job at the RBI and what efforts we are undertaking 
to help ensure that micro credit becomes available to more borrowers; micro finance provided 
a robust foundation; micro enterprise given an additional fillip; and indirectly, in the process, 
our children offered greater opportunity for schooling and skilling. 
Public Credit Registry (PCR) – An Important Step to Democratise and Formalise Credit3 
In  an  emerging  economy  like  India,  it  is  always  felt  that  the  smaller  entrepreneurs,  mostly 
operating under the informal economy, do not get enough credit as they are informationally 
opaque  to  their  lenders  who  prefer  to  provide  loans  to  more  transparent  larger  businesses.  
                                                            
2 At some of the student gatherings and convocations, I ended the remarks here by reciting a 
poem I received from Yuvaraj Galada on December 22, 2017, called ‘The Invitation’, written in 
1999 by Oriah Mountain Dreamer, that has inspired me immensely.  
3 For a fuller treatment of this theme, please see my speech “Public Credit Registry (PCR) and 
Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN): Giant Strides to Democratise and Formalise Credit in 
India”, delivered in August 2018. 
 6 
Data as of March 2018 of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) from RBI’s basic statistical returns 
(BSR) shows that close to half of the outstanding credit is for ticket size above a hundred million 
rupees and thirty per cent is above one billion rupees. Credit penetration is particularly low for 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector where the ticket size is generally believed 
to be between one to ten million rupees. Even though more than 95 per cent of accounts with 
SCBs are having sanctioned credit limit less than one million each, the amount outstanding on 
these accounts is only 23 per cent of the total. 
Is there a big opportunity for us to rethink and reshape our credit eco-system for the future so 
that micro credit can thrive to unlock economic value, as I laid out in my collage of images? 
At the RBI, we firmly believe so.  We have initiated work on a Public Credit Registry (PCR). We 
are excited about how we can solve in a fundamental way the information problem affecting 
access to credit for micro entrepreneurs.  
Let me elaborate on the information problem and how a PCR can help get around it. 
Information  asymmetry  with  the  borrower  is  the  major  difficulty  faced  by  any  lender  while 
granting  a  loan.    Put  simply,  the  borrower  has  more  information  about  her  own  economic 
condition and risks than the lender.  Credit information systems aim to reduce this asymmetry 
by  enabling  the  lender  to  know  the  credit  history  with  past  lenders  and  the  current 
indebtedness of the borrower.  They improve efficiency of credit allocation, as the lender can 
use credit information systems to properly differentiate and appropriately price (interest rate) 
as well as alter terms (maturity, collateral, covenants, etc.) of the loan.   
What would occur without the credit information systems? 
As  borrowers  build  history,  lenders  would  like  to  protect  the  information  of  their  profitable 
customers and may not be ready to share it directly with other lenders.  This way, borrowers 
can get locked to their initial lenders, become vulnerable to gouging in loan terms, and worse, 
be unable to convey their credit quality to new lenders if existing lenders experience problems 
of  their  own  (such  as  due  to  capital  erosion  from  recognition  of  losses,  as  was  witnessed  in 
 7 
India over the past decade in the form of high retail and MSME cost of borrowing from banks 
due to spillover from their large corporate borrower loans turning non-performing).  
This is where third-party credit information companies come in to play, those that will pool the 
data from lenders and share the information with other lenders as per the laid down policy.  
Globally, Private Credit Bureaus (PCBs) and Public Credit Registries (PCRs) both operate in this 
space.    PCBs  can  be  legislatively  authorised  to  receive  credit  data;  however,  being  for-profit 
enterprises, they may focus primarily on those data segments around which it is most profitable 
to build a business model (e.g., provision of credit scores based on data gathered).  Indeed, it is 
found internationally that a PCR, being a non-profit enterprise, is able to ensure much better 
data coverage than PCBs.  In turn, the PCBs when given access to comprehensive data from a 
PCR  can  provide  better  and  greater  value  addition  through  data  analytics  and  innovations, 
complementing the PCR. 
One can easily surmise that to be useful, it is important for credit information systems to gather 
complete  credit  information,  possibly  even  asset-side  and  cash-flow  details    about  the 
borrower, which is sometimes referred to as the ’360-degree view’. Also, the latest information 
is more important, giving rise to the demand for near-real-time data. That is how the Report of 
the  High-Level  Task  Force  (HTF)  on  Public  Credit  Registry  for  India,  chaired  by  Shri  Y.M. 
Deosthalee, has envisaged the Public Credit Registry (PCR) to be. The HTF examined the data 
gaps in the current credit information system in India and recommended that a PCR be set up, 
backed by an appropriate Act, to improve the information efficiency of the credit market and 
strengthen the credit culture in India. 
How will the Public Credit Registry (PCR) for India work? 
The  PCR  has  been  envisaged  as  a  database  of  core  credit  information  –  an  infrastructure  of 
sorts on which users of credit data can build further analytics. It will strive to cover all regulated 
entities (i.e., financiers) in phases and in this way get a 360-degree view of borrowers. It will 
facilitate  linkages  with  related  ancillary  information  systems  outside  the  banking  system 
including corporate filings, tax systems (including the Goods and Services Network or GSTN), 
and utility payments.  The PCR will have to be backed and governed by a comprehensive Public 
 8 
Credit Registry Act to be brought in consultation with the Government.  It will have to follow 
the latest privacy guidelines based on a laid down consent framework.  
 The proposed Public Credit Registry (PCR) information architecture 
Core Credit Information
Banks/ NBFCs/ Regulated FIs
(such as domestic borrowings, 
ECBs and all contingent liabilities)
Mandatory 
reporting
PUBLIC CREDIT 
REGISTRY
(PCR)
Borrowers
Creditors
RBI
Other regulators
CICs
IU(s)
Secondary Information Base
PCR-MCA Sub System:
Company ID Details, Company 
Financial details etc.
PCR-Legal Database Sub 
System:
Litigation against debtor/ 
promoter
PCR-Fraud Database 
sub system:
Wilful Defaulter list, RBI 
Caution list, CFR, ECGC etc.
PCR-SEBI Sub System:
Promoter, Shareholding 
Market Borrowing
Tax/ Utility:
Payment Arrear
PCR-CERSAI Sub 
System:
Securitized Asset 
Details
PCR-IBBI Sub System:
IBBI Listing Status
PCR-GSTN Sub System:
GST Details
 
Source: Report of the High-Level Task Force on Public Credit Registry for India, 2018. 
 
 Let me now spend some time on how the PCR will work and help strengthen the credit culture.  
(1) First, PCR will make borrower information more complete with increasing coverage of 
lending entities. In particular, it will eventually reach out even to the smallest primary 
agricultural credit societies. It will also cover entities which may not be regulated by the 
RBI.  This  will  have  to  be  done  in  phases  and  it  may  take  up  to  three  to  five  years  to 
accomplish, possibly sooner.   
 9 
(2) Secondly,  PCR  will  vastly  simplify  and  reduce  the  reporting  burdens  on  the  lenders. 
Other  entities  including  regulators  and  supervisors  will  be  able  to  access  it  for  core 
credit  information  and  supplement  it  with  only  the  incremental  part  as  per  their 
requirement.  Many  of  the  statistical  returns  presently  collected  by  the  RBI  may  also 
accordingly  be  substantially  rationalised  and  pruned,  freeing  up  resources  in  the 
financial eco-system for analysis instead of repetitious efforts in data collection, follow-
up and cleaning.  The same would be the case with other entities that presently collect 
such data from banks. 
(3) Thirdly,  PCR  will  have  credit  data  available  digitally  at  a  higher  frequency  than  at 
present. Therefore, it will make credit decision-making faster and efficient.  
(4) Fourthly,  as  the  chart  here  shows,  with  linkages  to  other  information  systems  like 
corporate data from the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA21) and tax filing or invoicing 
data (GSTN), it will help the users to access other data on borrowers’ assets and evolving 
cash flows, which are essential for taking efficient credit decisions.  
(5) Finally, it will be possible within the PCR architecture to address privacy concerns and 
control access to data with a proper consent-based framework for appropriate usage, 
better than what is currently feasible. These concerns will have to balance the objective 
that the PCR is just a step in helping the democratisation of credit, whereby credit data 
is not only used for regulatory / supervisory purposes, but also leveraged to expand the 
credit market efficiently.  In particular, 
a.  While  an  individual  will  have  access  to  her  data  stored  in  PCR,  she  should  be 
empowered to share it with other lenders for availing credit.  
b.  Similarly, lenders need to be given access to their own customers’ complete data 
for monitoring such accounts.  
c.  Regulators / supervisors will require full access to the data for their work so that 
they can address systemic risk concerns with the advantage of a holistic view.  
To  appropriately  put  in  place  the  required  access  and  control  policies,  the  High-Level 
Task  Force  recommended  that  a  separate  Public  Credit  Registry  Act  (PCR  Act)  be 
brought in.  The PCR Act will need to ensure adequate safeguards on data while at the 
 10 
same  time  address  extant  restrictions  on  sharing  of  credit  data  that  prevent  efficient 
allocation  and  regulatory  supervision  of  credit.    The  PCR  Act  would  also  have  to  be 
comprehensive so as to bring in data from the section of lenders who do not directly fall 
under the RBI regulations.  To this end, the RBI plans to engage with the Government 
and  other  regulators  in  the  coming  months.    In  the  meantime,  the  RBI  has  set  up  an 
Implementation  Task  Force  that  is  putting  the  systems  infrastructure in  place  to kick-
start the PCR with data from regulated entities that can be covered either under, or with 
minor tweaking, of the extant legislative framework. 
 Public Credit Registry can help “sachetise” Micro Credit 
To  build  credit  models  for  individuals  and  small  credits,  the  financier  and  its  modelers  are 
ideally required to know not just outstanding credit for the micro borrowers, but possibly also 
their  entire  repayment  history  and  their  cash  flow  fluctuations,  so  as  to  tailor  the  terms  of 
credit suitably.  In the absence of such information, many borrowers may simply get ’rationed’ 
out of the market due to severe information asymmetry faced by financiers. 
With  a  PCR  tracking  every  credit  transaction  from  its  origination  to  closure  (initial  terms, 
repayment, default, restructuring, etc.), and being linked to various digital systems in place (as 
shown in the chart above), it would be possible to identify and get to know well businesses, 
even  micro  enterprises  and  micro  entrepreneurs.  In  other  words,  the  PCR  could  supply  the 
missing  link,  which  is  the  complete  ‘360-degree  view’-  information  of  the  borrower  or 
prospective  borrower.  This  will  allow  lenders  to  assess  the  borrower’s  credit  risk  keeping  in 
view  the  viability  of  cash  flows,  ask  the  relevant  questions  (e.g.,  are  there  other  underlying 
issues that are affecting ability to pay the loan in spite of healthy cash flows from the micro 
enterprise?), and price the loan terms without compromising on due diligence.  
Based  on  these,  nearly-automated  loan  sanction  and  disbursement  mechanisms  can  be 
devised, as are also being attempted by fin-tech companies.  
 11 
In  fact,  credit  products  could  get  transformed  with  the  possibility  of  sanctioning  small  ticket 
loans with short maturity and zero or low collateral requirement.  Borrowers and entrepreneurs 
can build their reputation and credit quality by repaying well such initial information-building 
loans.    Gradually,  they  can  borrow  more  and  at  longer  maturities,  potentially  making  capital 
investments  to  enhance  productivity.    Once  their  size  increases  and  they  register  with  the 
GSTN, tax invoices can act as the cash-flow verification with PCR.  Robust credit history built 
over  a  period  can  work  as  sturdy  collateral,  building  the  trust  of  the  lenders.    Such 
’sachetisation’  of  credit  can  rapidly  expand  access  to  credit  for  those  micro  and  small 
enterprises, hitherto not included in the formal credit market.   
As I stressed while describing the ability to pay and willingness to pay of micro entrepreneurs, it 
would remain important not to undermine their inherently strong credit culture by making it 
easier  for  borrowers  not  to  repay.    That  would  compromise  the  essence  of  how  micro 
entrepreneurs build a reputable credit history to differentiate from others and over time grow 
in size and economic value creation. 
Let me conclude. 
There is a deep connect between the images I started with, their collage in my mind, and my 
day  job  at  the  RBI.    Ultimately,  while  central  banks  are  not  always  visible  to  the  common 
person, their policies have the potential to touch her in a meaningful way.  As its etymology 
suggests,  this  is  what  economics  must  help  achieve  in  the  end  –  better  management  of  the 
household.  It  is  perhaps  too  ambitious  a  vision  of  our  future  to  believe  that  a  fundamental 
change  in  the  financial  data  infrastructure  such  as  a  Public  Credit  Registry  can  help  improve 
access to micro credit as well as improve schooling and skilling outcomes for our children and 
youth,  but  so  be  it.    My  son’s  poster  at  his  school  last  year  introduced  me  to  a  gem  from 
Michaelangelo, which underscores why we must keep painting such a vision and persist with 
efforts to convert it into reality. It says, 
“The greatest danger for most of us lies not in setting our aim too high and falling short; but in 
setting our aim too low, and achieving our mark.” 
 12 
