Benjamin E Diokno: The Philippine economy - sustaining resilience
amid uncertainties
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), to the Economic Journalists’ Association of the Philippines, Manila, 27
August 2019.
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. First, let me thank the Economic Journalists’ Association
of the Philippines for inviting me to share the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas’ view on the current and
future state of the Philippine economy.
As we are all aware, the specter of slowing global economic growth looms larger than ever on
the  horizon  as  protectionist  policies  and  geopolitical  tensions  continue  to  dominate  the  global
growth narrative.
Greater global economic uncertainty may lead to higher risk aversion as international investors
turn  to  safe-haven  assets,  resulting  in  volatility  in  our  domestic  financial  markets.  When  this
happens, this could have adverse consequences on our price and financial stability objectives,
and ultimately on the country’s growth momentum.
Nevertheless,  in  this  presentation,  I  will  show  you  how  the  BSP,  with  our  purposeful  and
meaningful structural reforms, can help support against the impact of these external risk factors.
Risk factors identified last year, such as the escalating trade tensions between major economies
and  geopolitical  factors,  have  either  intensified  or  materialized  this  year  and  contributes  to
weaker global economic prospects.
Acknowledging the impact of these on world trade and investment, the IMF have several times
downgraded its 2019 and 2020 global growth projections this year. Moreover, the IMF continues
to view the balance of risks to the global outlook as being on the downside, with further escalation
of trade tensions.
In response, central banks around the world, including the Philippines, have responded by easing
their respective policy rates to stimulate their domestic economies.
In fact, some central banks have surprised the markets by reducing their rates by more than
what  was  expected.  This  indicates  that  the  global  monetary  policy  easing  cycle  could  gather
momentum and last longer and deeper than previously anticipated.
Despite  all  this,  we  remain  optimistic  about  the  prospects  of  the  Philippine  economy.  As  I
emphasized earlier, we are well-positioned to deal with these challenges.
We  now  have  an  encouraging  mix  of  a  manageable  inflation  environment  alongside  steady
economic  growth,  which  affords  policymakers  sufficient  space  to  respond  appropriately  to
evolving domestic and global conditions.
Overall  liquidity  and  credit  conditions  remain  supportive  of  the  country’s  growth  requirements.
We  likewise  continue  to  have  a  fiscal  target  that  both  delivers  effective  government  spending
while remaining prudent in meeting debt obligations.
Our sound and stable banking system is aided by strong prudential regulation and supervision.
Finally,  our  robust  external  payments  position,  underpinned  by  comfortable  FX  reserves  and
prudent external debt management, acts as additional cushion against external vulnerabilities.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  terms  of  the  current  state  of  the  Philippine  economy,  the  current  manageable  inflation
environment bodes well for sustaining economic growth. Headline inflation slowed down further
to  2.4  percent  in  July,  the  lowest  inflation  reading  since  January  2017.  Thus,  the  year-to-date
average inflation rate of 3.3 percent is now well within the Government’s inflation target of 2 to 4
percent.
Price pressures eased anew in July 2019, as food inflation slowed down following the summer
harvest season and amid liberalized rice importation.
Meanwhile, it is not surprising that we had a lower-than-expected GDP growth in the first two
quarters  of  the  year.  To  a  large  extent,  the  delay  in  the  passage  of  the  2019  budget  and  the
election ban significantly weakened government spending and public construction.
Nevertheless,  we  expect  catch-up  fiscal  spending  by  the  Government  to  buoy  the  growth
momentum in the second half of 2019.
We  likewise  take  comfort  in  the  fact  that  credit  and  liquidity  dynamics  in  the  country  remain
supportive of growth.
The latest reading of credit growth is 10.5 percent as of end-June 2019 while domestic liquidity
expanded by 6.4 percent during the same period.
Notwithstanding the slower growth in loans for production activities, we continue to see sustained
business demand on account of favorable macroeconomic conditions in the country, particularly
with the easing of inflation in 2019.
Meanwhile,  the  continued  lending  activities  of  Philippine  banks  indicate  their  effectiveness  in
facilitating a smooth flow of funds in the economy, boosting economic growth.
Banks remain sufficiently capitalized, while their past due ratios have consistently declined over
the  years.  This  enhances  their  capacity  to  manage  risks  and  at  the  same  time  increase
profitability.
We expect these improvements to continue given the positive outlook on the macroeconomy.
In  addition,  we  continue  to  have  sizeable  international  reserves  to  help  insulate  our  domestic
economy against external shocks. This is built from sustained remittances, robust receipts from
business process outsourcing and tourism, and steady foreign investment inflows.
As of end-July 2019, gross international reserves stood at 85.2 billion dollars, equivalent to 7.4
months’ worth of imports of goods and payments of services and primary income.
Meanwhile,  overseas  Filipinos’  remittances  remained  robust  in  the  first  half  of  the  year,
increasing by 3.2 percent, which is equivalent to US$14.6 billion.
Taking all these into account, the Monetary Board in its most recent meeting on 8 August 2019,
deemed  it  necessary  to  reduce  the  BSP’s  key  policy  rate  by  another  25  basis  points  to  4.25
percent. This brings the year-to-date monetary policy adjustment to 50 basis points.
In doing this, the BSP noted that price pressures have continued to dissipate, while prospects for
global economic activity are likely to remain weak amid sustained trade tensions among major
economies.
Domestically, the outlook for growth continues to be firm on the back of a projected recovery in
household  spending  and  the  accelerated  implementation  of  the  government’s  infrastructure
spending program.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Looking ahead, we expect inflation to remain on a target-consistent path for 2019 and 2020. The
latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation is projected to average 2.6 percent for 2019 and
2.9 percent for both 2020 and 2021.
Inflation expectations have also moderated further to levels consistent with the target based on
the BSP’s survey of private sector economists.
We assess the balance of risks to the inflation outlook to remain broadly balanced for 2019 and
2020,  before  tilting  to  the  downside  for  2021.  Weaker  global  economic  prospects  continue  to
temper the inflation outlook.
Going  forward,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  monitor  price  and  output  conditions  to  ensure  that
monetary policy remains appropriately supportive of sustained non-inflationary economic growth
over the medium term.
In terms of financial stability safeguards, we now have a deeper policy toolkit to deal with external
and domestic shocks to the system. These tools will allow the BSP to respond to the formation
of imbalances and address the build-up of system risk.
First,  we  continue  to  implement  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  as  our  first  line  of  defense
against external shocks. Such a framework allows the BSP to intervene only if volatility in the
foreign exchange market is perceived to adversely affect the inflation outlook.
Our policy toolkit now encompasses macroprudential regulations that can be targeted against
specific  sources  of  risks,  contingency  measures  such  as  liquidity-enhancing  facilities,  and
regional firewalls that boost the flexibility and effectiveness of our actions.
Aside from this, amendments to the BSP Charter allows the BSP to issue its own securities.
The BSP has also expanded its crises surveillance and monitoring toolkit. To name a few, we
have the Bank Distress Index, which is used to identify potential banking crisis episodes in the
country;  the  Philippine  Composite  Index  of  Financial  Stress,  which  is  used  to  measure  the
degree of financial stress across markets; and the Early Warning System on currency crisis and
on debt sustainability.
Likewise, in terms of supervision, we continue to review and align our financial regulations and
policies  with 
the
competitiveness of our banks in view of the ASEAN integration. We intend to further develop our
macro-financial  surveillance  capability  by  improving  coordination  and  cooperation  with  other
government agencies and regulators.
to  enhance  risk  management  and  ensure 
international  standards 
With the rapidly evolving technology and payments landscape, our policy stance in supporting
responsible fintech innovation remains anchored on three core principles:
1) Regulations must be risk-based, proportionate and fair.
2) There should be an active multi-stakeholder collaboration.
3) Regulations must ensure consumer protection.
Accordingly, please allow me to mention some key policy initiatives that we have implemented:
We  updated  the  BSP’s  regulatory  framework  on  the  operation  of  money  service  business  to
enhance  the  customer  due  diligence  expectations  and  re-balance  the  objectives  of  financial
integrity and financial inclusion.
We also established a framework for regulating virtual currency exchanges which subject them
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to registration, minimum capital requirements, internal controls, and regulatory reporting, among
others.
At the same time, we recognize that digital finance delivered through mobile technology alone
cannot reach everyone. This is why we have also issued regulations that enable cash agents to
provide  improved  “last  mile”  delivery  of  financial  services  to  the  unbanked  and  under-banked
among our countrymen.
Needless to say that the BSP is committed to the effective discharge of its mandates and policy
thrusts—foremost of which is maintaining price stability—to contribute to the country’s favorable
growth narrative. Maintaining price and financial stability, as well as an effective and transparent
payments systems, will help foster an enabling macroeconomic environment that is conducive to
a sustainable economic growth.
On monetary policy, the BSP remains committed to a forward-looking approach to pre-emptively
address  risks  to  price  stability.  In  every  policy  decision  that  we  will  make,  we  will  always  be
guided by the evolving conditions for inflation and outlook, while being mindful of developments in
the world economy.
On financial stability, the BSP will continue efforts to safeguard the domestic financial system
and help manage risks attendant to financial market developments. The goal is to strengthen the
regulatory regime to ensure responsible risk-taking by financial institutions.
We are also stepping up advocacy efforts to promote financial learning and microfinance to more
sectors and areas across the country.
Finally, in the area of payments and settlements, we will remain proactive in ensuring the safety
and timely completion of financial transactions by minimizing systemic risks and enhancing the
integrity of financial processes through progressive policies on e-commerce and innovations.
The growth narrative of the Philippine economy has gone a long way. The transformation that the
domestic  economy  underwent  before  achieving  its  current  state,  has  been  arduous,  and  at
times,  painful,  but  nevertheless  rooted  on  solid  structural  underpinnings  and  macroeconomic
policy discipline.
In closing, while the Philippine economy is not immune from risks in the global market, it is well
insulated. In a global environment where risk sentiment is fragile and uncertainty is permanent,
we are confident to say that the Philippines still provides a unique value proposition that is not
fleeting, but anchored on a dynamic track record of changing for the better.
At the same time, we need to ensure that this growth performance continues over the longer
term so that the next generation of Filipinos will likewise enjoy years of economic prosperity. In
this  regard,  a  sustained  commitment  to  pursue  the  Government’s  infrastructure  and  reform
agenda will support high, inclusive, and sustainable growth.
For its part, the BSP remains committed to the effective pursuit of its mandates for the country’s
continued, balanced, and sustainable growth which ultimately will improve the life of every Filipino
people.
Thank you and mabuhay!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
