Yandraduth  Googoolye:  Mauritius 
system to spur digital economy
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Launch of the
Mauritius Central Automated Switch, Port Louis, 14 August 2019.
launches  Switch  payments
Honourable Pravind Kumar Jugnauth, Prime Minister
 Honourable Deputy Prime Minister
Honourable Ministers
Board directors of the Bank of Mauritius
Your Excellencies Members of the Diplomatic Corp
His Lordship, The Lord Mayor of Port Louis
Former Governor, Present and Former Deputy Governors
Chairman of the Mauritius Bankers Association
Chief Executives of Regulatory Authorities, Banks, and Other Financial Institutions
Members of the Press
Ladies and Gentlemen
Good afternoon.
Thank you all for being here with us to mark another landmark in the Bank’s functions.
We  often  associate  central  banking  with  monetary  policy,  financial  stability,  supervision  and
regulation of banks and deposit-takers, amongst others. However, we tend to minimise another
major function of central banks: that of promoting a safe, secure, and efficient payment system.
An  efficient  payments  system  reduces  the  cost  of  exchanging  goods  and  services.  It  is
indispensable to the functioning of the money and capital markets. The system is necessary to
promote financial stability, assist in the conduct of monetary policy, and improve the efficiency of
the financial system and the economy as a whole.
Payment systems have always rested at the heart of the banking and financial system. Over
time, they have evolved from the traditional narrow channel for transferring funds into a broader
integrated  network  for  creating  additional  forms  of  value.  The  establishment  of  networks  and
systems for retail payments has acted as a catalyst in supporting financial access in developing
countries.
Since  independence,  transactions  in  Mauritius  have  been  primarily  cash-based,  with  cheques
being the only alternative to cash. The seed for a modern payment infrastructure for Mauritius
was sown around 1995.  In the first phase, an interbank fund transfer system in real time was
implemented. This culminated with the implementation of a real-time gross settlement system on
15  December  2000,  known  as  the  Mauritius  Automated  Clearing  and  Settlement  System
(MACSS).
The  MACSS  allows  interbank  transfer  of  funds  and  links  electronically  all  banks  operating  in
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Mauritius as well as the Ministry of Finance to the Bank of Mauritius via a secure, reliable and
efficient payment network. Effective 14 January 2009, the MACSS application was upgraded. It
now has a more resilient architecture that supports multi-currency transactions. That is, we are
able to settle payments not only in local currency but also in major international currencies, the
first of its kind in sub-Saharan Africa at that time.
The  automation  of  the  Port  Louis  Clearing  House  constituted  the  second  phase  of  the
modernisation  of  the  payment  systems.  This  phase  required,  as  a  pre-requisite,  the
standardisation  of  cheques  using  Magnetic  Ink  Character  Recognition.  This  process  was
completed in 2003 and led to the electronic settlement of cheques. The last leg of the second
phase consisted of carrying out clearing of cheques based on the electronic images of cheques,
known as Cheque Truncation, and was completed in September 2011.
Honourable Prime Minister, through this initiative, the Bank supports the development of Mauritius
into a digital economy. MauCAS is a payment ecosystem designed to benefit all stakeholders of
the payment industry, from end-customers to merchants and service providers as well as the
Government.  MauCAS will be a game changer in the way payments are carried out in Mauritius
and creates many firsts in Mauritius:
As the first national payment platform to operate round the clock, a feature attributable to a
handful of countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, MauCAS effects retail payments outside official
operating hours. This will change the dynamics of currency circulation in the country, reduce
float in the system and allow banks and businesses to manage their liquidity more efficiently.
It sets rolling the Instant Payments System, which will enable customers to effect transfers
between any two accounts in any two institutions within seconds. Instant Payment services
will also comprise instant direct debits and credits.
It  introduces  the  concept  of  dissociating  an  account  from  a  payment  service.  Thus,  any
person can avail the service offered by any operator, bank or non-bank, and tie it with an
existing  account  in  another  bank.  This  will  allow  new  payment  services  to  emerge  while
letting banks maintain their customer base.
MauCAS allows non-bank payment service operators to access selected account details of
their  customers  in  banks  through  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  under  strict  security  norms.  This
provision  represents  our  adherence  to  the  European  Payment  Service  Directive  2,  which
sets the legal framework for banks to open their core banking systems through application
programming  interfaces  (APIs).  MauCAS  which  is  API  enabled,  will  permit  operators  to
come up with open banking solutions.
It  introduces  the  concept  of  payment  through  Alias,  where  customers  make  payments
through easy to remember pseudonyms such as email addresses while keeping account
numbers safe and secure. The Alias feature of MauCAS will be managed centrally by the
Bank of Mauritius.
It  initiates  nationwide  bill  payment  facilities  where  billers  such  as  utility  companies  will
digitally interface with MauCAS to upload their billing information. Service providers will be
able to tap on such information to provide embedded services to their customers.
MauCAS allows the sharing of ATMs as well as other value-added services.
Government can use this technology to issue special purpose cards for transport and for the
provision  of  social  benefits.  Similarly,  other  sectors  of  the  economy  can  embark  on  this
facility and avoid issues associated with the handling of physical cash.
We expect MauCAS to contribute to:
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Lower  transaction  costs.  MauCAS  will  act  as  a  direct  intermediary  between  operators  to
bring  about  the  much  needed  efficiency  and  will  charge  much  lower  routing  fees  to
operators, bringing down the cost of payments.
Reduce operating costs. As the central payment infrastructure, MauCAS allows operators to
connect through low-cost interfaces such as APIs. Operators that target the domestic card
segment will gain from reduced operational costs, which will be expected to be passed on
customers.
Increase  the  number  of  payment  operators.  MauCAS  will  encourage  the  flourishing  of
payment services providers through the provision of more electronic payment options which
will develop products that leverage on the switch as a service infrastructure. The Bank of
Mauritius is providing a level playing field for bank and non-bank operators, which will offer a
variety of novel services to customers.
Support E-government services. MauCAS will offer government a national payment gateway
to set up services on the MauCAS platform to boost the acceptance of electronic forms of
payments for all government agencies and deliver online services.
The idea of a payment switch germinated some time in 2010, but it was not until an amendment
to the Bank of Mauritius Act in 2015 that the ground work began. The pathway to MauCAS was
not without thorns. Throughout our journey, the Bank was subject to a number of criticisms and
indirect pressures to discourage it to move forward. Please allow me to rebut some of those
criticisms.
There was a fear that the Bank would be competing with banks and other operators. Ladies and
Gentlemen, no responsible central bank will ever attempt this. The Bank has national interests
above all. With MauCAS, the Bank aims to ensure that our payment system is up-to-date and in
line with Digital Mauritius.
The involvement of the Bank in the setting up of MauCAS emanates from the Bank of Mauritius
Act and the National Payment Systems Act. The Bank is mandated to oversee as well as own
payment schemes. The perception of collusion or conflict of interest does not arise as the Bank
will have separate teams for operations and oversight.
The Bank has always adopted an enabling approach with regard to new technology in order not
to stifle innovation. MauCAS is a testimony of the Bank’s commitment towards maintaining an
innovative, yet secure, payment system ecosystem.
The launch of MauCAS is not the end in itself. It is the start of a fantastic journey. The Bank will
go around improving the system and adding new features. The Bank intends to establish bilateral
ties  with  switch  operators  from  other  countries  with  a  view  to  bringing  down  the  cost  of
transactions  for  trade  in  goods  and  services,  including  for  tourism  purposes,  with  these
countries. The creation of a payment card for the islands in the region is another project that will
contribute to higher trade among these countries. The Bank has other projects in the pipeline for
the benefit of financial institutions and the public at large.
On the regional front, Mauritius is already a member and host of the COMESA Regional Payment
and Settlement System (REPSS). MauCAS may serve as a regional switch to the participating
countries.  It  can  be  used  for  cross  border  retail  payments  through  mobiles  and  cards,  with
settlement being carried out on REPSS.
Honourable  Prime  Minister,  in  your  2016/17  Budget  Speech,  you  mentioned  that  the  Bank  of
Mauritius will come up with a National Payment Switch as well as introduce a National Payment
Bill. Both have materialised under your guidance and support.
Testing  but  interesting  times  lie  ahead  as  digital  transformation  brings  about  fundamental
changes  in  working  modes  and  business  models  of  the  financial  sector  as  well  as  changing
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
customer preferences. Such openings can be but beneficial to our society and economy. We
must not only take advantage of the opportunities but also be alert to manage any accompanying
risks.
Now  that  the  Bank  is  launching  MauCAS,  I  invite  banks  and  non-bank  operators  to  make
extensive use of this platform. The opportunities to develop new payment services are immense.
Both payment service providers as well as consumers stand to gain from this modern system.
Operators in Fintech can also leverage this platform to launch new products and services.
This journey would not have been as fruitful without the support of our partners, banks and other
economic  stakeholders.  I  thank  all  Chief  Executives  of  banks  for  their  assistance  and
cooperation to deliver on MauCAS, which will benefit one and all. Last but not least, I thank the
Bank’s Board of Directors, my two Deputy Governors and the staff of the Bank for their guidance
and hard work.
Thank you.
Payment systems have always rested at the heart of the banking and financial system. Over
time, they have evolved from the traditional narrow channel for transferring funds into a broader
integrated  network  for  creating  additional  forms  of  value.  The  establishment  of  networks  and
systems for retail payments has acted as a catalyst in supporting financial access in developing
countries.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
