Yandraduth Googoolye: Renewed protectionist tendencies - some
implications for macroeconomic policy in Africa
Speech  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Continental
Seminar of the AACB for the year 2019, Balaclava, 6 May 2019.
 Deputy Governors
Mr Papa Lamine Diop, Executive Secretary of  the AACB
Delegates from member central banks
Ladies and Gentlemen
Members of the media
Good  Morning  and  a  warm  welcome  to  you  all  in  Mauritius  for  this  2019  AACB  Continental
Seminar.  This  is  the  first  time  that  the  Bank  is  hosting  this  event.  We  are  pleased  to  have
participation from 24 member central banks and 12 institutions. I am given to understand that we
have  about  70  participants.  The  large  turn-out  demonstrates  the  importance  of  the  chosen
theme.
The Bank of Mauritius has participated actively in AACB meetings and activities over the past
years.  Mr  Diop,  who  is  with  us  today,  can  bear  testimony  to  this.  We  hosted  the  Governors’
meetings of the AACB Eastern Africa sub-region in July 2007 and July 2008 and we also hosted
the AACB Annual Meetings in August 2013 in our capacity as Vice – Chair of the Association.
Last year, as Chair of the sub-region, the Bank hosted for the third time the Governors’ meeting
for the Eastern Africa sub-region.
The  theme  for  this  2019  Continental  Seminar:  ‘Renewed  Protectionist  Tendencies:  Some
Implications  for  Macroeconomic  Policy  in  Africa’  is  highly  pertinent  and  topical.  In  its  latest
Regional  Economic  Outlook  for  sub-Saharan Africa,  the  IMF  has  estimated  growth  to  pick  up
from 3 percent in 2018 to 3.5 percent in 2019.
The  economic  recovery  under  way  is  a  positive  development.  However,  one  can  reasonably
argue that current and expected growth levels are somewhat inadequate to lift millions of people
out of poverty and provide decent jobs to an estimated 20 million new entrants to labour markets
each year.
The IMF has also cautioned against downside risks stemming from heightened trade tensions,
slower growth in China, lower commodity prices, and tighter global financial conditions, which
could  lower  growth  in  sub-Saharan Africa  by  2  percentage  points  this  year. As  expected,  the
impact would be more pronounced for commodity exporters and countries with stronger links to
China and global markets.
A  review  of  the  performance  of  African  countries  with  respect  to  the  African  Monetary
Cooperation  Program  criteria  in  recent  years  indicates  clearly  that  African  countries  are  not
building adequate fiscal and external buffers to cope with a range of shocks – both internal and
external. Our economies rely  too  much  on  mineral  resources  and  agriculture.  They  also  face
significant  infrastructural  gaps  and  have  fragmented  markets.  Regional  integration  is  also
relatively low. 
Africa is far more dependent on overseas trade than any other economic region or global player.
The  fact  is  that  Africa  is  integrated  asymmetrically  in  global  trade.    Originating  mainly  from
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
resource-rich  countries,  African  exports  are  concentrated  in  raw  materials  and  agricultural
products. These range from crude oil, gold and diamond to cocoa and timber, fruits and nuts,
copper, natural gas, cotton, iron ore, uranium, just to name a few of these. Imports are mainly
dominated by capital goods.
Openness  to  trade  brings  many  benefits  to  the  supply  side  of  the  economy.  That  is  why  we
cannot but welcome the African Continental Free Trade Area agreement which, once completed,
will  establish  a  market  of  1.2  billion  people  with  a  combined  GDP  of  2.5  trillion  dollars.  The
agreement could significantly boost intra-African trade whilst promoting foreign direct investment
and technology transfers. This can potentially raise the competitiveness of African economies
and enhance their integration into the global economy.
Before the global financial crisis, trade growth has been a major engine of global growth and an
enhancer of living standards worldwide. The integration of economies into global trade, notably
through participation in global value chains, has improved incomes. It has also moved millions of
people out of poverty. Since the crisis, trade has generally lagged behind output growth.
Some economies have borne the brunt of open trade. A number of them have been running a
persistent  trade  deficit  and  have  been  facing  intense  competition.  We  have  also  witnessed
scenarios  of  protectionism  resulting  in  an  increase  in  non-tariff  barriers.  The  anti-globalisation
sentiment which emerged since the crisis has been gradually cemented through what has been
termed a “trade war", leading to a broader reversal of globalisation. Some economies have even
announced retaliatory measures.
Recourse to trade protectionism has been posited to foster recovery from economic downturns. 
This, by creating barriers aiming at protecting the economy from the negative impacts of open
trade and improving their trade balances.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  protectionist  measures  impact  on  the  free  movement  of  goods  and
services and they obviously affect economic performances across the world. Higher tariffs have
an  effect  on  growth  and  inflation  whilst  influencing  financial  conditions,  expectations  and
confidence in the near to medium term.
For  us  central  bankers,  such  elements  can  influence  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Higher
tariffs could translate into higher import prices and these could increase firms’ production costs.
This  could  ultimately  reduce  households’  purchasing  power.  Ultimately,  depending  on  the
severity of these impacts, they would weigh on consumption, investment and employment, which
could negatively affect the GDP performance.
The  uncertainty  about  growth  prospects  is  bound  to  postpone  investment  decisions.  This  is
something that we would never wish to see. Barriers to trade would also cause both productivity
and potential output to decline. What this means is that protectionism does matter for central
bank  policy.  And  that  is  why  this  Seminar  will  enable  our  participants  to  ponder  on  the
implications of protectionism.
Before  I  end,  allow  me  to  quote  former  US  President  Barrack  Obama…  I  quote:  “There  are
legitimate concerns and anxieties that the forces of globalisation are leaving too many people
behind – and we have to take those concerns seriously and address them. But the answer isn’t
to turn inward and embrace protectionism. We can’t just walk away from trade”. Unquote.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  there  cannot  be  winners  in  trade  wars.  Protectionism  is  not  the  right
answer to the economic challenges that some economies are witnessing.
On this thought, I wish you all fruitful deliberations.
I look forward to your report for consideration of Governors at the 2019 AACB Annual Meeting
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
scheduled on 01 August 2019 in Kigali, Rwanda.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
