Philip R Lane: The Centenary of Dáil Éireann - coin launch
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the launch of the €2
circulating coin and €100 gold coin commemorating the centenary of the meeting of the First
Dáil, Dublin, 16 January 2019.
Introduction
 Lord  Mayor  of  Dublin,  Ceann  Comhairle,  ministers,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  honoured  to
participate in today’s launch of these two new coins that commemorate the centenary of Dáil
Éireann. There are two coins: a €2 coin that will be in general circulation (one million have been
minted), plus a commemorative €100 gold coin.
The Central Bank acts as the agent for the Minister of Finance in issuing all Irish coins, both
circulating  and  commemorative.  The  first  Irish  proof  set  was  issued  by  the  Currency
Commission in 1928 and commemorative coins have been issued over the decades to mark
both  key  moments  in  our  history  as  well  as  the  individuals  who  helped  shape  it.  Through  the
issuance  of  the  new  coins,  the  Central  Bank  is  pleased  to  play  its  part  in  the  Decade  of
Commemorations.
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Lord  Mayor  for  his  welcome  to  the  Mansion  House:  the  momentous
gathering of the first TDs in the Round Room is depicted in the new coins.
The Oireachtas and the Central Bank of Ireland
Today’s event is a natural opportunity to reflect on the relationship between the Oireachtas and
the  Bank.  This  is  a  multi-layered  relationship.  At  a  fundamental  level,  the  mandates  and
governance structures of the Bank are determined by legislation, as originally laid out in the initial
1942  law  and  through  major  revisions  such  as  the  Central  Bank  Reform  Act  2010.  It  is
fascinating to read the transcripts of the Oireachtas debates concerning these landmark pieces
of  legislation,  with  the  various  contributions  highlighting  the  range  of  concerns  of  Oireachtas
members in relation to the role of a central bank in the functioning of the financial system and the
wider economy.
In related fashion, the regulatory and supervisory work of the Bank is guided by many individual
pieces of legislation, whether domestic in origin or transposed from European directives. Each of
these acts requires careful consideration through the various stages of the Oireachtas legislative
process. The extensive regulatory reforms of the European and domestic financial systems in
the wake of the financial crisis has meant that the Oireachtas has had to devote considerable
time to Bank-related legislation over the last decade.
For instance, the Central Bank assisted with fifteen bills during 2018, while nine regulations were
put  before  the  Oireachtas.  The  Bank  also  routinely  provides  assistance  on  the  drafting  of
statutory instruments that transpose EU directives into Irish law.
The  emergency  nature  of  some  crisis-related  measures  also  puts  pressure  on  the  normal
conduct of Oireachtas business, as was vividly evident in relation to the September 2008 bank
guarantee and the February 2013 liquidation of IBRC.
In addition to the legislative function, the Oireachtas also plays a vital role in holding the Bank to
account in terms of the execution of its mandates. As explained in the magisterial book written by
Paul Tucker, the independence granted to central banks and financial regulators in fulfilling their
mandates must be accompanied by sufficient scrutiny by parliaments if democratic legitimacy is
to be maintained (Tucker 2018).
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  Oireachtas  performs  this  function  through  several  mechanisms.  Each  year,  many
parliamentary questions are put to the Minister of Finance in relation to the work of the Bank. For
example,  we  estimate  that  there  were  384  Bank-related  parliamentary  questions  answered  in
2018. In addition, the Bank corresponded with Oireachtas members on ninety-four matters last
year.
In addition, the leadership of the Bank appears several times each year before the Oireachtas
Joint Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, and Taoiseach. In these sessions,
committee  members  can  press  the  Bank’s  senior  management  on  a  wide  range  of  topics  in
relation  to  its  work  across  its  various  mandates.  This  provides  an  important  mechanism  by
which the Bank can explain its actions, even if confidentiality requirements inevitably put some
limit on transparency in relation to the supervision of individual institutions. In addition, a wider
range  of  Bank  staff  appear  before  Oireachtas  committees  in  relation  to  specific  pieces  of
legislation  or  technical  topics.  In  total,  Bank  staff  appeared  before  Oireachtas  Committees  on
eight occasions during 2018.
The Oireachtas has also played a major role in shedding light on the origins and dynamics of the
financial  crisis  through  the  work  of  the  Joint  Committee  of  Inquiry  into  the  Banking  Crisis.  In
addition  to  the  report  of  the  committee,  the  statements  from  many  participants  and  the
associated  hearings  constitute  a  vital  historical  record.  It  is  essential  that  such  inquiries  take
place  in  order  to  make  sure  that  the  lessons  are  fully  absorbed,  which  can  help  reduce  the
likelihood of future crises (both in Ireland and elsewhere).
A further dimension of the relationship between the Oireachtas and the Bank is the contribution of
the surplus income of the Bank to the public finances and the integration of the balance sheet of
the Bank into the wider public sector balance sheet.
For  budgetary  strategy,  it  is  important  that  the  Oireachtas  has  sufficient  understanding  of  the
contribution  of  the  Bank’s  surplus  income  in  the  overall  revenues  of  the  government.  In  this
regard, the Parliamentary Budget Office can play a useful role in assisting parliamentarians in the
technical analysis of the Bank’s income: its 2018 note on this topic is a useful initial contribution
to this end (Parliamentary Budget Office 2018).
In relation to the wider financial health of the State, it is important to take an integrated view that
recognises that the assets and liabilities of the Central Bank form an important part of the overall
public balance sheet. At the same time, even while there are fiscal implications from our balance
sheet decisions, it is essential that the Bank’s balance sheet is managed independently in line
with our central banking mandate, whether in relation to price stability or financial stability. For
instance, the balance sheet is currently large for two reasons: (a) the local implementation of the
European  Central  Bank’s  (ECB)  asset  purchase  programmes;  and  (b)  the  remainder  of  the
special portfolio of floating rate notes issued by the government to the Central Bank upon the
liquidation of IBRC in 2013.
In turn, the liquidity (against collateral) provided by the Bank to IBRC was just one component of
the large-scale system-wide provision of emergency liquidity to domestic banks during the crisis.
The expansion and contraction of the balance sheet occurs in pursuit of the policy goals of the
Bank and the wider eurosystem – optimising the balance sheet for income purposes is not an
independent policy objective.
We spend considerable effort in carefully managing our balance sheet, in order to maintain the
necessary  financial  independence  of  the  Bank,  while  also  delivering  surplus  income  to  the
government.  For  example,  we  have  recently  published  two  studies  that  explain  the  underlying
drivers of our balance sheet and the associated risk management tools that we employ (Donnery
et al 2017, Doran et al 2018).
Finally, as members of the eurosystem, our shared accountability for the operation of the ECB is
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
to the European Parliament, with the President of the ECB appearing before the Committee on
Economic and Monetary Affairs on a quarterly basis and the annual report of the ECB scrutinised
by  the  European  Parliament.  That  said,  it  is  desirable  that  the  leadership  of  the  ECB  also
participates in dialogues with national parliamentarians. To this end, the recent appearance of
President  Draghi  before  the  Oireachtas  Joint  Committee  provided  an  important  opportunity  to
exchange views on the work of the ECB and macro-financial conditions in Europe.
Conclusions
Our  mission  statement  reads:  “The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  serves  the  public  interest  by
safeguarding monetary and financial stability and by working to ensure that the financial system
operates  in  the  best  interests  of  consumers  and  the  wider  economy.”  Fulfilling  our  mission
involves  a  close  but  challenging  relationship  with  the  Oireachtas:  we  operate  within  the  legal
framework  passed  by  the  Oireachtas  and  recognise  that  our  decisions  and  operations  are
subject to the scrutiny of Oireachtas members, while having the duty to make independent (and
sometimes  politically  controversial)  decisions  in  delivering  our  mandate. As  we  celebrate  the
centenary  of  the  Dáil  with  the  launch  of  this  coin,  we  look  forward  to  the  next  century  of  the
relationship between the Oireachtas and the Bank.
I would like to thank our colleagues in the Austrian Mint for their expertise and commitment in
minting this beautiful gold coin. I would also like to express my gratitude to Emmet Mullins, who
designed both the gold coin and the €2 coin. Emmet is a designer, art director and illustrator
based in Dublin. His understanding of the theme and the significance of the historical event is
captured in this design, which I am sure will be highly appealing both to the general public and
coin collectors.
The Central Bank – on behalf of the Minister for Finance – takes great pride in the issuing of such
commemorative coins. It is an important element of our public service role and is a unique way to
pay tribute to individuals and events of national importance.
Accordingly, I am delighted to present this gold proof coin marking the centenary of Dáil Éireann
to the Ceann Comhairle Seán Ó Fearghaíl TD for display in Leinster House.
References
 Donnery,  Sharon,  David  Doran,  Ruth  Gleeson  and  Konstantina  Carroll  (2017),  “Non-Standard
Monetary Policy Measures and the Balance Sheets of Eurosystem Central Banks,” Central Bank
of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2017–03.
Doran, David, Ruth Gleeson, Steve Kilkenny and Sarunas Ramanauskas (2018), “Assessing the
Financial Risks and Buffers of the Central Bank,” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin 2018–
04.
Honohan, Patrick (2018), “Three Quarter-Centuries of Central Banking in Ireland,” Central Bank
of Ireland Economic Letter 2018–3.
Parliamentary  Budget  Office  (2018),  “Note  on  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  Surplus  Income,”  PBO
Note 5 of 2018.
Tucker,  Paul  (2018),  Unelected  Power:  The  Quest  for  Legitimacy  in  Central  Banking  and  the
Regulatory State, Princeton University Press.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
