 Speech 
   Embargo 
5 September 2019, 6.00 pm 
Currencies, money and digital tokens 
30th anniversary of the WWZ and VBÖ, University of Basel 
 
Thomas J. Jordan* 
 
Chairman of the Governing Board  
Swiss National Bank 
Basel, 5 September 2019 
© Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 2019 (speech given in German) 
   * The speaker would like to thank Oliver Sigrist for his support in preparing this speech. He also thanks Simone Auer, Nicolas Cuche-Curti, 
Matthias Gubler, Christoph Hirter, Carlos Lenz and Alexander Perruchoud, as well as SNB Language Services. 
   Page 1/7 
   Ladies and gentlemen 
 It is a great pleasure, and an honour, to be invited to speak to you today, on the occasion of 
the 30th anniversary of the University of Basel’s Faculty of Business and Economics (WWZ) 
and the Vereinigung Basler Ökonomen (VBÖ). I congratulate you wholeheartedly on 
reaching this milestone. There is a long-standing and close association between the Swiss 
National Bank (SNB), on the one hand, and the WWZ and the University of Basel on the 
other. Many SNB economists were trained here and some of our staff regularly give lectures 
at the WWZ. I would like to thank the University of Basel and the organisers for inviting me 
to this special event. I am sure that the ties between our institutions will continue to be close 
for many years to come. 
For central bankers, Basel is a special place. We regularly meet with our counterparts from all 
over the world at the headquarters of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), not far 
from the WWZ, to discuss the challenges facing us. These challenges have always revolved 
around monetary policy and financial stability. The increasing digitalisation of the financial 
sector opens up another area for discussion. Against this backdrop, the BIS announced a few 
months ago that it was launching an Innovation Hub. The aim of the Hub is to study 
technological developments with the potential to improve the functioning of financial markets 
and support central banks in fulfilling their mandates. Furthermore, it will provide a network 
for central banks to exchange knowledge on innovations. One of the Hub’s three regional 
centres will be in Switzerland, and will be operated jointly with the SNB.  
The word ‘innovation’ brings me to the subject of my speech tonight. 
Issuers and types of money 
Ladies and gentlemen, how do you pay your bill in your favourite restaurant? With cash, card 
or smartphone? We already have various payment options at our disposal, and these are 
typically based on cash or book money. In the not-too-distant future you may also be able to 
pay using a ‘digital token’. Money in the form of a token? What’s that, you may ask? Before 
we get into the detail, let’s first remind ourselves of the similarities and differences between 
the various types of money. 
Given that Basel lies at the intersection of three countries, your favourite restaurant might 
well be in France or Germany. So you may need to decide not just in what form you want to 
settle your bill, but in what currency. What exactly is the difference between currency and 
money? A currency defines a unit of account. In Switzerland and Liechtenstein the Swiss 
franc is the official or ‘state’ currency used to pay for goods and services. In the surrounding 
countries, the official currency of the euro area – the euro – is the unit of account. 
Multiple types of money co-exist within a given currency. These can be broken down into 
categories as shown in this illustration. Two principal types of money are in use today: cash 
(banknotes and coins) and book money. While banknotes and coins are issued by states, bank 
  Page 2/7 
    deposits, held on the accounts of commercial banks, are privately issued book money. The 
sight deposits of financial market participants, held at central banks, are another form of book 
money. This state book money functions as a liquidity reserve for commercial banks and as a 
means of payment for interbank transactions. 
In addition to cash and book money, another type of money has recently emerged: digital 
‘token money’. Tokens are digital assets, which can be transferred from one party to another. 
As with a payment using a banknote, such a transaction does not require the involvement of a 
central third party. I shall devote the rest of my remarks to exploring this kind of digital token 
money in greater depth.  
Our understanding of digital token money has been heavily influenced by cryptocurrencies 
like Bitcoin. Cyptocurrencies are privately issued currencies denominated in their own units 
of account. In our illustration, we refer to money based on cryptocurrencies as ‘crypto 
tokens’. 
Digital tokens can be issued in conjunction with a private cryptocurrency denominated in its 
own unit of account; but they can also use an official currency as their unit of account. On the 
one hand there are private issuers, who claim that the value of their tokens is stable against 
official currencies; in our illustration we assign this type of token money to the ‘stable coins’ 
category. However, state institutions such as central banks can also issue digital token money 
– the SNB, for example, could issue a Swiss franc token. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as you see, digital token money can take a number of forms. It is 
important that we understand the characteristics and implications of these various tokens, as 
they could influence the SNB’s mandate. I will now set out our thoughts on this topic. 
Privately issued digital token money 
Let me start by outlining our view of cryptocurrencies, before moving on to discuss stable 
coins and state-issued digital tokens. We believe that cryptocurrencies and cryptocurrency-
based tokens are of only limited use as payment instruments, stores of value and units of 
account because they are subject to major fluctuations. Crypto tokens are more like 
speculative investment instruments than ‘good’ money in terms of their characteristics. Users 
typically describe money as ‘good’ if it has a stable value over time, is broadly accepted, and 
enables efficient payments. Given these parameters, it seems unlikely that crypto tokens will 
be widely used as money in Switzerland. 
The picture may be different for stable coins, however. These are designed in such a way that 
they can potentially assume the characteristics of good money – for instance if they are 
pegged to stable, official currencies. In the simplest case, such an anchor would consist of a 
single currency. Let’s take an example: An issuer of stable coins in Swiss francs would 
typically pledge that his tokens are equal in value to Swiss franc cash. When it comes to 
classifying these kinds of stable coins, two important factors need to be taken into 
  Page 3/7 
    consideration. The first concerns the strength of such a pledge. Does the issuer explicitly 
commit to instantly and unconditionally converting the stable coins into Swiss franc cash at 
nominal value? Or is the pledge merely a statement of the issuer’s intention to keep the 
exchange value of his tokens stable against the Swiss franc? The second key point concerns 
the credibility of the pledge. In the case of a Swiss franc stable coin, the more extensively the 
issued tokens are backed by Swiss franc-denominated assets – and the more liquid and 
intrinsically valuable these assets are – the more credible the pledge will be. And indeed, 
some stable coin issuers seek to lend their ‘stable value’ pledge maximum credibility by 
ensuring that their tokens are fully backed by bank deposits or banknotes in the anchor 
currency. 
The Facebook-affiliated Libra project has attracted a lot of attention in recent weeks. Libra 
can be classified as a stable coin, as its value is supposed to be kept stable against a basket of 
official currencies. Libra’s creators have sought to underpin this claim by fully backing their 
stable coin with a reserve of assets (including government bonds) in the relevant currencies. 
However, there is no guarantee that Libra will be converted – proportionally and at any time – 
into the currencies in the basket. Libra is thus its own unit of account and a private currency. 
Libra and the Swiss franc stable coin I mentioned earlier represent only a small part of the 
spectrum of possible stable coins. Irrespective of their precise structure, such stable coins 
share one core characteristic: they are pegged to stable currencies in order to minimise 
fluctuations in value. Stable coins therefore hold greater promise for widespread deployment 
as a payment instrument and store of value than today’s crypto tokens. This is why it is 
important that we analyse and classify stable coins rigorously from a regulatory and monetary 
policy perspective. 
First, on the regulatory front, it is essential that we are clear about the economic function of 
stable coins. Depending on how they are structured, stable coins may have the characteristics 
of a bank deposit or a privately issued banknote. This would be the case for the Swiss franc 
stable coin, were it to be used widely for cashless payments or as a store of value, as it would 
effectively become a substitute for Swiss franc bank deposits. The issuers of such Swiss franc 
stable coins would take on functions similar to those of a bank – all the more so if they were 
to use the funds collected to finance risky, long-term projects and engage in maturity 
transformation. 
If the economic function of stable coins is comparable to that of bank deposits, their issuers 
should have to play by the same rules as banks. The principle of regulating by activity rather 
than by technology (‘same business, same risks, same rules’) must apply here. On the other 
hand, not all stable coins are directly comparable with bank deposits, particularly if a token is 
used more for investment purposes. Certain stable coins could therefore conceivably be issued 
without the issuer holding a banking licence. Today, the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory 
Authority already classifies tokens according to their function, and the regulatory treatment is 
  Page 4/7 
    different for each category. However, the more a stable coin resembles a bank deposit or cash 
in terms of its economic function, the greater its utility as money will be. 
Whether or not a banking licence is required, stable coin issuers must abide by certain 
regulations just like any other financial market participant. These range from investor and 
data protection to rules on combating money laundering and terrorism financing. As you see, 
ladies and gentlemen, stable coins present many regulatory challenges, which in turn require 
close cooperation between the various authorities. This is particularly true of cross-border 
projects like Libra. 
In addition to the regulatory issues, there is the question of whether stable coins might 
influence the effectiveness of monetary policy. If Swiss franc stable coins were to proliferate 
in Switzerland, this would have no immediate impact on the effectiveness of our monetary 
policy. In such a scenario, the Swiss franc would remain the relevant currency. The stable 
coins pegged to Swiss francs would simply be another Swiss franc-denominated form of 
money alongside bank deposits and cash. As long as prices, wages and loans are set in Swiss 
francs, the SNB can influence incentives for savers and borrowers via its monetary policy and 
thus ensure price stability over the medium term. However, if stable coins pegged to foreign 
currencies were to establish themselves in Switzerland, the effectiveness of our monetary 
policy could be impaired. 
How close stable coins will get to good money and what additional benefits they will offer 
versus traditional types of money remains to be seen. What matters is that the various book 
and token money providers operate under identical competitive and regulatory conditions. 
The market will then decide which types of money households and companies prefer over the 
long term. 
So far, I have focused on various types of digital token money emerging from the private 
sector – crypto tokens on the one hand and stable coins on the other. Inevitably, the debate 
about privately issued digital token money also raises the question of whether central banks 
should issue their own tokens. This brings me to the last section of my speech, which looks at 
state-issued digital token money.  
State-issued digital token money 
Just like a private institution, a central bank, too, can issue digital token money in its own 
currency. Essentially, there are two potential areas of application: One, all households and 
companies could be given access to tokens. Or, two, tokens could be made available only to 
commercial banks and other financial market participants, just like sight deposits at the 
central bank today. 
In Switzerland, the idea of granting all households and companies access to digital central 
bank money was mooted as an alternative to the Swiss sovereign money initiative. The SNB 
put out a statement at the time, and remains critical about the idea of broad access to digital 
  Page 5/7 
    central bank money. I would like to briefly sum up the main arguments, and point out that the 
discussion about access to digital central bank money needs to be conducted independently of 
the technology adopted. In principle, households and companies could be granted access to 
digital central bank money via both a token-based and an account-based system. 
Broad access to digital central bank money would call the existing two-tier banking system 
into question. Instead of being the banker to the banks, as it is today, the SNB would act like a 
commercial bank, taking on the role that is currently played by the private sector. Moreover, 
broad access to digital central bank money could pose a threat to financial stability. Switching 
over from bank deposits to digital central bank money is easier than changing to physical 
banknotes. In a crisis situation, this could increase the risk of a bank run. Thus, overall, the 
implementation of this proposal would have far-reaching consequences not just for banks, but 
also for the entire financial system. 
These fundamental concerns would argue against opening up access to digital central bank 
money to all households and companies. Furthermore, cashless payments in Switzerland are 
already reliable, secure and efficient and the system is continuously being updated and 
refined. So from that standpoint, too, access to digital central bank money for all households 
and companies, whether in the form of Swiss franc tokens or sight deposits, would bring 
virtually no advantages. 
Now let’s turn to the second potential area of application for state-issued digital tokens: 
digital token money exclusively for financial market participants. Such tokens could be used 
in payment transactions between financial market participants in the same way as sight 
deposits are today, and could ultimately result in efficiency gains for financial market 
infrastructures. Taking Switzerland as an example, this would mean that the SNB would make 
Swiss franc tokens available to financial market participants. 
The financial industry and a number of central banks are currently assessing whether, and to 
what extent, tokens can bring efficiency gains. For instance, experiments and tests are being 
conducted with digital tokens in the areas of securities trading, settlement and management. It 
is hoped that ‘security tokens’ could be transferred between counterparties in near real time, 
resulting in more efficient management of securities. In a ‘Swiss franc tokens for financial 
market participants’ scenario it would be possible to exchange security tokens for token 
money on a delivery-versus-payment basis. 
In-depth analysis will be required to determine whether security tokens can indeed bring the 
desired efficiency gains. Besides the technical hurdles that would to be overcome, steps must 
also be taken to ensure that applicable legal and regulatory requirements can be met. 
Moreover, efficiency gains must never be allowed to compromise the security of technical 
systems. 
It is too soon to answer the question of how best to configure money flows in trading with 
security tokens. In certain situations, security tokens could be traded and settled just as 
efficiently if the transfer of funds continued to flow directly via the sight deposits at the 
  Page 6/7 
    central bank. So digital token money for financial market participants is not necessarily a 
prerequisite for achieving efficiency gains in the trading and settlement of security tokens. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, this brings me to my concluding remarks. 
There are a variety of interesting potential uses for digital tokens – including, for example, 
privately issued digital tokens in the form of stable coins, as well as state-issued digital token 
money for financial market participants. 
Stable coins have the potential to achieve broader acceptance than crypto tokens. The 
associated opportunities and risks have to been seen in a wider context. The benchmark for 
assessing utility, efficiency, reliability and security is set by the existing systems and the 
regulations governing comparable activities. Only once there is competition on equal terms 
will it become clear whether stable coins can be a useful and efficient complement to today’s 
cash and book money. 
Moreover, if security tokens become established in the financial sector, this will raise the 
question of whether state-issued digital token money will also be needed for the new financial 
market infrastructures, as a means of payment for financial market participants. Here, too, it 
will have to be demonstrated that such tokens offer advantages over the existing system of 
sight deposits at central banks. The SNB is following developments closely, and is actively 
involved in the debate, not least through its future participation in the BIS Innovation Hub I 
mentioned earlier.  
Thank you for your attention. 
   Page 7/7 
 Currencies, money and digital tokens
Thomas J. Jordan
Chairman of the Governing Board
Swiss National Bank
30th anniversary of the WWZ and VBÖ
University of Basel, 5 September 2019
Types of money in Switzerland
Currency Issuer
Type
Cash
state
Banknotes 
and coins
state
Book money
Digital token money
Sight deposits held at the SNB 
for financial market participants
Swiss franc tokens for financial 
market participants
Sight deposits held at the SNB 
for all households and companies
Swiss franc tokens for all 
households and companies
private
Bank deposits
private
private
Existing types            
of money
Potential types 
of money
05.09.2019            Currencies, money and digital tokens |  Thomas J. Jordan  |  © Swiss National Bank
Stable coins (value stable against 
Swiss franc)
Stable coins (minimal 
fluctuations in value against 
official currencies, e.g. Libra)
Crypto tokens (e.g. Bitcoin)
