John  C  Williams:  Discussion  of  "Prospects  for  Inflation  in  a  High
Pressure  Economy:  Is  the  Phillips  Curve  Dead  or  Is  It  Just
Hibernating?" by Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Amir Sufi
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the US Monetary Policy Forum, New York City, 22 February 2019.
Accompanyting Tables and Figures of the speech.
As prepared for delivery.
 The Phillips curve is the connective tissue between the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate goals of
maximum employment and price stability. Despite regular declarations of its demise, the Phillips
curve has endured. It is useful, both as an empirical basis for forecasting and for monetary policy
analysis.
The paper by Peter Hooper, Rick Mishkin, and Amir Sufi—HMS for short—provides an in-depth
analysis  of  key  aspects  of  inflation  dynamics  in  the  United  States  and  how  they  may  have
changed. This study is particularly timely against the backdrop of an emerging consensus that
the  Phillips  curve  has  become  nearly  flat.  If  this  is  true  it  would  fundamentally  alter  the
employment-inflation trade-offs the Fed confronts.
There is a lot to like about this paper: It synthesizes existing research, new analysis, and bridges
the study of wages and prices. Too often these are studied in isolation. But most significant, as
someone  who  has  discussed  papers  at  the  USMPF  that  reached  the  century  mark  in  page
count, this year’s paper came in at a relatively svelte 65 pages. I hope this represents a durable
structural shift, and isn’t merely a reflection of the fact that this year’s paper has three authors
rather than the usual four.
The paper covers a lot of ground, so I will only summarize a few key takeaways. First, HMS find
evidence of asymmetric effects of unemployment on both price and wage inflation, with very low
rates  of  unemployment  leading  to  disproportionately  large  movements  in  inflation.  That  is,  the
Phillips curve is very much alive in very tight labor markets. Second, they find that the dynamics
of price inflation have changed in important ways; specifically, it has become less sensitive to the
business  cycle  and  less  persistent.  Finally,  they  draw  the  policy  conclusion  that  Fed
policymakers should not be complacent about the possibility of a resurgence of inflation in the
context of a tight labor market.
In  my  remarks,  I  will  discuss  two  issues.  First,  that  price  inflation  dynamics  have  changed
significantly in recent decades. I will argue that a number of structural factors have contributed to
the appearance of a flattening of the Phillips curve and that a modified formulation that accounts
for  these  changes  displays  little  sign  of  the  Phillips  curve  flattening.  Second,  I  will  turn  to  the
issue of anchoring of inflation expectations and the need for the Fed to be vigilant in maintaining
the anchor in the right place. Before I continue, I’ll give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views
I  express  are  mine  alone  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market
Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.
Has the Phillips Curve Changed, or Is it a Trick of the Data?
Throughout the paper, HMS use a reduced-form Phillips curve regression as a basis for their
analysis. For my remarks, I simplify the specification and assume the inflation rate depends on
the unemployment gap (and variants thereof), four lags of inflation, and a constant (relative to
HMS, I have dropped the import price and inflation expectations terms).
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overall, the results for the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index inflation
using  this  simplified  specification  are  quite  similar  to  those  reported  in  HMS.  The  full-sample
(1961-2017) estimated coefficients using the core PCE price inflation rate are reported in the first
column of the upper part of Table 1. The second column reports results corresponding to the
“spline” specification of HMS, where positive values of the unemployment gap are added to the
equation  to  capture  asymmetry  in  the  response  of  inflation  to  labor  market  tightness  versus
slack. The third and fourth columns of Table 1 report the corresponding estimation results for the
subsample of 1961-1987, and the final two columns report the results for the subsample 1988-
2017. Like HMS, the latter sample shows far less intrinsic persistence in inflation and a severe
flattening of the Phillips curve relative to the full-sample results.
Interestingly,  I  find  evidence  in  the  early  (pre-1988)  sample  that  suggests  that  inflation  was,  if
anything, more sensitive to the unemployment gap when unemployment was high, rather than
low. Although these estimates are imprecise, this pattern is the opposite of the claim by HMS,
which  relies  on  full-sample  estimates  to  draw  conclusions.  This  also  runs  counter  to  HMS’s
historical narrative about the 1960s and the dangers of a red-hot labor market. I will not dwell on
this  further,  but  it  is  a  reminder  that  findings  of  nonlinearities  in  Phillips  curves  are  often  not
robust.
The apparent breakdown in this simple price Phillips curve in the past 30 years reflects a number
of  structural  changes  in  the  U.S.  economy.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  success  in  re-anchoring
inflation expectations at a low level can explain the decline in inflation persistence seen in the
data.   However,  the  role  of  well-anchored  expectations  in  flattening  the  Phillips  curve  is  not
obvious, and as HMS note, this flattening is not as clear in the wage inflation equations. This
suggests other forces are at work.
1
Several  usual  suspects  come  to  mind,  including  the  effects  of  supply  shocks,  increased
globalization  of  goods  markets  and  supply  chains,  and  changes  in  the  market  structure  for
consumer  goods.  For  example,  Alberto  Cavallo  has  shown  how  Amazon  and  other  online
retailers have fundamentally changed price dynamics for consumer goods, with prices changing
more  rapidly  and  more  affected  by  exchange  rate  changes.   In  today’s  globalized  and  rapidly
changing  economy,  standard  reduced-form  Phillips  curve  models  that  focus  primarily  on  the
demand-driven movements in inflation are less relevant. Other factors besides the state of the
business cycle dominate price movements for a wide variety of goods.
CSI to the Rescue
2
In  theory,  one  could  try  to  modify  the  model  to  account  of  these  factors,  but  for  the  present
purpose,  a  more  straightforward  approach  is  to  focus  on  prices  for  categories  of  consumer
spending that are less susceptible to supply shocks, international trade, and changing market
structure. This approach follows in the tradition of “core” measures of inflation that remove the
categories  that  are  particularly  prone  to  supply  shocks.  A  number  of  related  measures  have
been  developed  along  these  lines,  including  work  at  both  the  New  York  and  San  Francisco
4
Feds.
3
5
In my remarks I will use the “Cyclically Sensitive Inflation” measure, or CSI, developed by Jim
Stock and Mark Watson.  By design, CSI includes the categories that are cyclically sensitive and
less prone to measurement error or other non-cyclical drivers. In practice, this measure more
heavily weights services with well-measured market-based prices and significantly down-weights
goods. Figure 1 compares the four-quarter moving averages of CSI to that of core PCE price
inflation, with the shaded regions indicating NBER-dated recessions.
Regression results using CSI display neither a flattening of the short-run Phillips curve nor signs
of  nonlinearities.  The  lower  part  of  Table  1  reports  the  estimation  results  using  CSI  inflation.
Starting with the linear specification, the full-sample and early-sample results are very similar to
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
those using core PCE price inflation. This is not altogether surprising since the two series track
each  other  closely  during  the  first  half  of  the  sample.  The  big  difference  is  in  the  later  sub-
sample, where the coefficient on the unemployment gap is not that much smaller than in the
early sample, and larger than in the full-sample estimation. Moreover, there is little evidence of
nonlinearity in the Phillips curve relationship in either the full or later samples. Evidently, both the
flattening of the Phillips curve and evidence of nonlinearities depend on including goods and other
categories that are primarily influenced by non-cyclical factors.
These results suggests that the Phillips curve is alive and kicking when inflation is measured
using categories that are cyclically sensitive, rather than buffeted by supply and other shocks.
Based on this analysis, the trade-offs between employment and inflation the Fed faces haven’t
fundamentally changed.
That  does  not  imply  there  have  not  been  meaningful  changes  in  inflation  dynamics—inflation
persistence  has  fallen  significantly  for  the  CSI  as  well.  This  means  that  transitory  shocks  no
longer get embedded in inflation expectations, but instead have relatively short-lived effects on
inflation. This is a very favorable development for the economy and monetary policy, which can
safely “look through” transitory shocks.
Anchoring Inflation Expectations at the Target
This brings me to my second point of the importance of anchoring inflation expectations at the
target  level.  As  HMS  correctly  stress,  policymakers  cannot  take  for  granted  that  inflation
expectations will remain well anchored. They highlight the risk that very tight labor markets could
eventually lead to a resurgence of inflation and unmoor expectations, as in the 1960s. I concur
that we must remain vigilant regarding a sustained takeoff in inflation.
We must be equally vigilant that inflation expectations do not get anchored at too low a level. So
far during this expansion, core and overall PCE inflation has averaged about 1.5 percent, well
below the Fed’s 2 percent target. Taking a longer perspective, over the past 25 years, core and
overall inflation have both averaged 1.8 percent.
This persistent undershoot of the Fed’s target risks undermining the 2 percent inflation anchor. In
this regard, research by Ulrike Malmendier and Stefan Nagel is sobering.  They find that inflation
expectations  are  heavily  influenced  by  the  inflation  experience  in  one’s  own  lifetime,  which
implies that decades of too low inflation can become embedded in expectations. Indeed, we have
seen some worrying signs of a deterioration of measures of longer-run inflation expectations in
recent years, as seen in Table 2.
6
Importantly, this sustained undershoot of the inflation target is likely to be a recurring dilemma for
the Fed and central banks in Japan and Europe that have had similar experiences over the past
decade.  This  problem  of  inflation  running  chronically  below  the  target  stems  in  part  from  the
limited ability of central banks to offset economic downturns due to the lower bound on interest
7
rates in a low-neutral-rate environment.
Implications for the Monetary Policy Framework
The risk of the inflation expectations anchor slipping toward shore calls for a reassessment of
the dominant inflation targeting framework.  A number of alternative frameworks and strategies
have been proposed that hold the promise of better achieving the inflation goal and holding fast
the inflation anchor.  In this regard, I am very pleased that the Federal Reserve is undertaking a
review of our policy framework this year, a topic that Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Clarida will
discuss in his lunch remarks today.
8
9
In summary, the Phillips curve is alive and well. I wholeheartedly agree with the authors that we
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
must not be complacent about inflation expectations becoming unmoored, whether at too high or
too low a level.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 See John C. Williams, Inflation Persistence in an Era of Well-Anchored Inflation Expectations, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2006–27, October 13, 2006.
See More Amazon Effects: Online Competition and Pricing Behaviors,  Jackson  Hole  Economic  Symposium
Conference Proceedings; Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2018.
See Alan S. Blinder, Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation, Academic Press, 1979
See Tim Mahedy and Adam Shapiro, What’s Down with Inflation? FRBSF Economic Letter 2017–35, November
27, 2017, and Andrea Tambalotti, Stefano Eusepi, and Bart Hobijn, CONDI: A Cost-of-Nominal-Distortions Index,
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(3): 53–91, July 2011.
See James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson, Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation, Working Paper.
See  Ulrike  Malmendier  and  Stefan  Nagel, Learning  from  Inflation  Experiences,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics, Volume 131, Issue 1, 1 February 2016, Pages 53–87.
See John C. Williams, Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic
Letter 2016–23, August 15, 2016.
See John C. Williams, Preparing for the Next Storm: Reassessing Frameworks and Strategies in a Low R-star
World, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2017–13, May 8, 2017.
See Thomas Mertens and John C. Williams, Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective Lower Bound on
Interest Rates, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 877, Revised January 2019.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
