  28 March 2019 
 
Speech 
 
Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank 
delivered at the 58th Annual Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, 28 March 
2019 
  Prime Minister, other ministers, Chairman of the Economic Affairs and Trade 
Committee  and  other  members  of  Parliament,  bank  directors,  foreign 
ambassadors, other honoured guests! 
 This is the last speech I will give at the Annual Meeting of the Central Bank of 
Iceland, as I will step down as Governor this August, as is provided for by law, 
after ten years in the position. I would therefore like to focus on matters other 
than  current  tasks  relating  to  monetary  policy,  financial  stability,  and  other 
Central Bank functions, but it is unavoidable to make an assessment of the most 
recent events. I will focus on two main areas. First of all, I would like to take a 
backward glance at developments in the Icelandic economy and financial system 
over  the  past  ten  years.  In  this  context,  I  will  give  my  assessment  of  how 
successfully  the  Central  Bank  has  achieved  its  objectives.  The  published  and 
printed  versions  of  this  speech  will  include  selected  charts  that  illustrate 
economic developments over the period. Second, I will take a look at the future 
and discuss several challenges in connection with the Central Bank’s tasks and 
objectives. 
 Let us now cast our minds back to mid-2009. At that time, Iceland was in the 
midst  of  its  severest  economic  contraction  since  World  War  I,  a  century  ago. 
GDP contracted by nearly  13% from  its Q1/2008 peak to  its Q1/2010 trough. 
This  caused  unemployment  to  soar  —  although  with  a  lag,  as  always  —  to  a 
post-war  high  of  over  8%  in  Q4/2010.  Inflation  had  peaked  at  nearly  19%  in 
January 2009 and had fallen back to about 12% by mid-year. At the same time, 
the Central Bank’s key policy rate had been lowered from 18% to 9½%. State 
and local governments were hit hard by the economic contraction and spike in 
unemployment.  In  2009,  the  public  sector  deficit  was  nearly  10%  of  GDP, 
excluding one-off items such as the recapitalisaton of the Central Bank. Gross 
public sector debt peaked in 2011 at 92% of GDP. Iceland’s net external debt 
position was poor as well, with external debt exceeding external assets by nearly 
130%  of  GDP  at  the  end  of  2008,  excluding  the  estates  of  the  failed  banks. 
During the run-up to the financial crisis, Iceland’s international reserves equalled 
only 12% of GDP. They grew somewhat with the first drawdown of the loan in 
 1 
 connection with the economic programme with the IMF, to about 24% of GDP 
by mid-2009. Nearly all of Iceland’s reserves were financed with foreign credit. 
 So the situation was difficult, but in addition, there was substantial uncertainty 
about what would happen next. Would we succeed in stopping the depreciation 
of the króna, which was still ongoing, partly because the capital controls weren’t 
working as intended? The second review of the economic programme with the 
IMF, and the disbursement of the second tranche of the loan facility, was delayed 
because of the Icesave dispute. The capital controls had sequestered an overhang 
of offshore krónur amounting to some 40% of GDP, and it was not yet known 
how big a balance of payments problem lurked in the failed banks’ estates, as 
the split between the new and old banks had not been completed. The new banks 
had not yet been capitalised sufficiently, and non-performing loans represented 
a major problem. As a result, it was highly uncertain how the new banks would 
fare.  Would  efforts  to  put  public  sector  finances  on  a  sustainable  footing  be 
successful? In short, all three of the key objectives of the IMF programme were 
still  up  in  the  air:  exchange  rate  stability,  fiscal  sustainability,  and  financial 
system reconstruction. 
 We  know  now  that  the  turnaround  was  just  around  the  corner.  The  economic 
contraction,  of  course,  was  a  consequence  of  the  financial  crisis,  but  it  also 
stemmed from the inevitable adjustment of unsustainable economic imbalances 
and from the contraction of bloated sectors such as construction and financial 
services.  The  adjustment  showed  most  clearly  in  the  current  account  balance, 
which flipped from a double-digit deficit before the crisis to a sizeable surplus 
as early as 2009. Such a swift and sizeable turnaround is a rarity in international 
context and has drawn considerable attention. The drop in the real exchange rate 
by  45%  from  the  pre-crisis  peak  played  a  role  in  this  adjustment,  although  it 
overshot,  initially  causing  severe  side  effects  because  of  the  large  stock  of 
foreign-denominated  debt  owed  by  resident  borrowers  without  any  natural 
hedging in  the form  of foreign income or assets. As a result, strong emphasis 
was placed on halting the collapse of the króna. This was achieved in H2/2009. 
Closing loopholes for capital outflows and adopting measures that allowed the 
capital controls to work as intended made a big difference in this regard.  
 The economic recovery began once the exchange rate had been stabilised and 
the  inevitable  adjustment  of  domestic  demand  to  a  new  economic  reality  was 
more or less complete. The economy gained resilience through the underlying 
strength  of  the  sectors  that  had  not  been  part  of  the  bubble  economy  — 
conventional  export  sectors  in  particular.  Firms  in  the  tradable  sector  took 
advantage of the low real exchange rate.  
 The economic upswing began in Q2/2010, when GDP began to grow once again. 
GDP has grown more or less without interruption since, and in terms of GDP per 
capita this is Iceland’s longest economic upswing since the end of World War 
 2 
 II. Early on, growth was weak in comparison with previous upswings, as it was 
driven mainly by closing the slack in the economy, as investment was relatively 
weak  at  the  outset.  That  changed  in  2015,  when  tourism  began  to  grow  at  an 
unprecedented pace, terms of trade improved, and  investment picked up. That 
year the output slack closed and a positive output gap opened up, and sustained 
growth without economic overheating called for increased labour importation.  
  In recent years, Icelanders income has risen above its pre-crisis peak, owing both 
to GDP growth and to the improvement in terms of trade. Real wages were 24% 
higher  in  2018  than  in  2007,  and  real  per  capita  income  was  12%  higher. 
According to international statistics, Iceland ranked 11th in the OECD in terms 
of per capita income in 2007. We dropped to 19th place in 2010, but by 2017 we 
were up to sixth place. 
 I always expected that the economy would recover, but I dared not dream that 
we would get to where we are today. As I mentioned in my speech at the 2010 
Annual Meeting, I was also worried that the endemic imbalances in the Icelandic 
economy would surface again once the economic recovery was further advanced. 
This  could  manifest  itself  in  economic  instability,  an  unsustainable  external 
position, and above-target inflation. Fortunately, that did not happen. We have 
experienced a long, sustained period of growth. Certainly, a positive output gap 
could have ended in overheating and instability. But we managed to avoid this 
with  imported  labour  and  prudent  economic  policies,  particularly  monetary 
policy. Now the output gap is narrowing quickly, but without yet giving way to 
an economic contraction.  
 In the future, considerable effort will probably be spent on seeking explanations 
for this success. At the top of my list of explanations is the nature of the shocks 
that struck in autumn 2008. The damage caused by the failure of the Icelandic 
banks  affected  many  more  countries  than  Iceland  alone.  The  economic 
adjustment  was  unavoidable,  as  I  mentioned,  and  the  contraction  was  most 
pronounced in  bloated sectors, while  a large share of other business  activities 
retained their strength, conventional export sectors in particular. Second on my 
list is the way in which the measures taken when the banks collapsed contained 
the damage and kept the cost of the failed private banks from landing too heavily 
on  the  general  public.  Third  is  the  economic  programme  of  the  Icelandic 
authorities with the IMF, and the economic policy pursued thereafter. All three 
of the key objectives of the IMF programme were achieved. Fourth is our success 
in  lifting  the  capital  controls  without  balance  of  payments  disequilibrium  and 
while  preserving  financial  stability.  Fifth  is  the  integration  of  the  domestic 
economy  with  trading  partner  countries,  particularly  through  the  EEA 
Agreement.  This  made  it  easier  to  cushion  the  blow  by  exporting  labour  and 
other production factors and then importing when demand pressures were about 
to become too strong. Sixth is just good luck, pure and simple, which is one of 
the factors underlying the tourism boom and the improvement in terms of trade 
in recent years. 
 3 
  On the whole, things have gone well, although naturally, it was not all successes. 
We must not forget, either, that financial crises of the magnitude of the one in 
Iceland  cast  long  shadows,  and  many  have  faced  hardship  for  a  long  time 
afterwards. This underscores the necessity of safeguarding financial stability. 
 The  Central  Bank’s  contribution  to  this  successful  outcome  is  threefold: 
formulation  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy;  participation  in  the 
resurrection of the financial system and the formulation and implementation of 
financial  stability  policy;  and  participation  in  the  development  of  the  capital 
account liberalisation strategy and the execution of the strategy. I will now turn 
to these three factors and, as I do so, move to the present day. 
 Inflation subsided in 2009 and 2010 as the inflationary impact of the steep drop 
in  the  exchange  rate  in  2008  tapered  off  and  the  exchange  rate  stabilised  in 
H2/2009 and then began to rise in 2010. Inflation declined steadily until it fell to 
target  in  late  2010.  As  inflation  eased,  Central  Bank  interest  rates  were  cut, 
reaching a low of 3½% early in 2011. Inflation expectations remained above the 
target,  however.  In  H2/2011  and  2012,  inflation  rose  again  following  the 
depreciation of the króna and large contractual wage increases. We know now 
that monetary policy achieved good results in its response to this situation. The 
response consisted of interest rate hikes and signalling of further ones to come, 
but also of more active use of other policy instruments such as foreign exchange 
market intervention and, later, the special reserve requirement on capital inflows 
into the bond market and high-yielding deposits. Monetary policy was successful 
in bringing inflation — and thereafter, inflation expectations — back to the target 
after 2012, without sacrifice costs in terms of employment Furthermore, the use 
of new policy instruments helped ensure that the exchange rate of the króna was 
countercyclical rather than procyclical, as it had been to some degree before the 
crisis. Inflation remained close to the target for about five years.  
 When  the  banks  failed  in  autumn  2008,  new  banks  were  established  virtually 
overnight.  These  banks  received  deposits  in  Iceland  and  matching  assets,  and 
became a new channel for domestic payment intermediation. There was hardly 
a hiccup in domestic payment intermediation, which has to be considered quite 
a feat. As I mentioned earlier, the task of recapitalising the banks and finalising 
the new-bank-old-bank split remained. It was decided that the old banks should 
take an equity stake in two of the new ones. To begin with, there were sizeable 
imbalances in the banks’ balance sheets, including foreign exchange imbalances, 
and non-performing loan ratios were very high. As a result of various measures 
and the economic recovery, the imbalances subsided and non-performing loan 
ratios fell rapidly from 2011 onwards. Since 2015, they have been relatively low 
in historical context. The banks’ capital adequacy ratios increased, both for these 
same  reasons  and  because  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  prohibited 
dividend  payments  without  explicit  approval  during  the  banks’  first  years  of 
 4 
 operation and the capital controls made dividend payments to foreign creditors 
less  feasible.  At  the  same  time,  the  regulatory  framework  for  the  banks’ 
operations was improved significantly.  
 Now we have a banking system that primarily serves domestic households and 
businesses and, in terms of total assets relative to GDP, is about 15% of its pre-
crisis  size.  As  can  be  seen  in  their  high  capital  adequacy  ratios  and  sound 
liquidity position, the banks are quite resilient.  
 Their capital ratios have fallen in recent years as a result of dividend payments, 
and it can be said that there was scope for such a reduction. But now their capital 
ratios  are  much  closer  to  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority’s  capital 
requirements, and under current conditions of elevated economic uncertainty, it 
would be imprudent to lower them much more with dividend payments. In this 
context, it is important to bear in mind that the current capital requirements also 
include buffers that can be used without the banks being deemed to have failed. 
These  capital  buffers  are  a  sort  of  cushion,  and  if  they  are  tapped,  resilience-
enhancing measures such as restrictions on payments of dividends and bonuses 
will be adopted. Furthermore, the countercyclical capital buffer can be lowered 
very quickly if conditions warrant it, although it has been decided to increase it 
to 2% in the coming term. 
 On  the  whole,  the  2008  IMF  programme  objective  of  rebuilding  the  banking 
system on firmer foundations was met successfully. Certainly there are a number 
of  questions  and  challenges  regarding  future  developments  in  the  banking 
system and the regulatory framework for it, as has emerged in the recent White 
Paper on a Future Vision for the Financial System, but further discussion of that 
topic must await another opportunity.  
 Early  this  month,  Parliament  passed  legislation  lifting  restrictions  on  the 
remaining stock of offshore krónur, which amounted by that time to 84 b.kr., or 
just under 3% of GDP. This represented the final step in lifting capital controls 
on non-residents’ króna-denominated assets. The assets fell into two categories: 
so-called offshore krónur, on the one hand, and króna-denominated assets held 
by the failed banks’ estates, on the other. These assets combined amounted to 
65% of GDP at the peak. We reduced that percentage to the current level through 
various  measures  taken  in  2010-2017  —  without  disturbing  the  balance  of 
payments  or  financial  stability,  without  tapping  the  Bank’s  reserves  to  an 
inordinate degree, and without significant legal repercussions. This success has 
been noticed, including internationally. 
 Alongside  the  final  liberalisation  of  offshore  krónur,  the  special  reserve 
requirement on capital inflows into the bond market and high-yielding deposits 
was lowered to 0%. This synchronised effort has delivered positive results. The 
 5 
 exchange rate of the króna has not been under pressure due to  offshore króna 
outflows,  and  the  Central  Bank  has  not  yet  needed  to  use  significant  reserve 
assets  in  order  to  fulfil  its  pledge  not  to  allow  those  outflows  to  weaken  the 
currency.  
 Honoured guests: The news that WOW Air has discontinued operations broke 
this morning. With that, a part of the risk facing the Icelandic economy in the 
recent past has materialised. Last autumn, the Central Bank conducted a scenario 
analysis  providing  for  the  potential  collapse  of  WOW.  It  was  clear  that  the 
impact on the economy would depend to a substantial degree on how quickly, 
and to what extent, other airlines would step into the breach. The analysis was 
based on WOW Air’s size and operations in 2017. The WOW Air that closed 
shop  this  morning  is  about  half  that  size,  according  to  a  very  rough  estimate. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  clear  that  WOW’s  collapse  will  have  a  negative  impact  on 
GDP growth, particularly in 2019. It is unlikely that this alone will push Iceland 
into a contraction this year, though. On the other hand, this shock comes on the 
heels of others, such as the failed capelin season. In addition there are risks that 
have not yet materialised, including the possibility that wage settlements will be 
out  of line with price stability  and the repercussions of a disorderly  Brexit.  If 
these risks do materialise, a temporary contraction cannot be ruled out. 
 In this context, it matters greatly that we are now more resilient and better able 
to  mitigate  shocks  than  perhaps  at  any  time  in  our  history.  I  have  already 
mentioned many of these strengths here today. They centre on the ability of the 
economy  and  financial  system  to  face  shocks  because  of  a  good  external 
position, large international reserves, and households’ and businesses’ relatively 
strong equity position. The banks are strong as well, as  I have just explained. 
Furthermore, economic policy has considerable scope to respond, and more than 
in many other countries. The Treasury is running a surplus, and public debt is 
historically low. There is significant scope to lower interest rates if conditions 
call for it, unlike in many of our trading partner countries, as Iceland's interest 
rates are well above zero.  
 Honoured guests: In my speech today, I have focused on our experience of the 
past decade and our current position. Now I would like to address some of the 
challenges ahead for the Central Bank. 
 The first pertains to how we can preserve stability under conditions of virtually 
unrestricted  movement  of  capital.  The  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  has  been 
preparing  itself  for  this  for  years.  In  2010  and  2012,  the  Bank  published  two 
reports on monetary policy and on prudential rules post-capital controls. Much 
of what is proposed there has already been put in place. I have discussed these 
topics extensively, verbally and in writing, in Iceland and abroad. Some of that 
material can be found on the Bank’s website.  
 6 
  The big picture has been sketched out. Unrestricted movement of capital is of 
great  benefit  for  a  small  open  economy,  but  there  are  also  significant  risks 
attached  to  it.  Such  risks,  and  the  fact  that  they  were  not  addressed,  played  a 
major role in the run-up to Iceland’s financial crisis. We have tried to learn from 
this.  In  addition,  it  is  clear  that  small  open  economies  that  are  financially 
integrated  with  the  rest  of  the  world  face  increasing  difficulties  in  pursuing 
independent  monetary  policy  without  jeopardising  financial  stability  if  they 
adhere to conventional economic and prudential policies. To solve this problem, 
it is not sufficient to have a floating exchange rate. Additional tools and measures 
must  be  applied.  Among  them  are  foreign  exchange  market  intervention, 
conventional  macroprudential  tools,  and  rules  that  limit  foreign  exchange 
mismatches in domestic balance sheets. Conditions could arise, however, where 
this would not suffice, and then it could prove necessary to activate capital flow 
management measures like the special reserve requirement that we have used in 
the  recent  past.  This  mainly  occurs  when  the  exchange  rate  is  higher  than  is 
warranted  by  economic  conditions,  international  reserves  are  ample,  and  the 
economy is on the verge of overheating. Under such conditions, it is difficult to 
use exchange rate flexibility, foreign exchange market intervention, or interest 
rates to counteract capital inflows. 
 The  next  challenge  is  to  ensure  secure,  efficient,  and  economical  payment 
intermediation.  Last  year  the  Central  Bank  issued  a  report  on  retail  payment 
intermediation  from  the  standpoint  of  contingency  and  financial  stability.  It 
discusses important public interests. Unfortunately, the Bank has not been able 
to follow up sufficiently with presentations and discussions, but the aim is to do 
that in the near future, including with the establishment of a so-called Payment 
Council,  a  forum  for  dissemination  of  information  and  exchange  of  opinions 
among key stakeholders. The Council’s first meeting is planned for next month.  
 In many respects, electronic retail payment intermediation has been effective and 
secure  in  Iceland,  in  part  because  it  has  been  based  largely  on  Icelandic  core 
infrastructure and real-time settlement. Internationally, real-time settlement is a 
widespread goal, and it is therefore important that we do not backtrack on that 
point.  
 One  of  the  factors  that  was  of  vital  importance  for  domestic  retail  payment 
intermediation during the financial crisis in autumn 2008 was that the Icelandic 
authorities could take control of domestic payment intermediation and guarantee 
continued  functioning  without  external  involvement.  In  view  of  the  changes 
currently taking place in domestic retail payment intermediation, it is no longer 
a given that the authorities will be able to respond in the same way. It is therefore 
appropriate  to  ponder  how  best  to  ensure  continued  functioning  of  electronic 
payment intermediation if an unexpected incident or shock should occur. To an 
increasing degree, domestic electronic payment intermediation is viewed as an 
 7 
 element in national security — that the authorities must guarantee, directly or 
indirectly, that there will always be a domestic payment channel independent of 
foreign entities. The existence of alternate routes  that  can be used if the main 
systems  malfunction  enhances  the  security  of  retail  payment  intermediation. 
Physical cash in the form of banknotes and coin plays the same role. But it is 
consistent with the requirements of our time that there must also be electronic 
payment routes that are independent of foreign card systems’ core infrastructure. 
Elsewhere in the Nordic countries, such independent electronic solutions have 
been in place for some time. A comparable technological solution is now ready 
in Iceland — a payment solution based on domestic financial institutions’ core 
infrastructure  —  but  it  has  not  yet  been  put  into  general  use.  This  is  not 
acceptable,  given  the  possibility  that  this  solution  will  improve  security  and 
enhance efficacy and efficiency for the benefit of Icelandic society.  
 Bills  of  legislation  providing  for  the  merger  of  the  Central  Bank  and  the 
Financial Supervisory Authority have been introduced before Parliament. This 
is a large and complex project that I do not have time to discuss at length here. 
In important ways, the changes provided for in the bills are major improvements. 
Chief among them is the fact that they make monitoring financial stability more 
effective  and  efficient,  and  they  allow  for  better  harmonised  formulation  of 
monetary, financial stability, and financial supervision policies. In addition, it is 
ensured that the Central Bank, as lender of last resort, will have a good enough 
overview  to  take  the  best  decisions  possible  when  the  need  is  greatest.  The 
experience of the financial crisis has taught us that this is important. 
 In  closing,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Supervisory  Board  and  the  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  for  their  collaboration,  and  I  wish  to  thank  the  Central 
Bank’s many colleagues and collaborators for their cooperation – not least the 
Prime Minister’s Office, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs, and 
the Financial Supervisory  Authority.  I would also like to  thank the financial 
institutions with which the Bank interacts for their cooperation. Furthermore, I 
would like to thank the Parliament of Iceland, particularly the Economics and 
Commerce Committee, for their collaboration. And last but certainly not least, 
I want to thank the staff of the Central Bank for their tirelessness, dedication, 
and outstanding work in the past ten years. And at this turning point, I would 
like to extend my sincerest thanks to all of you who have come here today and 
have attended the Bank’s annual meetings in the past. Central banks can be a 
force for change, but history and tradition are also strong, and they contribute 
to strength and steadfastness in the work they do at any given time. It means a 
great deal to me that here today are two former Governors and other former 
Central Bank employees have attended the Annual Meeting every year during 
my term as Governor. Thank you for that. 
  8 
