   Remarks  
Carolyn A. Wilkins – Senior Deputy Governor 
Toronto Region Board of Trade 
Toronto, Ontario 
January 31, 2019 
 
A Look Under the Hood of  
Canada’s Job Market 
 
Introduction  
It is a pleasure to be here in Toronto today, and I’d like to thank the Toronto Region 
Board of Trade for the invitation.  
In many ways, 2019 has gotten off to a challenging start. What’s happening in the 
housing market here at home, lower oil prices, the trade conflict between the United 
States and China, and Brexit are top of mind for all of us.  
Canadians will be more confident facing these challenges if they feel secure in their 
jobs. This is vital to your bottom lines as business people: without secure, good-paying 
work, sooner or later demand for your products and services will suffer.  
For central bankers like me, the job market is a bellwether of financial health and a 
useful gauge of inflation pressures. And by many measures, the labour market in 
Canada is in good shape. The unemployment rate is at its lowest level in records going 
back more than 40 years. Firms across the country tell us that it’s difficult to fill 
openings. I suspect many employers here in Toronto can relate. 
These are signs of labour market strength. Certainly, many are benefiting from the 
positive overall environment. Not everyone is, though; recent layoffs in the auto sector 
have touched many families in this region, and there have been layoffs and closures 
elsewhere in the country. Moreover, wages overall in Canada are not rising as fast as 
we would expect given how low unemployment is. 
I would like to thank Eric Santor, Rhys Mendes and Michael Francis for  
their help in preparing this speech. 
 Not for publication before January 31, 2019 
12:30 p.m. Eastern Time 
 2 
 
Today I will look under the hood of the Canadian labour market to answer a few 
important questions:  
•  How well is the job market really doing?  
• 
•  What structural factors could weigh on wage growth going forward?  
If firms are finding it so tough to fill jobs, why don’t they just offer higher wages?  
The answers to these questions will help the Bank find the right path for interest rates to 
meet our inflation objective. They will also help businesses and governments develop 
strategies to boost Canada’s prosperity over the longer term. 
 
So, how well is the job market really doing? 
Let’s start with a few basic facts.  
Last year, the economy added a net 163,000 jobs, all full-time positions. The 
unemployment rate fell to 5.6 per cent, a historic low. The participation rate for prime-
age workers (those aged 25 to 54) is around 87 per cent, near its all-time high.  
If that sounds positive, it’s because it is. However, it raises the question for the Bank of 
Canada of whether the job market is at a point where inflation pressures are starting to 
build. If you use the trend or “natural” rate of unemployment as a guide—that’s the rate 
that puts neither upward nor downward pressure on inflation—then, at first glance, the 
answer could be yes.1 That’s because our most recent staff analysis puts Canada’s 
trend or natural rate of unemployment in the range of 5½ to 6½ per cent.2  
However, I think this conclusion would be too hasty. The natural rate of unemployment 
is like dark matter in physics. Estimates are subject to great uncertainty, perhaps even 
more so than with other useful economic concepts like potential output. They also move 
around as the structure of the economy changes. The natural rate of unemployment in 
Canada was estimated to be around 9 per cent during the 1990s—it was brought down 
in large part by labour market reforms, although estimates in real time only captured 
these changes with a lag.3   
                                                           
1 The term “non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment,” or NAIRU, is often used interchangeably with 
“natural rate of unemployment.” NAIRU comes from a framework that includes an “accelerationist” Phillips curve. 
Accelerationist Phillips curves are no longer commonly used and are not a part of the Bank’s main macroeconomic 
models. The reason there is a trend or natural rate of unemployment is because unemployment would never fall to 
zero since, in a well-functioning labour market, there is always some degree of job turnover. 
2 See D. Brouillette, M.-N. Robitaille, L. Savoie-Chabot, P. St-Amant, B. Gueye and E. Nelson, “The Trend 
Unemployment Rate in Canada: Searching for the Unobservable,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper 
(forthcoming).  
3 The experience of other countries is very similar. Estimates of natural rates of unemployment have fallen over 
the past two decades. For example, the Congressional Budget Office’s estimate for the US natural unemployment 
rate has fallen from a peak of around 6.2 per cent in the late 1970s to around 4.6 per cent now.   
   3 
This uncertainty means that it is imperative to look beyond such measures of “full” or 
maximum employment toward other indicators of labour market slack. In this instance, 
the Bank has pointed to relatively subdued wage growth as a possible sign that the job 
market may have more room to run.  
Economic theory tells us that when the actual jobless rate is at the natural rate, an 
economy is essentially at full employment. At that point, we would expect wages to be 
rising at the same pace as the target inflation rate plus the trend rate of productivity 
growth. This is because the strongest underlying factors that determine worker pay in 
real terms are how productive workers are and their value to an employer’s production 
process.4 So, for Canada, this implies wage growth of around 3 per cent—2 per cent for 
inflation and 1 per cent for trend productivity growth.  
Wage growth has picked up considerably to average about 2½ per cent in 2018, 
compared with 2 per cent over the past five years.5 But we are still shy of what one 
would expect in a tight labour market.  
The story is similar in the United States. The US jobless rate has been below 4 per cent 
for a while. This is much lower than the estimate of the US natural rate—currently 
pegged at around 4½ per cent.6 Yet, wage gains only recently reached the sum of 
inflation and productivity growth.  
In Canada, regional and sectoral factors can explain a lot of why wage growth has been 
tame. The steep drop in oil prices that occurred in the second half of 2014 had an 
impact that rippled across Canada and is still being felt. Wage gains in energy-intensive 
regions continue to lag behind those in the rest of the country.  
To give you a sense of how big a deal this is, wage growth in the third quarter of 2018 
was just under 2 per cent in Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador. It 
was about three-quarters of a percentage point higher in Ontario and Quebec, so closer 
to the 3 per cent one would expect.  
                                                           
4 For more detail on how wages are determined, see The Economy, Plain and Simple article that we released today. 
5 This is according to the Bank of Canada’s composite wage measure, called the “wage-common.” This measure is 
created by extracting the common signal from four sources of wage data (the National Accounts; the Productivity 
Accounts; the Survey of Employment, Payrolls and Hours; and the Labour Force Survey) and filtering out indicator-
specific movements. See D. Brouillette, J. Lachaine and B. Vincent, “Wages: Measurement and Key Drivers,” Bank 
of Canada Staff Analytical Note No. 2018-2 (January 2018); and J. Lachaine, “Applying the Wage-Common to the 
Provinces,” Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note No. 2018-16 (May 2018). 
6 For further detail, see Congressional Budget Office, “The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2019 to 2029” (January 
2019). Differences in Canadian and US unemployment rates stem from differences in how statistics agencies define 
unemployed workers and those not participating in the labour force. For more detail, see R. Bender, “Measuring 
Employment and Unemployment in Canada and the United States – a Comparison,” Statistics Canada (January 18, 
2016).  
 
   4 
That divergence makes sense when you consider that investment and jobs in energy-
intensive regions respond to oil prices. In fact, there was a massive increase in 
employment in these regions from 2000 to the end of 2014, and they led wage growth. 
With much lower oil prices since 2015, employment in the oil and gas sector has fallen 
by about 20 per cent—that is about 30,000 jobs. 
Other goods-producing sectors, such as manufacturing and agriculture, are also 
becoming less prominent employers.7 Instead, a range of service sectors have 
contributed to job growth, in exactly the places you would expect given longer-term 
trends. Digitalization has led to a burst of jobs in computer system design—up by 
around 40 per cent over the past five years. There has also been a boom in health-
related jobs, particularly elder care.  
Almost all the jobs created in services have been full-time, and about two-thirds have 
been in industries that pay higher-than-average wages. Over the past year, service-
sector wage gains were much stronger than those in the goods sectors.8  
Yet, even after accounting for these regional and sectoral factors, wage growth overall 
is still a bit short of what one would expect at this stage.  
This is particularly puzzling when you consider what businesses are telling us about 
how hard it is to fill jobs. Firms in our latest Business Outlook Survey reported one of 
the highest levels of labour shortages since the Great Recession. And job vacancies 
continue to rise, now totalling about 550,000. 
 
Why aren’t labour shortages driving up wages? 
If the right workers are so hard to attract, why not simply offer more money? Many firms 
are doing just that. However, other factors must be holding back wages, or the national 
numbers would be higher. As far as I can tell, no one has found a smoking gun. But 
there are at least a couple of compelling suspects. 
The first is that it might be difficult to find the right person for the job. Attracting the right 
talent is rarely just about money. I can tell you, in my business it is not easy to find all 
the specialized talent the Bank needs. Estimates suggest that about 1 out of every 10 
jobs in Canada is affected by mismatches between the skills that the job requires and 
the skills that workers actually have.9 The sectors with skills shortages are no surprise: 
                                                           
7 The share of these industries in total employment has fallen by nearly half a percentage point over the past five 
years to 17 per cent. 
8 Based on data from Statistics Canada’s monthly Survey of Employment, Payrolls and Hours, average year-over-
year wage growth in 2018 was 2.8 per cent in the services sector compared with 1.8 per cent in the goods sector. 
9 For more detail, see Employment and Social Development Canada, “Canadian Occupational Projection System 
(COPS): Imbalances Between Labour Demand and Supply (2017-2026)” (2017) and related documents. 
 
   5 
health care and the digital economy top the list. Meanwhile, sectors like manufacturing 
and natural resources have a surplus of people with the required skills.   
The second suspect is a sense of caution. People may be reluctant to search for a 
better job even if they would like one. The data bear this out. Turnover in the Canadian 
job market, a process known as job “churn,” is relatively low these days.10 Higher churn 
usually means higher wages, because the people willing to change jobs—to trade up—
typically drive wage gains in the economy. Job churn is especially sluggish in oil-
producing provinces, where wage gains have been most restrained.11 As a comparison, 
job churn in the United States has recovered more quickly, in part because the oil price 
shock was positive for the US expansion. That churn has supported US wage growth. 
Another suspect is geography. Canada is a beautiful country, but its sheer size does not 
help. The data show that Canadians have become more open over the past few 
decades to relocating for new opportunities.12 Still, it is no small thing to pull up stakes 
and move to a new city or province, often far from friends and family. If you are 
fortunate enough to find a job that is a good match for your skills and ambition, you still 
have to ask yourself: Will housing be affordable? Will the commute be a nightmare? Will 
my partner be able to find meaningful employment too?  
I’ll bet a few people in this room have had prize candidates slip away once they realized 
that they could not afford Greater Toronto Area housing prices, or were not keen to 
spend hours commuting to work every day if they lived further out.  
As the expansion continues, history tells us that job churn will pick up as employment 
continues to grow. This should lead to more employers finding it necessary, and worth 
their while, to offer higher wages. 
                                                              
10 Job churn is technically the sum of all workers who change jobs from an existing job, enter the workforce by 
obtaining a job, leave their job (voluntarily or not) or quit the labour force altogether (e.g., through retirement or 
becoming a discouraged worker). Aside from the lingering effects of the oil price shock, the aging workforce may 
also be contributing to slow job churn. Older workers tend to value stability more than younger workers do. 
11 See O. Kostyshyna and C. Luu, “The State of Labour Market Churn in Canada,” Bank of Canada Staff Analytical 
Note No. 2019-4 (January 2019). 
12 Interestingly, labour mobility has increased significantly in the last 20 years. Bank staff have found that the mean 
absolute difference in employment rates between provinces has converged to be the same as the difference 
between US states. See D. Amirault and N. Rai, “Canadian Labour Market Dispersion: Mind the (Shrinking) Gap,” 
Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note No. 2016-3 (March 2016). 
 
   6 
What structural factors could weigh on wage growth going forward? 
All that said, some forces that have been weighing on wage growth are structural, and 
therefore are likely to persist. In fact, these forces are not unique to Canada; they are 
being felt in many advanced economies.13  
How innovation is playing out in the global economy is at the centre.  
Technological advances have lowered demand for many types of routine jobs, both 
cognitive and manual, in all advanced economies, including Canada. These losses have 
been more than offset by jobs in other sectors that are experiencing stronger 
employment and wage growth. High-tech workers are the most obvious example. At the 
same time, more and more workers have to compete for jobs with people around the 
world as firms work to stay competitive in global markets.   
Another effect of the most recent wave of innovation is the rise of “superstar” firms that 
are making the competitive landscape more challenging.14 While issues around market 
power are hardly new, control of valuable consumer data and of electronic platforms 
can act as modern impediments to competition. When a few firms dominate an industry, 
or a firm becomes the only major employer in town, workers have little choice but to 
stay in their jobs regardless of wages or other labour conditions. Consequently, those 
firms may feel less pressure to raise wages for many of their workers even as the job 
market tightens. It is not just digital firms: concentration is growing across many 
industries in some countries, including Canada and the United States.15 Because 
workers’ wages have not kept pace with gains in productivity over the last few decades, 
their share of income has fallen, particularly in the United States but also in Canada.  
The relationship between employers and workers has also changed. We know that 
employers are making greater use of employment agencies and short-term contractors 
                                                           
13 See A.-K. Cormier, M. Francis, K. Hess and G. Poulin-Bellisle, “Drivers of Weak Wage Growth in Advanced 
Economies,” Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note No. 2019-3 (January 2019). 
14  Autor et al. (2017) document evidence showing that US industries have become more concentrated on average 
(see D. Autor, D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson and J. van Reenen, “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of 
Superstar Firms,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23396 [May 2017]). De Loecker and 
Eeckhout (2018) show that firm markups have risen globally, a sign of weaker competition, particularly in North 
America and Europe (see J. De Loecker and J. Eeckhout, “Global Market Power,” National Bureau of Economic 
Research Working Paper No. 24768 [June 2018]).  
15 The rate of industrial concentration for Canada, specifically, is historically high: economists at Innovation, 
Science and Economic Development Canada estimate that the median concentration of Canadian industries in the 
early 2000s was about 75 per cent higher than in the United States. See M. Duhamel and S. Crépeau, “Competition 
Intensity in Canada: A Critique of Recent OECD Findings,” Industry Canada Working Paper No. 2008-09. In the 
United States, such “monopsony” power can be seen in the use of no-poaching agreements among firms and non-
compete contracts for workers. These are less common in Canada, but for the US experience see A. B. Krueger, 
“Reflections on Dwindling Worker Bargaining Power and Monetary Policy” (luncheon address at the Jackson Hole 
Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24, 2018) and the references there-in. 
 
   7 
to replace salaried employees. Unionization rates in the private sector are down. And 
we hear from labour market experts that this has changed the social contract between 
companies and their workers.  
The gig economy has also created a new set of jobs in Canada and elsewhere that 
reduces the bargaining power of workers as well. These non-standard jobs may have 
advantages, such as the ability to work as needed—Uber drivers come to mind—but 
many workers in these jobs indicate that they would prefer more stability. A recent Bank 
survey of Canadians found that roughly one-third of respondents were participating in 
some form of non-standard or gig employment.16 For many it was as a side job to top up 
income. These workers were more likely to be young and to live in provinces where 
jobless rates are historically high. By our count, the number of people in Canada doing 
non-standard work because of weak economic conditions who would rather be doing 
something more formal is equivalent to about 700,000 full-time positions.  
To be sure, monetary policy can do little to directly influence structural issues affecting 
the labour market and the wider economy. My job is to keep inflation low and stable so 
that people like you in the business community can operate in a predictable 
environment that supports sustainable economic growth.  
That said, there is considerable scope for other public policies, and for businesses, to 
enhance the long-term prosperity of workers—your customer base—and by extension 
the economy.  
We all recognize the importance of investing heavily in the right skills for the digital 
economy, and for other growing sectors like elder-care services. While governments 
may be on the front lines, businesses need to play a stronger role in partnering with 
schools and universities. We want more students to gain pertinent experience and to 
develop the working relationships that foster entrepreneurship. This has been 
happening for years. For instance, about two-thirds of University of Waterloo students 
are in co-op placements with firms across Canada. Other schools, such as Carleton 
University, are expanding their links to locally based tech industry leaders. And it does 
not stop once you have made the hire. More businesses need to invest in their 
employees throughout their careers. Many tell us that is exactly what they are doing, 
through intensive in-house training. 
What is less prominent in discussions on how to improve the job market is supporting 
worker mobility—this would help businesses attract the right people for the job. 
Affordable housing is front and centre. It is to a large extent an issue of supply. Then 
                                                           
16 See O. Kostyshyna and C. Luu, “The Size and Characteristics of Informal (“Gig”) Work in Canada,” Bank of Canada 
Staff Analytical Note (forthcoming). For another example of how economists are trying to get a handle on the size 
and characteristics of the gig economy, see the Oxford Internet Institute’s Online Labour Index, which uses real-
time tracking to measure supply and demand in online freelance labour across many countries and occupations.  
   8 
there is the issue of transportation infrastructure in major job markets. And supporting 
mobility also includes removing barriers to interprovincial trade. 
Finally, let’s not forget that the competitiveness of Canadian businesses is at the 
foundation of a robust job market. The tax changes made by the federal government 
last autumn are a positive step in this regard and should lead to more investment in 
capacity and productivity. Higher productivity would make it easier for wages to rise 
faster without increasing inflation pressures. Strategies geared to developing and 
adopting new technologies in a digital and data-driven economy—across all sectors—
will also be critical to our economic potential.  
 
Conclusion  
It is time to wrap up.  
Despite a challenging start to the year, the labour market in Canada is in a solid place 
overall. It is worth looking under the hood of the job market to better understand 
emerging inflation pressures and what strategies might add to Canada’s prosperity.  
Some of the weakness in wage growth can be explained by continued adjustment in 
energy-intensive regions to lower oil prices. There are also some structural factors both 
inside and outside Canada that may continue to weigh on overall wage growth. 
That said, we also need to be mindful of stronger wage gains and signs of labour 
shortages in other parts of the economy. Monetary policy must be forward-looking. As 
you know from our latest outlook published a couple of weeks ago, the recent weakness 
in oil prices and softness in housing mean that we expect growth to slow temporarily. 
We expect the economic expansion to pick up again after this detour, in the second 
quarter of 2019. This should lead to a pickup in wage growth as well.  
There are risks on both sides of this outlook, so we will continue to pay close attention 
to wages and to other developments that are driving our projection for inflation. This 
includes how oil prices, the Canadian housing market and global trade policy evolve.  
Rest assured that the Bank of Canada will do its part to meet our inflation objective.  
And as I’ve just discussed, businesses and governments can help build an even more 
vibrant job market by investing in education and training, encouraging labour mobility, 
and improving the competitiveness of Canadian companies.  
   