Benoît Cœuré: The effects of APP reinvestments on euro area bond
markets
Closing remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the ECB's Bond Market Contact Group meeting, Frankfurt am Main, 12 June 2019.
 In  December  2018  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  halt  net  purchases  under  its  asset
purchase  programme  (APP)  and  to  continue  reinvesting,  in  full,  the  principal  payments  from
maturing securities for an extended period of time past the date when we start raising the key
ECB  interest  rates,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity
conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
In my short remarks this evening I will take stock of euro area bond market developments since
the  start  of  the  year  without  elaborating  on  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy,  which  the
Governing Council discussed at its meeting last week in Vilnius.
I will show that the APP has continued to provide substantial monetary accommodation also after
the  transition  from  net  purchases  to  reinvestments.  The  stock  effect  of  our  asset  purchases,
alongside  clear  forward  guidance  by  the  Governing  Council  on  its  intentions  regarding
reinvestments and policy rates, has helped to preserve very accommodative financial conditions.
And our decision to distribute redemptions under the public sector purchase programme (PSPP)
over the year, and to maintain our presence in primary markets under some of the private asset
purchase programmes, has supported the transition with minimal impact on market functioning.
Euro area bond markets in 2019
Since the start of the year, government bond yields in the euro area have fallen noticeably. In
many euro area countries they currently stand at, or close to, historical lows and cross-border
dispersion  of  financial  conditions  across  countries  has  declined  considerably,  with  few
exceptions. You can see this on the left-hand side of my first slide.
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Consider Portugal and Greece, which you can see on the right-hand side. Since the start of the
year, ten-year government bond yields have fallen by around 100 basis points in Portugal and
160 basis points in Greece. These declines mark a significant easing in financial conditions in an
environment  of  downside  risks  to  growth  and  imply  that  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary
policy stance is now being felt more forcefully across larger parts of the euro area.
It  is  tempting  to  argue  that  the  decline  in  yields  is  proof  enough  that  the  end  of  net  asset
purchases did not trigger an unwarranted tightening in financial conditions. But this would be far
too simple, of course.
Financial asset prices, as you know, reflect the effects of a large number of forces at any given
point in time, pulling yields in different, and often opposing, directions. To make some sense of
changes in asset prices, ECB staff use an array of analytical tools, including exploiting cross-
asset  price  restrictions  to  identify  the  possible  sources  of  economic  shocks. An  unexpected
tightening in monetary policy, for example, is assumed to lead to higher yields, lower stock prices
and an appreciation of the exchange rate, just like textbook economics would teach.
You can see the outcome of such an exercise for the ten-year euro area overnight index swap
(OIS) on my second slide. Clearly, according to this model, a number of factors, including global
and euro area monetary policies, have contributed to the downward pressure on yields since the
start  of  the  year.  In  other  words,  there  are  no  signs  that  the  effects  of  our  asset  purchases
started to evaporate the moment we stopped expanding our balance sheet.1
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Indeed, I would argue that the effects of asset purchases are highly persistent, and that they have
affected  recent  pricing  dynamics  in  two  important  ways:  through  a  yield  level  channel  and
through a yield sensitivity channel.
The persistence of stock effects
The  first  channel  relates  to  the  growing  evidence  that  central  banks,  through  their  stocks  of
acquired  assets  and  by  reinvesting  maturing  principals,  can  persistently  lower  the  yield level
around which investors evaluate changes to the economic outlook.
2
I  have  laid  out  the  mechanics  behind  the  persistent  impact  of  asset  purchases  in  previous
speeches.  In short, as the central bank reduces the bond free float – the share of outstanding
government bonds held by private price-sensitive investors – it also reduces the compensation,
or term premia, that investors, as a whole, demand for holding long-term bonds.
A crude yet simple way to see this is to look at the correlation between a measure of the bond
free float and the spread between ten-year German Bund yields and corresponding OIS rates.
You can see this on my next slide.
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The intuition is that, both being risk-free assets, changes in the economic outlook or monetary
policy expectations would shift Bund and OIS yields to a similar degree.  A sudden spike in risk
aversion, such as during the sovereign debt crisis or towards the end of last year, can cause the
spread  to  widen.  But  such  episodes  are  typically  short-lived  and  reverse  as  investors  reduce
their demand for safe assets.
3
In other words, we would expect the Bund-OIS spread to be fairly constant, on average. But the
fact that the spread has been gradually and persistently widening over time suggests that it is not
being driven by common factors, but rather by factors specific to the Bund market since about
the start of 2015. The most plausible candidate for this kind of secular effect is supply-demand
4
effects induced by a shrinking bond free float.
You  can  see  that,  according  to  new  ECB  staff  estimates,  only  a  little  more  than  a  third  of
outstanding general government bonds of the four largest euro area countries are currently in the
hands  of  private  price-sensitive  investors.   Before  the APP  was  launched,  more  than  half  of
these bonds were held by these investors.
5
And by rolling over our bond portfolio, we keep removing duration risk from the market. You can
see this on my next slide. In Germany, for example, PSPP reinvestments in central government
bonds this year and next are expected to still absorb nearly 30% of gross issuance. In some
countries, like France and Italy, reinvestments as a share of total gross issuance are expected to
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
rise in 2020.
The implication of this is that the stock effect of our purchases will continue to be significant, as
you  can  see  on  my  next  slide.  Two  years  from  now,  the  stock  of  acquired  assets  is  still
estimated to compress the ten-year term premium in the four largest euro area government bond
markets by some 70 basis points. The main reason why the effect gradually becomes smaller in
the coming years is due to the mechanical ageing of the portfolio.
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is also easy to see now why the concerns that many have voiced regarding the potential impact
of  our  intention  to  reduce  deviations  from  the  ECB’s  capital  key  have  not  materialised.   Put
simply, these adjustments in our purchases are too small to have a significant effect on yields.
6
On my next slide you can see the progress we have made so far this year in reducing the overall
sum of absolute deviations from the capital key across all euro area countries. It is interesting to
see that the introduction of the new capital key in itself contributed to a one-off reduction in overall
deviations.  This  is  the  jump  in  the  series  at  the  start  of  the  year.  We  expect  to  reverse  the
deviations further in the coming months and years, as you can see by the dotted projection line.
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Stock effects, yield sensitivity and market functioning
The  second  channel  through  which  the  stock  of  our  assets  and  continued  reinvestments  are
likely to have affected recent pricing outcomes is through their impact on the sensitivity of yields
to  macroeconomic  shocks.  You  can  see  this  on  my  next  slide,  which  shows  the  rolling
coefficient of the impact of macroeconomic news on ten-year German Bund yields.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The chart shows that the average sensitivity of yields to macroeconomic news fell by 20% in the
year following the launch of the APP. It has fallen by half since the Governing Council increased
the monthly pace of purchases from €60 billion to €80 billion in April 2016 – that is, when stock
effects started to become more powerful. And it has not visibly increased after the end of net
purchases.
Such reduced sensitivity is remarkable considering the economic and political environment we
have been navigating these past three years. Of course, a variety of factors might be at play
here. For example, forward guidance may have contributed to reducing the sensitivity of yields to
macro  news.  Or  perceptions  of  reduced  policy  space,  in  particular  for  conventional  policy
instruments,  may  have  led  investors  to  expect  less  forceful  changes  in  yields  for  any  given
macroeconomic impulse.
This is indeed what we have been seeing for negative news shocks. As you can see on the left-
hand side of my next slide, there has been a relatively clear structural break in the sensitivity of
ten-year yields to negative news since around the time we lowered the rate on our deposit facility
to zero in mid-2012. In the vicinity of the effective lower bound, a central bank has less means to
react to adverse shocks by reducing rates further.
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, on the right-hand side you can see that we have also observed a striking decline in the
trend sensitivity of long-term rates to positive news. Today, it is about half of what it was in the
earlier part of this decade. Policy space on the way up certainly has far fewer, if any, constraints.
All this suggests that, by reducing the bond free float, stock effects may have helped temper the
impact of demand shocks and foreign spillovers on yields. This is not to say that markets have
lost their price discovery function. Just consider the large swings in yields we have seen over the
past  two  years,  and  the  changing  constellation  of  intra  euro  area  spreads.  The APP  has  not
suppressed market discipline.
But  what  stock  effects  do  is  shield  financial  conditions  from  unwanted  tightening  forces  and
thereby  help  preserve  the  financial  conditions  that  are  needed  to  ensure  a  sustained
convergence path of inflation towards levels that are below, but close to, 2%.
And  where  the  large  volume  of  bonds  extracted  from  the  market  may  have  had  adverse
consequences on market functioning, we took appropriate action to mitigate them. As you well
know, growing scarcity of some securities led to a persistent and measurable rise in the share of
bonds trading special in the repo market.  You can see this on my next slide.
7
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The initial Eurosystem restriction that bonds could only be lent against other securities was too
penalising and is likely to have contributed to the growing specialness premium. The Governing
Council’s decision in December 2016 to also open the facility for lending against cash was an
important step towards alleviating market pressure.
As you can see on the right-hand side, lending against cash collateral was used widely during
our  net  purchase  phase  and  helped  stabilise,  and  later  reduce,  the  share  of  bonds  trading
special. The fact that lending against cash has practically evaporated in recent months suggests
that both the repo and cash markets are now operating smoothly despite the reduced bond free
float.
Continued smooth implementation of the APP during the reinvestment phase corroborates the
view  of  efficient  market  functioning.  The  decision  to  distribute  redemptions,  where  and  when
needed, over the year has been well understood by market participants and allows Eurosystem
central banks to have a continued presence in all euro area sovereign bond markets.
Private purchase programmes and reinvestments
Before concluding, let me briefly discuss the private purchase programmes, which have arguably
been the strongest cause for concern for market participants regarding the impact of the end of
net  purchases.  The  increase  in  corporate  bond  spreads  during  the  course  of  last  year,  for
example,  was  widely  taken  as  a  sign  that  investors  were  anticipating  the  nearing  end  of  our
purchases.
Yet, as you can see on the left-hand side of my next slide, spreads have fallen measurably again
since the start of the year, back to levels below those prevailing before the start of our corporate
sector purchase programme (CSPP) in March 2016.
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  have  observed  a  similar  dynamic  for  the  net  issuance  premium  firms  have  to  pay  when
tapping the market. You can see this on the right-hand side. The premium rose strongly towards
the  end  of  the  year  but  fully  reversed  its  rise  during  the  course  of  this  year,  much  like  in  the
covered bond market, as you can see on my next slide.
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Both  charts  together  make  clear  that  the  drop  in  central  bank  allocations  in  primary  markets
since the start of the year has not left a void. Banks in particular have taken up a larger share of
supply in the primary market, keeping premia low and relatively stable.
So, the tightening in financial conditions in credit markets in the last quarter of 2018 was, in all
likelihood, unrelated to the Eurosystem ending net purchases. It was rather the result of a sudden
global flight to safety that put downward pressure on risky asset prices, similar to what we have
been experiencing in recent weeks.
But looking through the ups and downs, current market-based financing conditions for firms have
returned  to  levels  that  are  highly  conducive  to  investment  and  job  creation,  thereby
complementing  our  commitment  to  preserve  favourable  bank  lending  conditions  through  the
launch  of  the  new  series  of  quarterly  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  TLTRO  III,
under  which  banks  can  borrow  at  highly  favourable  rates,  conditional  on  their  lending
8
performance.
On my last slide you can see that this two-pronged approach has been successful. The start of
the  CSPP,  and  the  subsequent  drop  in  spreads,  triggered  a  healthy  rebalancing  of  external
funding  by  some,  mainly  CSPP-eligible,  firms  and  has  thereby  freed  up  bank  balance  sheet
capacity to lend to CSPP-ineligible firms.
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The end of net purchases has not jeopardised this virtuous circle. Today, thanks to our broad
package of policy measures, a very large majority of euro area firms can freely decide on their
9
optimal funding mix with few supply constraints.
Conclusion
Taken together, there is convincing evidence that supports the view that the APP has remained a
considerable  source  of  financial  easing  also  after  the  end  of  net  purchases.  It  continues  to
provide important accommodation in an environment of increased downside risks to growth and
thereby supports the sustained convergence of inflation to levels closer to 2%.
Since our decision to halt net purchases, further employment gains, increasing wages and the
underlying  strength  of  domestic  demand  continue  to  confirm  the  Governing  Council’s  central
outlook  of  gradually  rising  inflation.  At  the  same  time,  global  headwinds  have  undisputedly
accelerated, and uncertainty has increased, mainly related to the rising threat of protectionism.
In this environment, the Governing Council last week extended its forward guidance on rates and
now expects them to remain at their present levels at least through the first half of 2020, and in
any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to
levels  that  are  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  We  have  also  announced  the
technical parameters governing TLTRO III.
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Governing Council is determined to act in case of adverse contingencies and stands ready
to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation continues to move towards
the Governing Council’s inflation aim in a sustained manner.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Of  course,  such  models  cannot  differentiate  between  different  policy  instruments.  But  the  effects  of  policy
tightening or easing should, in principle, have similar effects on asset prices across the central bank’s toolkit.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “The persistence and signalling power of central bank asset purchase programmes”,
speech at the 2018 US Monetary Policy Forum, New York City, 23 February.
For example, swap dealers use positions in Bunds to hedge interest rate risk on swaps.
The  phasing  in  of  banks’  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  and  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  is  also  likely  to  have
contributed to this secular effect.
ECB staff have further refined and expanded the methodology used to calculate the bond free float for the
aggregate of the four largest euro area countries that together account for around 80% of euro area sovereign
debt and GDP. There are a number of methodological differences and enhancements compared with the bond
free float shown in Cœuré (2018), op. cit. The new measure is based on security-level information from the
quarterly Securities Holdings Statistics. These data are only available from the last quarter of 2009 but allow for
a more granular analysis that also takes into account holdings by other less price-sensitive investors, such as
insurance companies and pension funds. Total outstanding debt relates to general government debt and not to
the central government. Estimates for the euro area bond free float proxy are naturally higher than for Germany
as foreign exchange reserves are predominately held in German Bunds. For more detail, see Eser, F., Lemke,
W., Nyholm, K., Radde, S. and Vladu, A., “Tracing the impact of the ECB’s asset purchase programme on the
yield curve”, Working Paper Series, ECB, forthcoming.
See ECB (2018), ECB decides on technical parameters for the reinvestment of its asset purchase programme,
press release, 13 December. Because our holdings of some sovereign bonds at the end of our net purchase
phase exceeded the amount implied by the share of these countries in the capital key, we communicated last
December that we would start to gradually adjust monthly purchase volumes under the reinvestment phase with
a view to reducing cumulated deviations from the capital key without adversely affecting financial conditions.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “Bond scarcity and the ECB’s asset purchase programme”,  speech  at  the  Club  de
Gestion Financière d’Associés en Finance, Paris, 3 April.
See ECB (2019), ECB announces details of new targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III), press
release, 6 June.
Further efforts to build a true capital markets union would help extend these improvements by, for example,
allowing firms to further diversify their investor base or to issue securities on a pan-European level. See also
Cœuré, B. (2018), “The euro area’s three lines of defence”, speech at the conference “Deepening of EMU”,
Ljubljana, 2 February; and Cœuré, B. (2018), “The role of the European Union in fostering convergence”, speech
at the Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI), Vienna, 26 November.
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
