For release on delivery 
11:45 a.m. EDT (8:45 a.m. local time) 
September 26, 2019 
 
The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy,  
Tools, and Communication Practices 
Remarks by 
Richard H. Clarida 
Vice Chair 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
“A Hot Economy:  Sustainability and Trade-Offs,” a Fed Listens event sponsored by  
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
San Francisco, California 
         
at 
 
September 26, 2019 
 I am delighted to be in San Francisco today to participate in this Fed Listens 
conference, “A Hot Economy:  Sustainability and Trade-Offs,” which is one of a series of 
events associated with the Federal Reserve’s 2019 review of our monetary policy 
strategy, tools, and communication practices.1 
Motivation for the Review 
Although I will have more to say about the review in a moment, let me state at the 
outset that we believe our existing framework, which has been in place since 2012, has 
served us well and has enabled us to achieve and sustain our statutorily assigned goals of 
maximum employment and price stability.  However, we also believe now is a good time 
to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, 
tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain our goals as consistently and 
robustly as possible.2 
With the U.S. economy operating at or close to maximum employment and price 
stability, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review.  The unemployment 
rate is near a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective.  With 
this review, we hope to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our 
statutory goals in coming years. 
The U.S. and foreign economies have changed in some important ways since the 
Global Financial Crisis.  Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have 
                                                 
1 These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve 
Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
2 Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy 
framework.  They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement 
needed changes to its framework. 
 - 2 - 
fallen in the United States.3  A fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central 
bank’s policy rate will hit its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns.  
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary 
policy to support spending and employment and to keep inflation from falling too far 
below the 2 percent objective.4 
Another key development in recent decades is that price inflation appears less 
responsive to resource slack.  That is, the short-run price Phillips curve—if not the wage 
Phillips curve—appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship 
between inflation and employment.5  A flatter Phillips curve permits the Federal Reserve 
to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and 
after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the 
Phillips curve is flatter.6  However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in 
terms of lost economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation 
expectations.  Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that inflation 
expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7  
                                                 
3 For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several 
contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); 
and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018). 
4 For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications 
for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), 
Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019). 
5 For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among 
others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for 
International Settlements (2017). 
6 One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary 
policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such 
a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and 
Mishkin (2010).  As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a 
central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions.  Similarly, the 
adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary 
policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to 
shocks. 
7 See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others 
(2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an 
 - 3 - 
And let me emphasize that, based on the evidence I have reviewed, I judge that U.S. 
inflation expectations today do reside in a range I consider consistent with our 
price-stability mandate. 
A Robust U.S. Labor Market 
For some time now, price stability in the United States has coincided with a 
historically low unemployment rate.  This low unemployment rate, 3.7 percent in August, 
has been interpreted by many as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating 
beyond full employment.  However, we cannot directly observe the level of the 
unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment and price stability, u*, but 
must infer it from data via models.  I myself believe that the range of plausible estimates 
of u* extends to 4 percent and below and includes the current unemployment rate of 
3.7 percent.  As the unemployment rate has declined in recent years, labor force 
participation for people in their prime working years has increased significantly, with the 
August participation rate at a cycle high of 82.6 percent.8  Increased prime-age 
participation has provided employers with additional labor resources and has been one 
factor, along with a pickup in labor productivity, restraining inflationary pressures.  
Whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains to be seen.  
                                                 
uncertain economic environment.  Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures 
of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the 
precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation.  Faust and Wright (2013) review 
the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of 
inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation.  Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the 
level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in 
these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s.  These authors suggest that, in a low 
and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in 
determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations. 
8 The box “The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals” in the Board’s July 2018 
Monetary Policy Report contains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for 
prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp. 8–10). 
 - 4 - 
But I note that prime-age participation still remains below levels seen in previous 
business cycle expansions. 
Also, although the labor market is robust, there is no evidence that rising wages 
are putting upward pressure on price inflation.  Wages today are increasing broadly in 
line with productivity growth and underlying inflation.  Also of note, and receiving less 
attention than it deserves, is the material increase in labor’s share of national income that 
has occurred in recent years as the labor market has tightened.  As I have written before, 
there is a cyclical regularity in U.S. data that labor’s share tends to rise as expansions 
endure and the labor market tightens.9  In recent cycles—and thus far in this cycle—this 
rise in labor’s share has not put upward pressure on price inflation. 
 The strong job gains of recent years also have delivered benefits to groups that 
have historically been disadvantaged in the labor market.  For example, African 
Americans and Hispanics have experienced persistently higher unemployment rates than 
whites for many decades.10  However, those unemployment rate gaps have narrowed as 
the labor market has strengthened, and, as President Daly’s research shows, there is some 
indication these groups especially benefit when the unemployment rate remains very 
low.11  Likewise, the gaps between unemployment rates for less-educated workers and 
their more-educated counterparts appear to narrow as the labor market strengthens.12  
                                                 
9 See Clarida (2016). 
10 See Cajner and others (2017) for a careful examination of how labor market differentials by race and 
ethnicity have evolved over time. 
11 See Aaronson and others (2019) for evidence on the relative behavior of unemployment rates by race and 
ethnicity in a strong labor market.  The authors find similar patterns for labor force participation rates and 
for employment-to-population ratios. 
12 Disparities in labor market outcomes are also evident between urban and rural areas of the United States.  
However, these gaps have not narrowed as the labor market has strengthened.  The box “Employment 
Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas” in the Board’s February 2019 Monetary Policy Report 
examines these disparities in more detail; see Board of Governors (2019, pp. 10–12).  See also Weingarden 
(2017). 
 - 5 - 
Wage increases in the past couple of years have been strongest for less-educated workers 
and for those at the lower end of the wage distribution.13 
Scope of the Review 
The Federal Reserve Act assigns to the Fed the responsibility to conduct monetary 
policy “so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, 
and moderate long-term interest rates.”14  Our review this year takes this statutory 
mandate as given and also takes as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most 
consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate. 
Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee’s Statement on 
Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.15  First adopted in January 2012, the 
statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 
2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level.  In 
doing so, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recognizes that these 
assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. 
As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy 
framework known as “flexible inflation targeting.”16  However, the Fed’s mandate is 
much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-
                                                 
13 Wage gains for workers with different wage levels and with different levels of education can be 
calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.  The 
Economic Policy Institute (2019) provides convenient tabulations of these data. 
14 Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve’s mandate for monetary policy is 
commonly known as the “dual mandate.”  The reason is that an economy in which people who want to 
work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad 
measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed 
for interest rates to settle at moderate levels.  For a discussion, see Mishkin (2007).  Quoted text from the 
Federal Reserve Act is in 12 U.S.C. § 225a (2000), 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section2a.htm. 
15 The statement is available on the Board’s website at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf. 
16 For a discussion of this terminology and references, see English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) and 
Clinton and others (2015). 
 - 6 - 
targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides 
of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedence over the other. 
The review of our current framework is wide ranging, and we are not prejudging 
where it will take us, but events of the past decade highlight three broad questions that we 
will seek to answer with our review. 
Three Questions 
The first question is, “Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives 
with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to 
reverse past misses of the inflation objective?” 
Under our current approach as well as the approaches of many central banks 
around the world, persistent inflation shortfalls of the target are treated as “bygones.”  
Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent 
inflation overshoots, but the ELB on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more of a 
challenge.  Persistent inflation shortfalls carry the risk that longer-term inflation 
expectations become anchored below the stated inflation goal.17 
In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated “makeup” 
strategies under which policymakers seek to undo past inflation deviations from target. 
These strategies include targeting average inflation and price-level targeting, in which 
policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.18  Other 
                                                 
17 These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be 
insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB.  For related discussions, see Reifschneider 
and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016). 
18 Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB 
entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion.  Nessén and 
Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting.  There 
is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations.  Central banks 
that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon—
 - 7 - 
makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by 
keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.19  In many 
models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average 
performance on both legs of the dual mandate.20 
The success of makeup strategies relies on households and firms believing in 
advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes—for example, 
that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent.  As is 
well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time 
consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at 
that time will not justify that action.  Thus, one of the most important questions we will 
seek to answer in our review is whether the Fed could, in practice, attain the benefits of 
makeup strategies that are possible in theoretical models. 
The next question the review will consider is, “Are existing monetary policy tools 
adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should 
                                                 
typically a couple of years ahead or over the “medium run”—without regard to past inflation deviations.  
One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of  
“2–3 per cent, on average, over the medium term” and thus might embed some notion of history 
dependence.  However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is 
comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation 
goal.  The only known historical example of price-level targeting occurred in Sweden from 1931 to 1933 
when the country abandoned the gold standard and attempted instead to maintain its price level.  The 
temporary adoption of price-level targeting is credited with helping Sweden avoid deflation, an outcome 
that contrasted with that in countries that stayed on the gold standard.  See Berg and Jonung (1999). 
    See Bernanke (2017) for a discussion of a temporary price-level targeting strategy.  See Hebden and 
López-Salido (2018) for a quantitative assessment of that and other strategies.  See also Kiley and Roberts 
(2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic 
expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns. 
19 See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule 
makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy 
rate lower than otherwise.  The box “Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules” in the Board’s July 2018 
Monetary Policy Report contains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018b, 
pp. 37–41). 
20 See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and 
nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S. economy. 
 - 8 - 
the toolkit be expanded?  And, if so, how?”  The FOMC’s primary monetary policy tool 
is its target range for the federal funds rate.  In December 2008, the FOMC cut that target 
to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions.  
Because the U.S. economy required additional support after the ELB was reached, the 
FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis:  balance sheet 
policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.21 
In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, the review will 
examine additional tools for easing policy when the ELB is binding.  During the crisis 
and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve considered but ultimately found some of the tools 
deployed by other central banks wanting in the U.S. context.  But the review will reassess 
the case for these and other tools in light of more recent experience with using these tools 
in other countries. 
The third question the review will consider is, “How can the FOMC’s 
communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?”  Our 
communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal 
Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting.  Over the past decade or so, 
the FOMC has enhanced its communication both to promote public understanding of its 
policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability.  These 
enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy 
Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about the principles and 
                                                 
21 As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial 
Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed 
setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017).  In addition 
to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other 
measures to stabilize the financial system, increase household and business confidence, and more generally 
support the economic recovery.  These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit 
facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions. 
 - 9 - 
strategy guiding the Committee’s normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly 
summaries of individual FOMC participants’ economic projections, assessments about 
the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and 
balance of risks around their projections.22 
As part of the review, we will assess the Committee’s current and past 
communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful.  For 
example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of 
policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability. 
Activities and Timeline for the Review 
Let me turn now to our review process itself.23  At our Fed Listens events, we are 
hearing from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and 
labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics.  At a research 
conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in early June, we heard from 
prominent academic economists as well as national and community leaders.  One panel 
discussion provided a valuable perspective on the labor market that could not otherwise 
be gleaned from the aggregate statistics we often consult.  Another panel discussion 
offered insights into how the monetary levers we pull and push affect communities, credit 
                                                 
22 Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from 
various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual Monetary Policy 
Report.  With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC 
increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables 
included, and extended the forecast horizon.  Because the SEP includes individual contributions of 
projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of 
FOMC members.  For a discussion and data, see Bernanke (2007) and Romer (2010). 
23 Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board’s website at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-
communications.htm.  
 - 10 - 
availability, and small businesses.  In addition to the Chicago conference, all 12 Reserve 
Banks and the Board of Governors have hosted or will soon host Fed Listens events. 
This summer, the FOMC began to assess what we have learned at the Fed Listens 
events and to receive briefings from System staff on topics relevant to the review.24  At 
our July meeting, FOMC participants agreed that our current framework for monetary 
policy has served the Committee and the U.S. economy well over the past decade.  
FOMC participants noted that the Committee’s experience with forward guidance and 
asset purchases has improved its understanding of how these tools operate.  As a result, 
the Committee could proceed more confidently in using these tools in the future if 
economic circumstances warranted.  However, overall, we judged that forward guidance 
and balance sheet tools, while helpful, did not eliminate the risk of returning to the ELB.  
If forward guidance or balance sheet actions prove to be insufficient in future episodes, 
ELB constraints could impede the attainment of the Federal Reserve’s dual-mandate 
objectives over time.  At our July meeting, we also noted that the Committee’s Statement 
on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy has been helpful in articulating and 
clarifying the Federal Reserve’s approach to monetary policy and agreed that any 
changes we might make to our strategy would likely call for some modification of this 
consensus statement. 
We have much still to discuss at upcoming meetings.  I expect we will consider 
various topics, such as alternative policy strategies, options for enhanced use of existing 
monetary policy tools, possible additions to the policy toolkit, potential changes to 
communication practices, and the relationship between monetary policy and financial 
                                                 
24 See Board of Governors (2019b). 
 - 11 - 
stability.  We will share our findings with the public when we have completed our 
review, likely during the first half of next year. 
Concluding Thoughts 
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.  So it 
makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider 
ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has 
assigned us.  For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict 
our ultimate findings.  What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to 
our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to 
achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. 
Thank you very much for your time and attention.  I look forward to the excellent 
program President Daly and her team have put together. 
   References 
- 12 - 
Aaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). 
“Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?” paper presented 
at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings 
Institution, Washington, March 7–8, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/03/Okun-Revisited-Who-Benefits-Most-From-a-Strong-
Economy.pdf. 
Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007).  “Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero 
Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 
vol. 54 (April), pp. 728–52. 
Bank for International Settlements (2017).  87th Annual Report.  Basel, Switzerland:  
BIS, June, https://www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2017e.pdf.  
Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2014).  “The Signaling Channel for Federal 
Reserve Bond Purchases,” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 10 
(September), pp. 233–89, https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb14q3a7.pdf. 
Baumeister, Christiane, and Luca Benati (2013).  “Unconventional Monetary Policy and 
the Great Recession:  Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread 
Compression at the Zero Lower Bound,” International Journal of Central 
Banking, vol. 9 (June), pp. 165–212, https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q2a9.pdf. 
Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999).  “Pioneering Price Level Targeting:  The Swedish 
Experience 1931–1937,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 43 (June),  
pp. 525–51. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007).  “Federal Reserve Communications,” speech delivered at the 
Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20071114a.htm. 
——— (2017).  “Temporary Price-Level Targeting:  An Alternative Framework for 
Monetary Policy,” Ben Bernanke’s Blog, October 12, 
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2017/10/12/temporary-price-level-
targeting-an-alternative-framework-for-monetary-policy. 
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015).  “Inflation and 
Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications,” IMF 
Working Paper WP/5/230.  Washington:  International Monetary Fund, 
November, https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2015/wp15230.pdf. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018a).  Monetary Policy Report.  
Washington:  Board of Governors, February, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/2018-02-mpr-summary.htm. 
 - 13 - 
——— (2018b).  Monetary Policy Report.  Washington:  Board of Governors, July, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/2018-07-mpr-summary.htm. 
——— (2019a).  Monetary Policy Report.  Washington:  Board of Governors, February, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/2019-02-mpr-summary.htm. 
——— (2019b).  “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019,” 
press release, August 21, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190821a.htm. 
Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006).  “Has Monetary Policy Become More 
Effective?” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 88 (August), pp. 445–62. 
Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010).  “How Has the Monetary 
Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?” in Benjamin M. Friedman and 
Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3.  Amsterdam:  
Elsevier, pp. 369–422. 
Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018).  “The Natural Rate of 
Interest:  Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy,” Occasional 
Paper Series 217.  Frankfurt:  European Central Bank, December, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecb.op217.en.pdf?57d8cac4d66960cce
deb5c2a59dd46cd. 
Bullard, James (2018).  “The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve,” speech delivered 
at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19, 
https://www.stlouisfed.org/%7e/media/files/pdfs/bullard/remarks/2018/bullard_ec
b_sintra_june_19_2018.pdf?la=en.  
Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017). “Racial Gaps in 
Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle,” 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071. Washington: Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/files/2017071pap.pdf.  
Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano 
(2012).  “Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 1–80, 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/2012a_Evans.pdf. 
Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D.M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi 
(2017).  “Forward Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial 
Crisis,” in Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, eds., NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 2016, vol. 31.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press, 
pp. 283–357. 
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. 
Schoenholtz (2017).  Deflating Inflation Expectations:  The Implications of 
 - 14 - 
Inflation’s Simple Dynamics, report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy 
Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago 
Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3, 
https://research.chicagobooth.edu/%7E/media/806fc2ded9644b5da99518d2b07cc6
37.pdf. 
Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero (2012).  “The Macroeconomic Effects of 
Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes,” Economic Journal, vol. 122 
(November), pp. F289–315. 
Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, 
James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019).  “Monetary Policy Options 
at the Effective Lower Bound:  Assessing the Federal Reserve’s Current Policy 
Toolkit,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.  Washington:  
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2019.003. 
Clarida, Richard H. (2012).  “What Has—and Has Not—Been Learned about Monetary 
Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment?  A Review of the 2000s,” Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 123–40. 
——— (2016).  “Good News for the Fed,” International Economy, Spring, pp. 44–45 
and 75–76. 
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000).  “Monetary Policy Rules and 
Macroeconomic Stability:  Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80. 
Clinton, Kevin, Charles Freedman, Michel Juillard, Ondra Kamenik, Douglas Laxton, 
and Hou Wang (2015).  “Inflation-Forecast Targeting:  Applying the Principle of 
Transparency,” IMF Working Paper WP/15/132.  Washington:  International 
Monetary Fund, June, 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2015/wp15132.pdf. 
D’Amico, Stefania, William English, David López‐Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012).  
“The Federal Reserve’s Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes:  Rationale and 
D’Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013).  “Flow and Stock Effects of Large‐
Scale Treasury Purchases:  Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,” Journal 
of Financial Economics, vol. 108 (May), pp. 425–48. 
Effects,” Economic Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F415–46. 
Economic Policy Institute (2019).  State of Working America Data Library.  Washington:  
EPI, March, https://www.epi.org/data. 
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003).  “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates 
and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, 
 - 15 - 
pp. 139–235, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2003/01/2003a_bpea_eggertsson.pdf. 
Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015).  “The 
Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary 
Policies,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005.  Washington:  
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.005. 
English, William B., David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2015).  “The Federal 
Reserve’s Framework for Monetary Policy:  Recent Changes and New 
Questions,” IMF Economic Review, vol. 63 (May), pp. 22–70.   
Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert 
Tetlow (2018).  “Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for 
Monetary Policy,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.  
Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2018.059.  
Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013).  “Forecasting Inflation,” in Graham Elliott, 
Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic 
Forecasting, vol. 2A.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier, pp. 2–56. 
Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018). “Should 
the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)” paper 
presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at 
the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14, 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2018/09/BPEA_Fall2018_Should-the-Fed-Regularly-Evlauate-
its-Monetary-Policy-Framework.pdf. 
Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian P. Sack (2011).  “Large-
Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve:  Did They Work?” FRBNY 
Economic Policy Review, vol. 17 (May), pp. 41–59, 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/epr/11v17n1/1105gagn
.pdf. 
Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012).  “The Effectiveness of Alternative 
Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,” Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking, vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 3–46. 
Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018).  “From Taylor’s Rule to Bernanke’s 
Temporary Price Level Targeting,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
2018-051.  Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
July, https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2018.051. 
Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016).  “The Risky Steady 
State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound,” Finance and Economics Discussion 
 - 16 - 
Series 2016-009.  Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, January, https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.009. 
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017).  “Measuring the 
Natural Rate of Interest:  International Trends and Determinants,” Journal of 
International Economics, vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59–75. 
Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011).  “The 
Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom,” 
International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (September), pp. 113–61, 
https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb11q3a5.pdf. 
Joyce, Michael, David Miles, Andrew Scott, and Dimitri Vayanos (2012).  “Quantitative 
Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy—An Introduction,” Economic 
Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F271–88. 
Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017).  “Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate 
World,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 317–96, 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/kileytextsp17bpea.pdf. 
King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014).  “Measuring the ‘World’ Real Interest Rate,” 
NBER Working Paper Series 19887.  Cambridge, Mass.:  National Bureau of 
Economic Research, February.  
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007).  “Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate,” speech delivered 
at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20070410a.htm.  
Nakov, Anton (2008).  “Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on 
the Nominal Interest Rate,” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 4 
(June), pp. 73–127, https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb08q2a3.pdf.  
Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005).  “Average Inflation Targeting,” Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (October), pp. 837–63. 
Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017).  “Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to 
Stay?” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42, 
https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb17q3a1.pdf. 
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000).  “Three Lessons for Monetary 
Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 
(November), pp. 936–66.  
Roberts, John M. (2006).  “Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,” International 
Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193–230. 
 - 17 - 
Romer, David (2010).  “A New Data Set on Monetary Policy:  The Economic Forecasts 
of Individual Members of the FOMC,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 
vol. 42 (August), pp. 951–57. 
Ruge-Murcia, Francisco (2014).  “Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target 
the Price Level?” International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 10 (June), 
pp. 301–26, https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb14q2a12.pdf. 
Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013).  “The Dog That Didn’t Bark:  
Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping?” in World Economic 
Outlook:  Hopes, Realities, Risks.  Washington:  International Monetary Fund, 
April, pp. 79–95, https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/01/pdf/c3.pdf.  
Swanson, Eric T. (2017).  “Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance 
and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets,” NBER Working Paper Series 23311.  
Cambridge, Mass.:  National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised 
August 2018). 
——— (2018).  “The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on 
Nominal Interest Rates,” NBER Working Paper Series 25123.  Cambridge, Mass.:  
National Bureau of Economic Research, October. 
Weingarden, Alison (2017).  “Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-
Metropolitan Areas:  Signs of Growing Disparities,” FEDS Notes.  Washington:  
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/labor-market-outcomes-
in-metropolitan-and-non-metropolitan-areas-signs-of-growing-disparities-
20170925.htm.  
Woodford, Michael (2012).  “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate 
Lower Bound,” paper presented at “The Changing Policy Landscape,” a 
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in 
Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30–September 1, 
https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/Woodford_final.pdf. 
Yellen, Janet (2015).  “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” speech delivered at the 
Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
September 24, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20150924a.htm. 
——— (2017).  “The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” speech 
delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford 
University, Stanford, Calif., January 19, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20170119a.htm. 
