Benjamin E Diokno: Sustained partnerships in financial inclusion
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Citi MicroentrepreneurshipAwards (CMA) Press Lunch, Manila, 18
June 2019.
 To my colleagues from BSP, partners from the Microfinance Council of the Philippines and Citi
Philippines headed by Aftab Ahmed, microfinance advocates and champions, esteemed guests,
and  friends  from  the  media,  good  afternoon  and  welcome  to  the  launching  of  the  17th  Citi
Microentrepreneurship Awards of the CMA.
I am pleased to be with fellow microfinance champions and advocates. I am equally honored to
be part of the selection committee of this prestigious awards program.
While it may be my first time to be part of the CMA, I understand the potential and transformative
power of the tools and initiatives for inclusive growth, one of which is microfinance.
As  a  civil  servant  for  more  than  four  decades,  uplifting  the  lives  of  the  poor  and  low-income
households has always been one of my thrusts. And here at the BSP, I am glad to be able to
contribute to that in a tangible way.
The photo you see now shows the winners of the CMA in 2018.
I understand an innovative fishball maker from Bulacan earned him the top spot in the 2018 CMA.
Before him, we had a Bicolana finding fortune in pili oil and a public school teacher from Davao
turned into a nata de coco manufacturer.
With  microfinance,  we  give  these  people  opportunities  for  success. And  the  possibilities  are
endless.
Since 2002, the CMA has been instrumental in making the public aware of the opportunities of
micro-entrepreneurship  and  how  it  impacts  on  development  and  poverty  alleviation  by
recognizing outstanding Filipino micro-entrepreneurs.
In fact, to date, there are 132 micro-entrepreneur awardees from all over the Philippines.
The  success  of  the  CMA  is  such  that  it  has  gained  international  recognition  and  has  been
replicated in 34 countries.
Now  on  its  17th  year,  the  CMA  continues  to  build  on  lessons  and  successes  by  offering
entrepreneurship training for winners through the Citi Microenterprise Development Center and
mentoring through UP Institute for Small-Scale Industries and expanding categories to recognize
specific fields and enterprises, namely agri and sustainable/green business, to name a few.
For the first time last year, the Start-up Microbusiness Award was given to a microenterprise less
than five years old.
Year after year, the CMA tells the inspiring stories of Filipinos with great entrepreneurial spirit.
This has been recognized by the Bangko Sentral as it began its microfinance work in the 2000s.
To this day, the CMA continues to lay the groundwork for initiatives that enable access to much-
needed  financial  products  and  services  that  would  empower  existing  and  aspiring  micro-
entrepreneurs.
And the BSP shall be your partner in formulating and promoting regulations that enable banks
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
and other financial service providers to reach out to unserved and underserved markets.
In recent years, the BSP has issued regulations on agent banking, digital services, basic deposit
accounts, branch-lite units, National Retail Payment System, and innovative financing such as
agriculture value chain financing.
The BSP is also at the forefront of digitization by opening its doors to other notable players such
as fintechs.
As part of its advocacy work, the BSP launched the Credit Surety Fund (CSF) program in 2008.
CSFs have been established in 54 provinces and cities all over the country to increase the credit
worthiness of cooperatives, businessmen, and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs).
Taken in entirety, the BSP believes that these initiatives are instrumental in accelerating financial
inclusion, and ensuring products and services that are affordable and accessible to key sectors
for growth.
To reinforce our policies, the BSP engages stakeholders within and beyond the industry.
The  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  has  proven  its  importance  as  a  platform  for
coordination and collaboration with the public and private sectors.
Last  year,  for  instance,  the  BSP,  together  with  the  Department  of  Trade  and  Industry,  the
Microfinance Council of the Philippines (MCPI), and Alliance of Philippine Partners for Enterprise
Development entered into a partnership that would expand the financing ecosystem of Negosyo
Centers nationwide. These one-stop shops play a critical role in shepherding fledgling MSMEs.
Complementing  this  is  our  collaboration  with  institutions  on  financial  education.  The  BSP  has
entered partnerships with the private sector on the development of financial literacy programs for
the  Philippine  Army,  the  Department  of  Education,  and  the  Overseas  Workers  Welfare
Administration; thus ensuring effective messaging and reach.
Of course, the partnership with MCPI and Citi Philippines remains one of the BSP’s cornerstones
in stakeholder engagement for financial inclusion. The Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards (CMA),
as  the  fruit  of  such  remarkable  partnership,  serves  as  an  important  platform  to  convey  the
message  that  collaboration  with  a  strong  shared  vision,  coupled  with  responsive  policies  and
platforms, can bring the best out of the Filipino people.
It is thus with great interest that I participate in this year’s CMA.
I look forward to the opportunity to discover promising micro-entrepreneurs whose experiences,
achievements, and community contributions would serve as an inspiration to everyone.
To my fellow NSC members, we indeed have some exciting work ahead of us. May the CMA
continue to nurture and empower Filipino micro-entrepreneurs in the years to come.
Again, good afternoon and thank you all for coming.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
