Ravi Menon: How Singapore manages its reserves
Keynote speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
the National Asset-Liability Management Europe Conference, Singapore, 13 March 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
Singapore has official foreign reserves (OFR) of almost US$300 billion. 
 In absolute terms, this is the eleventh highest stock of OFR in the world. 
As a percentage of GDP and on a per capita basis, it is the third highest in the world.
Singapore’s OFR sit on the balance sheet of the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS), the
central bank and integrated financial regulator.
Besides the OFR, there are two other pots of national reserves in Singapore:
The Government of Singapore Investment Corporation (GIC), a fund management company,
manages on behalf of the Singapore Government a diverse portfolio of foreign assets – well
in excess of US$100 billion.
Temasek Holdings, an investment company wholly owned by the Singapore Government,
holds equity stakes in a variety of domestic and foreign corporates, amounting to more than
US$200 billion.
This morning, let me try to answer three questions:
What role do the reserves play?
How are the reserves accumulated and managed?
How are the OFR managed?
Why does Singapore hold reserves?
Singapore’s reserves serve three objectives:
one, to serve as a buffer against crisis;
two, to provide a stream of investment income to help finance part of the annual government
budget; and
three, to maintain confidence in Singapore’s exchange rate centred monetary policy.
The reserves are thus a rainy day fund, an endowment fund, and a stability fund.
The imperative to hold a buffer against crisis is rooted in Singapore’s geography and history.
Singapore is a city state smaller than Greater London.
It has no natural resources and imports most of its food, including water.
When it became independent in 1965, it had no hinterland and meagre financial reserves.
It depended mostly on entrepot trade and hardly had an industrial base.
It was not expected to survive, let alone succeed.
An acute sense of vulnerability has been part of Singapore’s DNA since its birth.  This sense of
vulnerability, in turn, underpinned two convictions:
first,  that  the  only  way  to  survive  and  make  a  living  is  to  make  ourselves  relevant  to  the
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
world; and
second, we must build up strong buffers so that we can withstand the shocks that come
with being so small and open to the world.
As Singapore grew and prospered as a business and financial centre, its vulnerabilities to the
the vagaries of global trade and financial cycles also grew. 
The need to build up a sufficient rainy day fund to tide us through shocks and crises has
remained as relevant as ever.
Total trade is three times the size of the Singapore economy.
Gross capital flows into and out of Singapore are 77% of GDP.
The role of the reserves as a rainy day fund is not theoretical.  The reserves have indeed served
us well in past crises.
They helped underpin confidence in Singapore in the throes of the Asian Financial Crisis.
And during the Global Financial Crisis, the reserves were drawn down to finance a package
of  measures,  to  preserve  jobs  by  subsidising  employers’  wage  bills  and  to  help  viable
companies stay afloat by sharing the risk of bank lending.
A second purpose of the reserves is to serve as an endowment. 
This purpose has grown in importance – and salience - in recent years.
The  income  from  investing  the  reserves  provides  an  increasingly  important  source  of
revenue to fund government expenditure.
The  size  of  government  in  Singapore  is  small.    Government  spending  –  comprising  both
operating and development expenditure – is just about 16% of GDP. 
But tax and non-tax revenues are even lower, at 15% of GDP.
In other words, Singapore runs a structural deficit on its primary fiscal balance.
This is where the investment income from the reserves comes in.
The Constitution of Singapore bars the government from borrowing to spend or to spend
surpluses accumulated from previous terms of government. 
Instead, it allows the government to spend up to half of the expected long-term real returns
from the net assets invested by MAS, GIC, and Temasek. 
This is known as the Net Investment Returns Contribution (NIRC).
The NIRC is already the largest single contributor to revenues in the government budget,
accounting for about one-fifth of revenues.
The role of the reserves as an endowment from which to draw a steady stream of income to
finance the government budget will become even more important in the years ahead.
An ageing population will mean higher expenditures, especially for healthcare, and slower
economic growth will mean lower tax revenues.
The third purpose of the reserves is to serve as a stability fund.  More specifically, the reserves
help to maintain confidence in Singapore’s exchange rate-centred monetary policy framework.
As Singapore is a small and highly open economy, inflation and aggregate demand are more
significantly influenced by the exchange rate rather than interest rates.
Singapore’s  monetary  policy  is  therefore  centred  on  managing  the  exchange  rate  of  the
Singapore Dollar against a basket of currencies within a policy band.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  reserves  play  an  important  role  in  enabling  MAS  to  conduct  monetary  policy  and  to
secure macroeconomic stability.
How are the reserves accumulated and managed?
So,  how  are  the  reserves  accumulated  and  managed?   As  I  mentioned  earlier,  Singapore’s
reserves are held and managed in three distinct pots: the MAS, GIC, and Temasek. 
The government sets the overall investment objectives for the three entities and monitors the
risk and return profile of the total reserves.
But  it  plays  no  role  in  the  investment  decisions  by  the  three  entities,  which  are  made  on
purely professional grounds.
MAS, as Singapore’s central bank, manages the OFR.  The process of accumulating or using
OFR is intricately tied to MAS’ conduct of monetary policy.
The  MAS  may  accumulate  or  sell  foreign  assets,  principally  through  its  intervention
operations in the foreign exchange market, to manage the float of the Singapore Dollar.
Given Singapore’s positive net savings and persistent capital inflows, the nominal exchange
rate often tends to appreciate more than what is required to keep inflation low and stable. 
The MAS accumulates foreign assets on average in the process of managing the Singapore
Dollar  within  its  policy  band  even  as  it  sells  foreign  assets  during  times  of  stress  on  the
Singapore Dollar.
As the central bank, the MAS is the most conservative of the three investment entities, with the
OFR invested mainly in safe and liquid assets.
The OFR is sized to take into account its role as a buffer against a large and sudden outflow
of  capital  that  would  undermine  confidence  in  the  exchange  rate  and  Singapore’s
macroeconomic stability.
Traditional measures of reserve adequacy such as the number of months of imports the
OFR  could  finance  if  all  other  sources  of  foreign  financing  dried  up  are  less  relevant  for
Singapore.
A sizable and liquid OFR sends a clear signal that MAS has the wherewithal to resolutely
defend the Singapore Dollar against speculative attacks.
The GIC is a professional fund management company that manages the government’s foreign
assets.  These assets are separate from the OFR.
The history of GIC begins with the MAS.
Through  the  1970s,  Singapore  ran  persistent  fiscal  surpluses,  received  sizeable  capital
inflows, and had an elevated private savings rate.
This led to a substantial accumulation of OFR, well in excess of what was required for MAS’
central banking operations.
So, in 1981, the GIC was set up – in today’s parlance, a sovereign wealth fund – to manage
part of the reserves for higher returns without the central bank constraints of liquidity.
Part of the OFR was transferred from MAS to GIC, which was tasked to invest the reserves
in a globally diversified portfolio of asset classes with a higher risk profile to deliver good
long-term returns.
The  third  pot  of  reserves  is  managed  by  Temasek  Holdings,  an  investment  company  wholly
owned by the government.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Temasek’s history also dates back to the early years of Singapore’s development.
There was little private capital in those days but a rapidly industrialising economy needed key
infrastructure – in aviation, in shipping, in telecommunications, in banking, and so on.  The
government therefore set up enterprises in these areas. 
Temasek  was  formed  as  a  holding  company  in  1974  for  these  enterprises  so  that  the
government could focus on its roles of policy making and regulation without conflict, while
Temasek would own and manage these investments on a commercial basis.
Today,  Temasek  is  an  active,  equity  investor  that  aims  to  deliver  sustainable  long-term
shareholder value.
More than a quarter of Temasek’s portfolio is invested in Singapore, with the rest invested in
Asia and global markets.
The initial portfolio was provided by the government, but since then, Temasek’s funds have
come mainly from the investment growth of its own portfolio.
Compared to MAS and GIC, Temasek is further out on the risk-return spectrum.
How are the OFR managed?
Let me now move to the third question: how are the OFR managed?  This is the portion of the
reserves that MAS is responsible for.
There are three prongs to MAS’ approach to managing the OFR
robust risk management;
balanced asset allocation; and
efficient investment process
Robust risk management
The starting point to MAS’ approach to managing the OFR is its risk management framework,
which sets out the liquidity and risk tolerance levels of the OFR.  These relate to:
the ability of the portfolio to meet liquidity needs under stress conditions; and
the maximum loss of the portfolio under tail risk scenarios.
These liquidity and risk tolerance levels are determined on the basis of what is minimally required
to  meet  the  objectives  of  the  OFR  in  supporting  MAS’  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  They  are
factored in the construction of the MAS portfolio and closely monitored on an ongoing basis.
MAS employs a comprehensive range of stress tests to assess the risks to the portfolio on an
ongoing  basis  and  establish  whether  the  portfolio  remains  resilient  to  potential  tail  risk  events
over the medium term.
Three types of stress tests are conducted:
Historical: Shocks are applied to the portfolio using asset price movements seen in historical
stressed  episodes,  such  as  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  2000  dot-com  bust,  1994  bond
market selloff, etc.
Vulnerability-based: The portfolio is subject to hypothetical scenarios which stress in turn
each of the portfolio’s risk factors such as equity, interest rate, credit, inflation, and foreign
exchange.
Thematic: These are forward-looking stress tests and are designed by taking into account
prevailing market conditions and potential risk events on the horizon.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Depending  on  the  stress  test  results,  MAS  will  consider  appropriate  responses  and  portfolio
adjustments when needed.
The  risk  management  framework  is  reviewed  on  a  regular  basis  to  ensure  it  remains  fit-for-
purpose.
Balanced asset allocation
Subject  to  the  liquidity  and  risk  tolerance  thresholds,  MAS  seeks  to  achieve  good  long-term
returns on the OFR through a balanced asset allocation.
MAS invests the OFR in a well-diversified portfolio, probably more diversified than is the case for
most central banks.
is geographically 
The  portfolio 
diversified across  advanced  and  emerging  market
economies,  with  investment-grade  bonds  in  advanced  economies  making  up  the  largest
share.
The portfolio is diversified across asset classes – in cash, bonds and equities.
The  portfolio  has  a diversified  currency  mix,  with  about  three-quarters  of  the  OFR
denominated in US Dollars, Euros, Japanese Yen and Pound Sterling, with the US Dollar
forming the bulk.
Each asset class in the portfolio serves a function.
Cash and nominal government bonds facilitate regular operational needs and can be quickly
deployed to fulfil urgent liquidity needs under stressed conditions. 
Advanced  economy  inflation-linked  bonds  are  less  liquid  than  nominal  bonds  but  provide
inflation protection.
Equities provide exposure to long-term growth assets with higher return potential but also
with higher risk.
MAS’ investment horizon is longer than that of many central banks.
This  has  given  MAS  the  flexibility  to  invest  in  more  volatile  (and  longer  ‘duration’)  asset
classes beyond fixed income, including equities.
Both the risk management framework and strategic asset allocation are approved by the MAS
Board of Directors and reviewed regularly.
Efficient investment process
MAS strives to achieve an efficient investment process, underpinned by two elements:
one, judicious benchmark selection and customisation; and
two, tapping on specialised external investment expertise
First,  benchmark  selection.    MAS  uses  asset  class  benchmarks  to  represent  the  investment
universe  and  risk  profile  of  each  asset  class  that  can  be  easily  replicated,  to  evaluate  its
investment performance.
These benchmarks could be market-capitalisation weighted or customised.
For  some  asset  classes,  we  have  chosen  to  apply  certain  customisations  to  market-
capitalisation  weighted  benchmarks,  guided  by  considerations  of  liquidity,  stability,  and
concentration risk.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
One area we have applied customisation is in the fixed income asset class, where it is relatively
more important to guard against concentration risk.
This is because the response to credit risk is more asymmetric for fixed income than for
equities.  There is limited upside for credit improvement but large downside from the threat
of default.
We have therefore limited our exposure to some large government bond markets, taking into
account the default risk of these bonds.
Another  area  where  we  have  customised  our  benchmark  is  with  respect  to  Renminbi  (RMB)
assets, in particular Chinese government bonds.
Here,  the  consideration  was  not  to  limit  exposure  but  to  gain  exposure  ahead  of  market
benchmark inclusion as markets develop.
MAS started investing in RMB assets in 2012, fully expecting market indices to catch up at
some point.
Indeed,  recent  announcements  by  major  index  providers  to  include  or  accelerate  the
schedule of inclusion for RMB assets in their indices reflect this trend.
Next,  tapping  on  relevant  investment  expertise.    Part  of  the  MAS  portfolio  is  managed  by
reputable external fund managers.
These investment managers are hired for their deep investment expertise and specialised
knowledge in particular investment fields.
For instance, factor-based investing is an area that we are watching closely.
Institutional investors are starting to look beyond asset classes to view returns via a “factor
lens”.
There are two applications of this approach, return enhancement and portfolio analysis.
Looking  through  asset  class  labels  to  underlying  risk  factor  exposures  can  enhance
understanding of return sources.
Flipping them around, they also help to enhance understanding of risk drivers.
In fact, the vulnerability-based stress tests that I described earlier is an application of this factor
approach.
This  can  help  investors  to  create  more  efficient  and  diversified  portfolios,  compared  to  a
traditional asset class-driven approach.
But we are also mindful not to fall into the trap of data-mined quantitative strategies that rely
on factors that may not be robust through time.
Conclusion
In Singapore, reserve management is a multi-objective, multi-agency, and most importantly, a
multi-generational effort.
The  reserves  serve  as  a  buffer  against  bad  times,  as  an  endowment  to  finance  current
needs, and as a foundation for macroeconomic stability.
As custodians of the national reserves, MAS, GIC, and Temasek owe a duty of care and
responsibility to the ultimate beneficiaries of the reserves - current and future generations of
Singaporeans.
It is a duty that motivates our investment and risk managers as they go about their work
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
each day, trying to extract value while staying clear of pitfalls, amidst the turbulence, tides
and ebbs of financial markets.
Thank you.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
