Yi Gang: China's monetary policy framework - supporting the real
economy  and  striking  a  balance  between  internal  and  external
equilibrium
Lecture by Mr Yi Gang, Governor of the People's Bank of China, at Chang'an Forum, held by the
Chinese Economists 50 Forum, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 13 December 2018.
 It is a great pleasure to attend Chang’an Forum held by the Chinese Economists 50 Forum in
Tsinghua  University.  The  title  of  my  speech  today  is  “China’s  Monetary  Policy  Framework:
Supporting the Real Economy and Striking a Balance between Internal and External Equilibrium.”
The major task of monetary policy is to support the real economy, and meanwhile China is an
open  economy,  so  we  must  give  consideration  to  both  internal  and  external  equilibrium  in
formulating  monetary  policy.  When  there  are  contradictions  between  internal  and  external
equilibrium,  we  need  to  strike  a  balance  between  them.  This  is  the  overall  framework  of  my
speech.
My speech is composed of four parts. The first part is an introduction to China’s monetary policy
framework, the second part clarifies how monetary policy supports the real economy, the third
part is about how to prevent and resolve financial risks, and the last part focuses on how to strike
a balance between internal and external equilibrium. As we know, the Law of the People’s Bank of
China explicitly stipulates that the ultimate goal of China’s monetary policy is to maintain currency
stability and thereby facilitating economic growth. To maintain currency stability has two tiers of
meanings:  internally  it  means  to  maintain  prices  stable  and  externally  it  means  to  keep  RMB
exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Now I’d like to come to the first part, China’s monetary policy framework. As we can see, over the
two  decades  since  the  promulgation  of  the  Law  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  the  monetary
policy has been generally successful in maintaining currency stability. Throughout the 40 years
since reform and opening-up, the inflation rate has remained low with the exception of only a few
years. In recent years, the inflation rate has been kept around 2% and 3% on the whole. It was
somewhat high in 1988 and 1994, but that was a long time ago. Deflation risks also occurred
sometime after the year of 1998. In maintaining currency stability, we need not only to prevent
inflation, but also to forestall economic harms caused by deflation. Meanwhile when it comes to
maintaining stable prices, it doesn’t mean lower prices are necessarily better. Rather, it is the
concept of stability that should be emphasized.
Maintaining currency stability also involves exchange rate issues. The RMB exchange rates are
the values of RMB quoted against other currencies, which can reflect China’s economic strength
and the purchasing power of RMB in the world. We have been doing well in maintaining RMB
exchange  rate  basically  stable  at  an  adaptive  and  equilibrium  level.  The  single  exchange  rate
regime of RMB was established in the mid-1990s. Before that, there were both market-based
and official RMB exchange rates. In 1994, the dual exchange rates were unified, and then RMB
exchange  rate  against  US  dollar  stood  at  8.7.  Over  the  past  a  few  decades,  RMB  has
appreciated  against  the  US  dollar  and  a  basket  of  currencies  in  terms  of  both  real  effective
exchange rate and nominal effective exchange rate, and it has been revalued about 20% against
the  US  dollar.  With  RMB  exchange  rate  maintaining  basically  stable  at  an  adaptive  and
equilibrium level, the Chinese people got tangible benefits. By ensuring basic stability of the value
of  RMB,  we  can  help  promote  economic  growth,  and  therby  meeting  the  ultimate  goal  of
monetary policy specified in the Law of the People’s Bank of China.
It is the ultimate goal of monetary policy to maintain currency stability. But how? To this end, we
need to set an intermediate goal. In China, M2 is chosen as the intermediate goal of monetary
policy, as it can be measured and controlled. However, international experiences show that with
 1 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
an economy becoming more and more developed and market-oriented, the correlation between
M2 and the real economy will decline. Therefore, in 2012 we adopted aggregate financing to the
real  economy  as  a  reference  indicator,  which  measures  the  financing  offered  by  the  financial
sector to the real economy, covering loans, bonds, stock, trust, etc.
As the correlation between quantitative indicators and economy gradually declines, the monetary
policies of major developed countries and market economies are principally aimed at regulating
price indicators. Reforms in China were also focused on nurturing a market-based interest rate
system and enhancing a price-oriented regulation and transmission mechanism. What is interest
rate?  It  is  the  price  of  money.  We  should  give  the  market  a  decisive  role  to  play  in  resource
allocation.  Then,  how  does  the  market  allocate  resources?  It  is  through  prices,  which  are
determined by the supply-demand relationship.
Money is also a resource, a scarce resource. Hence, the marketization of interest rate is very
important, and the RMB interest rate, which is determined by the supply-demand relationship of
the market, must not be distorted. Only in this way can the resources be allocated in a market-
based  manner.  The  interest  rate  shaped  by  the  supply-demand  relationship  also  reflects  risk
premium.  If  your  risk  is  relatively  high,  then  the  market  will  require  a  higher  interest  rate.  By
contrast, if your risk is relatively low, then your risk premium will be low as well, which enables
you to borrow at a lower interest rate. There is profound knowledge in market allocation of funds.
Regulation  tools  are  necessary  in  achieving  the  goal  of  monetary  policy.  The  tool  system  of
China’s monetary policy is relatively simple. First of all, there is open market operations (OMO)
for injecting or withdrawing liquidity; second, the PBC can adjust money supply with central bank
lending and central bank discount; third, depository financial institutions can be required to park
deposit  reserves  in  the  PBC;  additionally,  we  can  also  supply  liquidity  to  the  market  with  the
medium-term lending facility (MLF), the standing lending facility (SLF) and other tools.
Just now I mentioned marketization of the interest rate. You may have heard a phrase called
“interest rate corridor”. The central bank can adjust and control the interest rate between a floor
and a ceiling level, which is called “interest rate corridor”. In the times of planned economy, loan
quotas  were  set  and  resources  allocated  through  administrative  measures.  After  that,
commercial  banks  came  into  existence,  the  planned  economy  was  replaced  by  market
economy, and the interest rate determined by market supply and demand came among. At this
point, an important question is, “What is the appropriate level of the interest rate?” We can see
that  central  banks  in  various  countries  all  concentrate  on  the  adjustment  and  control  of  the
interest rate. The Federal Reserve mainly regulates the federal funds rate by adjusting it to a level
deemed as appropriate, which will then affect the interest rates on deposits, loans and treasury
bonds and thus forming market interest rates.
At present, the focus of China’s monetary policy is gradually shifting from quantity control to price
control. You may ask, “currently what is on earth the focus of the PBC, quantity control or price
control?” My answer is, we are in a transition from quantity to price control, and both tools are
employed during this process. Price control has been more important than it used to be, but at
the same time, with the impact of our basis and systems as well as people’s thinking pattern,
quantity control is not yet discarded and remains very important. Hence at present, both quantity
and price controls are playing their part.
This figure is an illustration of interest rate corridor. In the corridor an important interest rate is
DR007,  namely  the  seven-day  repo  rate  in  the  inter-bank  market. A  repo  is  a  loan  secured
against collateral, which is a transaction between institutions. Why is it important? Because it
involves enormous trading volumes and can affect all market interest rates.
As you can see, the red line of DR007 lies between the blue line on the upper side and the green
line on the lower side. The blue line represents the interest rate of SLF and the green one is the
interest rate of excess reserves. The interest rate of excess reserves stands at 0.72% now, so
 2 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
the market interest rate must be higher. Why? Because as an absolute minimum, you can enjoy
a 0.72% return by putting your money in the central bank, and this is also the safest way to keep
your money — hence this is the lower limit of interest rates. The upper limit is the interest rate of
SLF.  When  financial  institutions  run  out  of  money,  they  can  borrow  from  the  central  bank  via
SLF,  and  the  interest  rate  is  moderately  higher  than  DR007.  Why?  Because  the  incentive
mechanism will not work if it is lower than DR007. You can see that the market interest rates
fluctuate between the upper and lower limits. You may consider the figure quite simple; but it is
not  easy  to  establish  such  a  mechanism  in  the  market,  nor  is  it  effortless  to  keep  DR007
between the two limits.
Recently  there  is  a  buzzword  called  “macro-prudence.”  We  know  that  the  requirement  of
establishing two-pillar regulatory framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies has been
proposed in the report to the 19th National Congress of the CPC. I have just explained the goal,
transmission  and  tools  of  monetary  policy.  Then  I’d  like  to  explain  what  is  macro-prudential
policy.  It  is  mainly  aimed  at  ensuring  financial  stability  and  forestalling systemic  risks  and
characterized by counter-cyclical adjustments. The monetary policy can practice both quantity
and price control. Quantity control is a simple tool, as quantity can be specified clearly. However,
it still has drawbacks, and the biggest problem is that the specified or allocated quantities may be
wrong and fail to conform to market conditions. Moreover, the quantities, which are allocated in
Beijing, may go wrong when it comes to provincial, municipal and county levels. Also, problems
like rent-seeking, tunneling and corruption may also arise in the process. Price control sounds
like a fine tool, but sometimes it is not very efficient and may not achieve regulatory goals. Hence
in practice, especially following the global financial crisis, countries around the world have been
increasingly  aware  of  the  importance  of  macro-prudential  policy.  This  is  also  why  we  have
decided to establish two-pillar regulatory framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies.
The following four items can give us some direct impression of macro-prudential policies. Firstly,
the PBC has established the macro-prudential assessment (MPA) system to assess whether
financial institutions work in line with macro-prudential requirements. The MPA system contains a
number of indicators, such as capital adequacy ratio and liquidity measures. We all know the
Basel Accords,  and  Basel  III  has  proposed  many  requirements  centered  on  capital  adequacy
ratio.  The  MPA  system  should  assess  whether  commercial  banks  have  satisfied  these
requirements.
Secondly, macro-prudential policies shall be in place for cross-border capital flows. Sometimes
the  inflow  and  outflow  of  capital  may  cause  herd  behavior  or  irrational  panics  among  market
entities. In such a case, we need to consider employing macro-prudential policies.
Thirdly, macro-prudential policies concerning housing finance. For example, we all know there is
down  payment  ratio  of  housing  loans,  and  this  ratio  can  be  used  for  counter-cyclical
adjustments. It varies from country to country and from stage to stage in the economic cycle.
Differentiated measures can also be taken for first-time and second-time homebuyers. All these
are effective practices of macro-prudential policies in different countries, and the core is making
counter-cyclical adjustments to protect people and ensure security of financial assets.
Fourthly,  we  are  attempting 
financial
infrastructure.  Financial  infrastructure,  mostly  including  clearing,  payment  and  trusteeship
systems, also requires macro-prudential mentality in regulation.
to  practice  macro-prudential  management  over 
The monetary policy includes quantity and price control, and it should be aligned with macro-
prudential policy in the regulatory process. As the monetary policy tools and framework are not
enough  to  ensure  stability,  macro-prudential  policies  can  be  implemented  simultaneously  to
maintain  financial  stability  and  prevent  systematic  financial  risks.  The  two-pillar  regulatory
framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies can provide additional guarantees when
the PBC considers and addresses the overall situation. The National Financial Work Conference
 3 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
has proposed that the Financial Stability and Development Committee under the State Council
should  be  established  to  enhance  the  PBC’s  responsibilities  concerning  macro-prudential
management and systematic risk prevention.
The second part of my lecture is about how monetary policy supports the real economy. I want to
talk  about  the  macro-economic  situation  and  the  response  of  monetary  policy.  Some  basic
judgments are necessary, for example, we need to have a profound understanding of the “new
normal” of the economic development. At present, China’s working-age population is decreasing,
and labor shortages begin emerging in some industries. The proportion of the service sector in
the economy is becoming increasingly larger, growing to exceed 50%. Under this circumstance,
China’s economy has been transitioning from a phase of rapid growth to a stage of high-quality
development.  Hence  the  economy  will  not  grow  at  double-digit  rates  as  it  used  to,  which  is
associated with our population structure. Currently, our economy is moving toward high-quality
development. China is the second largest economy in the world, with its GDP exceeding USD 12
trillion, which is a large base. Consumption is the major driver of economic growth. Meanwhile,
we have been acting on the understanding that “lucid waters and lush mountains are invaluable
assets” 
increasingly  harsh
environmental standards imposed on many industries. All these show the necessity to pursue
high-quality economic development. The growth rate may be a bit lower than before, but we will
be able to achieve sustainable development as long as we can ensure high-quality development,
full employment and “lucid waters and lush mountains.” By saying these things, hopefully I can
make you understand that while thinking about the monetary policy, we need to take into account
the basic feature of economic development: China’s economy is moving towards its goal of high-
quality development.
to  enhance  environmental  protection,  as  evidence  by 
the 
China’s economic growth is close to the potential output, which means that the former is actually
approaching  the  latter.  Hence  it  is  safe  to  say  that  resource  mobilization  and  economic
mobilization  in  China  are  relatively  efficient,  and  our  unemployment  rate  is  not  high  and  few
resources are left idle. Meanwhile, China’s economic growth remains resilient. Over the past 12
quarters,  the  economic  growth  rate  has  ranged  between  6.7%  and  6.9%.  The  overcapacity
problem  has  been  evidently  alleviated,  and  a  basic  balance  has  been  achieved  between  the
supply and the demand. As you can see, there is a blue line and a red line in this figure. The blue
line represents the y-o-y growth of manufacturing investment, and the red line stands for the y-o-
y growth of the GDP. When the y-o-y growth of manufacturing investment is higher than that of
the GDP, the production capacity is growing. You can see that the blue line lies below the red line
for  some  time,  and  this  shows  that  during  that  period,  overcapacity  can  be  alleviated  as  the
growth of manufacturing investment is relatively slow. This can also be reflected by enterprises’
profit gains: when enterprises  secure  satisfactory  profits,  they  tend  to  invest  more;  and  when
they  are  experiencing  profit  downturns,  they  will  invest  at  a  slower  pace.  Private-sector
investment is particularly sensitive.
Overall,  China’s  economic  growth  is  strong,  stable  and  resilient.  Recently,  the  downward
pressure  on  the  economy  has  mounted,  and  the  growth  of  off-balance-sheet  financing  has
slowed down significantly. The blue line and the red line in the figure represent the growth rates
of entrusted loans and trust loans, respectively. As we can see, entrusted loans and trust loans
grew significantly in 2016 and 2017, but the bar chart indicates that both loans have registered a
negative  growth  since  the  beginning  of  this  year  —  which  means  their  increments  are
decreasing. The green line stands for the y-o-y growth of infrastructure investment, and it can be
seen  that  the  decreasing  growth  of  off-balance-sheet  financing  is  highly  correlated  with  the
declining growth of infrastructure investment. Infrastructure investment may be partially financed
by  entrusted  loans  and  trust  loans.  Therefore,  if  financing  is  cut,  the  construction  of  these
projects and programs will slow down.
In  response  to  the  changes  in  economic  operation,  we  have  undertaken  forward-looking  pre-
emptive  adjustments  and  fine-tuning  of  the  monetary  policy  this  year.  The  PBC  reduced  the
 4 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
required  reserve  ratio  (RRR)  four  times,  which  freed  RMB  3.65  trillion  capital  in  total,  and
unleashed RMB 1.76 trillion of liquidity in the market via the MLF. All these measures were taken
to provide stronger support for the real economy and ease the investment contraction as a result
of economic cycle. Meanwhile, regulatory policies and some other management requirements,
such  as  the  purge  of  local  government  debt,  can  also  give  rise  to  investment  contraction.
Through RRR cuts and MLF, we can supply liquidity, offset cyclical investment contraction and
ensure the stability of economic operation.
Recently,  the  difficulties  that  private  enterprises  are  faced  with  in  securing  financing  become
more prominent. Here I’d like to present the statistics of credit, bonds and equity. For example,
the loans obtained by private enterprises from the credit market this year has climbed more than
5% from 2017, which is relatively slow. In terms of bonds, this year also saw a decrease in bond
financing  of  private  enterprises,  which  showcases  enterprises’  difficulty  in  securing  bond
financing. Equity financing also registered a decline. Meanwhile, some private enterprises have
become  bond  defaulters.  In  the  first  eight  months  of  2018,  there  were  22  enterprise  bond
defaults,  18  of  which  were  made  by  private  enterprises,  involving  more  than  RMB  50  billion.
These statistics show that it is difficult for private enterprises to access financing.
To deal with this problem, the PBC has introduced a policy mix of “three arrows” targeting at
smoothing the three major financing channels I mentioned just now. The first arrow is to enhance
credit support for private enterprises. We work to support commercial banks in issuing loans to
small and micro businesses (SMBs) and private enterprises by increasing the quota of central
bank lending and central bank discount and adjusting the parameters in the MPA system.
The  second  arrow  is  aimed  at  relieving  the  difficulty  faced  with  private  enterprises  in  issuing
bonds.  The  tool  can  serve  as  a  guarantee  to  enable  private  enterprises  to  issue  bonds.
Moreover, the negative effects of the three financing channels, i.e. credit, bonds and equity, may
reinforce each other. Why are commercial banks unwilling to purchase bonds issued by private
enterprises? That is because they are worried about possible bond defaults. Commercial banks
will  be  held  accountable  if  a  private  enterprise  defaults  on  the  bonds  they  have  purchased.
Therefore,  people  in  commercial  banks  are  concerned  about  the  potential  risks  of  private
enterprises. However, if private enterprises cannot issue bonds, they will lose access to liquidity,
which will then lead to credit problems and further undermine commercial banks’ willingness to
issue loans. Why? Because commercial banks are aware that such enterprises have run out of
money and have difficulty in loan repayments. As a result, they dare not to lend money to these
enterprises. Hence if enterprises cannot issue bonds, they will not be able to secure loans. To
make  matters  worse,  banks  that  have  issued  loans  may  even  accelerate  the  collection  of
payments  once  they  find  a  private  enterprise  at  fault. As  we  know,  failed  bond  issuance  will
usually be made known to the public. If a listed company fails to issue bonds, the news will be a
blow  to  its  share  price.  Since  many  private  enterprises  use  shares  as  collaterals  to  borrow
money from banks, it will be harder for them to secure loans when their share prices plunge.
Meanwhile, in this case, commercial banks will ask them to increase collaterals. Therefore, it can
be concluded that the negative effects of the three financing channels can affect and reinforce
each other.
Among the three channels, bonds and equity are more transparent than credit. In terms of loan
issuance, commercial banks and private enterprises need to sign one-to-one agreements, while,
by contrast, the bond and share issuance information of private enterprises is known to the entire
market. So we choose bonds to be the breakthourgh in a bid to address this issue. What we do
is to provide bonds with insurance, so as to help private enterprises issue bonds smoothly. Then
the successful bond issuance becomes a piece of good news. After knowing that bonds have
been issued, commercial banks will understand that the enterprises have secured money and
stop  urging  them  to  pay  back  loans.  When  the  stock  market  receives  the  message  of  bond
issuance,  the  share  price  of  such  enterprises  will  probably  take  a  favorable  turn.  This  is  the
reason  why  we  have  decided  to  choose  bond  issuance  as  the  breakthrough  in  easing  the
 5 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
financing difficulty of private enterprises.
The second arrow is the support instrument for bond financing by private enterprises, which is
similar  to  the  credit  risk  mitigation  (CRM)  instrument.  If  you  major  in  finance,  you  will  know  a
buzzword called CDS (Credit Default Swap), which refers to the insurance against credit default.
In the 2008 Lehman crisis, the reason why AIG, an American insurance company, collapsed was
that it had issued too many CDSs, and the US Department of the Treasury and the Fed had to
bail  it  out.  Consequently,  on  the  financial  market,  people  may  turn  pale  at  the  mention  of  the
CDS. Will issuing too many CDSs lead to new crisis? In terms of this instrument we introduced,
companies issuing CDSs are fairly reliable. At the same time, the design of the entire support
instrument is completely market-oriented, and companies would issue the CDSs and create the
instrument jointly with lead underwriters including commercial banks and securities companies.
Bond  buyers  can  choose  whether  to  buy  the  CDSs  at  their  own  discretion.  But  with  the
insurance, the bonds are exempt from credit risks, which is conducive to bond issuance.
Recently  we  have  successfully  issued  several  dozens  of  private  enterprise  bonds  with  the
volume reaching tens of billions of yuan. Since November this year, the bond issuance of private
enterprises has been restarted. The support instrument for bond financing has raised the credit
of private enterprises and relieved market anxiety over potential defaults by private enterprises.
Some state-owned commercial banks used to be unwilling to buy bonds of private enterprises as
they were anxious about a possible default. Now they can buy with the insurance. For example,
the yield of a private enterprise bond is 7%, and 1% of it is the premium. Then, an investor who
buys this bond can obtain 6% return on the bond and pay 1% for the premium. If the investor is
audacious enough and do not need the insurance, that is also okay. In this case, all of the 7%
yield belongs to the investor as the instrument we designed is optional. You can choose to buy or
not to buy. Whether the bond is issued at the rate of 6% or 7% is completely determined by the
market according to the roadshow bidding and book building. In the past month or so, the lowest
premium was only 40 base points, or 0.4 percentage point, which means that this enterprise had
a high credit level, so its premium was relatively low. In the meanwhile,  the premium of some
enterprise was 200 base points, implying relatively high risk of the enterprise. Yet, this enterprise
was willing to issue bonds. Why was that? For instance, the bond is issued at an interest rate of
7.5%, of which 2% is the premium. As a matter of fact, the person who buys this insurance can
still get a return of 5.5%, which is quite satisfactory for commercial banks.
Therefore, the design of this instrument is market-oriented. When designing the policy, we must
take into consideration the decisive role of the market in resource allocation and put power under
control. When does power most probably incur problems? One is when you can decide who can
issue bonds and who cannot. In fact, we cannot determine who can or cannot issue bonds since
the decision should be made by the market. The same case goes with the question of who can
or  cannot  successfully  issue  bonds.  We  have  adhered  to  this  principle  in  the  design  of  this
instrument by requiring that the competent authorities must not be involved in the selection of the
company list. This is aimed at limiting the power. There is no such process as review or approval
and no competent authorities determining who can or cannot issue bonds.
The second is when we price the bond issuance and CRM instruments. What should the interest
rate be? Is it 6%, 7% or 8%? From the perspective of issuers, the lower the interest rate the
better, since they need to pay for interest. Quite the opposite, investors who buy bonds want
higher interest rates so as to secure more returns in this way. But the risk is also higher when
the interest rate goes up. So investors should not only look at the interest rate as once there is
any default, it will be impossible to get their principal back.
Then what is the appropriate level of the interest rate on bonds and the premium? Who should be
the decision maker? The answer is the market. Therefore, relevant authorities should not set the
interest rate or premium. We all know that there should be a lead underwriter to issue bonds, and
it can be a commercial bank or a securities company. After figuring out the financial condition of
 6 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
the bond-issuing company, the lead underwriter illustrates it to investors through roadshows, and
invites bids and builds up the book before deciding the interest rate on bonds and the premium.
The  third  arrow  is  to  study  and  set  up  the  support  instrument  for  equity  financing  by  private
enterprises, in a bid to alleviate equity pledge risks and stabilize and promote equity financing by
private enterprises.
Now  I  am  going  to  talk  about  how  to  support  SMBs  and  private  enterprises.  There  are  many
examples at hand, and they are all about how to help these enterprises obtain loans. Let me start
by presenting a macro quantity-related concept. We have conducted a survey on SMB loans in
line with the statistical standards of inclusive finance. By the end of this October, over 16 million
enterprises had been granted loans, and this is a rather big number. You can see media reports
saying that the Chinese economy is pretty vigorous, and mass entrepreneurship and innovation
are  prospering.  China  has  a  population  close  to  1.4  billion,  but  do  you  know  how  many
enterprises there are in China? I mean those that have officially registered at the industrial and
commercial  administration.  The  rough  number  of  China’s  enterprises  (including  some  public
institutions) is 100 million. Currently this number might have exceeded 100 million since it has
been growing very rapidly over the past few years.
Why do I mention this? It is fairly easy to register a company and now the cost is pretty low, but it
is  quite  difficult  for  the  company  to  raise  funds.  The  major  financing  source  of  start-ups  is
relatives as borrowing money from banks or the capital market is very difficult. Moreover, there is
a strict selection process for bank loans. At present, there are a total of 1.35 million SMBs in
China that have secured loans, 11.03 million self-employed businesses with operating loans, and
4.11 million SMB owners with operating loans. These are all among the 100 million companies
mentioned just now. The credit record of companies with loans can be looked up in the credit
reporting  system  of  the  PBC.  SMBs  and  self-employed  businesses  are  at  a  relatively
disadvantaged position. In view of their loan conditions, we should say that the financial support
for them is quite strong.
The average lifespan of China’s SMBs is three years. Some achieve success and become big
companies while others disappear soon. The average lifespan of SMBs in the US is eight years,
and that in Japan is twelve years. When can China’s SMBs get bank loans for the first time? On
average,  four  years  and  four  months  after  their  establishment  —  that  is  to  say,  they  have  to
survive the death phase before getting loans. If they can get their first loans, they have a 75% +
chance to get the second loans. This is the law of finance. What finance does is to guard against
risks by examining whether you have collaterals or not and how big the risk of granting loans to
you is. So we can see such a distribution structure.
Now  let  us  go  back  to  the  three  numbers  I  mentioned  just  now.  Why  do  self-employed
businesses  and  SMB  owners  have  more  loans  than  SMBs?  It  is  determined  by  risks.  The
registered companies now are companies of limited liability that can go bankrupt. When SMBs
apply for loans, banks need to check whether they have collaterals. Otherwise, banks cannot get
back the principal once such enterprises go broken. This is the reason why, among so many
SMBs in China, only 1.35 million SMBs can secure bank loans as legal persons. Then why are
there  so  many  self-employed  businesses  that  have  been  granted  operating  loans?  This  is
because  although  they  are  companies  as  well,  they  apply  for  bank  loans  in  the  name  of
individuals. If the money is not paid back, their houses and assets bear joint liability, which in
nature is unlimited liability. The situation for SMB owners is similar, as they ask for loans in their
own names and may have used their houses as collaterals. You can learn about the implications
of  preventing  financial  risks.  From  the  perspective  of  macro  economy,  as  long  as  a  newly
established company can create jobs and produce products, it is good to the society — just as
the saying goes, it doesn’t matter if a cat is black or white so long as it catches mice. No matter
the loans are SMB loans, self-employed business loans or SME owner loans, enterprises can
increase employment and boost economic growth as long as the they get loans. Therefore, what
 7 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
I care about are the loans of this 16 million plus companies, and we should pay attention to the
perspective of inclusive finance in this sense.
With respect to changes in the external environment, the real economy has been impacted by
some external shocks. These shocks might be trade frictions or other market turbulances, which
have indeed exerted some impacts. In this process, expectation guidance should be enhanced.
And we should particularly be alert that risks can transmit across different markets, like the risk
transmission among the bond market, the foreign exchange market and the stock market. In the
meantime,  the  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policy  should  be  utilized  in  maintaining
market stability.
The monetary policy pays special attention to market liquidity, and one indicator is DR007. This
year, the terminal DR007 dropped from 2.8% in the first half of the year to 2.6%, and China’s 10-
year treasury bond yield also fell from around 4% at the beginning of this year to around 3.3% at
present. This is the effect of the prudent and neutral monetary policy, reflecting its support for the
real economy. It is safe to say that the financing and interest rate conditions are more relaxed,
which can partly ease the problem of enterprises being unable to access loans or having to pay
high interest to secure loans.
Looking at aggregate indicators, we just released the growth rates of the M2 money supply and
aggregate financing. Currently, M2 grows at a rate of 8%, and aggregate financing around 10%,
matching  the  growth  rate  of  the  real  economy.  The  current  macro  leverage  ratio  stands  at  a
rather stable level. Over the past 10 years, or 20 years, in particular after the Lehman crisis in
2008, China’s macro leverage ratio has been growing rather rapidly. As illustrated in this figure,
the  blue  line,  red  line  and  green  line  represent  enterprises,  households  and  the  government
respectively.  It  can  be  seen  that  the  macro  leverage  ratio  has  increased  by  roughly  100
percentage points from 2009 to 2015. The leverage ratio in 2007 and 2008 was around 150%,
and then increased to around 250% in 2016, which means that all economic entities borrowed
considerably. This has drawn the attention of regulatory authorities and the authorities in charge
of  macro  regulation  and  control.  In  recent  years,  the  central  government  has  proposed  to
facilitate  “deleveraging”.  Consequently,  the  leverage  ratio  has  been  standing  at  around  250%
since last year and has remained stable for almost eight quarters without further rise.
The monetary policy should be flexibly adjusted according to changes in the economic situation,
and counter-cyclical adjustments be particularly strengthened. If the leverage ratio is rather high,
or bubbles emerge in asset prices, the best strategy is “slow air-bleed” and “soft landing” so as
to  make  smooth  adjustments  to  the  economy.  When  the  market  or  economy  is  impacted  by
external  shocks,  we  should  take  prompt  measures  to  stabilize  the  financial  market  and,  in
particular, to bolster market confidence. This is a fairly good regulation and control strategy. In
the next phase, the monetary policy is going to push forward with its continuous support for the
real economy.
Just  now  I  talked  about  two  subjects:  the  framework  of  our  monetary  policy  and  how  the
monetary policy and finance support the real economy, in particular, how they support SMBs as
well  as  private  enterprises. And  with  regard  to  private  enterprises,  my  focus  was  on  how  the
second  arrow  in  the  three-arrow  policy  mix  provides  support  for  private  firms  in  their  bond
issuance.
Here  comes  the  third  part:  how  to  guard  against  financial  risks  in  the  process  of  formulating
monetary policy. This calls for consideration of both monetary policy and macro-prudential policy,
so the “dual pillar” regulatory framework should be improved to enable the mutual promotion and
complementation of monetary policy and macro-prudential policy.
I would first talk about what risks we should guard against. Here are several examples. One of
the  manifestations  of  major  risks  is  abnormal  market  fluctuation  and  external  shocks,  for
instance, the marked ups and downs in the stock market or the bond market, or market panics
 8 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
resulting from corporate defaults. Default means that an enterprise can’t repay the principal and
interest of its debt when time is due, which would cause panics. External shocks may destabilize
market expectations. At present, the pivot interest rate of money market stands at 2.6% with the
interest rate of excess reserves at 0.72% as the floor and the SLF interest rate at 3.55% as the
ceiling. The range of this interest rate corridor is relatively narrow. Why do we say it is not easy to
keep the interest rate within a narrow range? For example, when the Asian financial crisis hit
Hong Kong in 1998, the interest rates in HK could be as high as 300% plus. Just now I mentioned
that the money market rate stands at around 2.6%, the ceiling is over 3% and the floor is 0.72%.
External shocks may drive the interest rate up to 10%, 20%, or even several hundred percent. It
shows that if stricken by expectation or external shocks, the money market will probably suffer
from  great  fluctuations,  so  we  need  to  consider  preventing  risk  contagion  among  different
markets when making policies.
The second manifestation of risks is credit risks. What are credit risks? For commercial banks,
loans become non-performing assets if they cannot be serviced, which constitutes banks’ credit
risk.  For  companies,  if  they  default  on  bonds  issued,  the  credit  risk  will  emerge.  Credit  risks
should be taken into consideration when thinking about the monetary policy and financial stability.
At present, the overall non-performing loan ratio of commercial banks is 1.87%, lower than 2%. In
regards to the bond market, we should think about how many defaults there have been this year,
what the volume involved is, what the default rate is, and how much the overall credit default risk
impacts the market.
The  third  risk  is  the  so-called  shadow  banking  risk.  Shadow  banking  refers  to  bank-like
businesses such as asset management business, inter-bank business and asset securitization
operated by banks and other financial institutions including trust companies, asset management
companies and insurance companies. Shadow banking business conducts credit transformation
or  maturity  transformation  on  assets,  which  is  similar  to  banking  business  in  nature,  but  the
capital adequacy ratio and other indicators of shadow banks are not as strictly regulated as those
of banks, so more attention should be paid to the risks of shadow banking. For example, some
institutions circumvent macro policy and financial regulation in the name of asset securitization,
but  do  not  actually  sell  the  assets,  nor  maintain  bankruptcy  remoteness.  This  is  the  risk  that
should be noticed. Shadowing banking sounds pretty risky, but well-regulated shadow banking
business is a necessary supplement to the financial market. Hence shadow banking is not an
absolutely negative concept. As long as business operations are conducted in accordance with
laws and regulations, all of the business can become necessary supplements to the financial
market, be it on-balance-sheet or off-balance-sheet business, trust funds, publicly offered funds
or private equity funds.
The  fourth  risk  is  illegal  financial  activities.  Some  unlicensed  institutions  and  individuals  raise
funds  illegally  through  the  Internet  in  the  name  of  innovation.  And    trading-floor  products  in
violation of relevant laws and regulations are also part of illegal fund-raising activities, and should
be cracked down on. As for illegal fund-raising in the private sector, there were over 5,000 new
illegal  fund-raising  cases  in  China  involving  a  large  volume  and  many  investors  in  2017.  In
response to illegal financial activities, we must enhance consumer protection, act with greater
vigilance and strengthen legal right protection. In particular, we should protect the elderly from
being cheated.
Various  factors  cause  financial  risks,  such  as  international  factors,  domestic  factors,  market
factors,  institutional  factors,  moral  factors  and  incomplete  regulation.  So  risk  management
should be constantly improved. In coping with risks, there should be a unified principle, which is
“who  the  child  belongs  to  shall  holds  the  child.”  That  is  to  say,  the  owner  shall  take  the  risk.
Everyone knows that there are risks in the market and investment practices, so there should be
careful considerations before any investment decision is made. This is the law of the market, and
we should all keep it in mind.
 9 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ultimately, finance is set to address the issue of credit. Some people have had good credit since
a very young age, while some do not even when they are in their later years. Several measures
can be taken to address the issue of credit. One is to know about the borrower. If some people
do bad things, their reputation will be hit hard. Therefore, they can be trusted since the cost will
be too high for them to serve the devil. What does the financial market trust? It trusts money. It
trusts capital fund. Why should the owners assume the risk? When you do not know about or
cannot distinguish the credit of a person, you can look at how many bets he has made, or how
much money chipped in. If he has put his money here or used his house as collateral, you can
trust him within the scope of his collateral or the money he has chipped in. In this way, you are
able to assume the corresponding risk against his collateral. This is the essence of finance. It is
about why I can trust you. I trust you, or your record, or your capital fund. So owners need to
assume the risks.
When you start up a business, let’s say, how do you distinguish illegal fund-raising from normal
and standardized financing? The precondition is risk-assumption by the owners. Assuming that
an enterprise comes to control a rural credit cooperative (RCC) or a rural commercial bank, and
becomes  its  owner.  If  anything  goes  wrong  in  this  rural  commercial  bank,  it  should  be  the
owner’s  capital  fund  that  bears  the  brunt.  Why  do  we  focus  on  the  CAR?  The  core  of  Basel
Accords is the CAR. The requirement for it is 8%. If a bank does many other types of business,
the CAR requirement will be higher. This is also the case if it is a systemically important financial
institution (SIFI). Why is the CAR highlighted? The logic is that the money is really yours, and
your money will be lost first if there is any loss made, so I can trust you to a certain degree. I
believe that the money that is lost first is your money, and usually you would not easily lose your
own money, so I can trust you.
This is also true in our supervision on banks. When we find any RCC or financial institution is at
risk, we should remind it of the situation. If it begins to consume its own capital, we should pay
attention  to  it.  If  its  capital  fund  is  almost  used  up,  the  money  lost  later  will  be  that  of  the
depositors.  Now  we  should  pay  close  attention  to  it.  When  the  loss  made  reaches  a  certain
degree, we should take it over rather than allowing it to keep operating. Why? Because its capital
has been drained, the money of clients or the society will suffer if there is further loss. Then why
is it trusted at the beginning? Because at the beginning, it is its own money that is lost, and I
believe the capital fund as collateral represents its credit as well as compensation for the risk.
This also applies to bond-related issues. So I am talking about the most fundamental financial
issue.  It  is  about  why  you  can  trust  a  person  or  an  institution.  You  look  at  either  his  record,
namely his history accumulated in the past; or how much capital fund, how much money he has
chipped in. This is a simple judgment of risk.
For monetary policies to forestall and defuse financial risks, it is an important task to impose
certain regulations on asset management products, e.g. unified guideline for asset management
industry,  net  value-based  management,  mark  to  market  principle,  among  many  others.
Meanwhile,  it  is  also  very  important  for  us  to  enhance  regulation  on  non-financial  enterprises
investing in financial institutions. Generally, financial institutions operate on deposits, investors’
funds  and  insurance  premiums.  Although  a  non-financial  enterprise  in  bankruptcy  causes
relatively limited losses and influence, only affecting itself, a financial institution in such a situation
may involve depositors, investors and policyholders. Therefore, we shall pay special attention to
the qualification and purpose of those non-financial enterprises investing in financial institutions,
i.e.  why  they  make  such  investments. Are  they  regarding  those  institutions  invested  as  cash
machines  at  the  service  of  their  own  enterprises?  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  strengthen
regulation on such non-financial enterprises investing in financial institutions.
Efforts should be made to enhance regulations on financial holding companies, which include not
only  banks,  but  also  securities,  insurance  companies,  and  trusts.  How  is  the  firewall  built
between  these  business  lines?  How  to  isolate  risks?  How  to  consolidate  the  accounts?  It
 10 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
requires us to enhance regulations on financial holding companies. Meanwhile, we shall tighten
regulation of SIFIs, which is of utmost importance. There are totally five global SIFIs (G-SIFIs) in
China, among which ICBC, ABC, BOC and CCB are all global systemically important banks. In
other words, if problems occur in these four large banks, the influence will be global. How many
systemically important banks globally? There are only about 30, and they are mostly based in
developed  countries,  including  the  US,  followed  by  UK,  Switzerland,  Germany,  France  and
Japan. Among developing countries, only four Chinese banks are among the list, with Ping An
Group being one of the global systemically important insurance institutions.
Efforts  should  also  be  made  to  strengthen  regulation  of  domestic  SIFIs.  Global  systemically
important financial institutions are called G-SIFIs, and their domestic counterparts are called D-
SIFIs. The reason that we attach particular importance to the regulation of SIFIs in the banking,
securities and insurance sectors is that problems in these institutions could bring forth systemic
risks. Meanwhile, we should also carry out coordinated regulation of financial infrastructure and
promote comprehensive financial statistics.
Lastly, I would like to talk about the relations between internal and external equilibrium. As the
“impossible trinity” cited in many literatures shows, since China has been highly integrated with
the global economy, we have to take global factors into consideration when designing domestic
monetary policies and other policies. The exchange rate and interest rate provides an important
perspective. In this figure, the blue line illustrates the interest margin of China’s ten-year treasury
bonds, and the red line indicates the exchange rate of the US dollar against the Chinese Yuan.
Taking the ten-year treasury bonds as an example, a few years ago, the interest rate of ten-year
RMB treasury bonds was 4%, and that of ten-year USD treasury bonds was 2%, with a margin of
200 basis points, which was large. Now, the former has fallen to around 3.3%, and the latter has
risen to around 2.9%. Despite a positive margin, the RMB treasury bonds were only moderately
higher in rate than their USD counterparts, where the margin narrowed from 200 basis points to
40 basis points. This actually has significant meanings in that people are weighing the pros and
cons  in  holding  USD-denominated  assets  or  RMB-denominated  ones.  How  can  cross-border
capital  flow  keep  balanced  given  the  current  situation?  In  fact,  the  interest  margin  reflects
expectations  for  the  appreciation  or  depreciation  in  local  currency.  When  cross-border  capital
flow  reaches  balanced,  there  will  also  be  a  balance  between  the  interest  margin  and  the
depreciation or appreciation in the local currency. If such a balance can be sustained, the interest
margin will remain at the current level. If not, the margin will continue to change, as reflected by
the movement in the exchange rate.
This graph describes the relationship between the exchange rate and the export. China is a large
country  that  depends  increasingly  on  internal  demands,  and  boasts  a  fairly  complete  set  of
categories  in  manufacturing  industries  and  a  relatively  sound  industrial  system.  China’s
monetary policy should adhere to “self-centeredness”, so that it can effectively support the real
economy.  Besides,  we  should  also  give  consideration  to  international  factors  and  strive  for  a
favorable  external  environment.  When  designing  exchange  rate  policy,  we  should  keep  the
exchange rate flexible to make the balance more robust and resilient, and sustainable in times of
shock.  Stability  can  be  maintained  when  both  internal  and  external  equilibrium  is  considered.
Otherwise, the equilibrium will be more fragile under shock.
The flexibility of exchange rate comes from the mechanism where the exchange rate is decided
by  market  supply  and  demand.  When  the  exchange  rate  becomes  flexible,  it  is  capable  of
adjusting  the  macro  economy  and  the  balance  of  payments  (BOP).  This  is  why  a  flexible
exchange  rate  is  an  automatic  stabilizer  for  the  BOP.  The  ratio  of  China’s  current  account
surplus to GDP was around 10% in 2007, 1.3% in 2017, and possibly only 0.1% to 0.2% in this
year, which reflects the changes in China’s BOP. The best economic policy for us is to maintain
a general balance in BOP, rather than pursuing surplus. Admittedly, the BOP includes not only
the  current  account,  but  also  the  capital  account.  If  the  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate
mechanism is sound enough to adjust the BOP automatically, then it will serve as a stabilizer;
 11 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
otherwise, it will amplify shocks and render the economy more unstable. This is why both internal
and  external  equilibrium  should  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  figure  shows  the  flexibility  of
RMB exchange rate which, as we can observe, is stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
Some may argue that RMB has depreciated since the beginning of this year. Judging from this
figure, we can see that RMB has remained stable this year to date. Throughout the year, the
British pound has depreciated by 5.6% against the US dollar, the euro has depreciated by 5.7%
against the US dollar, and the RMB has only depreciated by 5.8% against the same reference.
Compared with the currencies of other developing countries, e.g. India, South Africa, Turkey and
Brazil, ours is also stable. The changes in exchange rate are mainly due to a robust dollar index,
with  China-US  trade  frictions  particularly  impacting  on  RMB  exchange  rate.  Even  in  such  a
situation, the currency remained rather stable, with no major difference from the trends of the
British pound and the euro. As is widely known, the British pound and the euro are both important
convertible currencies, and we will pay attention to counter-cyclical adjustments to prevent the
sheep-flock  effect.  When  necessary,  we  will  adopt  macro-prudential  policies  in  dealing  with
cross-border  capital  flow,  with  a  view  to  stabilizing  market  expectations.  In  general,  with
abundant experiences, tools and foreign exchange reserves, we are well prepared for, confident
in and capable of maintaining RMB exchange rate stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level.
That’s all for my speech today. Thank you!
***
Moderator:  Governor  Yi  has  just  given  a  wonderful  lecture  by  covering  the  framework  of
monetary policy, the “two-pillar” framework of monetary and macro-prudential policies, as well as
the  considerations  about  the  monetary  policy  framework  under  the  new  normal.  In  particular,
Governor  Yi  talked  about  the  downward  pressure  facing  the  economy  since  this  year,  and
measures we have taken, including supporting the development of private enterprises with “three
arrows”.  Further,  he  illustrated  risks  in  different  aspects,  and  finally  the  internal  and  external
equilibrium. These have made the speech highly profound and comprehensive. Due to limited
time, there may be some aspects that are not elaborated on. Now please allow me to ask a few
questions.
The second in the three arrows you mentioned, is the support for private enterprises in bond
issuance. There is a mechanism in place to insure against credit events, and you also said that
the tool will be priced by the market. What are the institutions that issue credit risk mitigation
tools in the market, as they are supposed to be competent enough to take such responsibility
and deal with possible risks?
Yi Gang: The most important precondition for issuing credit mitigation tools is that the market
should  trust  the  institutions  that  provide  credit  protection  to  insure  against  a  credit  event. At
present, this task is fulfilled by the China Bond Insurance Company (CBIC) under the National
Association of Financial Market Institutional Investors, with the support from the PBC; meanwhile,
CBIC can launch such products with principal underwriters, commercial banks and securities
companies. In addition, local governments, who know best about local enterprises, also actively
participate in the process.
Moderator: Is it supported by the PBC?
Yi Gang: Yes. With the PBC’s support, the credit protection that CBIC provides won’t fail to be
fulfilled upon crisis as what happened to AIG, so the payment will be 100% repayable. However,
the whole process is market-based and launched with principal underwriters. For example, firms
can issue bonds worth of RMB 1 billion, and make them half insured and half not. CBIC might
insure for a scale of RMB 100–200 million among the insured bonds of RMB 500 million, principal
underwriters another RMB 100–200 million, and other organizations the rest. I heard that a new
private  enterprise  bond  was  issued  today,  wholly  insured  by  the  principal  underwriter  itself.  It
 12 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
means that this instrument created by the PBC acts as an igniter introducing market players into
the market. Once the market is restored after the introduction, the PBC will gradually step out.
When there’s no one else to issue bonds or provide such  credit protection, the PBC will take the
responsibility. Besides, this mechanism is time-bound. We will automatically exit at the due time
and avoid competing with market players. We would only take actions when no one is willing to
do so.
Moderator: So, other participants also play a big part in pricing?
Yi Gang: Yes, the role they play is decisive. And the pricing is fully subject to book building and
bidding.
Moderator: When principal underwriters provide credit protection, does the PBC regulate them?
For instance, to review whether the underwriters are competent enough? After they provide such
protection, is there any possibility that the underwriters come short of money and fail to repay?
Yi Gang: We have a threshold for capital. In case of a credit mitigation tool default which results
in non-payment, they are the same as the bond defaults where the defaulting party shall bear the
legal  liability  and  proceed  according  to  laws  and  bankruptcy  procedures  at  the  court.  Those
principal underwriters could be banks or large securities companies with abundant capital.
Moderator:  As  for  the  other  two  arrows,  you  just  elaborated  the  second  one.  To  my
understanding, bond issuance is actually very important as it is an open message and important
signal for the market that the enterprises are capable of issuing bonds without difficulty, and then
the bank may follow with loans. The first arrow is to encourage banks to grant loans to private
enterprises,  especially  to  small  and  medium  ones.  We  saw  the  annual  new  high  of  private
enterprise bond issuance in November. How about bank loans to private enterprises? Is there
any improvement?
Yi  Gang:  This  year,  we  paid  much  attention  to  encouraging  RMB  loans  in  macro-economic
management.  In  November,  the  RMB  loans  increased  by  RMB  1.25  trillion  and  the  new  RMB
loans from January to November exceeded RMB 15 trillion, an increase of RMB 2.14 trillion year
on year. This year also witnessed decreased shadow banking and off-balance-sheet financing
activities,  particularly  trust  loans  and  entrusted  loans.  The  important  goal  of  macro-economic
management is to increase the on-balance-sheet RMB loans to hedge the decline of shadow
banking and off-balance-sheet financing  activities. Although  the  loan  growth  in  this  year  is  not
slow, as the increase still goes slightly smaller than the decrease of off-balance-sheet activities,
we may find the monetary conditions not that loose. Market needs indeed play a part here, but it
is mainly decided by economic factors and economic cycle. When conducting counter-cyclical
adjustment, we emphasized both market-based operation and risk prevention and control, so as
to fill the financing gap in an optimal way.
By loan structure, the PBC increased the quota of central bank lending and central bank discount
by RMB 300 billion, mainly to support small and medium banks who offer loans to SMBs and
private enterprises for a large part. I’ll skip the figures that all provinces have provided in details.
Central  bank  lending  and  discount  are  subject  to  bookkeeping,  so  we  have  a  clear  picture  of
which small and medium enterprises are beneficiaries.
Moderator: So, to some degrees, the support from the PBC to commercial banks and the loans
from commercial banks to small and medium enterprises is linked up to some extent?
Yi Gang: Yes, they are subject to bookkeeping. It means that commercial banks need to keep
accounts when they get the quota of central bank lending, specifying the amount of loans they
grant to SMBs and private enterprises and the total loans as well. We put more emphasis on
loans to enterprises with a credit line of up to RMB 5 million and RMB 10 million, as they are
broadly real SME loans.
 13 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Moderator: You mentioned that the third arrow is equity financing. Would you please give us
more information? As you have said, it’s under research, right?
Yi Gang:  Correct.  Despite  the  fact  that  it  is  in  the  research  stage,  this  tool  has  taken  effect,
because I’ve talked about these “three arrows” over a month ago, and market behaviors are often
guided by expectations. The first arrow has been in place all the time; and the second arrow,
namely the credit mitigation tools for bond issuance of private enterprise started to be massively
applied from October and November. The third arrow mainly tackles problems in equity financing:
in the event that private enterprises use their stocks for pledged financing, additional collateral
supplement resulting from declined stock price may, among other things, lead to the transfer of
ownership or other difficulties. Therefore, we are encouraging the market to optimize resource
allocation and mitigate the difficulties arising from additional collateral supplement. Many effective
innovative tools are created nationwide, so there are numerous ways out.
The  key  points  to  alleviate  this  problem  include:  Firstly,  there  must  be  no  irresolution  about
working to consolidate and develop the public sector; and there must be no irresolution about
working  to  encourage,  support,  and  guide  the  development  of  the  non-public  sector.  As  we
emphasize  here  the  current  difficulties  for  private  business,  we  shall  resolutely  support  the
growth of private economy. Secondly, we shall guard against moral hazards. What are the moral
hazards? Why did I elaborate on the second arrow today? Designed by the PBC though, this tool
takes effect fully based on  market-oriented resource allocation. In other words, it is designed to
insulate  power  from  resource  allocation,  and  thus  prevent  moral  hazards.  The  introduction  of
“three arrows” serves to guide expectations and local authorities are all working to adopt effective
measures.
Moderator: Governor Yi, in the speech, you mentioned the internal and external equilibrium at
the end, and before that, the uncertainties facing China’s external economic and trade relations
this year. Against these uncertainties, it might bring more challenges to us in striking a balance
between the internal and external equilibrium. As you previously stated, we shall prevent risks
from  spreading  among  different  markets.  Could  you  please  expound  on  this  aspect?  For
instance, at present there are three months for China and the US to negotiate over the trade
issues. What if the result turns out to be less satisfactory three months later? What responding
measures we have in terms of monetary policies? I believe we must have a pre-arranged plan,
right?
Yi  Gang:  What  I  meant  by  internal  and  external  equilibrium,  is  to  strike  a  balance  between
internal  and  external  equilibrium  when  considering  monetary  policies.  For  example,  when  the
domestic economy faces downward pressure and credit crunch, the monetary conditions should
be  somewhat  accommodative;  however,  if  the  conditions  are  overly  accommodative,  the
excessively  low  interest  rates  will  impact  on  the  exchange  rate.  Therefore,  the  external
equilibrium shall be taken into consideration for a balance. The Fed is now in interest rate hike
cycle. As it approaches the neutral rate, the uncertainty about a further rate hike seems to be
greater than that a few months ago, while the rate rise prospects were very clear a year ago.
However,  as  our  economy 
faces  certain  downward  pressure  and  requires  relatively
accommodative  monetary  conditions,  there  is  a  typical  contradiction  between  the  internal  and
external equilibrium. In this case, we shall focus on the internal equilibrium while considering the
external one to strike a balance in between, which in fact is the optimal balance point.
As  to  China-US  trade  frictions,  President  Xi  Jinping  and  President  Donald  Trump  have  held
fruitful meetings days before in Buenos Aires, Argentina and reached important consensus in this
regard. We’ll address this issue in a constructive way in line with the consensus made by two
leaders. I believe that there are huge mutual benefits and economic integration between China
and the US. A constructive solution will benefit not only China and the US, but also the global
economy.
 14 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you!
 15 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
