Johannes  Beermann:  Heads  and  tails  -  cash  in  the  age  of
digitalisation
Dinner  speech  by  Dr  Johannes  Beermann,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the International Cash Conference, Munich, 10 September 2019.
 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
Welcome to the Seehaus right at the heart of the English Garden.
This park is a true landmark of the city of Munich, with a design inspired by British landscape
architecture.
It probably comes as no surprise that football – another at least originally English pastime – is
popular around here as well.
Of course, “kicking a ball” with friends in a park such as the English Garden is a more informal
affair than the matches you might see in the professional football leagues, where the stakes are
arguably much higher.
But the basic principles of football apply everywhere. The direction of play is the first decision to
be made before any match can begin.
Depending on the position of the sun or the direction of the wind, the choice of which goal to
defend first could make a difference to the game’s outcome.
A neutral mechanism needs to be put in place to decide who obtains this “first mover advantage”.
A  coin  toss  is  one  such  mechanism.  The  coin  is  considered  “fair”  if  both  events  –  the  coin
landing on heads or the coin landing on tails – have an equal probability of occurring.
In the history of minting, heads on the obverse and tails on the reverse have emerged as the two
sides shown on coins which serve as legal tender. Although the details on each side differ at first
sight, they are closely related.
To  “coin”  a  well-known  expression, heads  and tails  are  literally  two  sides  of  the  same  coin.
Together,  they  complete  the  coin,  which  also  means  both  sides  have  to  be  taken  into
consideration.
In the world of payments, that is precisely what central banks do. On the one hand, we provide
payment systems that function purely electronically while, on the other hand, we take part in the
production  and  distribution  of  physical  cash.  In  the  prevailing  set-up,  one  aspect  of  payments
cannot work without the other.
Digital  payments  are  in  a  state  of  flux.  New  competitors  enter  the  market,  at  times  trying  to
disrupt existing structures.
The direction of play remains unclear at this stage. It may be that the rise of one form of digital
payment will lead to the fall of another. It is also possible that physical cash is used to a lesser
and  lesser  extent  until  it  effectively  fades  from  existence,  at  least  as  far  as  transactions  are
concerned.
None  of  us  have  a  crystal  ball  to  tell  us  how  the  match  will  end.  But  we  can  look  at  existing
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
evidence.  
In my brief remarks this evening, let us turn to the hypothetical question: how would the coin toss
change, if one of the sides were to vanish?
Supply and demand factors behind cash usage
Ladies and gentlemen,
In Germany, cash remains as popular among private households as ever. If asked directly, 88%
of  German  households  would  be  in  favour  of  keeping  the  option  of  using  cash  for  everyday
1
transactions.
This generally “cash-loving” attitude is reflected in the data on actual cash usage. We know from
2
our own analysis that 74% of all point-of-sale transactions are made using banknotes and coins.
But this number is declining – albeit gradually and from a high level by international standards. In
some countries, cash usage is already significantly lower than in Germany.  
In principle, the declining use of cash could be driven by weakening demand. This could occur if
alternative means of payment were to appeal more in relative terms to private households. We
as central bankers take a neutral stance towards such a consumer-driven process.
However, the declining usage of cash could also be driven by a weakening supply as the existing
cash infrastructure erodes. Such adjustments could stem from both private and public entities
and could hamper the adequate provision of cash.
The reasons for this may be complex, yet the implications would be straightforward: households
would have to adjust, too.
Once obtaining cash simply becomes “too cumbersome”, switching to electronic alternatives is
the rational decision, but it means less choice and it may pose several social challenges:
Think of ensuring financial inclusion in an ageing population.
Think of providing a non-electronic alternative in times of political crisis or in the event of
large-scale cyber attacks.
Any rational decision is preceded by a cost-benefit analysis. While we may see the benefits of
different payment methods, we also need to understand their underlying cost structures.
We looked in a recent study at the overall transaction costs of cash compared to debit and credit
3
card payments in the German retail sector.
Cash did turn out to be the most cost-efficient payment instrument for retailers when accounting
for  cost  drivers  such  as  cash  handling,  fees  for  card  payments  and  payment  infrastructure
provision.
But, looking ahead, several factors need to be understood better. To name just a few:
How is the increasing use of contactless payments impacting on transaction costs across
the various payment instruments?
How are other actors in the cash cycle, most notably financial institutions, dealing with their
cost structures?
What is the market price of personal information? Or, to put it more directly: do digital forms
of  payment  that  contain  traces  of  individual  data  generate  social  costs  that  need  to  be
accounted for in future cost comparisons?
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is obviously hard to disentangle supply and demand-side drivers in economics. Moreover, both
drivers are likely to be mutually reinforcing.
But to the extent that declining cash usage is driven by supply-side adjustments, central banks
can no longer remain neutral. With one side dominating, the coin becomes biased.
Being  neutral  with  regard  to  consumer  choices  does  not  imply  being  passive  with  regard  to
providing an adequate cash infrastructure.
This is especially relevant given that the only viable alternative to physical cash is introducing
some  form  of  central  bank  digital  currency.  But,  in  the  euro  area  at  least,  I  cannot  see  this
happening any time soon.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
The coin is still spinning through the air, and two outcomes seem conceivable at this juncture.
In the first scenario, private and public actors within the cash cycle take measures to ensure
the adequate provision of cash in line with prevailing demand. As a result, the coin retains its
current characteristics, encompassing both electronic and physical forms of payment. 
In  the  second  scenario,  the  physical  side  of  the  coin  increasingly  starts  to  resemble  the
digital side. In effect, the coin becomes one-sided.
One-sided coins are not without historical precedent.
Some 800 years ago, a variety of pfennig coinage dominated monetary circulation in German-
speaking areas. Known as bracteates, these coins were embossed on one side and often hollow
on the other.
The  relatively  simple  technique  employed  to  make  them  was  also  reflected  in  their  limited
function as a store of value. In fact, these one-sided coins were infamous for their frequent and
sharp devaluations.
As a result, stable coinages were introduced in the 14th century. Those were, of course, two-
sided and have become a true symbol of monetary stability that has endured to this day.
Central bank money is the most recognisable means of payment. It is the local unit of account
and the only legal tender. Ensuring its adequate supply is a key task for central banks, which we
need to fulfil at all times.  
As technologies advance and digital forms of money increasingly enter the field, policymakers
will not be able to remain “on the sidelines”.
There are two sides to every coin, after all.
On that note, I would like to wish you all a very pleasant and interesting evening. You still have to
decide  between  an  excellent  red  and  an  equally  excellent  white  wine.  The  choice  is  yours.
Perhaps a coin toss will help.
Thank you.
1
2
3
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Payment behaviour in Germany in 2017 – fourth study of the utilisation of cash
and cashless payment instruments.
Ibid.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), The cost of payment methods in the retail sector, Monthly Report, June 2019, pp.
65–79.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
