François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  The  euro  area  -  staying  the  course
through uncertainties
Introductory remarks by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the
Bank of France Symposium & 34th SUERF Colloquium on the occasion of the 20th anniversary
of the euro, Paris, 28 March 2019.
 th
Good afternoon everyone and welcome to Paris. This is not only the 34  SUERF Colloquium but
also  the  10   Banque  de  France  International  Symposium.  It  is  also  Marc-Olivier’s  last
symposium and I would like to warmly thank him and the teams at SUERF and the Banque de
France for their hard work. I also wish to express my gratitude to the speakers and moderators
as  key  players  in  “staying  the  course  through  uncertainties”.  In  my  opening  remarks  I  will
modestly describe different types of uncertainty before discussing their possible implications for
policy.   
th
1 – There are actually four different types of uncertainty
 We  often  talk  about  uncertainty  as  if  it  is  a  single  phenomenon.  There  are,  however,  multiple
sources and forms of uncertainty that have different implications for how policy makers can and
should  respond.  To  introduce  your  discussions  over  the  next  two  days,  I  will  mention  four  of
them.
First, “Current state” uncertainty
One form of uncertainty that we grapple with all the time is not being completely sure where we
are  economically.  So-called  soft  data,  such  as  surveys  and  sentiment  indicators,  and  market
signals  do  not  always  align  with  hard  official  statistics  which  are  generally  known  with  some
delay. Statistical techniques exist to try to combine these sources together into a “nowcast” but
the error bands around these central estimates are still quite wide. They also cannot deal with
one  of  the  most  difficult  problems:  what  to  make  of  so-called  “idiosyncratic  factors”?  For
instance, to what extent is the recent stutter in the German economy due to the car industry and
to the new emissions standards or to the low level of the Rhine and possibly climate change?
These are very hard judgements to make.                             
Second, “Future path” uncertainty
If we are unsure about where we are, we are even less certain about where we are going, most
obviously because of shocks that we cannot precisely predict. A potential slowdown in China or
different choices over Brexit – which you will discuss today – are two such examples.
Economic dynamics are also driven by underlying momentum that is very difficult to gauge. Is the
recent growth slowdown temporary or will it persist? A temporary slowdown is, as you know, the
base case for the ECB, which recently revised down its staff macroeconomic projections for real
GDP growth substantially in 2019 but only slightly in 2020.
Third, “Strategic” uncertainty
In  some  cases,  the  uncertainty  we  face  is  about  what  other  policy  makers  will  do.  This  is
particularly pernicious when unpredictability is considered a source of strategic advantage. For
instance,  a  seemingly  credible  threat  by  one  party  to  take  actions  that  lead  to  mutual
disadvantage can prompt concessions from the other, (or not).  A former American President,
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Richard Nixon, called this his “mad man” theory when applying it to the war in Vietnam and there
are  echoes  of  this  idea  in  current  international  trade  disputes.  Such  behaviour  undermines
multilateralism which has been an important source of stability and growth over many decades. If
strategic uncertainty is a source of unilateral advantage, it will not dissipate but remain a source
of latent policy risk.
Last, “Structural change and monetary policy” uncertainty
There are fundamental structural changes occurring, notably in the euro area economy but also
elsewhere,  that  are  poorly  understood.  The  ongoing  demographic  transition,  for  example,  is
changing employment, investment and saving decisions, which will probably lower the natural
rate of interest.
The monetary policy transmission mechanism also seems to be changing. A sustained period of
accommodative monetary policy has boosted growth and employment and is finally showing up
in nominal wage growth: this first part of the Phillips curve is at work. But higher nominal wages
have not yet been passed through to core inflation. It should eventually, but the more pertinent
issues  –  of  when  and  by  how  much  –  are  unclear.  There  is,  thus,  not  a  single  mechanical
relationship  between  monetary  policy  instruments  and  inflation,  rather  a  distribution  of  likely
responses.  Furthermore,  differences  in  demographic  trends  and  structural  policy  choices
between  countries  in  the  eurozone  (or  states  in  the  US)  may  create  or  perpetuate  some
heterogeneity across large monetary areas, an issue you will discuss tomorrow morning.
2 – How to respond to such uncertainties?
Without pre-empting discussions, let me flag some possible responses.
I’ll  first,  address the  issue  of  policy  uncertainty  between  central  bankers.  So  far,  it  is,
fortunately, the simplest one: we are not in a so-called “game of chicken” and clarity about policy
intentions between ourselves are beneficial for all. The frequent exchanges we have at the BIS,
G7, G20 and even events such as this Symposium, are valuable to create mutual trust and avoid
the possibility of large policy surprises. Our monetary policies are independent, and rightly so, but
they  are  concerted  and  we  are  committed  to  avoid  currency  wars.  Clarity  about  our  reaction
functions clearly also extends to financial markets and the public at large.
Second, how could we respond to current state and future path uncertainty? The textbook
answer, dating back to Theil and Tinbergen, is to work out your best guess and then act as if you
are completely sure. This is sometimes described as the certainty-equivalent approach. There
are, however, symmetry assumptions in this type of model that do not necessary hold in the real
world. Uncertainty around the central projection may be skewed in one direction.
Applying  the  certainty-equivalence  approach  also  assumes  that  upside  errors  are  regarded
equally  to  downside  errors.  But  given  that  inflation  is  still  below  the  objective,  as  are  market-
based long-term inflation expectations, upside shocks would be more welcome than equivalent
downside shocks at present.
Let  me  at  this  point  add  some  words  on  negative  rates  following  my  remarks  Lisbon  last
February, and state the obvious: we are in March 2019, and no longer in March 2016 when we
cut the DFR to –0.40%. This gap in time has two consequences:
First, there were, at that time, significant deflationary risks, and we decided accordingly a
strong calibration of our monetary answers. As these deflationary risks have now receded,
there is obviously no reason to go more negative on interest rates.
Second,  we  have  three  years  more  evidence  on  the  combined  effects  of  our  various
unconventional monetary tools, including negative rates, on financial intermediation and their
impact on the transmission of our monetary policy – the combined effects of which might
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
have evolved over time. So Mario Draghi rightly stressed that we need to further monitor the
bank lending channel and to reflect on possible measures that we can take to preserve the
favourable implications of negative rates for the economy, while mitigating their possible side
effects.
Knightian uncertainty is different situation, for which assigning probabilities is not feasible, and is
a concept that anyone trying to forecast the recent outcomes in the House of Commons would
instantly recognise. In such situations, it is usually argued that the best strategy is to try to avoid
the worst outcomes, as we have done in preparing for a no-deal Brexit. And sometimes you need
to be bold to avoid truly bad outcomes, exactly as Mario Draghi did when he said that the Euro-
system would do “whatever it takes”.
Third, how should we respond to uncertainty about structural relationships? Uncertainty about the
transmission  mechanism  is  often  used  to  justify  acting  gradually.  Sometimes  described  as
“tiptoeing  in  a  dark  room”,  a  central  banker  following  the  Brainard  principle  attenuates  his
response  to  inflationary  shocks  if  he  is  uncertain  about  the  precise  sensitivity  of  inflation  to
monetary policy. But the more cautious he is in the first step, the more ready he should be to
take several additional steps: gradualism is not inaction.
Structural  shifts  in  the  economy  are  also  constantly  changing  economic  dynamics  and
equilibrium  relationships,  such  as  r*  (the  natural  rate  of  interest)  and  u*  (the  natural  rate  of
unemployment).  But  as  John  Williams  of  the  New  York  Fed  has  pointed  out,  these  stars  are
today more a fuzzy blur than a single bright point of light. So whilst they can help with the broad
orientation  of  monetary  policy,  uncertainty  about  these  stars  is  too  wide  to  permit  precise
navigation.
Overall, therefore, the theoretical guidance on how to respond to uncertainty is itself open, to say
the  least.  My  understanding  of  the  present  debates  leads  me  to  the  following  four  pragmatic
suggestions that I hope can stimulate your discussions:
1.  Remain very clear about your objectives – uncertain times are not the right ones to create
additional  doubts  about,  say,  your  inflation  target  –  and  about  your  capacity  and
determination to use your tools in a predicable sequence.
2.  But, whilst being consistent with your guidance, be very flexible in the precise calendar and
calibration  of  your  implementation.  In  short,  be  as  predictable  as  possible,  but  never  be
precommitted.
3.  Act  to  prevent  the  worst  outcomes  occurring  but  without  supplying  complete  insurance,
which would create moral hazard.
4.  Never base policy on only one expected path for the economy.
 In  conclusion,  we  cannot  seek  to  control,  or  avoid,  uncertainty;  instead  we  must  implement
strategies that are the most robust to it. The French philosopher Edgar Morin put it nicely: “La
connaissance progresse en intégrant l’incertitude, non en l’exorcisant” – “knowledge advances
by integrating uncertainty, not by exorcising it”.
With that in mind, let me wish you all a very productive symposium with lively and enlightening
exchanges of views.   Christine, the floor is yours.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
