Shaktikanta Das: Opportunities and challenges of FinTech
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Shaktikanta  Das,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  FinTech
Conclave 2019, organized by NITI Aayog, New Delhi, 25 March 2019.
 I  am  extremely  happy  to  participate  in  NITI  Aayog’s  FinTech  Conclave  2019  and  share  my
thoughts on the technological revolution that is shaping the future of finance. I am particularly
thankful  to  Shri  Amitabh  Kant,  CEO  of  NITI  Aayog  for  having  invited  me  to  such  an  august
gathering.  As  I  understand,  this  Conclave  is  woven  around  the  theme  of  Indian  FinTech
ecosystem as well as steps required to help achieve the potential that the sector offers towards
growth, employment and inclusion. Given the wide canvas that FinTech encompasses, I have
organised my thoughts on some of the core issues in this area.
2.  In  general,  FinTech  stands  for  financial  technology  and  describes  technologically  enabled
financial innovations. From ‘start-ups’ to ‘big-techs’ to established financial institutions, all the key
players are harnessing this technological edge along the financial services’ value chain to provide
agile, efficient and differentiated experiences to the end-user. This movement has the potential to
fundamentally  transform  the  financial-landscape  where  consumers  will  get  to  choose  from  a
larger  set  of  options  at  competitive  prices  and  financial  institutions  could  improve  efficiency
through lower operational costs. As a country that is determined to achieve universal financial
inclusion  at  affordable  costs,  this  is  a  defining  moment  for  us,  and  we  should  seize  the
opportunity.
FinTech Experience in India
3. India has been at the forefront of this revolution. A recent global survey ranks India second in
1
. It is reported that there are as
terms of FinTech adoption, with an adoption rate of 52 per cent
many as 1218 FinTech firms operating in India which have created a large number of jobs. They
are also generating a healthy appetite for investment.
4. The Reserve Bank has over the years encouraged greater use of electronic payments so as
to  achieve  a  “less-cash”  society.  The  objective  has  been  to  provide  a  payment  system  that
combines the attributes of safety, security, enhanced convenience and accessibility, leveraging
technological solutions that enable faster processing. Affordability, interoperability, and customer
awareness and protection have also been other focus areas. Banks have been the traditional
gateway to payment services. However, with the fast pace of technological changes, this domain
is no longer the monopoly of banks. Non-bank entities are cooperating as well as competing with
banks, either as technology service providers to banks or by directly providing retail electronic
payment services. The regulatory framework has also encouraged this enhanced participation of
non-bank entities in the payments domain.
5.  In  recent  years,  a  focussed  effort  has  been  made  to  develop  a  state  of  the  art  national
payments  infrastructure  and  technology  platforms,  be  it  Immediate  Payments  Service  (IMPS),
Unified  Payments  Interface  (UPI),  Bharat  Interface  for  Money  (BHIM),  Bharat  Bill  Pay  System
(BBPS), or Aadhaar-enabled Payment System (AePS). This has changed the retail payments
scenario of the country. The total volume of retail electronic payments witnessed about nine-fold
increase over the last five years.
6.  Let  me  now  mention  some  numbers  with  regard  to  digital  modes  of  payment.  The  NEFT
system handled 195 crore transactions valued at around Rs.172 lakh crore in 2017–18 growing
by 4.9 times in terms of volume and 5.9 times in terms in terms of value over the previous five
years. Similarly, the number of transactions carried out through credit and debit cards in 2017–18
was  141  crore  and  334  crore,  respectively.  Prepaid  payment  instruments  (PPIs)  recorded  a
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
volume  of  about  346  crore  transactions,  valued  at  Rs.1.4  lakh  crore.  Thus,  the  total  card
payments,  in  volume  terms,  stood  at  52  percent  of  the  total  retail  payments  during  the  year
2017–18.
7.  Developments  in  the  spheres  of  banking  technology  and  trade  finance  have  been
commendable as well. Alternative models of lending and capital raising are coming up and have
the  potential  to  change  the  market  dynamics  of  traditional  lenders  and  the  role  of  traditional
intermediaries.  Crowd-funding,  which  entails  raising  external  finance  from  a  large  group  of
investors, is at a very nascent stage in India. The peer-to-peer (P2P) lending for which RBI has
issued Master Direction in October 2017 has the potential to improve access to finance for small
and  medium  enterprises.  Eleven  entities  have  been  licensed  to  operate  P2P  platform.  The
Reserve  Bank  has  also  granted  licenses  and  permitted  seven  purely  digital  loan  companies
(NBFCs)  to  commence  operations. Although  they  are  purely  digital  players  operating  through
mobile  applications,  we  have  ensured  that  they  have  at  least  one  physical  presence  for
customers to reach out to in case of need.
8.  Furthermore,  seven  payment  banks  have  commenced  operations.  These  technology-led
banks use FinTech, both while onboarding customers as well as while carrying out operations.
9. Invoice trading is another nascent area of FinTech application in India. It assists MSMEs which
often have working capital and cash flow problems due to delayed payments. The Reserve Bank
has set up the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDs), which is an innovative financing
arrangement  where  technology  is  leveraged  for  discounting  bills  and  invoices.  Three  entities
have been authorised for this purpose and the volumes are slowly gaining traction.
10. Another initiative has been laying down a regulatory framework for Account Aggregators (AA).
A total of five entities have been given in-principle approval as NBFC-AA and are expected to
commence their operations during 2019–20.
11.  To  further  deepen  digital  payments  and  enhance  financial  inclusion  through  FinTech,  the
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  has  also  appointed  a  five  member  committee  under  the
chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani.
12. While opening a new world of opportunities, the FinTech revolution has its own share of risks
and challenges for the regulators and supervisors. Early recognition of these risks and initiating
action to mitigate the related regulatory and supervisory challenges is key to harnessing the full
potential  of  these  developments.  I  would,  therefore,  like  to  give  a  bird’s  eye  view  of  these
opportunities, risks and challenges, especially in the Indian context as also the policy roadmap
that we have in mind.
Opportunities, Risks and the Way Forward
Let me first highlight the opportunities in the area of digital onboarding and financial inclusion.
Digital onboarding and financial inclusion
13.  There  are  two  broad  areas  that  merit  attention  in  the  Indian  context:  the  first  is  regarding
improving  the  accessibility  of  financial  platforms  using  FinTech;  and  the  second  is  about
analysing  potential  risks  that  may  arise  out  of  FinTech  adoption.  Designing  suitable  financial
products that cater to specific needs of the financially excluded population, digital onboarding and
boosting the quantum of investments are vital in achieving the first objective. Effective utilisation
of Aadhaar eco-system may provide incentives for the people to adopt digital platforms as it is
happening in the case of direct benefits transfer (DBT). The central KYC registry is a significant
step  in  this  regard  –  about  100  million  KYC  records  have  already  been  uploaded  onto  this
platform. We also need to ensure multi-lingual financial literacy and a robust grievance redressal
machinery to effectively handle inter-regional disparities and to offer online dispute resolutions.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
RegTech and SupTech
2
3
14. As regards potential risks and their mitigation, RegTech  and SupTech  have an important
role. Regulators and supervisors have to undertake accelerated off-site surveillance. This also
brings in the need for a transparent, technology and data-driven approach. To serve this need,
new fields called RegTech and SupTech are coming up. Both the technologies aim at improving
efficiency  through  the  use  of  automation,  introducing  new  capabilities  and  streamlining
workflows. In the Reserve Bank, we have been using SupTech for data collection and analysis.
The  examples  are  Import  Data  Processing  and  Monitoring  System  (IDPMS),  Export  Data
Processing  and  Monitoring  System  (EDPMS)  and  Central  Repository  of  Information  on  Large
Credits (CRILC), to name a few. Also, the risk-based supervision of banks is extensively data-
driven  and  is  an  example  of  SupTech.  The  future  of  RegTech  and  SupTech  technologies,
however,  lie  in  big  data  analytics,  artificial  intelligence,  machine  learning,  cloud  computing,
geographic information system (GIS) mapping, data transfer protocols, biometrics, etc.
15. A strong risk culture – in which risk detection, assessment and mitigation are part of the daily
job  of  bank  staff  –  will  be  central  to  the  success  of  managing  the  emerging  risks.  Similarly,
systemic  risks  may  arise  from  unsustainable  credit  growth,  increased  inter-connectedness,
procyclicality,  development  of  new  activities  beyond  the  supervisory  framework  and  financial
risks  manifested  by  lower  profitability.  Risks  for  FinTech  products  may  also  arise  from  cross
border legal and regulatory issues. Data confidentiality and customer protection are major areas
that also need to be addressed.
16.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  encouraged  banks  to  explore  the  possibility  of  establishing  new
alliances with FinTech firms as it could be pivotal in accelerating the agenda of financial inclusion
through innovation. It is essential that flow of investments to this sector is unimpeded to realise
its  full  potential.  It  is  imperative  to  create  an  ecosystem  which  promotes  collaboration  while
carefully paying attention to the implications that it has for the macroeconomy.
17. In order to ensure an orderly development of FinTech, to streamline their influence into the
financial system, to protect the customers and to safeguard the interest of all the stakeholders,
we need to have appropriate regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Such frameworks should
address  associated  risks  while  keeping  in  mind  the  growth  requirements  of  this  sector.  The
Reserve Bank’s working group on FinTech and digital banking (Report of the working group on
FinTech  and  digital  banking,  November  2017)  suggested  the  introduction  of  a  ‘regulatory
sandbox/innovation  hub’  within  a  well-defined  space  and  duration  to  experiment  with  FinTech
solutions, where the consequences of failure can be contained and reasons for failure analysed.
A  ‘Regulatory  Sandbox’  would  benefit  FinTech  companies  by  way  of  reduced  time  to  launch
innovative products at a lower cost. Going forward, the Reserve Bank will set up a regulatory
sandbox, for which guidelines will be issued in the next two months.
Conclusion
18.  In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  say  that  FinTech  has  the  potential  to  reshape  the  financial
services and financial inclusion landscape in India in fundamental ways. It can reduce costs and
improve access and quality of financial services. We have to strike a subtle balance between
effectively utilising FinTech while minimising its systemic impacts. By enabling technologies and
managing  risks,  we  can  help  create  a  new  financial  system  which  is  more  inclusive,  cost-
effective and resilient.
Thank you.
1
2
EY  FinTech Adoption  Index  2017, Available  at  www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-fintech-adoption-index-
2017/$FILE/ey-fintech-adoption-index-2017.pdf
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
RegTech is an application or platform which makes regulatory compliance more efficient through automated
processes and lowers the costs of compliance. RegTech focuses on technologies that facilitate the delivery of
regulatory requirements more efficiently and effectively.
SupTech is technology to be used by the regulators and supervisors to support supervision. The objectives of
SupTech are seamless and straight-through data collection / reporting, data analysis and decision making,
streamlined licencing, market monitoring and surveillance, KYC / AML / CFT, cybersecurity data or evidence
based policy making.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
