Yves  Mersch:  Yves  Mersch:  Lending  and  payment  systems  in
upheaval - the fintech challenge
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the 3rd annual Conference on Fintech and Digital Innovation, Brussels, 26 February 2019.
 Fintech is nothing new. Financial technology has existed for practically as long as the financial
services industry itself. The telegraph and the transatlantic cable laid in 1866 to connect North
America and Europe is a clear example. That technology provided the infrastructure for the first
era  of  major  financial  globalisation  in  the  late  19th  century.   And  innovations  such  as  the
automated  teller  machine  (ATM),  credit  cards,  electronic  payments  and  internet  banking  have
each changed the face of modern banking.
1
But  now  we  are  entering  the  next  phase  of  the  digital  age,  when  the  combination  of  new
telecommunications, big data analytics, cryptography and machine learning technologies has the
potential  to  change  the  whole  banking  industry  in  faster  and  more  disruptive  ways  than  ever
before.
As  technology  gives  new  entrants  better  and  cheaper  ways  to  compete  for  core  banking
business,  banks’  dominant  position  could  be  challenged. And  indeed,  we  are  already  seeing
disruptions in the financial services market:
In the first half of 2018, global investment in fintech reached $57.9 billion across 875 deals, a
2
significant increase from the $38.1 billion invested in the whole of 2017.
The time span for adopting various banking innovations, such as online or mobile banking, is
getting shorter and shorter.
Many consumers are switching to e-commerce, and more e-retail payments are made from
mobile phones. Consumers expect pan-European services that are safe, efficient and easy
to  use.  With  the  recent  launch  of  TARGET  Instant  Payment  Settlement  (TIPS),  the
Eurosystem  has  laid  the  groundwork  for  innovative,  customer-friendly  retail  payment
solutions that benefit everyone in Europe. TIPS is a truly domestic market infrastructure for
pan-European instant payments with settlement in central bank money within 10 seconds
3
and a price fixed at 0.20 eurocent.
Technological investment in cash cycles is also strong and helping to make this safe, instant
and cheap means of payment resilient. Indeed, on average, cash payments take just over 22
seconds and cost around 24 cent per transaction according to a recent study of retail sector
4
cash payments in Germany.
Fintechs  could  make  the  financial  system  more  diverse  and  competitive,  offering  customers
better-targeted,  faster  and  cheaper  financial  services.  But  fintech  could  also  lead  to  the
emergence of new risks and greater concentration.
So far, regulators have tolerated or even facilitated these developments. In the EU, for instance,
the revision of the Payment Services Directive (PSD2) aims to foster innovation and enhance
competition by requiring banks to share account information.
But to the extent that fintechs are providing core banking services, regulators and central bankers
need to monitor their activities in order to follow risk migration.
Fintech credit: lending in transition
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fintechs have now moved into core banking services, including the credit business.
Currently, fintech credit makes up only a very small fraction of overall credit, but it is growing
rapidly and could become more dominant in certain market segments. In the United States, for
5
example, 36% of unsecured personal lending was issued by fintechs in 2017.
“Fintech”  is  often  associated  with  small  start-ups  –  technologically  innovative  firms  with  agile
business  models.  But  huge,  globally  active  technology  companies,  the  so-called  big  tech
companies,  are  also  entering  the  market.  These  companies  have  a  competitive  advantage
because they can leverage their existing customer networks and huge amounts of proprietary
data  to  provide  financial  services.  Moreover,  their  enormous  balance  sheets  give  them  the
financial capacity to handle credit risks economically on a large scale.
These comparative advantages of big tech could, in principle, generate benefits for customers.
By using predictive algorithms, machine learning and a wider range of data, available from online
spending  or  social  media,  for  example,  big  tech  could  become  more  efficient  at  lending  than
traditional banks.
Moreover, if big tech can speed up loan application processing, reduce transaction costs and
improve  credit  risk  assessments,  it  could  increase  the  overall  degree  of  competition  in  credit
markets.
And  with  their  increasing  market  share,  these  companies  could  help  diversify  the  sources  of
credit to the economy, thus fostering investment and growth.
However,  these  big  tech  companies  are  generally  less  motivated  by  the  return  on  their  credit
activity and more by the access they get to data that let them sell products and services over and
above their financial activities.
Therefore  we  can’t  rule  out  some  negative  side  effects.  Not  only  could  large  technology
companies  increase  market  concentration  by  exploiting  their  network  externalities,  they  could
6
also create new risks.
For example, risks could arise from big tech’s funding models, which often use a mix of internal
and external investors to finance loans or repackage and sell them to third-party investors. Such
originate-to-distribute  models  can  lead  to  information  asymmetries,  incentive  problems  and
financial instability – as we painfully learned from the mortgage lending that led to the subprime
crisis.
Another  type  of  fintech  is  the  so-called  peer-to-peer  lender,  which  offers  credit  services  in  a
fundamentally  different  way  to  banks  in  that  the  services  are  unbundled.  Electronic  platforms
typically match borrowers and investors without taking on balance sheet risks and generate fee
revenue rather than net interest.
Technological  innovation  may  enable  lending  platforms  to  become  more  efficient  and  more
targeted  in  terms  of  how  they  intermediate  between  borrowers  and  lenders  and  thus  put
pressure on incumbent banks. Still, I would argue that, until lending platforms can replicate the
benefits of intermediation, they will not meaningfully challenge the role of banks in the economy. I
see two main reasons for this:
1.  Lending platforms are unable to perform liquidity transformation on a significant scale – that
is, to provide short-term liquidity services for depositors and long-term loans for borrowers.
2.  Lending platforms are less resilient during shocks, being more prone to funding freezes and
swings  in  credit  risk  appetite  than  banks,  as  at  this  stage  they  are  small  and  not
diversified.   Also,  banks  have  both  insured  deposits,  which  contain  depositor  runs,  and
higher levels of capital, which supports lending during downturns.
7
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
For these reasons, lending platforms are currently unlikely to threaten banks’ market position in
lending. Still, these developments should be continuously monitored.
Fintechs are changing the payments landscape
Fintech has had a more pronounced impact in the payments market, where firms have expanded
their presence in non-capital intensive business such as cross-border transfers, micropayments
and card payments because those are the areas where the incumbents have accumulated the
most glaring shortcomings, often resulting in inefficient and overpriced products.
This is affecting the payments landscape. In a European Banking Authority survey, a majority of
incumbent  banks  indicated  that  payments  is  the  business  area  most  affected  by  fintech
8
competition, eroding fees and commission income.
In response, many banks have begun to adjust their strategies by investing more in technology
and partnering up with fintechs.
The  emerging  competition  is  welcome  and  may  bring  lasting  social  benefits  to  customers  in
terms of efficiency gains, increased choice and more resilient payment systems.
But our role is to ensure not only efficiency, but also safety. As a central banker with the statutory
task of ensuring the smooth functioning of payment systems my view is that we also need to
carefully  observe  how  this  disruptive  process  unfolds.  We  should  be  mindful  that  risks  could
accumulate in the unregulated sector, which could affect payment security.
Customers’  interests  need  to  be  taken  into  account.  This  includes  consumer  protection  and
prudential requirements to defend customer funds. But these concerns must not be confused
with pretexts to secure vested interest and inhibit innovation.
Likewise, although it is desirable to have strong domestic European payment providers, not the
least to be less exposed to extraterritorial jurisdiction, we should not use protectionist measures
to shield incumbents from market pressures. On the contrary, we should remain open to global
players to foster competition. In fact, the industry itself should address the obstacles hampering
the emergence of European players.
Scenarios for the future
As the competition between fintechs and incumbent banks unfolds, the financial system could
become more diverse and competitive. But it could also become more concentrated, and new
risks to financial stability could emerge.
Two extreme scenarios for the future are possible. Both come with regulatory implications.
In the first one, banks rise to the digital challenge by upgrading their technological systems and
teaming up with fintechs. There are signs of this happening, as global banks’ IT expenses rose to
9
$250 billion in 2017, from $180 billion in 2013.
In this scenario, banks leverage technology to enhance their products, services and operations,
allowing them to retain their customer relationships and core banking services. Risks to financial
stability would be rather low, as financial services provision would remain largely subject to the
existing prudential regime.
In  the  second  scenario,  banks  fail  to  provide  the  digital  financial  services  demanded  by
customers.  New,  innovative  and  fast-moving  fintechs,  or  big  tech  firms  with  large  customer
networks, would come to dominate the market – with all the risks that I outlined.
Obviously, reality is much more complex than this binary distinction of extreme scenarios. And
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the range of business models of big or small banks, re-prioritization and mutualisation of certain
services cannot be captured by such simplifying templates.
Indeed,  some  traditional  banking  services  could  move  to  less-regulated  parts  of  the  financial
system.  But  pre-emptively  drawing  in  the  reins  in  the  name  of  financial  stability  could  harm
innovation and prevent fintechs from growing.
We  certainly  must  continue  monitoring  developments  closely  and  adjust  regulation  when  and
where needed to ensure that financial services remain safe and sound.
10
But competition – to refer to the Austrian economist Friedrich August von Hayek – is a discovery
procedure , and it is up to the markets’ verdict which product or service is the optimal solution.
Legislation  and  regulation  should  therefore  ensure  a  level  playing  field  for  all  market  players,
incumbent´s and new entrants alike.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
See Arner, D., Barberis, J. and Buckley, R. (2016), “ The Evolution of FinTech: A New Post-Crisis Paradigm? ”,
Georgetown Journal of International Law, Vol. 47, No 4, pp. 1271–1319.
Overall  investment  across  venture  capital,  private  equity  and  mergers  and  acquisitions.  See  KPMG  (2018),
“Global Fintech investment soars to record US$57B in first half of 2018: KPMG Pulse of Fintech report”.
See Mersch, Y. (2018), “TIPS and the future of innovative retail payment solutions in Europe”, speech at the TIPS
launch event, Frascati (Rome), 30 November.
See Deutsche Bundesbank / EHI Retail Institute GmbH (2019), Kosten der Bargeldzahlung im Einzelhandel,
February.
See Claessens et al. (2018), “Fintech credit markets around the world: size, drivers and policy issues”, BIS
Quarterly Review, September, pp. 29–49.
See Carstens, A. (2018), “Big tech in finance and new challenges for public policy”, keynote address at the FT
Banking Summit, London, December.
While investors typically cannot redeem claims early, they can choose not to roll over maturing claims.
61% of incumbent institutions indicated that fintechs threated to decrease their revenues in the payment and
settlement domain. See European Banking Authority (2018), EBA report on the impact of fintech on incumbent
credit institutions’ business models, July.
See Celent (2018), Global Tech Spending Forecast: Banking Edition, 2018, March.
See F.A. Hayek’s (1968), “Der Wettbewerb als Entdeckungsverfahren”, a 1968 lecture, sponsored by the Institut
für Weltwirtschaft at the University of Kiel. It was published as No. 56 in the series Kieler Vorträge.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
