Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Banking liberalisation’s next chapter -
digital banks
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of
Singapore, at The Association of Banks in Singapore’s Annual Dinner, Singapore, 28 June 2019.
 Chairman and Council Members of the ABS,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Thank you for inviting me to join you this evening.
Our objectives in liberalising banking
2.     I would like to talk this evening about our next steps in liberalising our banking system, and in
taking advantage of the ongoing digital revolution in finance.   3.     It will be a new phase in our
banking system. But the spirit of what we intend to do, and the calibrated way in which we will
move forward, is similar to the approach we have taken over the last twenty years, from the time
we began liberalising the industry.
4.          MAS  embarked  in  1999  on  a  major  programme  to  open  up  and  liberalise  Singapore’s
financial sector across the board, in banking, our securities markets and in insurance.
5.     We did so to ensure we remained a competitive and growing centre for finance in Asia and
globally.  But  enhanced  competition  was  also  a  way  to  spur  our  local  banks  themselves  to
upgrade  and  innovate  so  that  they  remained  strong  anchors  in  our  banking  system,  and  to
expand into markets abroad.
 
6.     We took a calculated risk. The risk was not trivial, as we began opening up in the midst of
the Asian financial crisis. The changes in banking in particular had to be paced out, to ensure that
confidence in our local banks and the system as a whole was not shaken, and to give the banks
time to regear and to grow new capabilities.
7.     The liberalisation of the banking industry to date has achieved its key objectives. Singapore
is  one  of  the  leading  financial  centres  in  Asia,  and  plays  an  enhanced  role  in  financing  the
region’s growth. We have also retained a core of strong and increasingly innovative local banks,
as anchors of the banking system. Critically, trust in our local banks and the MAS as regulator
remains high. We have avoided the sharp decline in trust seen in many financial centres.
8.          MAS  has  consistently  held  the  view  that  banking  systems  need  strong  anchor  players,
competitive and well-supervised, who can take the long view and have interests closely aligned
with both the growth and stability of the system as a whole.
The experience of the global financial crisis and its aftermath vindicated our view. A common
feature of jurisdictions with systemically important financial centres that held up well through
the crisis – notably Canada, Singapore, Hong Kong and Australia -  was the presence of a
handful of strong anchor banks in each of their systems.
9.          We  have  continued  to  liberalise  the  system,  a  decade  after  the  first  major  steps  that
introduced QFBs and enhanced the space for wholesale banks.
In 2012, we took steps to encourage foreign banks to deepen their roots in Singapore. MAS
will  allow  a  significantly  rooted  QFB  to  operate  an  additional  25  or  up  to  50  places  of
business, as part of an overall FTA package negotiated with the home countries of these
QFBs.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
In September 2018, we announced that FinTechs and other non-bank financial institutions
will be granted access to the FAST network for real time payments. This is a major step
towards making our payments system open, accessible and competitive.
10.     But we are in fact at the threshold of a further and more fundamental transformation in
banking. The far reaching effects of digitalisation are stimulating a fundamental re-think of the role
of banks, in most advanced financial centres. The ramifications go well beyond those ushered in
by the technologies and business models of a decade or two ago.  
 
11.          We  must  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities  that  digital  finance  brings,  and  not  be
overtaken by the wave of changes taking place globally.
12.     We must allow for greater competition and spur greater innovation in finance –
competition  between  new  and  traditional  business  models,  new  players  and  incumbents,  and
different ways of using technology to serve business and individual customers better. We must
also retain strong local anchors and trust in the banking system. These dual objectives
have guided our past liberalisation initiatives, and motivate our next moves.
13.     As we embark on this new phase, however, it is worth reminding ourselves of our real
purposes in finance. Innovation in finance is not an end in itself. And competition in finance has
to  be  more  than  a  zero  sum  game  -  it  has  sometimes  looked  like  that,  as  trading  desks
compete  against  each  other  to  be  a  fraction  of  a  second  faster  and  to  knock  the  other  out.
Competition and innovation has to be aimed at serving the needs of society and the economy
better,  here  in  Singapore  and  abroad.    So  it  is  worth  reminding  ourselves  of  these  larger
purposes and opportunities. I will highlight five:
First, financing  the  growth  of  infrastructure  in  emerging Asia,  and  increasingly  of
climate-resilient, low-carbon investments. Both banking and capital markets should seek
to  meet  what  is  still  a  huge  financing  gap  in  the  region  for  critical  and  sustainable
infrastructure.
Second,  financing growth  enterprises  and  SMEs.  SMEs  are  the  backbone  of  all  our
economies. Besides finding new ways to meet their financing needs, banks can also help to
raise their productivity by helping them adopt digital services.
Third, reducing  costs  and  improving  convenience  for  consumers.    We  are  already
seeing  major  changes  here,  especially  in  cheaper,  more  convenient  and  seamless
payments.
Fourth,  in helping people to plan early and achieve financial security in their later
years.    Singapore  has  recently  come  up  top  in  the  world  for  life  expectancy.  It  is  to  be
celebrated,  but  it  also  increases  the  need  for  good  financial  advice,  and  for  those  with
savings  outside  their  CPF  accounts  to  be  able  to  invest  in  products  that  will  help  them
achieve greater retirement security. This is in fact going to be a growing challenge in much
of Asia too.
Finally, creating good jobs. In Singapore, the financial industry employs close to 200,000
people, most of them in relatively well-paying jobs. Technology will replace many tasks and
even  whole  jobs  in  finance.  But  with  proactive  upgrading  of  skills  to  keep  pace  with  new
technologies, and with the continuing growth of our financial centre, we must and will provide
good jobs in finance for many years into the future.
How finance is being transformed
14.     The digitalisation of finance is picking up pace, and will transform banking.
15.     There are essentially three key forces driving this transformation: pervasive mobile internet
access, the rise of big data, and the growth of platform ecosystems as a major new business
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
model in finance. The  three  forces  are  also  reinforcing  each  other,  and  together  transforming
banking in more fundamental ways than we have seen before.
16.          Smartphones  and  tablets  are  ubiquitous.  Pervasive  broadband  access  has  coupled
mobility with connectivity – so interaction is real-time and unconstrained by where you are. The
smartphone is now our grocery store, our restaurant, our bank, and much more.
17.          Second,  big  data.  We  have  unprecedented  computing  power,  coupled  with  cloud
technologies that allows us to store and retrieve large volumes of information at low cost and on-
demand. Firms are also gathering a lot more data from a wide variety of sources, including social
media and e-commerce platforms. Advanced data analytics and machine learning are allowing
them  to  analyse  this  data  to  derive  much  richer  insights  into  customers’  financial  needs.
Incorporating big data into lending decisions, for example, can in fact help SMEs access finance
more easily. 
18.     These first two forces - mobile connectivity and big data - have enabled the rise of platform
ecosystems  as  a  major  new  business  model  in  finance.  Armed  with  the  goldmine  of  data
generated by millions of connected users, these technology platforms are able to exploit huge
network  effects.  They  operate  an  ecosystem  of  diverse  services,  from  retail  to  healthcare,
savings  to  lending.  They  are  providing  integrated,  end-to-end  solutions,  often  customised  to
individual preferences. And the more users that engage with the platform ecosystems, and more
extensively to meet their needs, the more data is generated. The platform ecosystems are using
this competitive advantage to expand into new markets.
19.          The  march  towards  digitalisation  is  having  a  profound  impact  on  consumers,  who
themselves have become a force for change.  Younger or ‘digital-native’ consumers have come
to  expect  the  same  lower  costs,  greater  convenience  and  more  customisation  from  financial
services as they already obtain from other services, from online shopping to transport to food
delivery. The days when transferring a bit of money involved taking a brisk walk to the bank’s
branch during lunch hour are now a quaint memory.
Embracing a Digital Future with Strong Anchors
20.     The changes we are already seeing in banking will very likely accelerate in the next 10
years. We must take advantage of these changes, and guard against the risks. Cyber risk is
foremost among them, as cyber incidents are growing in number and sophistication in banking. 
21.     MAS welcomes the innovation and competition from new models. We are doing so while
ensuring that we maintain the trust and stability that are the hallmarks of the Singapore banking
system.
22.     First, we have been working with the industry and other government agencies to put in
place  the  enabling  infrastructure  to  help  banks  to  better  harness  the  benefits  of  new
technologies.
23.     In payments, we have built up the national electronics payments infrastructure to provide
instant, seamless digital payment services that is more convenient and intuitive to users.
FAST allows fast and secure payments for both consumers and businesses.
Building  on  the  FAST  infrastructure,  we  were  able  to  introduce  further  initiatives  such  as
PayNow, which allows real time payment with the convenience and speed of mobile texting
for the customers of all major retail banks, including the three local banks and 6 Qualifying
1
Full Banks (QFBs).
As  mentioned,  MAS  has  also  announced  that  it  will  be  working  with  the  industry  to  open
FAST access to non-bank players.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
24.     In customer identification, MAS has worked with the Ministry of Finance and GovTech to
introduce MyInfo for the financial industry.
The MyInfo platform allows banks to more effectively and efficiently obtain authenticated and
updated information for account opening and other applications, doing away with the tedium
of manual physical authentication and resulting in time saving of as much as 80% for banks
and their customers.
25.          Second,  we  are  reviewing  our  regulatory  framework  to  balance  the  tension  between
encouraging innovation and managing risk. 
The Payments Services Act is a forward looking and flexible framework for the regulation of
payment systems and payment service providers in Singapore. It gives regulatory certainty
to new players to pursue innovation and growth, while at the same time providing sufficient
safeguards for consumers.
26.     Third, we are creating more channels to promote the exchange of ideas and collaboration
among financial and technology firms.
Since 2016, MAS has partnered industry players to bring together financial and technology
players from all over the world in the week-long Singapore FinTech Festivals. Turnout has
more than quadrupled over the past three years with 45,000 participants from 130 countries
in 2018.
It  is  early  days  yet,  but  the  results  of  our  efforts  are  encouraging.  Singapore  is  widely
regarded as one of the leading FinTech hubs in the world. A report by Ernst & Young finds
that nearly 7 out of 10 Singaporeans have made use of FinTech solutions in 2019, making
us a leader in the Asia-Pacific region.
27.     Another important development has been among our local banks themselves. They have
been  expanding  their  digital  platforms  to  better  cater  to  customers’  needs,  and  grow  markets
abroad.
They  have  partnered  with  FinTechs  to  harness  the  capabilities  of  new  technologies  and
deliver more customised solutions. For example, UOB has partnered with Personetics to
use  artificial  intelligence  to  identify  individual  transaction  demands  and  enable  UOB  to
provide customers with real-time and personalised guidance on their financial decisions.
Second, they have built digital banks in overseas markets, leveraging a lower-cost operating
model to quickly acquire new customers. For example, DBS launched digibank in India and
managed to acquire over 2.5 million customers in its initial two years of operations. The bank
has  also  recently  replicated  its  digibank  strategy  in  Indonesia.  DBS  was  ranked  by
Euromoney as the world’s best digital bank last year.
Third, they have adopted more customer-centric approaches, integrating solutions for their
financial  and  non-financial  needs.  For  example,  OCBC  has  built  a  niche  marketplace  to
provide curated products and services for mothers and their babies. The bank also launched
the  OCBC  Silver  Years  programme  to  provide  seniors  a  one-stop  solution  for  financial
advice, insurance products and lifestyle options.
28.          Digital  challengers  with  innovative  business  models  can  add  diversity  and  choice  to
banking systems. They can often serve the needs of traditionally underserved segments, such
as the credit gap faced by young and micro-enterprises. They could also bring with them deep
digital know-how and insights from operating non-bank businesses.
In China, for example, MYBank, has broadened financial inclusion, with 80% of its clients
being first time borrowers like mom-and-pop shops. 99% of its customers repay on time.
In Korea, Kakao Bank has in its first year of operations attracted more than 6 million users.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
29.     The success of our banking liberalisation to date gives us the confidence to manage the
entry  of  digital  banks  in  our  next  phase  of  liberalisation.  In  time,  successful  digital  banks  in
Singapore can also complement the local banks in anchoring domestic financial stability.
New Digital Bank Licences To Facilitate New Business Models
Eligibility conditions
30.     MAS will therefore issue up to five new bank licences to digital players that can add
value  to  the  Singapore  banking  sector  and  the  economy.  This  is in  addition  to  any  digital
banks that the local banking groups may also establish. The local banks are already allowed
to set up standalone digital banks under our internet-only bank framework.
 
31.     We welcome firms with innovative value propositions to apply for the new digital bank
licences, even if they have not yet established a track record in banking. They may apply for a
digital full bank licence or a digital wholesale bank licence, as follows.
32.     MAS will issue up to two digital full bank licences, to companies headquartered in
Singapore and controlled by Singaporeans. Foreign companies are eligible for these full
bank licences if they form a joint venture with a local company, and the joint venture
meets our headquarter and control requirements. 
33.     We are starting with two digital full bank licences, so as not to fragment Singapore’s small
domestic retail banking market. We are also restricting the new licences to players anchored in
Singapore for two reasons.  First, so that we maintain a strong local core in our banking system,
which must remain our objective as I explained earlier.  Second, to avoid an unintended unilateral
liberalisation of our full bank regime as a result of our WTO commitments.
34.     MAS will also issue up to three digital wholesale bank licences, which will be open to
both local and foreign players. The digital wholesale banks will be introduced as a pilot, and
MAS will review whether to grant more such licences in the future.
Safeguards
35.     To ensure high-quality applicants, MAS will set prudent baseline requirements on track
record and sustainability of business models. MAS will not allow value-destructive competition to
the  detriment  of  long-term  financial  system  stability.  We  will  also  put  in  place  safeguards  to
protect  depositors,  mitigate  the  risk  of  untested  business  models,  and  minimise  costs  to  the
financial system in the event of a failure. We will also ensure that digital banks will compete with
incumbents on a level playing field.
36.     As digital full banks will have access to retail deposits, MAS will phase in their permissible
activities via a two-stage process to minimise risks to retail depositors. It will also be required to
be a member of the deposit insurance scheme.
A digital full bank will commence as a restricted digital bank to build up its business model
and internal processes, and gradually progress to become a full functioning full bank. MAS
will  not  prescribe  a  time  period  within  which  graduation  to  a  digital  full  bank  must  be
achieved.
When the restricted digital bank first commences operations, it will be subject to an initial
deposit  cap  of  S$50  million,  an  individual  depositor  cap  of  S$75,000,  and  generally  be
allowed to accept deposits from only a small group of depositors such as business partners,
staff, related parties and selected customers.
37.          MAS  is  prepared  to  award  up  to  five  new  digital  bank  licences  -  two  full  and  three
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
wholesale. We will only award all five if the applicants meet the eligibility and admission criteria,
including demonstrating a tangible proposition that is innovative and sustainable.
38.     MAS is working on implementation details, and expects to invite applications in August this
year.
39.     Today in 2019, we are continuing the process of transforming our banking sector with a
progressive opening to new digital banks. We are in a strong position to do so today, as local
banks have responded well to changes in the competitive landscape and have in fact become
leaders in some areas of innovation. I am confident that they will hold their own against the new
competition. This new phase of banking liberalisation will add diversity and help strengthen the
resilience of our banking system in a new digital era in finance.
1
These include Bank of China, Citibank Singapore Limited, HSBC, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China,
Maybank, and Standard Chartered Bank.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
