  LAUNCH OF THE NEW GENERATION BANKNOTES 
 Remarks by Dr. Patrick Njoroge 
Governor, Central Bank of Kenya 
June 1, 2019 
Narok Stadium, Narok County 
 As prepared for delivery 
 Your Excellency; Distinguished Guests; fellow citizens: 
 It gives me great pleasure to participate in this auspicious national celebration. I 
am particularly grateful to Your Excellency for the honour you have bestowed on 
the Central Bank of Kenya, by graciously inviting me to say a few words at the 
end of this beautiful ceremony. It was also our singular honour, Your Excellency, 
when you visited the Central Bank last December and launched Kenya’s New 
Generation coins which have wildlife images as the theme. It is therefore fitting 
that today we are in Narok County, home of the world-acclaimed Maasai Mara 
and the animals depicted on our coins. 
 After launching the new coins, the matter of the New Generation banknotes still 
remains, that is, the issuance of banknotes that are consistent with the 2010 
Constitution. While the Constitution provides guidance on the features and 
elements that may be depicted, CBK also invited the public to provide their views 
on the design elements. Having consulted widely, CBK considered and selected 
the most appropriate elements—the design features that best meet CBK’s technical 
requirements, serve the public aspirations, and capture the spirit of the 
Constitution. 
    1 
Your Excellency, the Central Bank of Kenya has now completed the process of 
producing the New Generation banknotes, in accordance with the Constitution and 
all applicable laws. I confirm that the New Generation banknotes were issued 
yesterday, May 31, 2019, by a Gazette Notice. They are now legal tender. 
 A few words on the new banknotes are in order. The new banknotes bear a 
significant aspect of our nation, and like the coins, will serve as a means of passing 
knowledge, conserving culture and promoting our global uniqueness. All 
banknotes bear the image of Kenyatta International Conference Centre, one of the 
most iconic and recognisable landmarks in our country. The banknotes also 
embody each of the big five; nyati, chui, kifaru, simba, and ndovu. Each 
banknote has a unique theme to show the richness of our people and nature in our 
beautiful Kenya. For the fifty shillings we have Green Energy, one hundred 
shillings - Agriculture, two hundred shillings - Social Services, five hundred 
shillings – Tourism, and one thousand shillings - Governance. These are the 
drivers of a Newly Reborn and Prosperous Kenya. Additionally, for the first time, 
the new banknotes bear features that make them more accessible to the visually 
impaired members of our society. In the coming days, CBK will roll out an 
awareness campaign to educate the public on the features of the new banknotes. 
 Your Excellency, the new banknotes will circulate alongside those previously 
issued but not withdrawn. However, we have assessed the grave concern that our 
large banknotes—particularly the older one thousand shillings series—are being 
used for illicit financial flows in Kenya and also other countries in the region. 
More recently we have seen the emergence of some counterfeits. These are grave 
concerns that would jeopardize proper transactions and the conduct of commerce 
in our currency. 
      2 
To deal conclusively with these concerns, all the older one thousand shillings 
series shall be withdrawn. By a Gazette Notice dated May 31, 2019, all persons 
have until October 1, 2019, to exchange those notes, after which the older one 
thousand shillings banknotes will cease to be legal tender. More details about this 
will be provided. 
 Finally, let me thank all Kenyans for their patience with us, their contributions in 
the design of these new banknotes, and their support of the Central Bank as we 
seek to discharge our mandate. The launch of the New Generation banknotes at the 
Madaraka Day celebrations underscores that the history of the Central Bank is 
intertwined with the history of our country.   
 Your Excellency, it is my distinct honour and privilege, and it gives me great 
pleasure, to request you to unveil the New Generation banknotes of the Republic 
of Kenya. 
  3 
