Anita Angelovska Bezhoska: How to make capitalism work for all
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
North Macedonia, at the IMF/WB Constituency Meeting, Skopje, 22 June 2019.
 Distinguished  Prime  Minister,  ministers  of  finance  and  other  respective  representatives  of
government  institutions,  governors  of  central  banks  and  other  respective  representatives  of
central  banks,  Executive  Directors,  Vice  Presidents  in  World  Bank  Group  Directors  in
International  Monetary  Fund,  Professor  Zingales,  Delegates  of  the  Constituency,  excellences,
fellow colleagues, representatives of the media,
At  the  very  beginning,  let  me  say  how  honored  we  are  to  have  the  opportunity  to  host  this
important gathering of our Constituency. Sixteen years have passed since the last meeting of the
Constituency in Skopje, and we are delighted to have all of you with us here during these three
days.
By a twist of fate, I recently came across a book that I have not seen since my early youth days;
a book that starts with a very powerful notion – “Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family
is unhappy in its own way” – you might recall Tolstoy’s “Anna Karenina”. Few days after, while
searching  for  the  most  recent  discussions  on  the  matter  of  capitalism,  inequality,  wealth
distribution, I read an analytical piece where the author cited the same quote, linking it with all the
different modalities of inequality, as a symbol of the global unhappiness. Standard metrics on
inequality  point  to  a  widespread  and  rising  phenomenon.  It  obviously  underpins  the  rising
populism,  that  reflects  the  dissatisfaction  with  the  system  that  does  not  create  equal
opportunities for everyone, a system where reward is not merit based, i.e., system that gradually
evolves into a crony capitalism. Against this background, I have no doubts that we have chosen
the perfect spotlight for this Constituency meeting.
Let me shortly use the historical lenses – what questioned the sustainability of capitalism and led
to  Marxism  was  the  stagnation  of  wages  and  concentration  of  wealth  in  the  early  phases  of
industrial revolution. It gave ground for rising inequality, and as Thomas Pikketty, the so-called
“Modern Marx” reveals in his book “Capital in the Twenty-First Century”, the only exception from
this rising trend of global inequality is the period as of 1914 until 1970s, as a historical outlier. 
Indeed,  actual  data  does  indicate  rising  income  inequality  since  the  1980s  onwards  almost
across the board, although with different intensity. This turning point is very often associated with
the end of the so-called “post-war egalitarian regime” around the globe. To bring the point closer,
let me refer to the data retrieved from the 2018 World Inequality Report, which reveals that in
1980,  the  income  share  of  the  top  10%  in  the  income  distribution  in  Western  Europe,  North
America, China and India was around 30–35%. By 2016, this percentage rose to around 35–40%
in Western Europe, while the increase in the other regions was stronger, reaching 45%-50% of
the total income. One might notice the remarkable difference in the income concentration at the
top-level  earners  in  Western  Europe  and  US,  meaning  the  inequality  diverged  substantially  in
these two groups in the last almost four decades.
This so-called “modern” surge and divergence in inequality leads economists wondering, which
forces  may  be  preventing  benefits  of  capitalism  being  widely  distributed.  Observing  the  US  –
Europe nexus, apparently the level of development does not always matter for how the income
distribution could look like. There are policy tools and fundamental values in the society that can
affect the distribution curve markedly. For instance, many authors associate the divergence in
Western Europe and US with the educational inequalities and less progressive tax system in US.
On  the  other  hand,  in  Western  Europe  tax  progressivity  declined  moderately,  but  even  more
importantly the educational system and wage setting policies are thought to be relatively more
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
favorable  to  low  and  middle  income  groups.  Hence,  equal  opportunities  to  higher  quality
education,  in  particular  nowadays  when  technology  is  rapidly  advancing  could  be  one  of  the
remedies for the “illness” of inequality. It could enable young people at the bottom of the income
distribution to get access to better-paid jobs, and hence flatten the income distribution curve.
In the region-specific context despite the transition, process that in principle leads to increase in
inequality, the top 10% of the income distribution has a share of close to 29% of the total income,
lower compared to Western Europe.
Apparently, the issue of rising unequal income distribution is neither new, nor the world has been
shielded from tectonic changes in the systems, such as for example the transition in Europe,
which  was  “fertile  soil”  for  rising  inequality.  However,  it  is  only  in  the  last  ten  years  that  we
witnessed such substantial proliferation of literature, and academic and political debates on the
roots and consequences of rising income inequality. It was the financial crisis that brought the
issue  to  the  fore.  Even  more,  some  authors  link  the  severity  of  the  financial  crisis  and  its
unexpected  spell,  exactly  to  the  uneven  societies.  In  his  book  “Fault  Lines”,  Raghuram  Rajan
argued that rising inequality in the past three decades led to political pressure for redistribution
that  eventually  came  in  the  form  of  subsidized  housing  finance,  which  was  at  the  root  of  the
global crisis.
Whether or not policies of the central bank affect the income distribution gained lots of attention,
as  well.  I  would  say  that  the  pure  fact  that  we  inherently  face  with  heterogeneity  across
households in terms of their primary sources of income – capital or labor – or with respect to
their position of being saver, or borrower naturally implies that monetary impact, at least in the
short-term, could differ along these groups. Macro-prudential measures, by design are targeted
and  selectively  used  to  tackle  identified  points  of  vulnerability.  Purchase  of  different  types  of
assets, also significantly alters the pricing on the financial markets and can have different wealth
effects. Still, given the rationale and the features of central banking policies, as Ben Bernanke
(2015)  states:  “By  comparison  to  the  influence  of  (these)  long-term  factors,  the  effects  of
monetary  policy  on  inequality  are  almost  certainly  modest  and  transient”.  These  long-term
factors influencing inequality relate to globalization, technological progress, demographic trends,
and institutional changes in the labor market.
How  should  we  tackle  the  chronic  problem  of  uneven  income  distribution,  which  seems  a
symptom of many fundamental weaknesses of the system? How to return the greatness of the
opportunities that modern society should bring? Should the way forward be stronger regulation,
more active redistributive role of the state or as Prof. Zingales claims through harnessing the
power of competition? As economists, we all know that market based system inherently brings
some  inequality,  but  its  disruptive  power  is  unthinkable  when  boundaries  are  crossed. At  the
current juncture, when global growth slowdown is on the horizon pro–growth and pro–equality
policies seems inevitable. I am sure that distinguished speakers and panelists will reflect on the
array of available policies, including improving access to markets and levelling the playing field,
increasing financial inclusion, investing in human capital, regulatory and institutional reforms, that
strengthen the rule of law and promote competitive and fair business environments.
We,  as  policymakers,  cannot  only  have  the  role  of  “innocent  bystanders”,  scrutinizing  and
stocktaking,  but  putting  in  place  reforms  that  promote  strong  and  inclusive  growth  that  by  its
nature reduces inequality. Thus instead of re-slicing the pie more focus is needed on ensuring
that  the  pie  gets  bigger  and  more  inclusive,  which  will  lead  to  less  unhappiness  in  all  the
dimensions that it might appear. 
I truly hope that in a not so distant future, we will be witnessing moderation in the income gaps,
more prosperous and less unequal societies. This requires commitment, willingness and vision
by all policymakers. Somehow, it seems appropriate to end as I began, with Tolstoy quotation:
“Тhere is only one time that is important— Now! It is the most important time because it is the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
only time when we have any power”. And we, as policymakers, exactly Now have not only power,
but also a duty to act for a better wellbeing in our societies. 
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
