Peter Praet: On the importance of real estate statistics
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
International Conference on Real Estate Statistics, Luxembourg, 21 February 2019.
 I am very pleased to open this session of the International Conference on Real Estate Statistics,
which was organised by Eurostat in close cooperation with the ECB. The quality of real estate
statistics is an issue not just of relevance to statisticians, but increasingly to policymakers, too.
The  real  estate  market  has  been  shown  to  be  a  key  transmitter  of  shocks  in  advanced
economies   –  and,  by  and  large,  the  real  estate  market  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is  no
different.
The importance of real estate markets for euro area stability
1
Residential real estate (RRE) is the main component of euro area household wealth. Housing
accounts  for  around  50%  of  asset  holdings   and  is  largely  financed  through  borrowing,  with
mortgages making up 85% of household liabilities. The corollary is a tight linkage between RRE
prices  and  the  balance  sheets  of  the  euro  area  banking  sector.  Mortgage  loans  account  for
between 40% and 90% of total lending by euro area banks to households across EU countries.
2
Falls in prices therefore affect the euro area business cycle through two main channels. First, by
reducing  households’  net  wealth,  which  has  decelerator  effects  on  consumption ,  and
weakening banks’ balance sheets through the decline in collateral and property values (the asset
valuation channel); and second, by increasing the riskiness of households and of construction
firms, prompting banks to tighten their lending standards (the credit risk channel).
3
ECB  analysis  finds  that  housing  market  variables  in  the  euro  area  have  predictive  power  for
future prolonged contractions.  The effects of RRE bubbles on financial stability are also well
known. More than two-thirds of the past 46 systemic banking crises were preceded by boom-
bust  patterns  in  house  prices. And  recessions  coinciding  with  house  price  busts  have  been
found to yield a cumulative loss in GDP that is around three times greater than in recessions
5
without such busts.
4
Developments  in  the  commercial  real  estate  (CRE)  sector  are  also  relevant  for  the  business
cycle and, even more so, for financial stability. Price collapses in CRE markets have played a
central role in a number of recent financial crises, such as those in the Nordic countries and the
United States in the early 1990s, in some Asian economies in the late 1990s, and in some EU
countries during the global financial crisis.
CRE lending is less significant in terms of volume than RRE lending in the euro area, but it still
makes up between 20% and 50% of total bank lending to corporates. And historically, losses on
banks’  CRE  exposures  during  crises  have  often  been  higher  than  losses  on  their  RRE
exposures, despite those exposures being lower. This is because most CRE loans are arranged
on a non-recourse basis, coupled with the fact that CRE property is much less liquid than RRE
6
property.
So it is highly important for policymakers to have a good overview of the real estate market. In
order  to  mitigate  the  build-up  of  systemic  risks  and  calibrate  policy  responses,  policymakers
need  to  be  able  to  understand  the  underlying  factors  driving  both  fundamental  and  non-
fundamental real estate prices, the dynamics of lending underlying price growth, the level and
evolution of household indebtedness and the quality of banks’ mortgage loan portfolios.
While  this  mostly  applies  to  macroprudential  policies,  it  also  applies  to  monetary  policy,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
particularly in respect of the RRE sector. It is essential for us to be able to distinguish clearly
between  country-specific  developments  in  real  estate  markets  that  warrant  responses  from
macroprudential  authorities,  and  area-wide  developments  that  might,  in  some  circumstances,
warrant a monetary policy response. And this distinction is especially important in a low interest
rate environment.
The need for higher-quality real estate statistics in the EU
However,  in  the  wake  of  the  great  financial  crisis,  most  advanced  economies  realised  that
significant data gaps were severely hampering their ability to monitor developments in real estate
markets. This led to the G20 Data Gaps initiative, which recommended improvements in both
RRE and CRE statistics. But in the euro area, statistical challenges remain in both areas.
For RRE markets, the quality and granularity of price data is relatively good. The main challenge
lies in the availability of harmonised and granular data on lending standards for RRE. At present,
only average figures are available for most countries: information on the distribution of lending
standards  is  still  scarce  and  does  not  break  down  the  borrowing  population  by  relevant
segments, such as first-time buyers, buy-to-let buyers or owner-occupiers. And the definitions of
lending standards across EU countries’ indicators are still not adequately harmonised.
For  CRE  markets,  statistical  gaps  are  more  pervasive,  with  even  the  available  price  data  not
being  of  sufficient  quality.  A  study  by  the  ECB  and  Eurostat  concluded  that  only  nine  EU
countries have their own commercial property price statistics, six more obtain them from private
sources,  and  13  EU  countries  have  no  price  data  at  all.  Where  CRE  statistics  from  official
sources are available, they are not derived using a harmonised methodology.
There is similarly patchy coverage in statistics for rent indices and rent yields, vacancy rates,
transaction  numbers  and  values,  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  construction  starts  and  construction
completions. As a result, policymakers are often forced to rely on non-data information sources,
such  as  surveys  or  market  participants’  reports.  Data  on  the  financial  system’s  exposures  to
commercial real estate have comparable shortcomings, while information on lending standards
is very limited.
Closing these data gaps would offer several advantages for policymakers.
First,  it  would  enhance  the  ability  of  macroprudential  authorities  to  assess  systemic  risks  ex-
ante. For RRE, more granular data on lending standards would enable the identification of risks
that may be building up in the tail of the distribution, risks that are typically hidden by average
figures  –  for  example,  loans  with  high  debt-to-income  (DTI),  debt-service-to-income  (DSTI)  or
loan-to-value  (LTV)  ratios.  In  the  CRE  segment,  wider  data  coverage  would  provide  a  clearer
picture of market developments and improve the assessment of potential vulnerabilities.
Data on rent indices and rent yields for CRE, for example, would help indicate whether a given
price level reflects realised returns, or inflated expectations of future returns. Details on vacancy
rates and building permits would help in assessing property supply and demand. And transaction
numbers  and  values  could  serve  as  an  indicator  of  market  liquidity,  conveying  information  on
potential market overheating or on vulnerability to fire sales should banks or investors have to
quickly recover their positions.
More complete CRE data would also help inform monetary policymakers of the impact of the
policy stance on CRE markets. Decomposing the rental yield into the risk-free rate and the risk
premium  can  help  in  identifying  whether  price  developments  reflect  fundamentals.  A  highly
compressed or negative spread between yields and the risk-free rate can indicate an overvalued
property market.
Second, harmonising key definitions and concepts would facilitate cross-country comparisons of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
emerging  risks  and  of  the  prudential  policy  stance.  For  example,  at  present  the  definition  of
income  in  the  denominator  in  DTI  and  DSTI  ratios  supplied  to  the  ECB  is  not  homogeneous:
some countries base these ratios on net income and others on gross income. Using a gross
income concept leads to lower levels of DTI or DSTI than using a net income concept.
Another  example  is  that  valuation  methodologies  for  RRE  and  CRE  are  not  aligned,  with
Germany and Austria using a long-term sustainable value concept and others using true market
value. Developments in valuations across countries are therefore not comparable.
The  third  benefit  from  higher-quality  real  estate  statistics  would  be  for  policy  implementation.
Greater granularity in RRE data would help in calibrating macroprudential policies and tailoring
them  to  specific  segments  of  the  borrowing  population.  At  present,  most  countries  rely  on
qualitative  methods  for  policy  calibration,  as  the  lack  of  granular  data  on  lending  standards
prevents them from using more sophisticated quantitative methods.
For the CRE sector, improved data coverage would enable policymakers to identify local price
bubbles before they enter  into  national  data.  That  would  in  turn  facilitate  region-specific  policy
guidance, such as the introduction of lending limits on commercial property in a specific city.
Finally, more complete data would improve ex post assessments of policy effectiveness. Once
macroprudential  policies  are  introduced,  it  is  far  more  difficult  to  monitor  their  impact  on  the
target variables if only aggregate data are available. In addition, more granular information on the
distribution of credit standards would allow policymakers to assess whether policies are effective
in curbing tail risks.
Closing the gaps in real estate statistics
Work is now under way to close the gaps in real estate statistics.
In  2016,  the  ESRB  published  a  Recommendation  laying  the  foundations  for  improving  the
availability and comparability of data on real estate markets in the EU.  The Recommendation on
closing real estate data gaps provides detailed definitions of the indicators needed to monitor real
estate  sectors  across  countries,  and  sets  data  requirements  in  terms  of  granularity  and
frequency. It includes a specific requirement for the European supervisory authorities to disclose
annually aggregated information on the exposure to real estate markets of the entities under their
supervision.
7
The need for detailed data on real estate markets for prudential purposes was also recognised
by the Economic and Financial Affairs Council in 2017.
That said, statisticians in Europe – and further afield – still need to resolve a number of technical
issues in terms of methodology and data sources. In line with the division of responsibilities at
the European level, this work is being led by the ECB in the field of financial variables and by
Eurostat for the physical market variables. The two institutions are cooperating closely on the
topic and we are confident that they will make good progress.
Real  estate  data  is  not  merely  a  technical  issue.  The  availability  of  these  data  could  have
profound consequences for macroprudential and monetary policymaking and so for all euro area
citizens.  It  is  therefore  an  opportune  time  for  statisticians  and  other  stakeholders  to  meet  to
discuss these issues and I trust this conference will help move the debate forward.
1
2
See for example Mian, A. and Sufi, A. (2014), House of Debt, The University of Chicago Press.
Household wealth is mainly held in the form of real assets, which represent 82.2% of total assets owned by
households; the remaining assets (17.8%) are financial. The household main residence, with a portfolio share
of 49.5% of total assets, is the largest component of real assets. See ECB (2016), “The Household Finance and
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Consumption Survey: methodological report for the second wave”, Statistics Paper Series No 18, ECB, Frankfurt
am Main, December.
For a discussion of the relationship between wealth effects and consumption in the euro area see Guerrieri, C.
and Mendicino, C. (2018), “Wealth effects in the euro area”, Working Paper Series, No 2157, ECB, Frankfurt am
Main, June.
See  Battistini,  N.  and  Vourdas,  J.,  European  Central  Bank  (2018),  “The  housing  market  as  a  predictor  of
prolonged contractions in economic activity”, Box 1 of the article “The state of the housing market in the euro
area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 7.
See Crowe, C., Dell’Ariccia, G., Igan, D. and Rabanal, P. (2011) “How to Deal with Real Estate Booms: Lessons
from Country Experiences”, IMF Working Paper 11/91.
See Dierick, F., Point, E., Cornacchia, W. and Pirovano, M. (2017), “Closing real estate data gaps for financial
stability  monitoring  and  macroprudential  policy  in  the  EU”, IFC  Bulletins  chapters,  in:  Bank  for  International
Settlements (ed.), Data needs and Statistics compilation for macroprudential analysis, volume 46 Bank for
International Settlements.
ESRB Recommendation 2016/14 adopted on 31 October 2016.
3
4
5
6
7
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
