Olli Rehn: Building an enabling environment for circular businesses
Speech by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the World Circular Economy Forum,
Helsinki, 3 June 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
 Many thanks to Sitra for the invitation to the World Circular Economy Forum. While this is the
third such event, the things we talk about here are actually not that new. But what is new is that
the talks have started to materialise in actions taken by companies. And not only by individual
companies, but they are becoming increasingly mainstream. That’s the good news.
Historically economic growth has gone hand in hand with emissions growth and resource usage.
The problem is that in order for our planet to survive, we need to separate economic growth from
greenhouse gas emissions growth. Another piece of good news is that this is not impossible, as
the case of reduced emissions from production in the Nordic countries proves. But it is not easy
either.  Especially  in  the  developing  countries  economic  growth  is  badly  needed  to  reduce
poverty.
Last  autumn  the  IPCC  released  a  new  report  detailing  why  we  should  target  a  1.5  degrees
increase  in  temperature,  instead  of  the  Paris  target  of  2  degrees.  It  is  no  simple  feat,  as  our
current  path  would  lead  to  an  increase  of  more  than  3  degrees. And  we  have  only  about  a
decade to take the right bold actions to meet the 1.5 degree target.
There  is  no  single  tool  that  would  enable  mitigation  and  adaptation  to  climate  change.  The
European  Commission  is  currently  creating  legislation  to  increase  funding  for  the  green
economy.  This  supplements  the  EU  Emissions  Trading  Scheme  and  the  EU  CO2-emission
targets. This is also good news, but not enough.
What we need is action at the global level. In an ideal world, a unified global carbon tax would be
the  first-best  solution,  as  it  would  make  companies  internalize  the  externalities  of  emissions.
While economists have advocated such a carbon tax, in the real world where we live in, this is
being challenged by issues in measuring emissions and by the realpolitik.
Taxation can be used to create the right incentives even without a unified global carbon tax. Sitra
has  recently  published  a  report  detailing  how  an  environmental  tax  reform  could  reduce
emissions, while creating many benefits for the economy. The new government programme of
Finland, released today, is based on these principles. Globally several ministries of finance have
joined their forces in The Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action to consider issues
such as environmental tax reforms.
Likewise, a number of central banks and supervisors have joined their hands in the Network for
Greening  the  Financial  System.  In  the  EU,  and  also  globally,  the  financial  sector  still  lacks
adequate instruments for mainstreaming green finance. The EU Commission, through its plans
for  a  capital  markets  union  and  sustainable  finance  action  is  working  on  this.  Climate-related
criteria should be better reflected in the key tools used for decision-making by market actors,
such as benchmarks and credit ratings.
Apart  from  the  simple  carbon  footprint,  we  also  need  to  look  beyond  that.  In  addition  to  the
production and life-cycle of things, it is becoming more important to consider what happens to
products in their afterlife.
Many things considered green are not that, if we do not reuse and recycle the resources. Electric
cars is one of the prime examples. Similarly, many things considered brown might be less so, if
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
the product lifetimes are long enough and resources can be recycled in afterlife.
Looking at what the financial sector can do for the circular economy, in my view the financial
industry  does  acknowledge  the  problem,  and  there  are  ample  amounts  of  capital  looking  for
sustainable companies.
More  work  needs  to  be  done  on  how  companies  can  cost-effectively  and  reliably  indicate  the
sustainability of their operation. But for all companies planning their future, now it’s the time to
think deep about how to transform their business models sustainable, and turn that into concrete
actions. Not least because there is a paradigm shift going on in the sentiment of the investor
base, and it is starting to affect the selection of companies that attract investments and funding in
the future. I know this first-hand, because this is what we do in the investment policy of the Bank
of Finland.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me conclude. As I said, environment- and climate-conscious business models are becoming
increasingly mainstream. That is fine, but the transition should be much speedier. Hence, I want
to encourage us all to recognize the urgency of concrete climate action, and build a timely and
consistent transition path to the sustainable circular economy.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
