Honourable Minister Shala, 
Honourable Chairman of the CBK Board, Mr Mrasori, 
Honourable Deputy Governor, 
Representatives of Financial Institutions,  
Honourable participants, ladies and gentlemen, 
 I  am  pleased  that  today  we  are  all  together  marking  the  World  Consumer  Rights 
Day, which is now transformed into an annual activity for the Central Bank of the 
Republic  of  Kosovo.  The  special  feature  of  today's  organization  is  that  this  is 
happening  within  the  activities  of  marking  the  20th  anniversary  of  the 
establishment of CBK, so we are in a good moment to reflect on the development 
of  Kosovo's  financial  system  over  these  20  years  and  our  orientation  for  the 
development of this sector in the future. 
Kosovo started developing the financial system in 1999, at a time when everything 
had  to  be  developed  from  the  outset.  The  first  years  of  CBK's  operation  were 
mainly  related  to  the  construction  of  the  basic  infrastructure  necessary  for  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  system,  starting  from  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework,  the  payment  system  and  so  on.  Over  time,  together  with  the  highly 
valued  support  from  our  international  partners,  CBK  managed  to  advance  its 
capacities  at  the  same  level  with  the  central  banks  of  countries  with  a  longer 
tradition of the financial system. 
CBK  went  through  different  development  stages,  and  so  did  the  financial 
institutions  operating  in  Kosovo.  The  first  years  of  their  operation  were  quite 
challenging,  because  they  operated  in  an  environment  of  high  uncertainty  and 
significant  lack  of  information.  Nevertheless,  the  improvements  made  in  the 
 1 
financial  infrastructure  and  in  the  overall  business  environment  in  Kosovo, 
together with the growth of maturity of financial institutions and CBK during these 
20 years, have resulted in a modern and sound financial system that is successfully 
implementing  its  role  of  financial  intermediation  in  support  of  the  sustainable 
development  of  the  country's  economy.  Nowadays,  our  financial  system  is 
generally characterized by steady growth of activity and a very satisfactory level of 
financial health indicators. 
Whereas, in  the  first years  of  operation  of  the  financial  system, the  focus  was on 
creating  the  conditions  for  providing  basic  financial  services  for  the  country's 
economy, now we have reached a level where more attention is given to the quality 
of  these  services,  where  undoubtedly,  activities  aiming  consumer  protection  of 
financial  services  occupy  a  very  important  place.  For  us,  consumer  protection 
activities  represent  a  daily  task  that  we  exercise  with  the  utmost  seriousness,  and 
this  day  will  be  used  as  an  opportunity  to  make  a  general  reflection  on  these 
activities. 
Consumer  protection  is  not  a  single  action,  but  an  entire  process  that  promotes 
responsible  behaviour  of  financial  institutions  by  incorporating  various  aspects 
that,  besides  protecting  the  respect  of  contractual  customer  rights,  also  help 
customers  in  selecting  adequate  financial  products  and  contribute  to  maintaining 
the solvency of customers.  
Therefore, given the importance and complexity of consumer protection, CBK has 
organized  consumer  protection  activities  in  two  main  pillars,  consisting  of 
consumer complaints and financial education. 
By  reviewing  complaints,  CBK  intends  to  ensure  the  implementation  of  all 
contractual rights and obligations between financial institutions and  customers, in 
 2 
cases  where  customers  consider  that  such  a  thing  has  never  happened.  In  recent 
years, the number of financial institutions’ customers lodging a complaint to CBK 
regarding the implementation of their contractual rights has increased. We consider 
that the increase of the number of complaints directly reflects the higher awareness 
of  customers  about  the  right  and  the  possibility  of  complaining,  which  is 
contributing to the better protection of their rights, but it is also contributing to the 
rectifying  and  advancement  of  internal  processes  in  financial  institutions  in 
providing  and  further  developing  financial  services  as  well  as  avoiding  various 
errors. Consumer complaints represent a very important source of information for 
CBK,  which  often  takes  them  into  account  during  the  supervisory  activities  of 
financial institutions. 
In  addition  to  activities  to  address  possible  violations  by  financial  institutions  in 
relation to consumer rights, CBK is working intensively on financial education of 
the  public,  which  aims  to  increase  the  level  of  public  knowledge  about  financial 
products and their rights in relation to the financial institution. Also, in addition to 
its  activities  in  promoting  financial  education,  CBK  continuously  encourages 
financial  institutions  to  increase  their  activity  in  support  of  increasing  public 
knowledge  about  financial  products,  as  well-informed  customers  take  reasonable 
action and contribute directly to further development and maintenance of financial 
stability. 
CBK  also  gives  its  contribution  to  consumer  protection  as  a  member  of  the 
Consumer  Protection  Council,  an  inter-institutional  body  that  aims  to  provide  a 
harmonized  and  comprehensive  approach  to  ensure  consumer  rights  protection  in 
Kosovo.  The  establishment  and  functionalization  of  this  council  indicates  the 
orientation of the institutions of the Republic of Kosovo, which have put consumer 
protection at the top of their priorities. 
 3 
At  the  conclusion  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  our  commitment  in 
ensuring a financial system to the country's economy, which contributes in the best 
way  possible  to  the  economic  development  of  the  country  and,  at  the  same  time, 
conducts  the  financial  intermediation  activity  while  respecting  all  legal  and 
regulatory provisions.      
         4 
