   10.07.2019 
Opening address 
The current challenges of the financial sector / KPMG 
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor 
 
  Good morning, and many thanks to KPMG for the opportunity to inaugurate this meeting on 
the current challenges of the financial sector.  
 
Dictionaries define a challenge as an objective or a task that is difficult to carry out, and 
which is a stimulus and a trial for the person facing it. I believe the challenges facing our 
banks conform perfectly to this definition; they are not in the least easy or straightforward 
to carry out, and sufficient motivation is clearly needed to tackle them. The challenges I refer 
to are fairly well-known and, generally, shared by all.  
 
As supervisors we are always addressing two such challenges: improved profitability and 
improved solvency. I believe profitability and solvency should be related. Without sufficient 
profitability,  capital  cannot  be  generated  organically  nor  shareholders  remunerated.  And 
that in turn is an impediment to tapping the markets for new resources. Without capital, the 
growth of the business will be limited, exerting downward pressure on banks’ profitability.  
 
I should stress that, in my view, these two challenges are end-goals, i.e. they can only be 
directly  attained  as  a  result  of  achieving  intermediate  goals.  I  shall  refer  throughout  my 
address to these intermediate objectives, which may be summarised in the form of another 
challenge: transforming the business model.  
 
Developments since the crisis broke  
 
 
It  is  fair  to  stress  that,  following  the  crisis,  Spanish  banks  have  undertaken  intense 
recapitalisation and restructuring. This process has, in the past five years, notably improved 
the sector’s position in terms of basic metrics such as asset quality and profitability and 
solvency levels.  
 
This has come about against the background of the correction of structural imbalances, 
built  up  on  bank  balance  sheets  during  the  pre-crisis  upturn.  Arguably,  the  cause  and, 
largely,  the  effect  of  the  formation  of  these  imbalances  was  excess  capacity  in  the 
development of Spanish deposit institutions’ business.  
 
 3/15 
 We can observe the scale of the adjustment that has come about, both in the volume of 
banking activity and in the total volume of lending to the resident private sector. From its 
June  2009  peak,  when  the  stock  of  lending  practically  amounted  to  €1.8  trillion,  to  the 
present day there has been a reduction of almost 40% in volume, i.e. of over €600 billion. 
In terms of GDP we have moved into line with the European average. Also, the excessive 
dependence on external financing has been corrected; specifically, the Spanish economy’s 
net debtor position has declined from accounting for almost 100% of GDP in 2014 to 77.1% 
of GDP in 2018.  
 
The consolidation process, which began in 2009, has entailed a reduction of more than 30% 
in  the  number  of  institutions.  The  most  striking  impact  has  been  on  the  former  savings 
banks, of which only two have survived, although another seven have converted into banks. 
Also paradigmatic is the change in the number of bank offices, which have fallen by more 
than 40% (20,000 fewer), and in staff numbers, which are down by more than 30% (around 
90,000 fewer workers).  
 
Against this backdrop of substantial business adjustment, banks have managed to improve 
their solvency and the quality of their balance sheets. The average Tier 1 capital ratio has 
risen from 8.1% in 2008 to 13.4% late last year. Banks have also been active in the disposal 
of their non-earning assets, and non-performing and foreclosed loans, which has allowed 
volumes to be reduced most considerably.  
 
This divestment of non-earning assets has come about against a background of economic 
growth, which, undoubtedly, has helped the process. But I believe it is important to stress 
that supervisory pressure has also notably influenced this improvement. 
 
The chart shows clearly how the volume of NPLs has fallen almost exclusively over the past 
two years. To my understanding, the publication of the SSM guidance in March 2017 and 
of its addendum a year later have had a lot to do with this.  
 
 
 
 
 
4/15 
   
As regards results, once the 2012 downturn was behind us, banks showed returns on assets 
and on equity moving around 0.55% and 7.22%, respectively.  
 
As a result of all these efforts, Spanish banks are in a much sounder position and currently 
have unquestionable strengths compared with their European rivals, essentially as regards 
their profitability and efficiency.  
 
As  can  be  seen,  profitability,  measured  both  in  terms  of  RoA  and  of  RoE,  is  above  the 
European average. If we analyse average efficiency, we see that Spanish banks clearly have 
lower management expenses in relation to their revenue than their European competitors, 
particularly those in the core euro area countries.  
 
 
Regrettably, these strengths do not change our position relative to the comparative average 
levels of solvency.  
 
Admittedly, supervisors are always applying pressure in relation to capital levels; that is our 
mission. Banks usually protest about this growing capital requirement which, as the most 
widespread complaints have it, appears to be never-ending and may lead to credit being 
 5/15 
 squeezed.  Reference  is  also  made,  with  some  justification,  to  the  low  density  of  many 
European banks’ risk-weighted assets, owing to a more extensive use of internal models.  
 
I have indicated on more than one occasion that our banks have comparative strengths. For 
instance,  we  are  in  a  better  position  in  terms  of  leverage  when  set  against  the  industry 
average in Europe; moreover, the low use of internal models by Spanish banks enables the 
volatility of capital requirements to be reduced, while in turn keeping our banks unaffected 
by the introduction of the Basel III “Output floor”. Nonetheless, I do not share the rest of the 
analysis of the sector. 
 
I would point out that a high level of capital is neither a weakness nor a disadvantage. That 
might sound flippant; but the fact is that if anyone were to read certain statements for the 
first time, they might reach the conclusion that raising solvency levels entails all kinds of 
problems. As I said earlier, profitability and capital should go hand in hand. But the flattening 
in solvency ratios has come about against the background of a sustained decline in lending, 
not an increase therein.  
 
If we analyse the change in CET1 capital ratios since the start-up of the SSM, we see that 
in 2014 Spanish banks had average levels below the European average, very similar to those 
of French banks and indeed higher than those of Italian banks. Yet at the end of this period 
our  banks  show  levels  clearly  below  those  of  both  these  countries.  It  would  be  worth 
reflecting on why our banks – which initially showed lower solvency levels than the European 
average and which, moreover, have maintained higher average profitability than their peer 
group – should have seen not only a reduction in the starting difference in solvency levels, 
but also a widening in this difference. Unlike their counterparts, Spanish banks have not 
been able to offset the erosion in CET1 brought about by the gradual entry into force of 
Basel III with increases in capital or reserves.  
 
Clearly, our banks consider that, since the launch of the SSM, the demands placed on them 
in respect of capital needs have been very great. But looking at the comparison, I wonder 
what banks in the other euro area countries that have significantly reinforced their capital 
ratios  will  think.  Moreover,  unlike  Spain,  most  of  our  peers  have  activated  –  or  have 
announced the activation – of countercyclical capital buffers, which may partly explain the 
increase in their solvency ratios.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6/15 
 Dividend policy  
 
   
It  is  worth  remembering  that  the  clearest  route  to  strengthening  capital  is  through  the 
organic  generation  of  reserves.  That  leads  once  again  to  highlighting  the  importance  of 
profitability and, in relation to profits, of dividend policy. Each bank should give structure to 
this dividend policy, bearing in mind its present and future capital needs.  
 
As I have occasionally indicated, in my view dividend payments are excessively rigid. They 
have functioned more as a fixed remuneration than as a genuine, variable distribution of 
each year’s return.  
 
In  this  respect,  one  possibility  used  by  banks  at  various  times  has  been  to  use  scrip 
dividends. These allow remuneration to the shareholder to take the form of the delivery of 
new issued shares, instead of cash.  
 
This policy enables the necessary remuneration of capital to be combined with the organic 
generation of capital, although it inevitably entails some dilution of earnings per share, as 
also occurs whenever there are capital increases. It is the responsibility of each bank to 
assess these aspects when setting its dividend policy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7/15 
 Implementation of Basel III 
 
 
I have previously referred to the need for banks to plan their future capital requirements, 
whether as a result of their business projections or of regulatory changes. In this connection, 
the  importance  of  strengthening,  as  far  as  possible,  current  capital  levels  should  be 
interpreted against the background of the challenge – a further challenge – entailed by the 
entry into force of the final stage of Basel III.  
 
Last week the EBA published an update of the estimated impact that the implementation of 
the outstanding elements of Basel III will have on European Union (EU) banks. According to 
this estimate, risk-weighted assets (RWAs) will increase in the EU as a whole by 24.4%, 
meaning additional capital totalling €135 billion in order to respond to new needs. Naturally, 
we should qualify these figures. Let us not forget that they reflect estimates made under 
conservative assumptions that banks will not adjust their portfolios to lessen the attendant 
impact. 
 
The EBA itself indicates that needs would fall to €58.7 billion if banks decided to retain all 
their profits during the transitory period. The reforms will not affect all banks equally. Large 
banks,  in  particular  those  that  use  internal  models  (IRB),  will  be  most  affected,  with  the 
impact being restricted to an 11.3% increase in RWAs for medium-sized banks and of only 
5.5% for the smallest banks. 
 
The main impact will stem from the application of the regulatory floor for those risk-weighted 
assets calculated using the internal ratings-based approach. As indicated, the lower use of 
IRB models by our banks means they will not be affected by this concept. However, other 
changes,  such  as  the  new  operational  risk  and  Credit  Valuation  Adjustment  (CVA) 
frameworks, or the introduction of changes in the standardised approach, will indeed affect 
our banks, which should prepare themselves to absorb the new requirements. 
 
 
 
 
8/15 
 MREL 
 
  
Another  challenge  banks  face  stems  from  the  introduction  of  the  new  eligible  liabilities 
requirements,  known  as  MREL.  As  you  will  be  aware,  the  introduction  of  MREL  is  the 
consequence of the change in paradigm in crisis resolution. We have now moved from the 
bail-out to the bail-in. The aim is to ensure that banks have sufficient unsecured liabilities 
on their balance sheet, whether own funds or “bailinable” debt, if you will allow me to use 
this expression, so as to avoid the use of public funds in the event of failure. 
 
The Single Resolution Board (SRB) has set MREL objectives for each significant institution 
at the European level. It has also informed them of the maximum time available to cover 
these requirements, which must be met through organic growth of specific liabilities and 
new  issues.  It  is  essential  that  each  institution  should  plan  the  issues  to  be  made 
appropriately.  
 
It  is  worth  recalling  here  that  the  characteristics  of  these  liabilities  make  them  rather 
unsuitable for distribution among retail customers. As we have witnessed in some cases in 
the recent past, the holding of these securities by individuals entails problems in a context 
of crisis, turning them even into an obstacle for the institution’s “resolvability”. And that is 
exactly the opposite of what the rule originally sought. The Banco de España is determined 
to prevent this type of past situation from recurring. We should not make the same mistakes 
again.  
 
For these reasons, the challenge of covering these issues is greater for smaller-sized banks, 
which have a scant presence on the markets and are more geared to the retail segment.  
 
I think it is important that banks, in particular those with less access to the markets, should 
take  advantage  of  those  windows  in  which  investors’  appetite  for  this  type  of  asset 
increases, so as to bring forward as far as possible the issuance calendar.  
One final aspect I wish to mention is the cost of these issues and of liabilities in general. The 
latest Banco de España Financial Stability Report offers the findings of a study on European 
banks which conclude that the higher the level of the CET1 capital ratio, the lower debt 
issuance costs are.  
 
 9/15 
 This effect increases as debt instruments become more akin to capital instruments. As can 
be seen in the chart, if the CET1 ratio increases by 1 pp, a 0.3% reduction may be expected 
in the cost of issuing instruments eligible as Tier 1. The effect is smaller, although significant, 
by around 0.13-0.16% for Tier 2 instruments or for senior debt.  
 
The findings are, in my opinion, perfectly logical and rational. Evidently, a higher capital ratio 
is a guarantee for those debt-holders situated lower in the hierarchy of credit tranches. As 
a result, investors are prepared to buy debt at lower rates than those that are demanded of 
institutions showing lower CET1 levels. 
 
As I pointed out, showing a high level of capital is not a disadvantage. In addition to MREL 
eligibility,  a  high  level  of  capital  evidently  enables  the  bank  to  reduce  its  funding  costs, 
likewise improving its external rating and its access to markets.  
 
Improving profitability  
 
Apart  from  improved  solvency,  there  are  other  levers  that  can  help  improve  profitability. 
First, headway in reducing non-earning assets is important. Spanish banks have managed 
to significantly reduce their portfolios of NPLs and foreclosures, although we remain above 
the figures posted by other European Union banks and the level continues to be clearly 
above what it was pre-crisis.  
 
As their name suggests, these assets are “unproductive“. But, moreover, maintaining them 
entails high costs in terms of human, financial and – in the case of property – tax and upkeep  
 
resources. Evidently, their disposal allows costs to be cut and resources to be freed up and 
used for other productive activities. 
 
 
In  this  setting  of  low  margins  and  high  competition,  bank  mergers  are  an  alternative  for 
gaining  competitiveness.  Mergers  –  or,  I  should  rather  say,  their  absence  in  light  of  the 
recent past – are always prominent in press headlines. In this respect, let me reiterate that 
mergers may be a means for securing gains in efficiency and profitability, but they are very 
complex operations and the attendant business plans must be appropriately assessed.  
10/15 
   
We  have  seen  a  30%  reduction  in  the  number  of  institutions  there  were  in  2009.  More 
recently  we  have  seen  how,  in  the  absence  of  a  context  of  acute  crisis,  many  of  the 
corporate operations announced do not reach fruition. Meantime, in some of the operations 
that are finalised, integration problems continue to be seen for years.  
 
Our task in a setting such as the present one is to ensure that any merger process should 
lead  to  the  creation  of  a  new,  more  solvent  institution,  with  a  sound  business  model, 
enabling structural costs to be cut and, in short, value to be generated. 
  
We  must  of  course  assess  these  same  aspects  with  a  view  to  potential  cross-border 
mergers in Europe. The absence of such mergers may be seen as a sign that the Banking 
Union is not working as it should. True, several elements of the Banking Union are still not 
in  place,  including  most  notably  the  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS).  It  is 
likewise true that the regulations affecting the sector are still too heterogeneous across the 
different Member States. Yet it seems that the very excess capacity of the banking sector 
is acting as an entry barrier to banks from other jurisdictions, given that the potential gain in 
costs and synergies arising from the elimination of duplicated networks and services occurs 
chiefly in national mergers.  
 
Lastly, another means of improvement would stem from cost-cutting and the subsequent 
enhanced  efficiency.  Admittedly,  I  did  say  our  banks  made  notable  efforts  to  shed  the 
excess capacity in place pre-crisis; but there still remains room for improvement. In any 
event, further gains in efficiency appear to be closely linked to technological transformation.  
 
 
Technological change  
 
We are all aware that technological change is one of the main transformations banking must 
pursue. If we look at what has happened in recent years in other sectors, there is clearly a 
need for the banking business model to adapt.  
 
Technological  change  is  a  complex  matter,  but  one  that  is  fundamental  for  tackling  the 
future. It should be part and parcel of deeper reflections relating to the banking business 
model and its sustainability in the long term.  
 
Naturally, technological adaptation calls in many cases for significant investment in systems 
to be made. However, such investment today will be key to future income. 
 
 11/15 
  
Clearly,  the  gains  in  efficiency  will  be  very  closely  linked  to  technological  change.  Most 
banking  transactions  in  Spain  continue  to  be  made  through  ATMs  and  bank  windows. 
However, the proportion of online users is growing every year. In step with this trend, the 
potential for cost savings is significant.  
 
I  should  stress  that,  when  undertaking  this  transformation,  banks  have  most  significant 
starting strengths. Despite all the reputation problems, people continue to trust their bank, 
much  more  than  any  other  service-providing  company.  Personal  relationships  with 
customers continue to be very important, particularly in certain segments and age groups.  
 
 
According  to  the  latest  Funcas  financial  innovation  barometer,  in  January  this  year, 
customer  ties  to  their  main  financial  institution  remained  very  strong.  Close  to  90%  of 
banking  activity  is  conducted  with  the  main  institution.  Also  notable  is  the  fact  that 
customers’  perception  of  quality  of  innovation  and  their  degree of  satisfaction  with  their 
institution is high; higher, indeed, that what the managers of institutions themselves think.  
 
 
 
 
12/15 
   
While the proportion is growing, still less than half of Spanish bank customers (4 out of 10) 
would  be  prepared  to  use  exclusively  digital  channels  to  take  out  traditional  financial 
products. Assuming a change in institution, traditional banks remain the first option (71%) 
for moving an account from one institution to another. Fully digital banks would be chosen 
by  24%,  while  FinTech  are  an  option  for  only  3%.  Lastly,  only  the  2%  remaining  would 
change their bank for a technological or telecommunications company that offered these 
services.  
 
This starting position, which is a relatively good one from a “defensive” standpoint, should 
not have us forget that the tendency towards the use of alternative channels is on the rise. 
Despite the fact that FinTech have so far not had a significant effect on the market, specific 
events, such as the implementation of PSD2, may alter the current picture. There is concern 
over the possibility that third parties may have access to customers’ bank data. But I must 
point out here that it is in fact banks that currently have all this information. Naturally, the 
problem  lies  in  knowing  whether  banks  are  ready  to  extract  and  properly  exploit  this 
information.  
 
There  is  much  talk  about  interaction  with  customers,  the  quality  of  apps  and  the  user 
experience.  Yet  I  would  like  to  stress  that  it  is  even  more  important  to  undertake 
technological  change  “in-house”,  as  regards  data  aggregation  and  quality  and  internal 
applications. Here there is much potential for improvement, although Spanish banks are not 
in any way worse positioned than their European rivals.  
 
Banks should be capable of extracting, exploiting and analysing their customers’ data. And 
in this connection, it will be necessary in many cases to invest in systems. Managers must 
have  the  information  to  take  decisions.  Without  it,  evaluation  and  transformation  of  the 
business model will not be possible.  
 
Against this background of technological change, I would like to refer briefly to the recent 
announcement  of  the  launch  of  the  “libra”  project,  the  virtual  currency  sponsored  by 
Facebook.  The  reaction  by  the  public  sector,  supervisors  and  central  banks  to  this 
announcement has, to put it mildly, been shrouded in caution.  
 
 
 13/15 
 Testifying to this is the letter sent last week by the US authorities to Facebook. In its first 
paragraph, a request – or rather a demand – is made for the implementation of the project 
to be delayed while its potential consequences are evaluated. The same paragraph indicates 
that the libra project “is intended to rival US monetary policy and the dollar”.  
 
I do not think this is an exaggerated reaction, since the irruption of big tech has potentially 
systemic implications.  
 
 
Customer relations  
 
I think it is also important to talk about customer relations as another key factor of any future 
business model. I shall not dwell on this point, the ground for which has been previously 
covered. But I would like to point out that this change is the only means of responding to 
the challenge the sector faces to restore its image and reputation.  
 
Society has changed in terms of its demands of the financial sector. The rules governing 
customer-bank relations have likewise changed. A good example of this is the recent law 
on real estate lending. Banks should, therefore, change to respond to the new social and 
regulatory reality. 
 
Evidently, legal cases from the past continue to weigh on and hamper the restoration of 
image.  But  if  banks  change  their  behaviour  today they  will  be  laying the  foundations on 
which to build the industry’s future reputation.  
 
In this respect, last year we saw a decline in claims lodged against banks. According to the 
Banco de España 2018 Annual Claims Report, published last Wednesday, the number of 
claims processed by the Bank last year fell by more than 50% on 2017 to close to 19,700.1 
Nonetheless, the total percentage of rectifications by banks relative to those estimated by 
the Banco de España was 70.6%, a similar percentage to that of 2017. 
 
 
                                                                                              
1 In any event it should be borne in mind that, since 2013, the annual claims figures have shown strong year-to-year 
oscillations, generally linked to the impact of specific legal rulings. 
14/15 
  Business model  
 
Evidently, banks should analyse their current business models with a view to assessing to 
what extent they respond to this new technological and customer-relations reality, but also 
to identifying their strengths and weaknesses.  
 
To conduct this analysis, the above-mentioned management information is needed, which 
depends,  in  turn,  on  the  quality  of  systems.  Consequently,  technology  becomes  an 
objective of the change in business model and a prerequisite for such change to occur, 
hence  its  central  role.  Naturally,  another  prerequisite  worth  mentioning  is  governance, 
without which all these changes will be destined for failure.  
 
Importantly, reflection on the business model should be individualised, and adapted to the 
particular characteristics of each bank. Indeed, the results of a theme-based review by the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism on profitability and business models show that there is no 
single approach and that there are differences in strategies among those banks with the 
best profitability results. Some pursue strategies geared to obtaining high revenue, which 
counter relatively high costs. Others focus on low costs that are compatible with relatively 
low revenue. And others strike a balance between average revenue-generating capacity and 
medium or low-level costs.  
 
These differences in strategies are reflected in different action plans: some are geared to 
growth in loans or fees; others to streamlining costs through various means, although two 
appear to be prominent, namely digitalisation and externalisation.  
 
Conclusions  
 
To conclude, I believe we all share the view that the challenges the financial sector faces in 
Spain are far-reaching.  
 
The  social  environment, supervision  and  regulation  appear  not  to  be  helping,  since  they 
increase pressure on banks. However, experience shows that, sadly, it is almost always 
under pressure that reforms are undertaken.  
 
Compared with their European competitors, Spanish banks have significant comparative 
strengths to address the changes. These include higher profitability and efficiency, and a 
lower  potential  impact  from  the  implementation  of  Basel  III.  We  should  harness  these 
advantages  and  attempt  to  correct  those  areas  in  which  we  are  less  competitive. 
Irrespective  of  improving  profitability,  efficiency  and  solvency  levels,  the  key  long-term 
challenge  involves  transforming  the  business  model.  And  as  I  have  said,  technology  is 
central to this challenge.  
 
The  future  will  be  for  those  who  are  most  prepared.  In  this  respect,  I  believe  that  any 
challenge can be viewed from two different and, in fact, opposite standpoints: as a threat 
or as an opportunity. The difference between both views lies in the attitude adopted and the 
willingness deployed.  
Thank you. 
 15/15 
