Yi Gang: Deepen investment and financing cooperation for quality
development of the Belt and Road Initiative
Opening remarks by Mr Yi Gang, Governor of the People's Bank of China, at the Thematic Forum
on  Financial  Connectivity  of  the  Second  Belt  and  Road  Forum  for  International  Cooperation
(BRF), Beijing, 25 April 2019.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Distinguished Guests,
Good morning and a warm welcome. Taking this opportunity, I would like to give an update on
what the financial sector has done to support the BRI in the past two years and look forward to
the future of financial connectivity.
I.  The Progress Thus Far in Financial Support for BRI 
First,  the  funding  support  system  has  been  improved  and  financing  has  become  increasingly
market  based  and  diversified.   According  to  our  statistics,  Chinese  financial  institutions  have
provided  more  than  US$440  billion  for  BRI,  among  which,  more  than  RMB320  billion  were
channeled  through  RMB  Overseas  Fund  Business.  China’s  capital  market  provided  over
RMB500  billion  yuan  in  equity  financing  for  the  relevant  enterprises.  The  BRI  countries  and
enterprises raised more than RMB65 billion by issuing panda bonds in our onshore market.
Second, financial services have become more sophisticated. At end 2018, 11 Chinese banks
have  established  76  branches  and  subsidiaries  in  28  countries  along  the  Belt  and  Road  and
about 50 banks from 22 Belt and Road countries have business operations in China. They are
providing  a  larger  variety  of  financial  products  and  services  including  credit,  guarantee,  bond
underwriting, merger and acquisition, risk management, clearing, and etc.
Third, international cooperation has deepened. The People’s Bank of China has signed bilateral
local  currency  swap  agreements  with  21  central  banks  along  the  Belt  and  Road.  We  have
deepened  third-party  cooperation  with  the  International  Finance  Company,  European  Bank  for
Reconstruction  and  Development, 
the  African
Development Bank. The Asian Financial Cooperation Association has strengthened exchanges
among financial institutions and improved financial resource integration. The Belt and Road Inter-
Bank Regular Cooperation Mechanism has worked continuously to improve cooperation among
financial institutions. Cooperation mechanisms, such as China-CEEC Interbank Association and
SCO Interbank Association, have been keeping making progress.
Inter-American  Development  Bank  and 
Fourth,  the  concept  of  green  development  takes  priority.  The  China  Society  for  Finance  and
Banking  and  City  of  London  jointly  released  the    BRI  Green  Investment  Principle  to  promote
green development along the Belt and Road. Nearly 20 financial institutions from 10 countries
and regions have signed up to the principle.
Fifth,  more  efforts  has  been  made  in  capacity  development.  The  IMF-China  Capacity
Development  Center,  established  last  year,  has  provided  training  courses  for  nearly  400
participants from about 40 Belt and Road countries on important topics in macro-economic and
financial governance, such as macro-economics, monetary and fiscal policy, financial regulation,
inclusive growth, and etc.
2. Considerations on Further Deepening Investment and Financing Cooperation under
BRI
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Going forward, to promote quality development of the Belt and Road, we will, in the principle of
joint  consultation,  contribution  and  shared  benefits,  continue  the  approach  of  engaging
enterprises in market-based operations as major players to achieve win-win outcomes, and build
an open and market-oriented investment and financing system.
First, we will follow the market principle and let market play a major role. To meet the need of
market-based operation in BRI, commercial funds will take up a major share in funding support
while concessional funds will be kept low. Government money will play a catalyst role to mobilize
funds from the private sector. The private sector will be the major player in investment whereas
government investment will serve as a lever to catalyze and guide private investment.
Second, a multiple of stakeholders can participate in the investment and financing system. While
the BRI originates from China, its opportunities and results belong to the world. The Belt and
Road  countries,  advanced  economies,  developing  countries,  international  financial  institutions,
international  financial  centers,  each  with  their  own  comparative  unique  advantages,  work
together in investment and financing for the BRI to complement one another’s strength, produce
synergy, and realize the principle of joint consultation, contribution and shared benefit.
Third, measures will be adopted to enhance debt and risk management to achieve sustainable
development.  It  is  necessary  to  have  an  objective  view  of  the  debt  problem  of  developing
countries. If debt expansion happens at the same time with improvement in infrastructure and
people’s livelihood, higher labour productivity, lower poverty rate and other indices of economic
development, it is conducive to long-term debt sustainability. On the one hand, investment and
financing decisions should fully consider the capital constraint of market entities and design a
reasonable financing structure and effective risk management; on the other hand, there should
be  full  consideration  of  overall  debt  affordability  of  a  country  and  enhanced  coordination  in
investment and financing to ensure debt sustainability.
Fourth, the opening-up of China’s financial sector can play a role in supporting and promoting
BRI development. In particular, the development and opening-up of local currency bond market
effectively mobilize long-term capital and mitigate currency mismatch risk. Increased use of local
currency helps reduce exchange rate and currency mismatch risks.
Fifth, the green development philosophy will be practiced. We welcome the endorsement and
signing of BRI Green Investment Principles by enterprises and financial institutions and hope to
see  more  green  projects  that  are  ecologically,  environmentally  and  climate  friendly  and  the
development and increased use of green financial instruments. At the same time, it is necessary
to  enhance  transparency  and  information  disclosure  of  data  on  carbon  emission,  emission
reduction, and etc.
Financial  connectivity  supports  the  smooth  and  sustainable  development  of  BRI,  and  quality
development of the BRI requires an open and market based investment and financing system. I
invite you to contribute your proposals and wisdom, participate in and promote investment and
financing cooperation for the Belt and Road. I wish the Forum a success.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
