   
Governor 
 
Title 
Date 
 
Event   
Venue  
 
  
: Mr. Tariq Bajwa 
: Keynote Address 
: March 18, 2019 
: Bloomberg Pakistan Economic Forum 
: Movenpick Hotel Karachi. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Assalam-o-Alaikum and Good morning! 
First of all, I would like to thank the organizers for inviting me to this forum. I’m 
pleased to have the opportunity to address you today. 
As you are all aware, Pakistan’s economy is going through a phase of transition.  
On the one hand, stabilization policies are in place to  ensure a stable  macroeconomic 
environment  which  is  vital  for  economic  development;  and  on  the  other,  the 
government is pursuing wide-ranging reforms to improve the ease of doing business in 
the country and minimize the cost of stabilization measures 
After  experiencing  a  spell  of  rising  GDP  growth  between  FY14  and  FY17, 
Pakistan’s economy is set for a calibrated moderation.  This is a result of the high fiscal 
and CAD which was registered in FY 18. Unless we are able to grapple the three core 
macroeconomic  issues  i.e.  low  savings,  low  revenue  generation  and  high  trade  gap, 
sustainable high growth will continue to be a challenge.   
 Page 1 of 9 
The twin objectives of macroeconomic policies are growth and stability. With the 
twin deficit moving to unsustainable territory, stability became a priority over growth. 
In view of the pressures building in the economy we had begun to take policy 
measures. In December 2017, there was an adjustment in the exchange rate.  A month 
later, SBP’s Monetary Policy Committee initiated the tightening cycle, which to date has 
resulted  in a  cumulative  upward  revision  of  450  basis  points  in  the  policy  rate  i.e.  to 
10.25  percent.    And  the  Rupee  has  moved  31%  against  the  dollar  during  the  same 
period.  
However, it has been hard to shift the focus of fiscal policy.  While the economic 
growth is slowing down - which in turn is hurting the revenue growth - many of the 
government’s  expenditures  are  non-discretionary  in  nature,  especially  debt  servicing, 
and increase in defense expenditure under the existing tension with India. On the other 
hand, Government receipts both tax and non-tax are below target. Therefore, the deficit 
in the fiscal accounts has persisted at a high level. The need for taking the tax to GDP 
ratio  to  atleast  15%  cannot  be  overemphasized.  Without  this  a  primary  and  revenue 
surplus will be a mirage.   
On the external front, the foremost step required is to arrange external funding to 
meet the financing gap. You are all well aware of the government’s efforts in this regard 
to arrange timely inflows from China, Saudi Arabia, UAE and other friendly countries, 
alongside the finalization of deferred oil payment arrangements from Saudi Arabia. In 
addition, the most encouraging aspect is the investment commitments that our friendly 
countries have recently made.  Certainly, these have given the country some  cushion to 
withstand  external  headwinds,  and  also  bode  well  for  growth  and  employment 
opportunities.   
As for the IMF, the government is continuously negotiating to get a program that 
can avoid a hard landing for the economy. There is a general agreement regarding the 
 Page 2 of 9 
policy  direction  between  us  and  the  IMF;  the  differences  are  only  on  the  timing  and 
pace of stabilization policies.  
In  the  meantime,  we  have  already  laid  the  foundations  of  a  homegrown 
stabilization program, which hopefully would deliver good results. As I’ve mentioned 
before,  tight  monetary  policy  is  in place,  and  the government  is  committed  to reduce 
fiscal  deficit.  Importantly,  the  focus  is  on  narrowing  external  imbalances  to  a 
sustainable level by allowing greater exchange rate flexibility and incentivizing savings 
in the economy.  Finally, the government has been pursuing wide-ranging reforms to 
improve the investment climate in the country.  
The  policy  mix  has  already  started  to  bring  the  desired  results  in  the  external 
front. The current account deficit has declined by 22.6 percent on a YoY basis during the 
first eight months of  FY19 and was only $  356 mio in Feb 2019. It is likely to narrow 
further  on  the  back  of  a  deceleration  in  imports  of  goods  and  services  and    robust 
workers’ remittances. FX  reserves are also expected to improve further in the coming 
months. Taken together, these favorable developments have helped reduce the level of 
uncertainty  in  the  domestic  FX  market.  Furthermore,  the  early-harvest  CPEC  projects 
aimed at eliminating structural bottlenecks in the economy are near completion, and the 
next  stage  of  the  corridor  pertaining  to  Special  Economic  Zones,  agricultural 
advancement and technology upgradation is about to begin. Thus, the overall business 
environment in the country stands ready to experience significant improvement in the 
next few years.  
Like any stabilization exercise, the economy must brace for an initial slowdown 
before  it  gets  back  on  the  recovery  track.  I  understand  that  raw  material  costs  for 
businesses have moved up because of higher oil prices and exchange rate depreciation, 
and financing cost has also escalated. At the same time, prices of consumer goods have 
also  increased  as  the  year-on-year  CPI  inflation  for  February  2019  has  reached  8.2 
percent,  with  Jul-Feb  average  inflation  at  6.5  percent.    However,  it  is  encouraging  to 
 Page 3 of 9 
note  that  the  burden  of  this  rising  inflation  was  considerably  lower  for  low  income 
segment of the society as the food inflation remained considerably low. Going forward, 
average CPI inflation for FY19 is likely to fall in the range of 6.5 to 7.5 percent. Having 
said this, let me say that these are short-term challenges, and I hope that our economy’s 
inherent resilience will meet these challenges successfully.   
 Even  during  this  stabilization  period,  we  are  trying  to  protect  our  export-
oriented businesses.  Importantly, the mark up rates on the export finance scheme (EFS) 
and long-term financing facility (LTFF) have been left unchanged to keep incentivizing 
the export-oriented sectors of the economy. Currently, the EFF and LTFF rates are at ten 
years’  low.    To  further  incentivize  the  financing  under  EFS,  the  rates  are  linked  with 
performance, wherein lower rates are charged from exporters who achieve higher level 
of export performance. Similarly, the market-driven PKR depreciation has allowed the 
domestic goods and services to compete more favorably in the international markets.  
While  there  are  challenges  in  the  Pakistan’s  economy,  there  are  opportunities 
also. The correction in the exchange rate shall make production in many sectors more 
competitive and encourage new ventures in import substitution. Let me assure you that 
State  Bank  will  continue  to  provide,  through  its  regulatory  and  policy  initiatives,  a 
conducive  financial  system  that  is  able  to  contribute  in  the  growth  of  Pakistani 
businesses  through  the  provision  of  adequate  banking  facilities.  Furthermore,  our 
banking  industry  shall  also  play  an  effective  role  when  it  comes  to  financial 
intermediation.  In  particular,  beyond  the  encouraging  growth  in  private  sector  credit 
numbers,  banks  are  now  being  asked  to  extend  their  services  to  the  underserved, 
unbanked and  disadvantaged segments as well. I appreciate that the government has 
offered  a  lower  tax  rate  of  20  percent  to  the  banks  on  their  income  derived  from 
incremental financing to the SME, Agriculture, and low cost housing borrowers (via the 
Finance Supplementary [Second Amendment] Act, 2019). As I have emphasized before 
 Page 4 of 9 
at other forums, the State Bank’s key focus is on three priority sectors,  namely SMEs, 
Agriculture,  and  Low  Cost  Housing,  with  financial  inclusion  and  Islamic  Banking  as 
cross cutting themes.  
Let me first expand on SMEs. The SME sector makes a prominent contribution 
towards  the  country’s  GDP,  exports  and  generation  of  employment  opportunities.  In 
this  context,  SBP  had  launched  a  Policy  for  Promotion  of  SME  Finance  in  December 
2017, aimed at enhancing SME access to finance by addressing the key challenges faced 
by  the  sector.  There  are  nine  key  pillars of the  SME  Finance  Policy,  which  include  (i) 
improving  the  regulatory  framework,  (ii)  upscaling  of  micro  finance  banks,  (iii)  risk 
mitigation  strategy,  (iv)  simplified  procedures  for  SME  financing,  (v)  program  based 
lending  &  value  chain  financing,  (vi)  capacity  building  &  awareness  creation,  (vii) 
handholding  of  SMEs,  (viii)  leveraging  technology  and  (ix)  simplification  of  taxation 
regime.  The  detailed  policy  is  available  on  SBP’s  website,  and  I  would  simply 
encourage those of you who have an interest to review it there at your convenience. It is 
encouraging  to  note  that  SME  Financing  of  banks  has,  for  the  first  time,  crossed  the 
nominal  milestone  of  Rs.  500  billion,  as  of  December  2018.  The  target  that  has  been 
given  to  the  commercial  banks  is  that  by  2020  SME  credit  should  be  equal  to  17%  of 
their lending.  
Let  me  add  that  State  Bank  is  keeping  close  coordination  with  federal  and 
provincial governments as well as the Chamber of Commerce & SME Associations for 
timely  implementation  of  all  the  initiatives  identified  under  this  policy.  Moreover, 
under  the  enhanced  National  Financial  Inclusion  Strategy  approved  by  the  Prime 
Minister as part of the government’s 100 days agenda, some immediate measures that 
need to be taken for SME sector development have also been identified. These measures 
include strengthening of specialized banking institutions and SMEDA. It also includes 
formation of a National SME policy on a fast track basis.  
 Page 5 of 9 
SBP  is  also  offering  concessional  refinance  facilities,  like  the  Refinance  Scheme 
for  Working  Capital  financing  for  Small and  Low-end  Medium Enterprises.  The  end-
user  markup  rate  on  such  facilities  is  6  percent.  The  Refinance  and  Credit  Guarantee 
Scheme  for  Women  Entrepreneurs  in  Underserved  areas  is  even  more  attractive  at  5 
percent end-user rate, with up to 60 percent risk coverage facility.  
Our second priority  area is the agriculture sector, which contributes around 19 
percent to GDP, 20 percent to overall export of the country and, importantly, employs 
around  38  percent  of  the  labor  force.  SBP  has  been  proactively  promoting  credit  to 
agriculture  sectors,  primarily  through  the  enhancement  in  production  loans  to  small 
farmers to improve their productivity. I am pleased to share that banks have disbursed 
Rs. 606.1 billion up to January 2019, which is around 50 % of the total assigned target of 
Rs.  1,250  billion  for  FY19.  Moreover,  the  number  of  outstanding  borrowers  has  also 
increased to 3.92 million as of end-January 2019 from 3.50 million a year earlier, with a 
growth  of  12  percent.  Going  forward,  I  believe  there  is  a  need  to  develop  stronger 
linkages  between  the  agriculture  sector  and  SME/large-scale  processing  and 
manufacturing  sectors.  This  would  help  achieve  the  dual  objective  of  making  the 
country  self-sufficient  in  terms  of  industrial  raw  material,  while  also  providing 
incentives to farmers to grow non-traditional high value crops. 
Finally,  I  will  move  to  the  third  priority  area,  i.e.  low-cost  housing  finance. 
Pakistan is facing a shortage of 10 million housing units and this number is growing. 
This  basic  human  need  is  felt  more  profoundly  at  the  bottom-of-the-pyramid 
comprising  of  the  poor  and  financially  under-served  segments  of  the  society.  To  this 
end, SBP has undertaken various initiatives to promote and develop housing finance in 
Pakistan.  Key  initiatives  include  separate  Prudential  Regulations,  setting  up  of  the 
Pakistan  Mortgage  Refinance  Company,  capacity-building  measures,  and  creating  an 
enabling regulatory framework. 
 Page 6 of 9 
In  order to  address the  issue  of  affordability,  the  SBP  in  the  presence  of  Prime 
Minister  has  launched  a  low-cost  housing  finance  policy  last  week  that  encompasses 
important measures taken by the SBP including regulatory relaxations to banks/DFIs, 
as  well  as  a  subsidized  fixed  rate  financial  facility  for  low  cost  housing  for  special 
segments.  Firstly, to give you some examples of regulatory relaxations, the existing 0.5 
–  1.5  percent  general  reserve  requirement  against  classified  housing  finance  portfolio 
will not be applicable on low-cost housing finance. In addition, the Loan to Value ratio 
of 85:15 has been relaxed to 90:10 for low cost housing finance. Also, the bank or DFI’s 
exposure  in  low  cost  housing  is  not  to  be  included  for  calculating  the  real  estate 
exposure limit (i.e. 10percentof advances and investments). 
The Financing Facility for  Low  Cost Housing  for  Special Segments is a scheme 
designed to benefit widows, children of martyrs, special persons, transgender persons, 
and  persons  in  areas  severely  affected  by  terrorism.    Under  this  facility,  SBP  shall 
provide  refinance  against  subsidized  low-cost  housing  financing  extended  by  banks 
and DFIs. Among its salient features, the scheme will have a 5 percent borrower rate, 
including the bank’s spread of up to 4 percent. Loan amounts up to Rs. 2.7 million, for 
tenors up to 12.5 years, will be eligible, with up to 100 percent refinancing provided by 
SBP.  
Moreover,  SBP  will  also  assign  targets  for  housing  finance  to  banks.    It  is 
expected that introduction of targets will contribute in achieving the policy objective of 
increasing the housing finance portfolio from 1.7 percent currently to 6 percent of total 
private sector credit by December 2023. 
Now I move to the first cross-cutting theme that is financial inclusion. Financial 
inclusion  is  an  important  instrument  for  inclusive  economic  growth  and  therefore,  is 
also  a  high  priority  for  the  government.  We  all  know  that  majority  of  people  in  our 
country  fall  in  lower  income  groups  who  strive  each  day  to  make  their  ends  meet. 
Financial inclusion can empower these segments to not only meet their financial needs 
 Page 7 of 9 
but also improve their livelihoods through better financial management and investment 
in micro and small businesses.  
In this regard, the GoP has adopted the National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) as 
one of its priorities. The NFIS targets and time-line have been enhanced until 2023 from 
its earlier end-date of 2020. We now have an agenda set for us for the next 5 years and 
some ambitious targets to meet, through which we aim to enlarge the strategy’s scope 
and deepen its impact for the country’s socio economic growth.  
Besides promotion of digital payments, the strategy also aims to: 
a.  Enhance deposit to GDP ratio to 55%,   
b.  Promote SME Finance to 700,000 Small and Medium Enterprises, 
c.  Increase Agricultural Finance disbursements to Rs.1.8 trillion, and serve 6 
million farmers through digitalized solutions; and 
d.  Enhance share of Islamic Banking to 25 percent of the banking industry. 
Here  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  most  critical  difference  in  the  previous 
headline  targets  versus  the  new  targets  is  emphasis  on  usage  of  financial  services.  I 
believe  that  mere  account  opening  is  not  enough.  It  is  essential  that  we  permeate  a 
culture  of  using  digital  financial  services,  to  spur  activity  in  accounts.  Secondly,  we 
have  a  clear  priority  to  ensure  that  a  gender-segregated  target  for  account  usage  is 
incorporated as well. I am confident that  we can meet all of the targets, based on the 
progress  I  have  seen  so  far.  By  reaching  these  targets,  we  hope  to  create  at  least  3 
million new jobs, and additional exports of US$ 5.5 billion. 
The Government’s ownership in NFIS can also be determined by the fact that an 
NFIS Transformation Office will be established in the PM Office: 
a.  To  ensure  100%  digitalization  of  Govt.  payments,  along  with  providing 
necessary technical services to provincial government, so they can possess or 
identify the pool of expertise in this regard. 
b.  To act as Trouble-shooter in resolving Implementation Agencies issues. 
 Page 8 of 9 
Second  cross  cutting  theme  is  Islamic  finance.  Islamic  Banking  industry  now 
accounts  for  13.6  percent  of  the  country’s  overall  banking  system  in  terms  of  assets 
while in terms of deposits the share is 14.7 percent (as of September 30, 2018). The focus 
on Islamic Banking is not only a question of faith but an important plank to increase the 
savings rate. In a survey undertaken in 2015 over 78% of these surveyed had stated that 
if  they  have  access  to  Islamic  Banking  they  will  use  Islamic  banking.  This  is  the  vast 
segment of the populace that we want to tap by promoting Islamic Banking.  
Today  we  have  one  of  the  most  robust  Shariah  governance  framework  in  the 
world  in  place  that  is  regularly  revised  to  address  the  needs  of  this  evolving  and 
dynamic  industry.  To  address  the  needs  of  faith  sensitive  clients  Shariah  compliant 
alternatives  of  existing  refinance  schemes  have  been  introduced.    Our  policies  aim  at 
not only providing a level playing field for the Islamic Banks but also facilitate them.  
Why are these initiatives important? Because growth in Agriculture, SME and 
low cost housing can be a catalyst for the growth in the economy in a short period. 
Furthermore, growth in these areas would not be a burden on the current account 
and hence would not only be sustainable but also generate employment. 
Having highlighted the steps taken by the State Bank of Pakistan to further the 
agenda of sustainable and inclusive economic growth in the country. Furthermore, the 
central bank fully supports the agenda of the business community and is always open 
for  discussion  and  support.  I  remain  very  much  confident  that  the  new  policies  and 
programs  being  ushered  in  would  prove  conducive  to  our  economy  and  bring  about 
improvements in our economic development.  
Thank you for your time! 
  Page 9 of 9 
