Marzunisham Omar: Globalisation - contents and discontents
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Marzunisham  Omar,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  World  Bank  International  Conference  "Globalisation:
Contents and Discontents", Kuala Lumpur, 15 January 2019.
 Globalisation  has  contributed  to  the  world’s  unprecedented  economic  growth  and  prosperity.
Global output has increased more than six-fold in the past 50 years. A billion people have been
lifted from abject poverty in just one generation.
Although the gains from globalisation are vast and widely-acknowledged, its fruits have not been
equitably shared by all. The growing sense of discontent and injustice among the marginalised
have led to a retreat from globalisation in the recent period.
This  reminds  me  of  what  the  late  Kofi Annan  once  said:  “Globalisation  is  a  fact  of  life.  But  I
believe we have underestimated its fragility”.
Globalisation has, and will always, exist in a tension. The challenge is finding the right balance
between  various,  and  often  contrary,  objectives.  The  retreat  from  global  integration  and
multilateralism today serves as a wake-up call for us to reflect on the realities of globalisation, to
re-examine our policy choices and to recalibrate our way forward.
With  rapid  technological  advancements  becoming  an  increasingly  polarising  force,  the
sociopolitical and economic issues at hand are more pressing than ever. 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  today  to  the  World  Bank  International  Conference  on
‘Globalisation:  Contents  and  Discontents’.  Thank  you  to  the  World  Bank  for  giving  me  the
opportunity to say a few words.
This morning, in my brief remarks, I will touch on globalisation from three perspectives, namely
trade, financial and human capital.
Trade Globalisation
A key manifestation of globalisation is the exponential increase in international trade. Exports as a
share  of  global  output  have  tripled  since  the  1950s,  while  foreign  direct  investments  have
increased  seven-fold.  This  phenomenal  development  has  been  facilitated  by  economic
integration, technological advancements and the proliferation of trade agreements.
The benefits of globalisation of trade and investment have been experienced across the board –
economic  growth  and  productivity  have  accelerated;  businesses  have  greater  access  to
resources and markets; workers have broader job opportunities; and consumers have a greater
array of goods and services to choose from. Collectively, these gains have translated into the
unprecedented improvement in income across the world.
This is certainly true for Malaysia. We are no stranger to international trade, ever since the rise of
Malacca as an important global port more than 600 years ago. Despite accounting for only 0.2%
of the world’s land mass, Malaysia is currently the 25th largest trading nation in the world and a
key player in the global value chain. Our financial system is highly integrated with the international
markets. Malaysia’s economic and financial integration with the rest of the world has undoubtedly
contributed significantly to our economic progress in the last few decades.
And yet, there is increasingly growing pushback against globalisation, especially in the advanced
economies. This is driven primarily by the view that open trade has worsened income and wealth
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
inequalities. The recent work by Thomas Picketty as well as Branko Milanovic’s “elephant chart”
have  shown  how  income  inequality  has  worsened  in  the  recent  period.  In  2016,  the  top  1%
earned more than double the share of global income compared to the bottom 50%.
It  is  no  surprise  then  that  accusations  of  free  trade  causing  job  losses  and  disproportionate
depression of wages have shifted from economic textbooks to the forefront of policy discussions
today.  The  next  decade  promises  to  be  even  more  challenging,  with  rapid  technological
advancements  poised  to  accelerate  job  displacements  and  potentially  worsen  income
inequalities.
Malaysia  faces  this  challenge.  As  we  liberalised  our  economy  over  the  years,  there  were
industries and workers affected by rising competition. As our economy evolved, we moved away
from uncompetitive sectors while new opportunities opened up. Policies were implemented to
facilitate these industries’ transformation, while assisting the displaced workers. These include
enhancing  upskilling  programmes,  strengthening  social  safety  nets  and  ensuring  sustainable
fiscal redistribution.
There  are  legitimate  concerns  on  trade  liberalisation.  In  my  view,  the  solution  does  not  lie  in
retreating behind our own borders. Instead, it lies in upholding the rules of fair trade and in us
being  proactive  and  adaptive  in  assisting  those  who  have  been  adversely  affected  by
globalisation. It is also clear that it is no longer sufficient just to focus on pursuing strong growth.
We must also foster inclusive growth.
Financial Globalisation
Beyond international trade, financial globalisation has also expanded tremendously. Cumulative
global bond and equity market flows are now more than 80 times larger than that in the year 2000
and far exceeded trade flows.
There is no doubt that financial integration, if properly managed, can catalyse a more efficient
allocation of productive capital and know-how transfers, with the intended benefits.
However, financial globalisation has also been accompanied by highly-volatile short term portfolio
flows, which frequently led to major disruptions to emerging economies’ financial markets. At the
extreme,  global  financial  flows  can  lead  to  the  build-up  of  domestic  vulnerabilities,  such  as
currency mismatches, external indebtedness and broader financial imbalances. When financial
globalisation becomes in itself a source of shock, financial markets can be easily overwhelmed.
In Malaysia, two-way capital flows have increased by almost three-fold in the aftermath of the
Global Financial Crisis. Similar to other emerging economies, we have also experienced several
episodes of sharp capital flow reversals. Supported by firm macroeconomic fundamentals, our
deep and broad financial markets were able to intermediate these flows in an orderly manner.
The  experience  of  emerging  economies  in  dealing  with  capital  flow  volatility  underscores  the
need to always keep our “own house in order”. While this is necessary, it is not sufficient. Often,
we  have  seen  how  external  developments  that  are  beyond  our  control,  such  as  the  Taper
Tantrum  and  trade  tensions,  could  trigger  periods  of  sharp  capital  flow  volatility  in  emerging
economies with severe consequences. There are “innocent bystanders”. 
It  is  therefore  imperative  that  the  risks  arising  from  financial  openness  be  better  managed.
Similar  to  legitimate  concerns  on  trade  openness,  emerging  economies  also  have  legitimate
concerns on the negative effects of financial globalisation. More needs to be done to have, to
quote IMF’s Christine Lagarde, “safer capital flows”.
Allow me to put forward two areas for deliberation. First is on financial safety nets. In this regard, I
welcome efforts to strengthen regional and global financial safety nets. To this end, ASEAN+3
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries achieved a significant milestone under the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation when
the fund size was doubled to USD240 billion in 2014. Moving forward, an important consideration
is to bring the various bilateral swap arrangements and regional financial safety nets together
with the IMF’s safety net into a coherent framework that will enhance their complementarities and
thus,  effectiveness  in  supporting  emerging  economies  in  dealing  with  short  term  capital  flow
volatility.
Second is with respect to domestic policy space for emerging economies in dealing with capital
flows.  Clearly,  capital  flow  volatility  poses  considerable  challenges  to  emerging  economies’
policymakers in safeguarding financial and macroeconomic stability. While the global community
continues  to  debate  and  explore  possible  solutions  to  manage  spillovers  and  spillbacks  of
policies in advanced economies, for emerging economies, there is a need not just to preserve
existing  tools  available  to  us,  but  to  constantly  refresh  our  policy  toolkit  to  deal  with  the
multifaceted risks confronting our economies and to be flexible in implementing them.
Pragmatism is key. Policy configuration will need to be pragmatic and premised on the risk that
is being managed. Indeed, macroprudential policies have been found to be effective in managing
financial cycles and associated risks, such as excessive credit growth and asset price inflation.
Nevertheless, sizeable shifts in capital flows could cause disorderly financial market conditions
and excessive exchange rate movements. In pursuit of preserving stability, policymakers must
therefore be able to avail ourselves to a broad range of policy toolkit.
Globalisation of Human Capital
Lastly, I will briefly touch on what globalisation means for the average person in today’s economy.
Being skilled alone is no longer a guarantee of employment. With offshoring of jobs, workers are
now  competing  in  a  fluid  workplace,  against  a  global  workforce. A  job  that  is  available  locally
today can be effortlessly transferred to a different country tomorrow.
Essentially, the increasingly dynamic nature of work underscores the importance for workers to
constantly adapt, re-skill and up-skill. A global workforce also means that borders no longer limit
the search for preferred jobs. In fact, globally, 258 million people, almost the size of Indonesia’s
entire population, are living in a country that is not of their origin.
Another aspect is the intensification of globalisation of information. Technology has brought the
world into the palm of our hands. Last year, 3 in every 4 persons were active on a social media
platform. In fact, if Facebook were a country, with 1.5 billion active users, it would be the largest
country in the world today. In the span of a decade, social media has become a bona fide global
marketplace, marketing tool, recruitment platform and social scene.
All  this  points  to  the  double-edged  nature  of  globalisation:  While  it  may  have  brought  people
closer  together,  it  also  introduces  the  challenge  of  promoting  greater  appreciation  of  cultural,
ideological and sociopolitical diversity.
Conclusion
Globalisation,  once  envisioned  to  be  a  beacon  of  unity,  has  fueled  increasing  polarisation  in
recent years.
Let’s remind ourselves that in this globalised world, it is important for the contented to appreciate
the struggles of the discontented. And, for the discontented to not lose sight of the potential that
globalisation holds. And for all of us, to remember – that 75 years after Bretton Woods – the
creation  of  a  safe,  fair  and  mutually  beneficial  global  system  is  still  not  an  easy  pursuit.  It  is,
nonetheless, a necessary one.
Once again, I would like to welcome everyone to Sasana Kijang. The World Bank, a product of
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Bretton Woods, along with the IMF and WTO, has brought to Malaysia an amazing gathering of
thought  leaders  and  experts  on  globalisation  from  all  over  the  world.  The  next  two  days  will
indeed be a fine example of globalisation in action.
Let  me  end  with  a  passage  from  John  Maynard  Keynes  which  I  think  is  appropriate  for  the
occasion.
“Yet the new economic modes toward which we are blundering are, in essence of their nature,
experiments. We have no clear idea laid up in our minds beforehand of exactly what we want.
We shall discover it as we move along and we shall have to mould our material in accordance
with our experience. Now for this process bold, free and remorseless criticism is a sine qua non
of ultimate success. We need the collaboration of all the bright spirits of the age.” 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
