Ravi Menon: Can the three musketeers click? Finance, technology,
trust
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Bank
of France Lecture, Paris, 14 May 2019.
Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor, Banque de France,
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
 I thank Banque de France for the opportunity to share my thoughts at this Lecture.
Both  France  and  Singapore  are  mature  economies,  enjoying  a  high  per  capita  income  but
reaching the limits of growth through increases in factor inputs. 
If  we  are  to  continue  growing  and  enrich  the  lives  of  our  citizens,  it  must  be  through
innovation.
And if we are to spread the benefits of growth, innovation must be pervasive and not the
exclusive preserve of the talented or well-endowed.
Innovation is not a zero-sum game.  It thrives on diversity, collaboration, and openness.
There is much we can learn from each other. 
France  and  Singapore  have  been  deepening  collaboration  in  areas  such  as  finance,
science, and technology.
2018 was designated as the France-Singapore Year of Innovation. 
Today, I want to focus on innovation in financial services.  Globally, the financial industry is facing
slower economic growth, tighter regulation, and keener competition. 
To overcome these headwinds and contribute to the broader economy, the industry needs to
harness technology, foster innovation, and transform itself. 
But how to do this, while maintaining the single most important commodity that underpins
financial institutions – trust.
As  Stephen  Covey  said: “Strength  lies  in  differences,  not  in  similarities”.  This  principle  is
embodied in the French novel “The Three Musketeers” by Alexandre Dumas.
Set in the 17th century, the novel recounts the journey of D’Artagnan, who left for Paris to
join the Musketeers of the Guard, and how he overcomes all adversities.
Together with him are three musketeers with contrasting personalities:
Athos who is intelligent;
Porthos who is adventurous; and
Aramis who is true and faithful.
But together they form a well-balanced trio that supports D’Artagnan on his journey.
The  three  musketeers  today  are  Finance,  Technology,  and  Trust,  corresponding  to  Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis.  Society is D’Artagnan. 
Can the three modern musketeers work together to support Society? 
Can they complement one another?  Can they click?
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finance – the Astute Musketeer Losing Appeal 
Let me introduce the first musketeer – Finance.
Like Athos, Finance is wise but can be complicated, and to some extent, mysterious and non-
accessible to many people.  As a result, Finance – at least in its traditional form – is losing its
appeal.
Consumers find that banks’ processes are too cumbersome to navigate.
They are increasingly looking to technology firms for their needs.
Some of them are even losing trust in the ability of banks to act in their interest.
Bill Gates once said: “People need banking, not banks”.  It is a reminder that, to survive, Finance
needs to be intuitive, innovative and customer-centric.
Technology – the Musketeer who can Transform Finance
This is where the second musketeer – Technology – comes in.
Technology is akin to Porthos, the fearless musketeer who is eager to try new ways for a better
future.  In a similar vein, Technology presents us opportunities to revitalise Finance:
the opportunity to enhance customer experience;
the opportunity to strengthen risk management; and
the opportunity to improve cost efficiency.
Let me elaborate on each of these opportunities.
First, enhancing customer experience.  This has become a critical success factor in many
industries, including finance.  Why?
Basically, technology firms have reshaped the way businesses interact with customers.
They have empowered customers and set higher bars for customer satisfaction.
Whether  they  are  established  Big  Tech  firms  or  small  FinTech  start-ups,  they  pose  a
competitive challenge to financial institutions.
If  I  have  to  name  one  thing  these  technology  firms  do  very  well,  much  better  than  financial
institutions, it would be that they are obsessively customer-centric.
Tech  firms  embed  themselves  in  the  customer  journey  and  use  data  analytics  to  deeply
understand customer needs.
They then provide end-to-end solutions, often customised to individual circumstances.
They have agile IT systems, efficient processes, and a culture that emphasises speed.
Essentially,  tech  firms  think  of  themselves  not  as  being  in  a  particular  industry,  but  as
platforms, upon which they provide access to the services their customers need.
Traditional banks tend to be largely product-centric. 
The credit card division tries to sell you unsecured credit, the wealth management division
tries to sell you mutual funds, the lending division tries to sell you a mortgage. 
They start with the product and try to persuade the customer why their product is good for
him.
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Many banks do not have a complete picture of their customers.
They are weighed down by legacy IT systems and bureaucratic processes.
But several banks are stepping up to the challenge.  Athos is learning from Porthos.
Banks  are  investing  heavily  in  technology  to  optimise  their  operations  and  enhance  their
systems.
They are collaborating with technology firms to accelerate the pace of innovation.
They are becoming more customer-centric.
These  banks  are  using  technology  to  provide customised solutions, complete solutions,  and
seamless solutions.
First, customised solutions to suit the individual needs and characteristics of the customer.
Some banks are experimenting with personalised products and services, not just based on what
the customer asks for but by anticipating what the customer might need.
Commonwealth  Bank  of  Australia’s  mobile  app  is  using  behavioural  science  to  provide
customers with financial management advice based on their spending patterns and financial
goals.
Some banks are offering personalised interactions at every customer touchpoint.
Royal Bank of Canada has enabled its customers to pay their bills on the mobile app via
speech and voice recognition.
Second, complete solutions that are based on the total picture of the customer.
Today’s customers are more sophisticated and want holistic solutions.
In  a  survey  of  10,000  tech-savvy  customers,  Accenture  found  that  80%  of  them  want
integrated solutions that address both their financial and non-financial needs.
Financial needs are really driven by non-financial desires. People do not desire a housing
loan or a fire insurance policy.  People desire a house.
To provide complete, holistic solutions, you need comprehensive customer data and you need a
deep understanding of the customer journey.
T h e customer  data that  most  banks  have  are  simply  not  sufficient  to  develop  a  good
understanding of the financial situation or needs of their customers.
Customers  have  multiple  relationships,  with  deposits  and  loans,  investments,  insurance
policies, and retirement plans, spread across many financial institutions.
How  many  financial  institutions  advising  a  customer  have  a  complete  picture  of  the
customer’s balance sheet – all his assets and liabilities?
Some  banks  have  started  to  offer  aggregator  services  which  consolidate  financial  information
such as bank accounts, credit cards, loans, and investments from all the financial institutions
serving their customers.
This allows financial institutions to provide holistic financial planning.
BBVA  provides  its  corporate  customers  with  a  consolidated  view  of  all  their  financial
information from about 90 financial institutions.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Next, understanding the customer journey.
Some  banks  have  begun  to  offer  their  corporate  customers  complete,  end-to-end  solutions,
based on a keen understanding of their customers’ work processes.
United Overseas Bank in Singapore provides its corporate customers an integrated digital
platform that enables the customer to:
generate purchase orders and invoices with a few clicks;
streamline its payroll process; and
get up-to-date views of its financials.    
Some banks are positioning themselves as partners with their customers on their life journey,
integrating their financial and non-financial needs.
DBS Bank in Singapore provides its customers looking to buy a car an online portal that
enables them to calculate their budget, find an affordable car, connect with the seller, get a
car loan, and finally purchase a car insurance.
Third,  banks  are  using  technology  to  provide seamless solutions.    This  means  resolving
bottlenecks and providing customers with a frictionless experience.
This means using technology to resolve bottlenecks in processes to provide customers with a
frictionless experience.
Banks such as BBVA, Mitsubishi UFJ, and BNP Paribas are using blockchain technology for
syndicated loans.
It improves efficiency.  
Each  step  of  the  loan  process,  from  credit  underwriting  to  credit  administration,  is
documented in the distributed ledger, thereby eliminating the need for duplicative back
office processing. 
The loan process is shortened from about two weeks to two days.
It also improves trust. 
Every record in the distributed ledger has a user code and time stamp. 
This creates an audit trail, leading to higher level of trust among the participants.
Let me share two initiatives from the Singapore financial sector, which show that achieving a
seamless  customer  experience  often  requires collaboration  across 
institutions a n d inter-
operability across systems.
The two key ingredients for a digital transaction are identity authentication and secure payments. 
The Singapore government worked closely with the industry to make the customer experience
seamless in these two areas. 
First, seamless identity authentication through MyInfo.
MyInfo is a government digital service that enables Singapore residents to authorise third-
parties to access their personal data residing across different government agencies through
APIs.
This means that, with the consent of the customer, banks can use the MyInfo service for
more efficient KYC using government-verified personal data.
I  can  now  open  a  bank  account  or  obtain  a  credit  card  –  online  and  instantly  –  when  I  give
consent to my bank to access my data through MyInfo.
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Customers do not need to go through the tedious process of filling up forms and providing
hardcopy  documents  to  banks  for  verification.   And  they  certainly  don’t  need  to  go  to  the
bank branch.
Banks benefit from higher productivity and better risk management.
Second, secure and seamless payments through PayNow.
PayNow was jointly developed by MAS and the banking industry.
It enables individuals and businesses to transfer funds using just the personal ID number or
mobile phone number or unique entity number of their recipients.
It operates 24-by-7 and funds can be transferred directly from one bank account to another
in real-time.
I can now send money to my friend in just three clicks on my smart phone – all I need to
know is his mobile number.
Business users of PayNow can generate a QR code containing their unique entity number.
This means I can now pay my utilities provider, telephone company, or plumber by simply
scanning their QR code using my smart phone and keying in the amount to be transferred.
Let  me  now  move  on  to  the  second  way  in  which  Technology  can  benefit  Finance  –
strengthening risk management.
Risk management and compliance have become major cost drivers in financial institutions since
the global financial crisis. 
Processes have become slower and more cumbersome.
The answer does not lie in lowering regulatory requirements or risk management standards. 
We know from 2008 what that can lead to.
Instead,  financial  institutions  should  harness  technology  to  make  risk  management  and
compliance more efficient and effective.
Technology can improve the efficiency of risk management.
JP Morgan is using machine learning to review loan contracts.  This reduces the review time
from 360,000 man-hours to seconds.  It also minimises human errors.
OCBC Bank in Singapore is using machine learning to monitor customer transactions real-
time and across multiple channels.  This allows the bank to identify fraudulent fund transfers
and take more timely actions to recover the funds.
Technology  can  make  risk  management  less  passive  and  more  predictive  by  harnessing  the
informational value of data.
Ping An Insurance has developed a system that detects whether a banking customer is lying
about the reason for borrowing money.
It  is  based  on  subtle  changes  in  customers’  facial  expressions,  with  the  analytical
algorithm based on 30,000 videos of real lending cases.
According to Ping An, this has helped to reduce credit losses by 60%. 
Blackrock and Rhodium are using data analytics to assess the risks of climate change to
assets such as mortgage backed securities under different scenarios.
We have not tapped on the full potential of new technologies.
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Research by IBM has found that quantum computing algorithms can compute the risk of an
investment portfolio near real-time. 
This is a significant reduction from the present Monte Carlo simulation approach which can
take days.
The third big opportunity that Technology offers Finance is improving cost-efficiency.
This  is  particularly  relevant  for  banks  –  saddled  with  the  high  costs  of  maintaining  extensive
branch networks and deterred from entering new markets or reaching underserved segments of
the population because the cost of setting up branches is too high.
Technology is changing this in two ways.
First, the use of digital platforms to quickly and cheaply acquire customers.
The ubiquity of the Internet combined with the proliferation of the smart phone has helped to
slash the cost of acquiring a customer.
According to research by Oliver Wyman, it costs about $30 to acquire an online banking
customer compared to $150 using offline channels.
Basically, the smart phone is replacing the bank branch.
Non-bank players have led the way in digital banking.
In the UK, we have seen a proliferation of so-called “neo-banks” – basically non-bank start-ups
who have obtained licenses to do banking business without physical branches.
Starling has opened 520,000 personal accounts since getting a banking license in 2016.
Monzo has opened 1.6 million accounts, adding 30,000 each week.
Monzo’s customers can connect their accounts to 600 different apps and services, and
create rules to integrate banking into their daily lives. 
For example, users can create a rule that automatically logs calories to the health app
on their mobile phone whenever they purchase coffee. 
But banks can also play the same game, and more of them are doing it.
DBS  Bank  from  Singapore  launched  a  “digi-bank”  in  India  two  years  ago  and  has  already
garnered 2.5 million customers.
Digibank is using artificial intelligence to learn customers’ spending habits and will prompt
them if they are overspending, or provide relevant marketing offers such as coffee vouchers
for a caffeine-lover.
Maybe  we  should  combine  the  DBS  Bank  app  and  the  Monzo  app  to  achieve  a  more
balanced intake of coffee!
United Overseas Bank from Singapore has just launched in Thailand a digital-only bank TMRW
(pronounced “tomorrow”) aimed at millennials.
It comes complete with an “engagement lab” using behavioural insights to study customer’s
banking habits and needs.
TMRW’s mobile app features a game designed to encourage their customers to save more.
In  Hong  Kong,  the  regulator  has  given  out  licenses  to  8  virtual  banks  to  acquire  and  deliver
banking services through the Internet.
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
The take-up numbers are interesting; they indicate the competition emerging in the space of
digital banking.
Out of the 8 virtual banks, 5 are non-banks but 3 are backed by banks.
But the second and potentially more powerful way in which technology is helping to drive down
the  cost  of  financial  intermediation  is  through partnerships between  financial  institutions  and
FinTech firms.
Soc-Gén is working with TagPay to provide mobile banking in Africa through a cloud-based
platform that is compatible with any mobile phone.
AXA  is  working  with  MicroEnsure  to  offer  simple  and  affordable  insurance  products  to
customers across Asia and Africa.
By helping to reduce customer acquisition costs, these collaborations have helped to serve a
larger social purpose – enhancing financial inclusion and expanding opportunity.  But there is a
lot more we need to do.
There are about 1.7 billion adults globally who are unbanked.
In the ten ASEAN countries of Southeast Asia, half the adult population is unbanked.
This is a shame.  The ASEAN countries have a burgeoning middle class and increasingly
modern  infrastructure,  yet  so  many  do  not  have  access  to  a  bank  account,  secure  and
affordable payments, or insurance protection.
Banks and insurers face high costs in reaching out to customers in remote areas.
We need to take collaboration between financial institutions and FinTech firms to a much broader
level – through platforms for innovation and inclusion.
This  is  why  the  MAS,  the  ASEAN  Bankers  Association,  and  the  World  Bank’s  International
Finance Corporation have teamed up to establish the ASEAN Financial Innovation Network, or
AFIN in short.
AFIN  aims  to  bring  banks  and  FinTech  firms  from  across  the  world  to  develop  innovative
solutions to penetrate hard-to-reach markets in a cost efficient way.
Last  year,  AFIN  launched  the  API  eXchange  –  the  world’s  first  cross-border,  open
architecture platform to enhance financial inclusion.
The API eXchange is a cloud-based platform that does two things:
It is a marketplace, enabling financial institutions to discover and connect with FinTech
partners through APIs on a globally curated platform.
It  also  provides  a sandbox environment  for  financial  institutions  and  FinTech  firms  to
design and test cross-border solutions.
I have spoken so far of how the two musketeers – Finance and Technology – can and must
come together to bring value and convenience to customers.  But for consumers to be part of
this ecosystem, there needs to be Trust – the third musketeer.
Trust – the Musketeer who Binds Consumers to Finance
Trust is similar to Aramis, the third musketeer who is faithful and values friendship.
Trust is a key attribute for the success of a financial ecosystem.
It is a shared responsibility among all the actors in the ecosystem.
Banks in particular must be trustworthy so that customers have faith that their money and
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
data are safe with them.
As Finance adopts more Technology, it must pay close attention to three risks, so as to maintain
the Trust of consumers.
First, cyber risk.
As  more  financial  services  move  online  and  collaboration  among  banks  and  technology
companies  becomes  more  pervasive,  a  growing  risk  that  financial  institutions  are  facing  is  in
cyber space.
The frequency, scale, and complexity of cyber-attacks are mounting.
Attackers can carry out sophisticated and prolonged attacks that can be difficult to identify
and defend against.
According to a study by FireEye, the median time it takes to detect a cyber intrusion is 78
days.
We need some common risk management standards in cyber defence.
The  risk  management  systems  in  financial  institutions  and  regulatory  and  supervisory
frameworks for cyber resilience are uneven and still evolving. 
There is no international equivalent of the Basel Capital Accord in cyber risk management.
But given the clear and present danger that cyber risk poses, MAS has put in place a mix of
mandatory requirements and best practice guidelines in this area.
Given their role as repositories of public monies and conduits for payments, banks in particular
must meet higher cyber security standards.  MAS expects banks to:
limit  unscheduled  system  downtime  of  their  critical  IT  systems  to  not  more  than  4  hours
within a year;
conduct  due  diligence  on  third-party  service  providers’  controls  to  safeguard  customer
information; and
report all significant cyber incidents to MAS within one hour.
But cyber risk management should go beyond banks.
The connectedness among participants in the financial system means that a cyber-attack
on one party can potentially escalate into a more systemic problem.
We need to level up the cyber resilience of all financial institutions, not necessarily to the
level of banks but at least to a basic level – what we call cyber hygiene.
Research  has  shown  that  the  majority  of  cyber  incidents  can  be  avoided  if  some  simple
cyber hygiene practices are adopted.
MAS  will  soon  issue  a  set  of  mandatory  requirements  on  cyber  hygiene  that  will  apply  to  all
financial institutions in Singapore.  They include basic things like:
securing administrative accounts;
controlling network access at the perimeter;
installing security patches promptly;
installing anti-virus software on their systems; and
implementing multi-factor authentication for users who access confidential information over
the Internet.
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
In short, if we don’t get cyber security right, financial institutions will be constrained in how much
they can leverage on technology.
The  second  area  financial  institutions  must  address  to  ensure  customer  confidence  is
information security risk.
Information security is not the same as cyber security.
Information  security  is  focused  on  protecting  data,  while  cyber  security  is  focused  on
protecting systems.
They are however closely related.
Data leaks can occur when a system is not properly secured.
In the financial ecosystem, information security risk is growing for two key reasons:
One, more data are becoming digitised.
The International Data Corporation has estimated that digital data will increase fivefold
from 2018 to 2025.
Two, as banks begin to collaborate with FinTech and BigTech players, customer data that
was traditionally within the inner sanctum of banks will increasingly be shared with third party
service providers.
Banks have to exercise care for the data they hold, as well as those that they have shared with
third parties. This means:
understanding at a granular level the data that are held, processed or shared;
assessing the criticality and sensitivity of all data sets;
putting in place targeted measures to safeguard data; and
taking swift recovery measures in the event of a data breach.
Besides their personal health data, people regard their personal financial data as most sensitive. 
Financial institutions have a particular responsibility to safeguard this data.
The  third  area  to  watch  closely  is risk  from  the  misuse  of  data  analytics  and  artificial
intelligence.
Data analytics and artificial intelligence can help to uncover patterns which we are unaware of
and to provide insights that we could not have gained from traditional analytical tools.
But  unless  there  is  public  trust  that  data  analytics  and  artificial  intelligence  will  be  used
responsibly,  financial  institutions  will  not  get  the  social  license  they  need  to  apply  these
technologies widely. 
To gain this trust, we must address four areas in data analytics and artificial intelligence:
Privacy of data.  How do we safeguard the confidentiality of personal data?
Explainability of results. How do we minimise the “black box” syndrome?
Accountability for decisions.  How can we hold humans ultimately responsible for decisions
made by self-learning machines?
Acceptability of outcomes.  How do we minimise unconscious bias, social exclusion, and
ethically unacceptable consequences?
MAS  has  co-created  with  the  financial  industry  in  Singapore  a  set  of  preliminary  principles  to
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
guide the responsible use of data analytics and artificial intelligence in financial services.
four  pillars  – fairness,  ethics,  accountability,  and
The  Principles  are  centred  on 
transparency.  Hence, the short-hand name FEAT Principles.
They  are  not  prescriptive  but  represent  an  industry  consensus  that  individual  financial
institutions  take  reference  from  when  formulating  their  own  data  governance  policies  and
practices.
We believe that the FEAT Principles will help to promote public confidence and trust in the
use of data analytics and artificial intelligence in our financial sector.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Technology and Finance must come together.  And they must do so in a manner that maintains
Trust.
Finance, Technology and Trust are like the three musketeers of old.
Like Athos, Finance allocates resources to those who need it.
Like Porthos, Technology represents the aspiration for Finance to innovate.
Like Aramis, Trust engenders confidence in Finance.
The motto of the three musketeers is: “Tous pour un, Un pour tous” – “One for all, All for one”.  
If Finance, Technology, and Trust can do the same, we can have innovation and dynamism
with safety and stability.
We can benefit not only the financial industry, but society at large.
We can raise productivity, expand opportunity, and enrich the lives of our people.
Thank you.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
