Luís Máximo dos Santos: Closing address - Bank of Portugal Legal
Seminar
Closing address by Mr Luís Máximo dos Santos, Vice-Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the
Bank of Portugal Legal Seminar, Lisbon, 3 December 2018.
 Allow  me  to  begin  my  closing  address  by  thanking  the  speakers  for  accepting  Banco  de
Portugal’s invitation. Their addresses have helped this seminar achieve its objective: to be a time
of reflection, at the highest level, on the reform of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) at a
critical time for the future of the European Union. 
Two words of thanks are due: to the Minister for Foreign Affairs for making time in his schedule to
share with us his stimulating reflections; and to Professor Jean-Victor Louis, who has honoured
us with his presence as keynote speaker. 
I have long admired Professor Jean-Victor Louis, whose work on European law – in particular on
the EMU and the external relations of the European Union – has inspired several generations of
scholars, impressed by its depth and clarity. Consulting his work has always been instrumental
in shining a light on the complex – and at times even somewhat tortuous – world of Community
law initially and then of European Union law, following the Maastricht treaty.  
In addition to his exceptional academic work, Professor Jean-Victor Louis has been a key player
in the development of the EMU as Head of the Legal Service of Banque Nationale de Belgique, a
post which he still holds today in an honorary capacity.  
On behalf of Banco de Portugal, thank you very much for being here.  
I would also like to thank all those who agreed to join this Seminar, on such a key issue for our
country and for the whole of Europe. 
Last but not least, I am grateful to all who, at Banco de Portugal, and in particular in the Legal
Services Department, have made this event a reality in a very short period of time.     
1.  The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  was  established  on  1  June  1998,  after  the  European
Council unanimously decided, on 2 May 1998, that 11 Member States, including Portugal, met
the requirements necessary to adopt the single currency on 1 January 1999. The ECB replaced
the European Monetary Institute (EMI), which had marked the beginning of the so-called second
stage of the EMU when it was created on 1 January 1994. 
This Seminar was also a way for Banco de Portugal to celebrate the twentieth anniversary both
of the ECB and of Banco de Portugal’s participation in the European System of Central Banks
(ESCB)  and  the  Legal  Committee  (known  as  LEGCO),  which  has  played  a  crucial  role  in
developing the EMU. 
On 7 July 1998, the ECB approved the Rules of Procedure, which laid down the establishment of
ESCB committees – composed of representatives of the ECB and of the national central bank of
each participating Member State – to assist in the work of the ESCB. The Legal Committee is
one such committee. 
The  committees  established  under  this  regulation  assist  in  the  work  of  the  decision-making
bodies  of  the  ECB,  specifically  the  Executive  Board  and  the  Governing  Council  and  are
composed  of  representatives  of  each  of  the  national  central  banks  and  the  ECB.  Different
committees  have  different  compositions,  depending  on  whether  matters  fall  within  the  field  of
competence of the Eurosystem, the ESCB or – since 2014 – the Single Supervisory Mechanism.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The establishment of these committees was the expression of a true conceptual system that
was behind the preparatory work conducted on the monetary pillar during stage three of EMU.
This  committee  structure  –  different  from  the  technical  committee  procedure  present  in  other
European decision-making bodies – invokes the idea of a participatory decision-making process
which  benefits  from  the  sharing  of  experience  and  know-how  among  national  central  banks,
under the aegis of the ECB.
The  ECB’s  Legal  Committee  is  a  genuine  example  of  the  identity  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the
ESCB. Taking over from the Working Group of Legal Experts, which operated under the EMI,
LEGCO is a committee with privileged insight due to its cross-cutting nature, whose assistance
is  invariably  requested  by  all  other  Eurosystem  committees,  the  Executive  Board  and  the
Governing Council of the ECB. 
This  is  also  the  reason  why,  20  years  after  its  creation,  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  this
committee acts as a repository that is a vital tool to understand and interpret developments in the
Eurosystem  and  the  ESCB,  and  will  certainly  be  called  upon  during  the  implementation  of
potential reforms.    
2. Regardless of one’s opinion on the merits of the European Monetary Union, the creation of the
ECB was a major historical landmark – which had a significant effect on Europe and each of its
countries  and  a  profound  impact  on  international  monetary  relations  and  consequently  on  the
economy and international politics.  
Several  generations  of  Banco  de  Portugal  employees  have  participated  in  the  construction  of
EMU at different times: first, during the technical negotiations on the Treaty of Maastricht; then,
during  the  implementation  of  the  three  stages  of  EMU,  and,  in  the  past  20  years,  in  the
performance of the tasks entrusted to Banco de Portugal by the European treaties, European
Union law and Portuguese law. 
This  work  was  and  remains  crucial  for  the  country,  having  already  produced  a  wealth  of
institutional experience that is renewed every day. 
By reflecting on how far we have come and how far we have to go in reforming the EMU, this
Seminar has also intended to pay tribute to all Banco de Portugal employees who over the years
have dedicated their efforts and knowledge to this mission. 
The work that led to the developments observed 20 years ago – which we are celebrating today –
was a pioneering effort undertaken by many with true idealism. Indeed, although the construction
of  monetary  unions  had  been  tried  in  the  past,  nothing  could  compare  to  the  ambition  and
complexity of building the European Monetary Union. 
The overall atmosphere over this historical period was marked by a clear sense of optimism and
a good deal of confidence on the part of the European Union and the countries that belonged to
the Union or wished to join it. Not that there were no problems, but there was a feeling that these
could be solved one way or another. 
In retrospect, these feelings may – undoubtedly – seem exaggerated. However, at the time, the
European  Union  –  composed  of  15  Member  States  following  the  1995  enlargement  –  was
cohesive  and  united,  firmly  believing  in  its  project,  and  willing  to  assimilate  and  achieve  a
balanced management of the divergences arising from its diversity. 
Nonetheless,  as  the  21st  century  progressed,  this  state  of  mind  gradually  disappeared,
culminating in a complete reversal in the past 10 years, following the global financial crisis.  
3. In response to the crisis, several measures were adopted to enhance the coordination of the
fiscal policies of the Member States (partly through purely intergovernmental instruments) and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  banking  union  project  was  launched.  Nevertheless,  six  years  after  its  launch,  the  project
remains incomplete both in terms of the so-called third pillar – the European Deposit Insurance
Scheme  –  and  as  regards  certain  aspects  that  are  essential  to  enhance  the  soundness  and
coherence of the Single Resolution Mechanism, notably in the crucial matter of the financing of
resolution measures and the consequences of winding-up institutions.  
In reality, as Peter Praet – member of the Executive Board of the ECB – mentioned a few days
ago,  “it  is  abnormal  that  the  supervision  responsibility  is  collective  but  the  consequences,  if
something goes wrong, go back to the national authorities.” 
4. As can be seen in the revealing title of Professor Jean-Victor Louis’ address, reforming the
EMU and the European Banking Union is a very difficult task. I would add that it is as difficult as it
is  necessary,  given  that  the  changes  that  have  been  introduced  so  far  –  although  generally
positive – are not enough to ensure the long-term sustainability of the EMU and to guarantee the
financial stability of both the Union and the countries that belong to it.    
There is no time to lose. We have the duty to prevent the next crisis from finding us in the current
situation, only halfway there and possibly having already exhausted a number of tools.  
The debate has long been underway and there is a need to refocus it around what really matters,
overcoming  non-existent  issues  that  only  lead  to  paralysis.  Indeed,  as  Professor  Jean-Victor
Louis  clearly  demonstrated,  in  a  view  shared  by  many,  establishing  a  relationship  of  priority
between reducing and sharing risks is a true argumentational fallacy on a number of levels. 
The  main  challenges  are  known:  to  complete  the  banking  union;  to  incorporate  the  European
Stability Mechanism into European law (overcoming its intergovernmental character); to find a
way of providing the EMU with a ‘fiscal capacity’; and to create a capital markets union are crucial
steps to enhancing the stability of the EMU. 
Divergences have been listed and possible paths have been identified. Now we must have the
courage  to  make  decisions.  But  we  must  also  be  aware  of  the  divisions  between  and  within
Member States and, for this reason, we must be realistic. What I mean by realism is having the
ability  to  implement  solutions  which  will effectively  address  the  problems  that  have  been
identified in the functioning of the EMU, but in a spirit of compromise and mutual understanding.  
The worst thing we could do would be to pretend we are reforming the EMU while leaving key
issues with no prospect of a solution. Notwithstanding the gradual approach that has historically
characterised the Union, we must take concrete steps to solve the imbalances that exist within
the Union. If we don’t, the EMU might even be jeopardised eventually. 
The EMU is not an end in itself. It was designed to contribute to improving the lives of EU citizens
and to strengthen the role of the European Union – and consequently of each EU Member State –
in the world. These are the key assumptions that, if realised, give it strength and legitimacy.  
Indeed, the EMU must not be perpetuated out of fear of the consequences of its failure. History
has shown that nothing sound and lasting is built on fear.
It  is  therefore  vital  that  the  reform  of  the  EMU  is  a  success.  Whatever  the  outcome  of  this
process, this period requires, and will continue to require, intense and difficult work by several
institutions – including Banco de Portugal – both in terms of ensuring policy choices and on a
strictly technical level. 
As  they  progress,  negotiations  on  the  reform  of  the  EMU  will  highlight  sensitive  legal  and
institutional issues, specifically on the appropriate distribution of power between the Union and
Member States and on the balance of powers between the various European institutions. This
should not surprise us, given that one of the objectives of the European integration process since
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the beginning has been to create an ‘economic community’ supported by a ‘community of law’,
which is how it has always seen itself.    
One of the objectives of this Seminar was to contribute to a better perception of this fact, an
objective which I believe has been fully achieved. 
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
