Yi Gang: Welcome address – 11th Lujiazui Forum
Welcome address by Mr Yi Gang, Governor of the People's Bank of China, at the 11th Lujiazui
Forum, Shanghai, 14 June 2019.
 Honorable Vice Premier Liu He, Secretary Li Qiang, Mr. Zhou Xiaochuan, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Vice  Premier  Liu  He  has  just  elaborated  in  his  speech  on  the  triangular  framework  in  the
economy  made  up  of  supply,  demand  and  the  financial  system.  He  has  underscored  the
importance  of  following  market-oriented  and  law-based  reform  approaches  and  drawing  on
international  practice  to  promote  the  healthy  development  of  the  stock  market,  particularly  the
STAR  Market.  Also  he  has  put  forward  requirements  on  accelerating  the  development  of
Shanghai as an international financial center, which are highly instructive as to what we should
do in the financial field to provide support. Next, in line with the theme for this forum “Accelerating
the International Financial Center Development and Promoting High Quality Economic Growth”, I
want to give my opinions from the following three aspects.
First, impressive progress has been achieved in the development of Shanghai as an international
financial center.
1.  The  financial  market  system  has  been  undergoing  improvement,  featuring  more  of  the
essential factors. So far, there have been all types of major financial markets in Shanghai, such
as  the  stock  market,  the  bond  market,  the  money  market,  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the
commercial paper market, the futures market, the gold market and the insurance market, with
trading volumes in quite a number of varieties ranking high globally.
2. The system of financial institutions has further grown so that the influence of Shanghai as a
financial center has risen significantly. In recent years, as a host of important financial institutions
or organizations have come to be based in Shanghai, such as the BRICS New Development
Bank,  the  Global Association  of  Central  Counterparties  (CCP12),  the  Cross-Border  Interbank
Payment  System  (CIPS),  the  China  Insurance  Investment  Fund,  and  the  National  Internet
Finance Association  of  China,  the  radiant  effect  and  influence  of  Shanghai’s  financial  industry
have  been  enhanced  remarkably. As  shown  by  the  latest  two  editions  of  the  Global  Financial
Centres  Index  (GFCI)  released  by  Z/Yen,  a  British  think-tank,  Shanghai  ranks  fifth  among  the
world’s financial hubs.
3. The progressive opening-up of the financial sector has contributed significantly to the city’s
international competitiveness. Shanghai has become home to a large number of foreign-funded
financial institutions in China. With the financial sector opening up wider and wider, the Shanghai-
Hong Kong Stock Connect, the Shanghai Gold Exchange international board, the Bond Connect
and  crude  oil  futures  have  been  introduced  successively;  the  interbank  bond  market,  foreign
exchange  market  and  money  market  have  been  opening  up  with  quickened  pace;  and  pilot
programs, such as overseas RMB investment and lending funds and cross-border exchange-
traded funds (ETFs), have been launched successfully. Shanghai has become one of the cities
in  the  world  where  financial  products  and  business  categories  are  most  diversified  and
concentrated.
innovation 
4. Financial reform and innovation have been pushed forward in an all-round way, with financial
business 
increasingly  gaining  momentum.  Shanghai  has  pioneered  many
fundamental measures in the  reform  and  opening-up  of  the  financial  sector. Among  others,  a
series of pilot financial reform measures taken in the Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone have been
replicated and applied nationwide.
Second,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC)  will  implement  resolutely  the  decisions  and
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
arrangements  of  the  Communist  Party  of  China  (CPC)  Central  Committee  and  the  State
Council to strongly support Shanghai accelerating the international financial center development.
In January 2019, to fully implement the important instructions that General Secretary Xi Jinping
had  given  during  his  inspection  of  Shanghai  last  November,  with  the  approval  of  the  State
Council,  the  PBC  issued  in  collaboration  with  eight  ministries  the  Action  Plan  for  Shanghai
International  Financial  Center  Development  (2018–2020),  which  sets  forth  key  tasks  and  the
roadmap for the undertaking. Going forward, the PBC will wholly support Shanghai’s endeavor to
complete the three major tasks entrusted by the CPC Central Committee in the new era. The
priorities are as follows.
1. We will support the establishment of an integrated RMB and foreign currency account system
in the new area of the Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone, and put into place a more convenient
system for the administration of cross-border funds.
2. We will continue to improve the interbank foreign exchange market and bond market, broaden
the spectrum of foreign exchange options products, expand market participants, and support the
development of “Silk Road” themed bonds.
3. We will support the cooperation between the Shanghai Gold Exchange (SGE) and the Chicago
Mercantile  Exchange  (CME),  and  the  launch  of  derivatives  based  on  the  Shanghai  Gold
Benchmark Price on the CME.
4.  We  will  support  the  establishment  of  representative  offices  by  international  financial
organizations,  and  the  establishment  of  subsidiaries  by  foreign-funded  financial  institutions  in
Shanghai.
5. We will support the establishment of a cross-region platform for financial cooperation in the
Yangtze River Delta region, enhance the connectivity of financial infrastructure, and promote the
integration of financial businesses across the region.
6. We will support the development of the “G60 Science and Technology Innovation Corridor”
driven by the building of Shanghai into a science and technology innovation center, promote the
application  of  Shanghai’s  financial  opening-up  innovative  policies  to  the  Corridor,  and  improve
financial services for sci-tech innovation enterprises.
7. We will support the Shanghai Commercial Paper Exchange expanding in the Yangtze River
Delta  region  the  use  of  commercial  papers  for  accounts  receivables,  and  launching  the  pilot
program of expanding the “Discount Connect” business to wider regions.
8. We will support the pilot program in Shanghai lifting the foreign ownership cap in securities
firms and fund management companies, and expanding the business scope for foreign-funded
financial institutions. We pledge full support for the development of the STAR Market.
9. We will further enhance the functions of the PBC Shanghai Head Office.
Third, the core of Shanghai international financial center development is to make Shanghai the
global center of RMB-denominated financial asset allocation and risk management .
During the visit to Shanghai in 2018, General Secretary Xi Jinping noted that Shanghai should
strive  to  strengthen  its  capacity  of  allocating  global  resources  in  an  effort  to  comprehensively
enhance the influence and competitiveness of Shanghai among cities in the world. Vice Premier
Liu He stressed in his speech just now that Shanghai international financial center development
should serve the overall picture of national strategy and national economic development, promote
Belt  and  Road  Initiative  and  accelerate  the  economic  integration  in  the  Yangtze  River  Delta.
Based on my working experience, I think Shanghai is bound to be an international financial center
based  on  RMB-denominated  assets.  Therefore,  efforts  will  be  focused  on  developing  the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
following “five centers” to further accelerate the development of Shanghai into an international
financial center based on RMB-denonminated asset management and financial market.
1. Developing Shanghai into a center of RMB-denominated financial asset allocation. With RMB-
denominated assets incorporated into MSCI Index, Bloomberg Barclay Global Aggregate Index
and other major equity and bond indexes widely used across the world, global asset managers,
passive and index-oriented ones in particular, will increase allocation of RMB-denominated equity
and  bond  assets.  Up  to  now,  over  60  central  banks  have  increased  their  holding  of  RMB
reserves,  which  encouraged  equity  and  bond  managers’  investment  in  RMB-denominated
assets.  This  requires  Shanghai  to  quicken  up  the  development  of  supporting  measures  for
financial market in trading, service and consultation to meet the demand of RMB-denominated
asset investors globally.
2. Developing Shanghai into an RMB-denominated financial asset risk management center. With
the  RMB  globalization  proceeding,  overseas  economic  entities  hold  more  and  more  RMB
positions  and  RMB  exchange  rate  becomes  increasingly  market-oriented.  As  a  result,  the
overseas  entities  will  face  market,  liquidity  and  other  risks  in  asset  allocation  and  fund
management, which produces the demand for risk management. Pricing and hedging are two
major aspects of risk management. For the first aspect, the financial market in Shanghai should
provide  accurate  product  pricing  and  continuous  trading  and  quotes  so  that  Shanghai  could
become a major asset pricing center in the world. Meanwhile, the depth of financial market and
market liquidity should be enhanced. For the second aspect, efforts should be made to improve
risk  hedging  tools,  promote  derivative  innovation  and  market  development,  actively  develop
derivative  products  and  orderly  enhance  convertibility  of  RMB  under  the  capital  account,  and
intensify the interaction between onshore and offshore financial markets.
3. Building Shanghai into a Fintech center. In the future, the growth point for global finance lies in
Fintech, which is also the focus of competition among international financial centers. Therefore,
we  should  attach  great  importance  to  Fintech  development.  With  the  development  of  science
and  technology  innovation  center  in  progress,  Shanghai  has  bright  prospects  in  Fintech
development. The PBC actively supports Shanghai to explore for correct methods and paths for
the  application  of  new  technologies,  such  as  artificial  intelligence,  big  data,  cloud  computing,
blockchain  and  e-commerce,  in  the  financial  field,  so  as  to  seize  the  commanding  heights  of
Fintech and promote in-depth integration of finance and technology.
4. Building Shanghai into a center of high-quality business environment. The development of an
international financial center is inseparable from a sound growth environment. Shanghai should
become  the  birthplace  and  proving  ground  of  the  first-class  financial  operation  rules,  financial
laws and regulations and other business environment and regulatory standards. Shanghai should
also  be  in  the  forefront  in  such  aspects  as  regulatory  sandbox  tests,  financial  supervision
coordination, comprehensive financial statistics and financial risk monitoring. Effective measures
can be extended nationwide.
5. Building Shanghai into a financial talent center. The competition among financial centers are
fundamentally the competition of talents. The number of high-end and internationally competitive
financial  talents  is  an  important  index  to  measure  an  international  financial  center.  The  PBC
supports  Shanghai  to  improve  its  institutional  mechanism  and  development  environment  for
attracting financial talents, to attract, retain and cultivate talents, and to bring together the best
financial practitioners in China and the world to Shanghai, hence making Shanghai a place that
global financial practitioners yearn for.
I  believe  that  Shanghai  will  be  able  to  build  on  schedule  an  international  financial  center  in
compatible with the economic strength of China and the international status of RMB and based
on RMB-denominated financial assets, and play a key role in promoting China’s financial reform
and opening up, economic transformation and upgrading, and high-quality development.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
