Nor  Shamsiah  Mohd  Yunus:  Keynote  address 
Conference on Climate Change
Keynote address by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Regional  Conference  on  Climate  Change,  Kuala  Lumpur,  25
September 2019.
-  Regional
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to today’s Regional Conference on Climate Change. The recent
shroud of haze in Malaysia and neighbouring countries is a timely reminder of the environmental
challenges confronting our generation and the generations to follow. With the passing of time,
these  challenges  have  become  more  pressing,  and  their  consequences  more  dire.  Yet,  our
response – at the industry, national and global level – is only just beginning to catch up to the
enormous  task  we  face. As  described  by  the  former  UN  Secretary-General,  “we  are  the  last
generation that can take steps to avoid the worst impacts of climate change”.
Climate  change  does  not  just  threaten  polar  bears  in  the Arctic.  It  also  threatens  our  socio-
economic prosperity here in Southeast Asia. It poses risks to the fiscal position of governments,
the viability of businesses and the living standards of individuals. As such, the effects of climate
change are not merely an ecological problem for scientists and conservationists to worry about.
It  presents  a  major  economic  issue  with  direct  implications  on  financial  stability.  It  is  for  this
reason that Bank Negara Malaysia, along with many other central banks around the globe, are
giving serious attention to climate risk. In my remarks today, I will outline:
Why climate change matters for the economy and for financial institutions, and;
How we can and must work towards building climate resilience.
Why climate change matters for the economy and financial institutions
The  financial  sector  is  an  important  enabler  of  economic  growth.  The  ability  of  financial
institutions and authorities to identify and manage risks that can impair financial intermediation
has direct consequences on the performance of the financial sector and the economy. These
risks  impact  those  we  invest  in,  lend  to,  promise  to  cover  and  strive  to  create  wealth  with.
Climate change impacts all of them, in increasingly significant and lasting ways.
As  we  have  seen  in  recent  years,  climate  change  is  causing  greater volatility  in  weather
patterns.  Globally,  overall  economic  losses  arising  from  natural  disasters  have  been  on  an
increasing trend for the past 40 years. In 2018, such losses amounted to USD160 billion – half
the size of Malaysia’s economy, and among the costliest disaster year on record. Last year, Asia
was the continent most affected by geophysical events, where typhoons, earthquakes, landslides
and  flash  floods  accounted  for  43%  of  all  events  worldwide  and  for  74%  of  fatalities.  While
storms and droughts have long been familiar to this region, they have become more intense,
more prolonged and more frequent. This translates into greater economic loss for governments,
businesses  and  households  –  which  in  turn,  can  make  its  way  into  the  financial  system.
Evidence of these effects can clearly be seen from recent events:
The  Thai  floods  in  2011  cost  USD45  billion  in  damages  and  affected  240,000  small
businesses. Carmakers in Malaysia, Japan and the US had to slow down production due to
the  interrupted  supply  of  parts  from  Thai  factories.  Prolonged  supply  chain  disruptions,
which  took  months  to  recover,  had  direct  financial  and  economic implications – Thai
exports fell, its budget deficit widened and the economy shrank by around 2%. The total cost
to the Thai economy was much higher if we account for the cost of repairs, rebuilding and
mitigation measures to prevent a repeat of the disaster.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Closer to home, the floods that hit Kelantan and Terengganu in 2014 were among Malaysia’s
worst  ever.  More  than  200,000  people  were  affected  and  displaced.  Businesses  and
financial  institutions  had  to  temporarily  shut  their  operations.  Economic  activities  and
financial intermediation were disrupted. The Government spent over RM2 billion to rebuild
basic infrastructure, such as roads and schools. The average cost to individual households
was  estimated  to  be  more  than  two  years  of  income  for  their  breadwinners.  In  2017,
massive  floods  in  Penang  and  Kedah  saw  similar  effects.  Banks  also  bore  the  costs  of
moratoriums on loan repayments that were provided to those affected by such disasters. As
climate-related events intensify, these costs will escalate.
As a result of the severe and prolonged El Niño drought in 2016, the agriculture sector in
Malaysia shrank by 5.2%. Last year, adverse weather (and production constraints) dented
yields yet again, causing the sector to contract by up to 2.5% in the second quarter. This is
not  an  isolated  problem  for  the  agriculture  industry.  These  shocks  can  also  jeopardise
domestic food production and cause prices to inflate. For instance, the irregular weather and
prolonged haze conditions in 2015 caused the prices of fresh vegetables to rise by 7.7%.
Climate  change  can  also  affect  the  economy structurally and gradually.  We  know  that  the
earth is warming.
The  global  average  temperature  has  been  increasing  by  0.1  degrees  Celsius  each  year
since  1950.  What  we  may  not  realise  is  that  our  cities  are  becoming  hotter  even  more
quickly. Some cities, despite efforts to maintain green lungs, are heating up twice as fast –
as  the  relentless  construction  of  high-rise  steel,  glass  and  concrete  buildings  work  in
tandem with asphalt roads to trap heat in the city.
Global warming is not just a problem on dry land. Warmer oceans affect the food chain for
marine  life  and  aggravate  the  already  declining  supply  of  fishery  resources.  This  in  turn
affects the fishing industry and the livelihood of fishermen.
Warming  oceans  also  mean  melting  ice  caps,  raising  sea  levels.  One  in  three  people  in
Southeast Asia  live  in  low-elevation  coastal  zones. Alarmingly,  since  1993,  the  Straits  of
Malacca has risen by the width of an iPhone 5. If this rise doubles, we may see 15 metres of
shoreline  erosion,  which  will  displace  many  coastal  populations  and  businesses.
Additionally, coastal erosion will directly impact tourism in places such as Kota Kinabalu and
manufacturing in industrial zones such as Kota Bharu, Kuala Terengganu and Mersing. If
this trend continues, our mangroves would completely sink by 2040 and industrial zones will
be affected by 2060. Our ports, the lifeblood of international trade linkages, will also struggle
to  cope  with  rising  sea  levels. A  recent  study  estimates  that  pre-emptively  adapting Port
Klang  and Tanjung Pelepas for climatic conditions expected in 2070 will cost nearly RM3
billion. Naturally, this cost would be far greater if not planned for in advance.
The effects of climate change are real. They are already upon us; and make no mistake, they will
intensify. For this reason, financial institutions can no longer be passive about climate change
and  its  effects.  There  is  a  clear  economic  case  for  building  resilience  to  climate  change:  it
directly  affects  our  balance  sheets,  and  can  pose  a  broader  risk  to  financial  stability  from
significant and prolonged climate-related events.
So far, I have explained the direct, physical risk posed by climate change to the economy and
financial industry. However, it is not only the climate that is changing. The changing behaviours of
economic  agents  also  give  rise  to  significant  transitioning  risks.  As  the  world  becomes
increasingly concerned with reducing the global carbon footprint, governments, businesses and
consumers  are  pushing  for  a transition to a more sustainable, greener economy. As  this
happens, some sectors of the economy may face declining demand, big shifts in asset values or
higher  costs  of  doing  business.  For  instance,  governments’  actions  to  enforce  the  Paris
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Agreement  could  see  the  vast  majority  of  the  world’s  proven  fossil  fuel  reserves  left  in  the
ground.  This  has  implications  on  the  value  of  investments  in  energy  companies,  particularly
those dealing with oil, gas and coal.
For many emerging market economies, the transition towards sustainability also invites policy
conflicts. For example, national goals for reducing fossil fuel use may entail significant trade-offs
with  growth  and  poverty  reduction  objectives,  at  least  in  the  short-  to  medium-term.  These
challenges  are  further  intensified  by  broader  environmental,  social  and  governance  (ESG)
considerations.  Achieving  sustainable  growth  and  development  amidst  capacity  and  funding
constraints  can  present  significant  challenges  for  political  leadership,  economic  priorities  and
social outcomes. Under these circumstances, the higher cost of transition is likely to mean that a
longer time is needed for the transition towards more sustainable growth policies, while keeping
in mind that this may be at the expense of heightened physical risks as a result of delayed action.
This  remains  a  difficult  balance  that  requires  careful  and  well-informed  assessments,  policy
coordination, planning and communication.
A very real example, close to home, is palm oil. As we all know, many in the global community
have  expressed  concerns  about  the  environmental  impact  of  the  palm  oil  industry,  which
accounts  for  7%  of  Malaysia’s  gross  exports.  Regardless  of  whether  these  concerns  are
justified,  the  fact  remains  that  the  industry  is  faced  with  significant  transition  risks.  The
government  and  industry’s  response  to  these  risks  will  ultimately  determine  the  resulting
economic impact on firms in the industry, their counterparties and the economy more broadly.
Inevitably, some adjustments will need to be made. Already, the industry is working towards the
end-2019 deadline for certification of Malaysian Sustainable Palm Oil (MSPO) compliance. But
the stark reality is that these adjustments will not come easily, especially for smallholders. In this
regard, I would like to applaud the effort made by several banks to educate and assist borrowers
in the palm oil industry in their journey to obtain MSPO certification. Such efforts are crucial to
ensure that the transition is orderly and can be sustained.
How we can work towards building climate resilience
Having established – I hope – a clear case for action, let me now address how we can work
towards building climate resilience together. The Bank has identified several key priorities.
First, we have to develop the tools and capacity for identifying climate risks relevant to financial
business. Climate change science is complex and multivariate. Getting to grips with issues such
as  weather  patterns,  groundwater  management  and  sustainable  palm  oil  go  well  beyond  the
remit of traditional cash flow projections, credit loss modelling or interest rate yield curves. We
will need to know what issues to pay attention to, how those issues affect your business and find
a common language to discuss them in a meaningful way. To this end, the Bank and Securities
Commission  Malaysia,  are  collaborating  with  the  World  Bank  to  develop  a  principles-based
taxonomy to enable financial institutions in Malaysia to classify green assets consistently. This
framework aims to support informed decisions and analysis of exposures to climate risk in fund
raising,  lending  and  investment  activities.  The  Bank  expects  to  issue  the  first  draft  of  the
taxonomy by the end of this year for industry feedback prior to its adoption.
Second,  we  need  to  develop  a more  complete  understanding  of  the  impact  of  climate-
related risks to the Malaysian financial system and economy. In this regard, the Bank is actively
involved in working together with the Central Banks and Supervisors Network of Greening the
Financial System (NGFS) to develop an analytical framework to assess such risks. This entails
sizing the impact of climate change on our financial system and economy, both in the central
case  and  tail-end  scenarios.  This  exercise  also  aims  to  estimate  the  relevant  time  frames  in
which  these  risks  may  materialise.  To  do  so,  we  would  need  to  better  understand  the
transmission channels of climate-related risks, taking into consideration potential second-round
effects and feedback loops. Ultimately, this exercise would provide valuable insights on how to
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
best  integrate  climate-related  risks  into  the  Bank’s  macroeconomic  and  financial  surveillance
activities and feed into wider policy responses to climate change.
Third, we will need to address the appropriate treatment of climate risks within the prudential
and supervisory frameworks for financial institutions. As a start, the Bank will require financial
institutions to report their exposures to climate risks once work on the green taxonomy has been
finalised.  Information  gathered  through  this  process  will  be  used  by  the  Bank  to  consider
changes  to  prudential  standards  to  better  reflect  risks  from  climate-related  exposures.
Concurrently,  the  Bank  also  intends  to  align,  where  relevant,  the  reporting  requirements  for
climate-related risks with the Value-Based Impact Assessment Framework (VBIAF), which will
be finalised by October this year, as well as its corresponding VBIAF Sectoral Guide, which is
currently  being  developed.  In  addition,  the  Bank  will  increase  its  engagements  with  individual
financial  institutions  to  better  understand  how  they  consider  climate  risks  in  their  risk
management approaches and practices.
Fourth,  we  need  to strengthen  the  use  of  disclosures  more  broadly,  to  provide  greater
transparency on how climate risk considerations are integrated into business decisions. Such
disclosures, by both financial institutions and non-financial firms, will help drive action towards
more effective risk mitigation and better adaptation to climate change. To this end, the Bank will
work with the industry to implement the recommendations of the FSB Task Force on Climate-
related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) in Malaysia.
Fifth,  the  financial  industry  will  need  to  step  forward  and facilitate an orderly transition for
households, businesses and governments to adapt  to  the  physical  and  transition  risks  of
climate  change.  This  involves  different  players  in  the  financial  ecosystem  –  including  banks,
insurers and takaful operators, venture capital and private equity firms – to ideate and innovate
solutions  that  would  help  the  economy  face  the  imminent  climate-related  risks.  There  is  an
urgent  and  critical  need  to  develop  sustainable  financial  solutions,  including  funding  and
investment structures with appropriate incentives and support mechanisms, to catalyse greater
climate resilience for firms and households.
Building climate resilience is no small feat. There is much work to be done with a window to
accomplish this work that is rapidly closing. Clear policy at the national level will be critical to
enable the financial industry to size up the physical and transition risks, and implement strategies
to manage these risks. Sector-specific approaches will also need to converge to limit risks of a
disorderly transition. This is a shared responsibility that requires us to come together to support
joint and coordinated responses to a clear and present threat to growth and financial stability. To
this end, I am pleased to announce that the Bank and the Securities Commission Malaysia are
establishing  a  Joint  Committee  on  Climate  Change  with  industry  representation  to  pursue
collaborative  actions  for  building  climate  resilience  in  the  Malaysian  financial  sector.  The  key
mandates of the Joint Committee are to:
Build capacity through the sharing of knowledge, expertise and best practices in assessing
and managing climate-related risk;
Identify issues, challenges and priorities facing the financial sector in managing the transition
towards a low carbon economy; and
Facilitate collaboration between stakeholders in advancing coordinated solutions to address
arising challenges and issues.
Beyond resilience
As  we  intensify  our  efforts  to  increase  climate  resilience,  let  us  not  forget  that  climate  action
begins  with  each  of  us.  For  the  Bank,  this  has  meant  making  changes  to  our  own  internal
operations to reduce our carbon footprint. For several years now, we have been watering our
grounds using rainwater harvested by our roofing systems. We have also actively reduced our
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
carbon footprint in our currency management operations. We print fewer brand new notes and
use  durable  polymer  banknotes  to  prolong  their  lifespan  in  circulation.  We  also  employ  co-
processing, where shredded old notes are converted into productive energy – this has saved 440
tons of CO2 emissions since 2016. The Bank has also embarked on a digitalisation strategy that
will  significantly  reduce  internal  usage  of  paper.  We  have  also  progressively  moved  to
incorporate wider sustainability considerations in our investment decisions.
Within  the  financial  sector,  the  leadership  shown  by  the  Islamic  finance  industry  in  adopting
value-based intermediation is a positive step towards sharpening the focus of finance on creating
a positive impact to the economy, people and the environment. Several financial institutions are
also  allocating  more  capital  towards  innovation  that  promotes  sustainability  –  such  as  in
renewable  energy  sources,  and  sustainable  agro-production  and  manufacturing.  Others  are
providing  incentives  to  encourage  “greener”  consumption  that  is  less  damaging  to  the
environment.  This  includes  preferential  rates  for  hybrid  vehicles  and  financing  projects  with  a
Green  Building  Index  certification  which  serve  to  encourage  manufacturers  and  developers  to
build more sustainable solutions.
Climate  change  will  have  irreversible  consequences  for  us  all.  The  effects  to  the  planet,  and
global efforts to transition towards greater sustainability, will certainly have implications for the
economy and for financial stability which cannot be ignored. Our window of opportunity to act is
narrowing very quickly. In the period ahead, it is crucial that the financial industry faces these
changes in a deliberate, informed manner. We must respond strategically, and pre-emptively;
and  we  must  act  now.  We  can  no  longer  afford  to  just  react  once  the  worst  has  already
happened. The stakes are simply too high.
On our part, the Bank is committed to ensuring that the financial system remains resilient in the
face of these risks. To this end, I have set out a broad outline for achieving climate resilience.
The  task  ahead  will  call  for  strong  leadership  in  working  with  authorities,  businesses  and
households to address what may be one of the greatest threats to our generation.
Discussions at this conference aim to help us meet this challenge with greater confidence and
conviction on what must be done – individually and collectively. On that note, I look forward to the
engaging sessions ahead. Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
