Evidence-Based Policy: Progress and Next Steps[1] 
Reception hosted by the Deutsche Bundesbank - Annual meeting of the Verein für 
Socialpolitik 
23.09.2019 | Leipzig | Claudia Buch 
On behalf of the Executive Board of the Bundesbank, I would like to welcome you to this year’s 
reception on the occasion of the Annual Meeting of the Verein für Socialpolitik. We have just 
heard some very interesting discussions on the role of central banks in the process of EU
enlargement. I would like to thank all the panelists for their contributions!
The discussion has shown that central banks play an important role in the European integration 
process – not only within the euro area but also in the European Union as a whole. Let me give a 
few examples of how the Bundesbank contributes as a constructive partner to decision-making in 
Europe: Monetary policy decisions are taken at the Eurosystem level, based on analytical work of 
committees within the European central banks to which the Bundesbank actively contributes. 
Cross-border cooperation and coordination also play a central role for ﬁnancial stability, which was 
established as a new mandate for central banks after the ﬁnancial crisis. In Europe, ﬁnancial 
stability falls under national responsibility but there is a close coordination between EU institutions 
and national authorities. The European level has the power to top up national policy decisions 
which are deemed insuﬃcient to address ﬁnancial stability risks.
is a shared responsibility: Even for the systemically important banks which are supervised by the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), national authorities play an important role in on-site 
supervision. And, not least, we work closely with our partners in Europe to ensure that statistical 
reporting of granular data is improved across Europe.
 Likewise, banking supervision 
 [2]
 [3]
These examples show that good analytical skills are key for central banks to play a competent role 
in the European integration process. Central banks certainly operate in an environment of political 
discussions on important societal questions. Central banks’ contributions to these debates need to 
be based on their mandates and on rigorous empirical analysis. Maintaining high analytical quality 
is, indeed, one of the core strategic goals of the Bundesbank.
 [4]
Therefore, we have been very careful observers of the initiative for evidence-based policy that the 
Verein für Socialpolitik (German Economic Association) has developed under the leadership of 
Professor Monika Schnitzer from the University of Munich. The core principles of this initiative 
were adopted by the Verein in 2015.
should be based on sound and rigorous evidence. The guidelines also point out that transparency, 
replicability, neutrality and independence should be key aspects of impact assessments and ex post 
policy evaluation.
 According to these guidelines, economic policy advice 
 [5]
A lot has happened since the initial adoption of these guidelines. Populism is on the rise, the 
economy is becoming increasingly digital, trade tensions have intensiﬁed and we may even see a 
reversal of globalization, there are concerns about climate change, and policy uncertainty 
surrounding Brexit but also more globally. All of these challenges increase uncertainty and may 
affect economic structures in the longer-term.  
Evidence-based policy is needed more than ever. How else are we to answer key questions facing 
society? We need to understand the drivers of inﬂation, productivity and growth, the role of 
policy, the effects of post-crisis ﬁnancial sector reforms, and, more generally, the effectiveness of 
policies that internalize externalities – be it in the ﬁnancial sector or with regard to environmental 
spillovers. Not all of these questions can be answered with hard, causal evidence. But learning 
how the economy is functioning, and understanding the mechanisms and incentives through 
which policy instruments affect the way people and ﬁrms behave is crucial.
The best strategy to counter distrust in public authorities and the spread of “fake news” is a 
structured policy process. We need transparency about what policy institutions are doing and how 
they operate, not least through good communication. Notwithstanding the erosion of trust in 
governments and political institutions since the crisis, there is indeed great demand for reliable 
evidence and expert knowledge. According to a survey by the Pew Research Center, for example, 
demand for scientiﬁc knowledge in the United States is fairly high and has even increased slightly 
in recent years.
 Yet, views diverge regarding the roles scientists should play in policy debates; 
potential biases and lack of independence in expert views are issues that many respondents 
consider to be relevant. Trust is thus important, and trust needs to be earned. Trust also implies 
that citizens want a transparent and objective decision making process.
 Therefore, we have 
taken the principles for evidence-based policy to heart and are working on operationalizing them 
in the policy areas for which we are responsible.
 [7]
 [6]
Generally speaking, a lot has also happened with regard to evidence-based policy making over the 
past few years. Let me give you an example: Very nearby, the Halle Institute for Economic 
Research founded a Centre for Evidence-based Policy Advice (IWH-CEP) in 2014. This platform 
aims to create better foundations for the evaluation of policy measures, including the effects of 
regional policies. Research based on ﬁrm-level information on subsidies shows that such subsidies 
support the creation of new employment while the productivity of the recipient ﬁrms remains 
largely unaffected for the time span covered by the data.
 Of course, this is only one of the 
many examples of how research institutes in Germany contribute to evidence-based policy-
making.
 [8]
Moving on to the national level, the 2018 coalition agreement foresees an evaluation of policy 
measures in a wide range of areas such as integration in schools, traﬃc laws and ﬁnes, cultural 
policy, an initiative to promote healthy diets and increased physical activity, programs to prevent 
political extremism, as well as data protection regulation.
operationalising policy evaluation and making it part of the policy process has been made by an 
initiative of the National Regulatory Control Council (Normenkontrollrat): Since March 2013, all 
national policy measures with annual implementation costs of more than € 1 million must be 
subject to ex post evaluation. These evaluations are reviewed by the Council.
 An important step towards 
 [10]
 [9]
Implementing these initiatives requires an active exchange between the ﬁelds of academia and 
policymaking, learning and experimenting. In order to promote this dialogue, the German 
National Academy of Sciences “Leopoldina” has established an initiative for evidence-based policy.
 [11]
 It aims to improve the transparency of political processes and to establish common 
standards on how policy measures should be evaluated. The initiative builds on an exchange of 
views between academia, administration, the media, and the political sphere through workshops, 
joint events, and (informal) networks.
 [12]
 In response to 
Another example of evidence-based policy comes from the international level: In 2017, the G20
 endorsed a framework for the ex post evaluation of ﬁnancial sector reforms.
the global ﬁnancial crisis, the G20 leaders agreed on a package of ﬁnancial sector reforms with 
four elements: increasing resilience through higher capital requirements for banks, new regimes 
for the resolution of large and systemic banks, reforms of derivative markets, and improved 
monitoring and regulation of shadow banking. The objective of the evaluation framework is to 
attribute outcomes of reforms, to identify relevant heterogeneities with regard to reform effects, 
and to study broader, general equilibrium effects. First evaluations have already been conducted. 
They ﬁnd that, by and large, the reforms are working as intended and do not have major side 
effects. In an ongoing evaluation project, the FSB members assess whether the reforms addressing 
the too-big-to-fail issue are reducing the systemic and moral hazard risks associated with 
systemically important banks. The evaluation projects beneﬁt from academic support through 
dedicated academic advisors; input from stakeholders is actively sought through public 
consultations. Hence, you are all invited to engage!
 [13]
What are the key lessons that we can take away from these examples of evidence-based policy? 
What are the elements of a good evaluation process?
Institutional knowledge and methodological diversity are the basis for good policy evaluations. 
Sound, evidence-based policy making needs to be based on a range of studies and methods. 
Different empirical models which have been replicated across different markets and time periods 
can provide insight into the robustness of empirical ﬁndings. Repositories of evaluation studies can 
provide overviews of empirical work and also provide the basis for meta studies. The Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS), for example, has recently launched a repository of studies on the 
effects of banking regulation.
 In addition to analytical and empirical methods, good 
identiﬁcation requires information about the relevant institutional background. Not least, 
sustaining the political momentum requires evaluation to be embedded in a policy process. This 
creates the incentives for administrations to actively support evaluations, both internally and 
externally.
 [14]
Sound evidence-based policymaking requires high-quality data: Data are needed early on in the 
process of policy evaluation, as collecting relevant data ex post can prove costly and ineﬃcient. 
The Bundesbank thus actively supports the provision of granular data for research purposes. The 
Bundesbank's Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) provides access to granular ﬁnancial data.
 [15]
 At the moment, researchers involved in 125 projects are working with RDSC micro data. To 
further facilitate access to these data, the RDSC has recently opened another site at our regional 
oﬃce in Düsseldorf. Furthermore, the Bundesbank is supporting a RePEc (Research Papers in 
Economics) initiative to highlight the value of data in empirical work.
initiative is to automate the search and discovery of datasets in the same way information on 
publications and citations can be collected.
good data, let me take this opportunity to thank Regina Riphahn (University of Erlangen-
Nuremberg) and Thomas Bauer (RWI Essen) for their work for the German Data Forum (Rat für So-
zial- und Wirtschaftsdaten).
 In the context of improving the infrastructure for 
 The idea of the 
 [17]
 [16]
Academic involvement is important: Causal identiﬁcation of policy effects is at the heart of 
academic research. This is a very welcome development as it adds rigor, quality, and comparability 
to academic output. Yet, translating evidence based on causal identiﬁcation strategies into sound 
policy advice requires much more: external validity and robustness of results over time and across 
different institutional setups is important. Adding such information and deriving broader policy 
implications from one’s own work is not always rewarded by the academic community, though. 
Hence, we also need to think intelligently about ways to combine both – analytical rigor and 
quality controls with incentives to transfer knowledge from academia to policy.
Footnotes:
1. I would like to thank Stefan Bender, Manuel Buchholz, Philipp Marek, Christian Schumacher, 
Edgar Vogel, and Matthias Weiß for most helpful contributions and comments on an earlier 
draft. All remaining errors and inconsistencies are my own.
2. The European Systemic Risk Board is tasked with the macroprudential oversight of the ﬁnancial 
 https://www.esrb.europa.eu/about/html/index.en.html
system within the European Union; it can issue warnings and recommendations to mitigate 
systemic risks (
). The ECB has the power 
to apply, if deemed necessary, more stringent measures than adopted nationally to address risks 
to ﬁnancial stability (
measures/html/index.en.html
Council of the ECB is supported by the Financial Stability Committee (FSC), which comprises 
representatives of the ECB and national central banks and supervisory authorities (
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/tasks/stability/framework/html/index.en.html
 https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/ﬁnancial-stability/macroprudential-
). Regarding macroprudential policy decisions, the Governing 
  . 
 https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/tasks/stability/html/index.en.html
3. For details, see 
4. See 
 https://www.bundesbank.de/en/bundesbank/organisation/mission-statement-and-
strategy/the-bundesbank-s-mission-statement-618248
5. See "Leitlinien und Empfehlungen des Vereins für Socialpolitik für Ex post-Wirkungsanalysen" as 
 https://www.socialpolitik.de/docs/VfS-Leitlinien_Ex_post-
) and Michael Burda, Monika Schnitzer, Bernd Fitzenberger, and Christoph 
of 6 September, 2015 (
Wirkungsanalysen.pdf
Schmidt (2014), Evidenzbasierte
Wirtschaftspolitik, Thesenpapier zur Kerntagung des Vereins für Socialpolitik in Hamburg 2014;
 https://www.socialpolitik.de/En/guidelines-evidence-based-policy
 6. Cary Funk, Meg Hefferon, Brian Kennedy, and Courtney Johnson (2019), “Trust and Mistrust in 
Americans’ Views of Scientiﬁc Experts”, Pew Research Center. 2 August, 2019. 

https://www.pewresearch.org/science/2019/08/02/partisanship-inﬂuences-views-on-the-role-
and-value-of-scientiﬁc-experts-in-policy-debates/.
7. OECD (2017), “Trust and Public Policy: How Better Governance Can Help Rebuild Public Trust”, 
OECD Public Governance Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris.
8. Brachert, Matthias, Eva Dettmann, and Mirko Titze (2018), “Public Investment Subsidies and 
9.
Firm Performance – Evidence from Germany”. Journal of Economics and Statistics, Vol. (Volume)
238(2): 103-124.

https://www.bundesregierung.de/resource/blob/975226/847984/5b8bc23590d4cb2892b31c987ad672b7/20
03-14-koalitionsvertrag-data.pdf?download=1
10. See Normenkontrollrat (2018), „Deutschland: weniger Bürokratie, mehr Digitalisierung, bessere 
Gesetze – Einfach machen! Jahresbericht 2018, Berlin. The Normenkontrollrat Baden-Württem-
berg has recently established a network of academic advisors, which is hosted by the Institute 
for Applied Economic Research (IAW) in Tübingen (press release of 5. August 2019: „Wissen-
schaftsministerium fördert Netzwerk für gute Rechtsetzung und Bürokratieabbau“).
 https://www.leopolidina.org/themen/thema-evidenzbasierte-politikgestaltung/
11.
12.
13.
 https://www.fsb.org/work-of-the-fsb/implementation-monitoring/effects-of-reforms/
 https//www.fsb.org/2019/05/fsb-launches-evaluation-of-too-big-to-fail-reforms-and-invites-
feedback-fram-stakeholders/
14. See Financial Regulation Assessment: Meta Exercise (
15. https://www.bundesbank.de/en/bundesbank/research/rdsc/research-data-and-service-centre-
 https://stats.bis.org/frame/
 rdsc--617900.
16. The Bundesbank is part of Coleridge’s Rich Context work stream,
17.
 https://blog.repec.org/2019/09/01/new-initiative-to-help-with-discovery-of-dataset-use-in-
scholarly-work/
