21st MAP Convention 
Speech by Deputy Governor, SBP on  
“Monetary Policy and Digitization of Payment Systems” 
28 August 2019 
ميحرلا
نمحرلا
 
 الله 
مسب
 
  Mr. Amir Jamil Abbasi, President MAP 
Distinguished Speakers 
Ladies and Gentlemen!   
 
Assalam o Alaikum and a very Good Morning! 
 
It is a privilege for me to be here to deliver a keynote address on “Monetary 
Policy and Digitization of Payment Systems”. These areas are the key policy 
pillars  of  every  forward-looking  Central  Bank  in  the  world  today  and  has 
therefore attracted a lot of interest of the academia, business community and 
the public in our country as well.  
 In my talk today, I would first like to draw your attention to the challenges our 
economy is facing and how the recent structural and policy changes by SBP, 
especially through monetary policy, will help stabilize it. Then, I will share my 
thoughts on the issue of digitization and technological developments, which 
is massively changing the payment and banking industry around the globe 
as  well  as  in  Pakistan.  Finally,  I  will  talk  about  the  strategy  of  SBP  on 
digitization and use of technology to not only bring efficiency in the payment 
but  help  in  documentation of  economy  while  also supporting  our  efforts  of 
financial inclusion.  
 Page 1 of 10 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen!  
1. As most of you may be aware that Pakistan’s economy is passing through 
a  stabilization  phase,  as  structural  deficiencies  have  accentuated  the 
twin  deficits  during  FY17  and  FY18.  The  situation  was  further 
complicated by the uncertainty prevalent in the global economy mostly 
due  to  trade  disputes  among  major  economies.  These  trade  wars  are 
unsettling the capital and commodities markets and affecting the export 
performance of emerging markets. 
 2. To  effectively  tackle  domestic  structural  bottlenecks  and  enhance  our 
economy’s resilience in line with the evolving global dynamics, Pakistan 
has made some tough but necessary adjustments in the monetary and 
exchange  rate  policies.  These  measures  have  already  helped  contain 
domestic demand pressures and led to a progressive improvement in the 
country’s  external  account.  Supported  by  a  healthy  growth  in  workers’ 
remittances  and  external  financing  from  multilateral  and  bilateral 
sources, the country’s foreign exchange reserves have now stabilized.  
 3. Encouragingly, the current account deficit decreased by a substantial 32.1 
percent during FY19 and the July 2019 figures of a 72.8 percent decline 
are  also  encouraging.  However,  inflation  has  been  on  an  upward 
trajectory  mainly  due  to  the  pass-through  of  the  exchange  rate 
depreciation and adjustment in energy prices. Cognizant of the building 
up  of  inflationary  pressures,  SBP  has  been  pursuing  a  tight  monetary 
policy stance since early 2018. However, the impact of this tightening is 
going to reflect in the headline inflation with a certain lag. 
 Page 2 of 10 
 
4. At  present,  barring  any  sudden  shock,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC)  of  SBP  is  of  the  view,  as  stated  in  the  last  monetary  policy 
statement, that the adjustment related to interest rate and the exchange 
rate from previously accumulated imbalances has already taken place. 
The recent monetary policy statement has explicitly stated that the MPC 
decision has inbuilt the impact of following 3 important developments:  
   First, the outlook for external financing has further strengthened with 
the  disbursement  of  the  first  tranche  associated  with  the  IMF 
Extended Fund Facility, activation of the Saudi oil facility, and other 
commitments of support from multilateral and bilateral partners; 
  Second, the  Government  of  Pakistan has passed  FY20  budget  that 
seeks  to  improve  fiscal  sustainability  by  focusing  on  revenue 
measures to widen the tax base. The government has also committed 
to cease borrowing from the SBP that would qualitatively improve the 
inflation outlook; 
  Finally,  on  the  international  front,  the  sentiment  towards  emerging 
markets has improved as expectations of further policy rate cut in the 
United States have grown stronger and with all the conducive policies 
Pakistan has the capacity to attract foreign investment. 
 5. As we know, the effectiveness of monetary policy critically depends on the 
level  of  financial  sector  development,  including  financial  access. 
Therefore,  countries  with 
low 
financial 
inclusion  and 
financial 
development  may  have  a  weaker  monetary  policy 
transmission 
mechanism as opposed to countries with higher financial inclusion and 
developed  financial  markets.  Globally,  financial  inclusion  is  considered 
Page 3 of 10 
 
an  effective  tool  for  achieving  sustainable  and  inclusive  economic 
growth, as it is a prerequisite for equitable distribution of the economic 
opportunities,  poverty  reduction,  and  financial  stability.  Pakistan  is 
committed  towards  broadening  access  to  financial  services  and 
implementing  development  finance  reforms  and  policies  that  can 
empower  individuals  and  firms  to  access  a  well-functioning  financial 
system,  which  cultivates  opportunities  for  enhanced  socio-economic 
outcomes, improved livelihoods and protection against economic shocks. 
The  stated  vision  for  financial  inclusion  in  Pakistan  is  to  improve  the 
access  and  usage  of  quality  financial  services  among  individuals  and 
firms, with dignity and fairness.  
 6. With  this  vision,  and  being  cognizant  of  high  financial  exclusion  in  the 
country,  SBP  in  2015  launched  the  first  National  Financial  Inclusion 
Strategy.  This  strategy  sets  the  vision  and  outlines  an  action  plan  for 
achieving certain targets like ensuring that at least 50% of adults have a 
bank account in Pakistan by 2020. The NFIS has progressed well, and I 
am happy to share that as of June 2018, SBP’s data shows that unique 
account ownership in Pakistan has reached to 63.9 million, representing 
more than 50% of adults having a bank account in the country well before 
the deadline of Year 2020.  
 7. Since we reached the headline targets well before our deadline of 2020, 
the  Government  adopted  an  enhanced  NFIS,  which  sets  the  vision  to 
improve  financial  inclusion through  further  access to finance  &  deposit 
base,  promotion  of  small  &  medium  enterprises,  easy  &  affordable 
access to finance to farmers, facilitation in low cost housing finance and 
Page 4 of 10 
 
provision of Shariah compliant banking solutions. Accordingly, the GoP 
has set the following headline targets to be achieved by 2023:    
  Enhancing the usage of Digital Payments to 65 million active digital 
transaction accounts, with gender segregation of 20 million accounts 
by Women 
  Enhancement of Deposit to GDP ratio to 55% 
  Promotion of SME Finance by extending finance to  700,000 SMEs 
which is 17% of the private sector credit 
  Increase in Agricultural Finance by serve 6 million farmers through 
digitalized  solutions  and  extending  annual  disbursements  to  Rs.1.8 
trillion 
  And finally enhancing the share of Islamic Banking assets and its 
number  of  branches  to  25  percent  and  30  percent  of  the  banking 
industry respectively  
8. The  NFIS  action  plan  expects  to  contribute  in  achieving  sustainable 
development through creation of 3 million new jobs, generate additional 
exports  of  US$  5  billion  and  enhance  banks’  deposits  to  GDP  ratio  to 
55%  by  2023  through  measures  adopted  under  NFIS-2023.  I  must 
mention  that  the  NFIS  strategy  also  includes  digitization  of  payment 
systems and adoption of technology as an effective method to improve 
financial access and inclusion. This leads me to my next topic which is 
the digitization of payment systems and SBP’s policy on it.  
   Ladies and Gentlemen!  
Page 5 of 10 
 
 9. Throughout  history,  technological  innovations  and  advancements  in 
payment  methods  have  continually  reshaped  monetary  systems. 
However, since the last decade we have witnessed the emergence of a 
plethora  of  exciting  innovations  especially  in  the  areas  of  banking  and 
payments, which has resulted in enabling open business models based 
on entirely new and disruptive ideas. I would like to briefly mention some 
of the most prevalent trends:  
  First is the rise of open platforms, such as e-commerce marketplaces, 
which  allows  anyone  to  buy,  sell,  and  share  in  real  time  without 
considerable investments in infrastructure; 
  Second:  cloud  based  hosting  enables  quick  deployment of  complex 
systems  using  tools  that  are  open  source  and  easily  available  to 
anyone; 
  Third  is  the  pervasive  adoption  of  mobile  devices  where  everyone 
regardless of their social or financial stature owns a mobile phone;  
  Fourth:  advancements  in  big  data  analytics  that  provides  deep 
insights about customer behavior, needs and wants;  
  Fifth:  advancements  in  artificial  intelligence  using  big  data  and 
complex  algorithms  are  being  put  to  use  in  ways  that  were 
unimaginable a few years ago;  
  Finally,  the  emergence  of  distributed  ledger  technologies  like  the 
Block Chain is set to transform entire industries by removing the need 
for intermediaries.  
  Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Page 6 of 10 
 
10. These technologies are now threatening to disrupt the financial sector by 
creating  new  forms  of  money  and  removing  the  need  to  intermediate, 
which has traditionally been the forte of banks. Since this has implications 
for central banks especially with regard to monetary policy execution and 
transmission, SBP has adopted a comprehensive strategy to further its 
agenda  of  digitizing  payments  in  the  country.  This  includes  promoting 
and developing interoperable payments Infrastructure, issuing enabling 
regulations especially for retail payment providers, ensuring the trust and 
security of digital payment channels in the country and finally promoting 
and experimenting with new fintechs players.  
 Let me now talk about each of these areas one by one: 
 11. As  most  of  you  may  be  aware  that  payment  systems  are  usually 
categorized  as  wholesale  and  retail  payment  systems.  Like  the  rest  of 
the world, SBP upgraded its wholesale payments infrastructure to a Real 
Time Gross Settlement system, over a decade ago. The RTGS system 
has made our monetary policy operations more effective and efficient.  
 12. Now  with  the  emergence  of  new  enabling  technologies,  the  retail 
payment  systems  are  being  transformed  into  the  so-called  “faster 
payments” that enables the public to pay and receive money in almost 
real  time.  Consumers  accustomed  to  instant  communication  via  email 
and  social  media  expect  to  be  able  to  make  payments  instantly. 
Therefore  it  is  not  surprising  that  these  faster  payments  are  rapidly 
gaining acceptance and popularity. 
 Page 7 of 10 
 
13. To remain abreast with these trends, SBP has already started work on 
the implementation of a Micro Payment Gateway in partnership with Bill 
&  Melinda  Gates  Foundation  and  its  representatives  in  Pakistan.  This 
Gateway  will  offer  faster  retail  payments  with  advanced  Application 
Programming  Interfaces  and  directory  services,  which  will  simplify  the 
requesting, receiving and sending of payments in the country.  
 14. SBP  is  also  closely  working  on  digitizing  government  collections  and 
payments, which includes digitization of government salaries, pensions 
and  government  collections.  Recently,  SBP,  FBR  and  the  provincial 
revenue authority of Punjab have successfully completed the project for 
digital collection of taxes and duties using alternate delivery channels. 
 15. On the regulatory front, realizing the emerging and critical role of non-
banks  in  digitization  and  payments,  SBP,  back  in  2007  issued 
Regulations  for  Branchless  Banking  that  disrupted  the  retail  payments 
space by introducing agent based banking and payments services. Then 
in  2014,  SBP  issued  the  Rules  for  Payment  System  Operators  and 
Service  Providers.  These  Rules  garnered  significant  interest  in  the 
payments  industry  and  signaled  a  changed  direction  in  SBP’s  policy 
towards payments and digitization. Further, these Rules not only enabled 
SBP to regulate the payment systems operators in the market but also 
helped us in interacting with the new tech-oriented service providers and 
understand their needs and requirements.  
 16. In  April  this  year,  SBP  issued  the  Regulations  for  Electronic  Money 
Institutions  that  signify  the  resolve  of  SBP  to  promote  digitization  and 
innovative  solutions for  payments in  the  country.  Since the  initiation  of 
Page 8 of 10 
 
the licensing process, we have received very exciting applications from 
a variety of service providers who intend to offer innovative, user-friendly 
and cost-effective low value digital payment products in the country. We 
expect that with the potential to innovate, these non-banking entities can 
play a critical role in digitizing different types of payments in the country.   
 17. For ensuring trust and security of digital payments, SBP being cognizant 
of  the  risks  inherent  in  digital  payment  is  strengthening  the  oversight 
frameworks and capability. Let me say that enhancing cyber resilience is 
our  number  one  priority  and  our  recent  regulatory  instructions  and 
enforcements are just first steps in that direction. I must mention that we 
have  already  issued  various  guidelines  encompassing  frameworks  for 
Enterprise  Technology  Governance  and  Risk  Management,  Payment 
Systems’  Designation,  Security  of  Internet  Banking  and  card  based 
transactions,  guidelines 
for  prevention  against  cyber-attack,  Risk 
Management in Outsourcing Arrangements by Financial Institutions, etc.   
 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
18. During  the  past  few  years,  SBP  has  adopted  an  open  door  policy  for 
Fintechs  innovators  by  facilitating  and  encouraging  dialogue  and 
discussions. Our teams from the policy group meet perspective providers 
especially from payments, remittances and banking and help them asses 
the appropriateness of their proposals against the existing regulations.  
 19. To  promote  Fintechs  and  nurture  innovative  ideas,  SBP  has  already 
established  an  Innovative  Challenge  Fund  facility,  which  provides 
funding facility to companies and Start-ups for innovative products and 
Page 9 of 10 
 
services in the area of digital payments. Further, we are contemplating 
the development of a fintechs facilitation mechanism that would enable 
smaller fintechs to work with SBP in assessing the feasibility of their ideas 
in  a  controlled  environment  while  at  the  same  time  giving  SBP  an 
opportunity to identify and address potential risks.  
 20. To sum it up, while central banks seem to be primarily concerned with 
the formulation and implementation of monetary policy, their domain has 
now expanded towards increasing the financial inclusion as well. This is 
necessary not only from financial deepening purposes but also from the 
perspective  of  poverty  reduction.  Enhanced  financial  inclusion  ensures 
economic efficiency, maximum participation of its population in the overall 
economic  process  and  thus  maximizing  growth  and  development. 
Technology  on  the  other  hand  is  rapidly  enabling  the  policy  makers  to 
take effective action and leapfrog economies into new progressive eras. 
SBP  is  not  only  aware  of  the  importance  of  these  trends  but  is  also 
continuously  adapting  itself  in  all  areas  of  policymaking  including 
monetary policy, financial inclusion and adoption of new technologies. I 
am  sure  that  Insha’Allah;  together  we  will  overcome  our  problems  and 
drive our country on the path of progress and development. 
 21. In the end, I would like to thank the Management Association of Pakistan 
for inviting me to deliver this Keynote Address. 
Thank you for your attention.  ****** 
Page 10 of 10 
 
