Benoît Cœuré: Interview in the Financial Times
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in the Financial Times, conducted by Ms Claire Jones on 12 June 2019, and published on 17
June 2019.
 At  the  last  ECB  Governing  Council  in  Vilnius,  there  seemed  to  be  some  progress  in
coming up with solutions to face the risks to the outlook……
The Governing Council discussion in Vilnius was about making sense of diverse signals from the
economy  and  the  financial  markets.  The  eurozone  economy  is  not  doing  so  badly;  in  fact
services and construction are doing quite well. The concerns are really around the manufacturing
sector, and the source of these concerns is mostly, if not entirely, to be found outside of the
eurozone and may be temporary. The signals coming from the financial markets, however, are
quite alarming.
Anything in particular that alarms you?
The constellation of prices in the bond market paints a picture of the global economy which is
very bleak. Central banks should never ignore market signals. They shouldn’t follow them blindly
either. I’m not saying this as a reason to be complacent, but we have to  make  sense  of  this
divergence between market prices and economic data.
Our  baseline  staff  projection  for  the  euro  area  economy  is  not  so  bad. And  that  message  is
something that the Governing Council is broadly comfortable with. But the distribution of risks
around this projection has broadened. Risk has increased. And that required reassurance from
the Council that we’re ready to address these risks, should they materialise. So far we’re talking
about contingency planning. But at some point during our next few meetings, we might very well
be facing a situation where risks have materialised.
And the question is not whether we have instruments; we do have instruments. We can change
our  guidance.  We  can  cut  rates.  We  can  restart  QE.  The  question  is  which  instrument,  or
combination  of  instruments,  would  be  best  suited  to  the  circumstances.  That  discussion  only
started in Vilnius; we need to take it forward and reflect on the nature of the risks we’re facing.
Can you cut rates without tinkering with the way negative rates are applied to banks?
All options come with costs and benefits, and we have to ponder them very carefully. None of this
would deter us from acting. We have a clear mandate and will act on our mandate. So, if the
conclusion were that cutting rates is the best option, then we would have to consider the impact
of negative rates on financial intermediation, especially for banks. We would have to consider
whether a tiering system is needed. Today the prevailing view in the Governing Council is that it
is not, but we also agree that it deserves further reflection.
Markets have got ahead of you. A lot of people are already pricing in a rate cut. A lot of
people are already thinking that the guidance that rates are expected to remain on hold
for the first half of 2020 is out-of-date, even though you’ve moved it forward only last
week. Does that not blunt two out of three of the policy options you’ve mentioned?
I would like to challenge the view that our guidance has to be aligned with the market at any given
point in time. If that were the case, then it would not be needed in the first place. The guidance is
a way to filter the view of the Governing Council on future economic developments and doesn’t
have to coincide with market expectations.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  in  terms  of  your  capacity  to  surprise,  to  really  get  ahead  of  markets,  that’s  a  bit
limited…
Whatever the instrument, we’ll calibrate it to what’s needed for the eurozone economy.
Some people have the idea that the issue limit on the proportion of a member state’s
bonds you can buy of a third of all the outstanding stock is not as hard as people might
have thought in the past. Would you agree with that?
The European Court of Justice has stressed the relevance and usefulness of limits. The limits
are there to guard against monetary financing and to protect the price discovery process. On the
other  hand,  the  ECJ  has  also  affirmed  the  principle  that  we  should  have  broad  discretion  in
designing  our  instruments.  The  limits  are  ours.  We  already  have  some  degree  of  freedom
across securities. For instance, we already buy up to 50 per cent of supranational bonds, while
for individual sovereigns the limit is lower. I’m not saying that’s the way to go, but a more detailed
discussion is possible if warranted by our price stability objective.
We’ve  been  very  serious  about  these  requirements  since  we  started  QE  and  if  we  were  to
restart it, we would have the discussion again in a serious and responsible way.
Some believe that if you have more action from the ECB, you might need more fiscal
spending as well…
We have a mandate to fulfil, and we will do what is necessary to fulfil it. There is no quid pro quo
between the ECB and governments, and we are not going to threaten them. We all have a job to
do. But imagine that if the eurozone were hit by a particularly adverse negative shock, then lack
of action on fiscal policy in those countries which can use it would require a stronger monetary
policy reaction. And a stronger monetary policy reaction would magnify the potential downsides
of rates being low for long.
Does the ECB need to follow the Fed’s lead and review its monetary policy strategy, in
particular its inflation objective?
I tend to think that we have more urgent issues to face right now, but I’m pretty sure that we’ll do
it at some point nevertheless.
Having very substantially broadened our range of monetary policy instruments, and having learnt
a lot from the crisis, I expect that, at some point, we’ll have to take stock of that experience and
review our monetary policy strategy, whoever is the next president.
But  I  would  advise  against  doing  so  in  a  piecemeal  way.  The  definition  of  price  stability  is  an
important dimension, of course, but it is not the only one. You also need to ask yourself which
instruments  have  worked  well  and  which  have  worked  less  well.  You  need  to  reflect  on  the
structural changes in our economy – technology, globalisation, servicification – that have kept us
away from our targets. Looking forward, maybe climate change will be another important thing to
look at, too.
What’s your thinking on how the ECB has changed over the past eight years?
It’s a long journey that goes back more than eight years. And the ECB has always been its own
beast,  even  when  it  started  back  in  1998.  It  was  never  designed  to  be  exactly  like  the
Bundesbank, but it’s true that, since then, it has borrowed features from the Fed.
And we’ve certainly abandoned the small, open economy mindset which was the one of most
participants back then.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
We’ve also learnt the hard way that Economic and Monetary Union is much more fragile as a
construct than initially thought. And that the job of the ECB is not only about setting prices and
quantities for monetary aggregates across the eurozone, but also about dealing with some of the
flaws and imperfections that hamper monetary policy transmission. We’ve had to look under the
bonnet and find out how all parts of the engine work.
But let me add that the challenges for the next eight years could be substantially different, and
could be even more daunting.
What do you think the key challenges are going to be for the next president?
Let me outline four main challenges. First, global cooperation is eroding. The capacity of global
policymakers to deal with shocks to the global economy is today less than it was previously. The
kind of coordinated action that we saw back in 2008 would be more difficult to achieve today. I’m
not saying it would be impossible, but it would be more difficult.
Second, the eurozone’s structural weaknesses, its lingering fragilities, are not going to go away
soon. I’m not dismissing all the good work being done in Brussels and other places to strengthen
the European Stability Mechanism and to complete banking union, which is something that we
didn’t have eight years ago, and that’s clear progress. But we’re still only half way. And as long as
this journey is not completed, new crises will inevitably come, and we have to stand ready to ride
out those crises.
Third, as the ECB, we do have instruments, and we’ve shown that we’re ready to use them and
even  design  new  ones  while  staying  within  our  mandate.  But  the  cost  of  using  any  given
instrument  might  be  increasing,  which  makes  the  trade-offs  more  acute.  Let  me  give  an
example. Rates being low for long may eventually create financial stability risks. So far, they’ve
been limited, scattered around the continent, around sectors, around jurisdictions, and they could
be addressed using targeted macroprudential instruments.
But most of these macroprudential instruments are about addressing risk in the housing sector;
there is little they can do today about risks in the corporate sector, or in shadow banking.
And finally, there are mounting challenges to our independence. The world today is different from
the one we faced in 2011 or 2012. There is widespread mistrust of experts, and what are central
bankers if not experts? European politics is much more fragmented, both within countries and at
the  European  level,  than  it  was  eight  years  ago,  and  that  has  been  evidenced  by  the  latest
European election.
The temptation to either overburden central banks with a variety of objectives which politicians
cannot achieve, or blame them for political failures, will be greater, and that’s something we’ll
have to live with.
Monetary  policy  is  difficult  to  understand.  And  because  money  creation  is  something  that
captures attention and fascinates, expectations of the ECB can also be too high. But there are
things that we just can’t do. And there are things that we could do, but should not do, because
they are political in nature.
I’m convinced that our narrow price stability mandate has served us very well and has protected
us  from  politicisation. A  broad  mandate  is  something  that  we  would  not  be  well  equipped  to
manage, because we are not a political institution.
The conclusion is that we will have to safeguard and defend our independence more strongly
than we have had to over the last eight years, at ECB level and at the level of national central
banks.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
So  what  would  be  the  right  credentials  for  the  next  president  to  have,  with  those
challenges in mind?
It’s  a  decision  for  European  leaders  and  European  finance  ministers  to  take.  But  there  are
common  credentials  for  any  central  bank  governor.  For  example,  part  of  the  job  profile  is  to
understand markets. Because, like it or not, we have to understand what markets are telling us.
We don’t always have to agree. But we have to understand the language they speak.
Also, you need to understand the political environment – because you have to be able to uphold
your  independence,  and  because  monetary  policy  is  not  the  only  game  in  town  and  in  many
cases needs supporting action.
If you want to see the fiscal response or regulatory response that will help monetary policy, you
need the ability to talk to political leaders, respecting our different mandates. And finally, good
economics never harm.
How do you make the public more aware of what the central bank can and cannot do?
First, you need to explain what you’re doing, and there are certainly many ways we can do it
better. This is an area where central banks can learn from each other.
For instance, what the Bank of England has been reflecting on in terms of using plain language,
trying to resist using arcane, academic language when talking to citizens, is something we could
make good use of.
It’s  even  more  important  for  the  ECB  to  be  active  reaching  out  to  people.  Being  a  European
institution in a tower in Frankfurt, we can seem even further away.
It’s a big challenge. Frédéric Bastiat, the French economist from the 1840s, wrote a wonderful
book which is titled “Ce qu’on voit et ce qu’on ne voit pas”, “What you see and what you don’t
see”.
Monetary policy works by trickling down first to the banks and the financial system and then on to
the whole of the economy. So people see the direct impact – unemployed workers will see that
we’re lifting stock prices, banks will see that we’re shrinking their interest margin. They don’t see
the indirect impact – jobs being created, wages being lifted thanks to higher consumption and
investment – and that’s what we have to do a better job of explaining.
One  of  the  big  problems  of  the  euro  is  that  it  hasn’t  produced  as  much  economic
integration as you would have thought. How do you address that?
That’s  true.  We  need  more  integration  and  we  need  more  convergence.  Which  is  why  the
budgetary  instrument  for  convergence  and  competitiveness  that  has  been  agreed  by  the
Eurogroup  is  a  useful  step,  although  it  should  evolve  over  time  to  include  counter  cyclical
features.
What do you think of the involvement of the ECB in the troika that designed and imposed
the Greek bailout programmes? Would you defend it as the right decision?
The ECB’s involvement in the troika was a symptom of one of the many flaws in the eurozone as
it was set up. Being in the troika was not the right place for a central bank.
But back in 2010, the institutional framework was highly deficient, and the only way to gather and
aggregate the relevant expertise was to bring together the Commission, the IMF and the ECB.
The ECB was asked to do it and did it as a service to European governments. I don’t think we
could have escaped from playing that role and we played it in an honest and professional way.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Now, the institutional framework has improved, we have a new arrangement emerging between
the Commission and the European Stability Mechanism, and ECB involvement is much less vital
than it was in 2010.
We’ve already scaled down our involvement; for some time now in Greece, we’ve been focusing
on financial sector issues, where our expertise is clear, and on broad fiscal topics. We wouldn’t
take a view on the structure of taxes, or on reforming public administration, or on social benefits,
as we have done in the past.
How  do  you  feel  about  the  political  will  for  more  integration,  after  the  European
elections?
As  a  citizen,  I  want  to  pick  out  the  good  signs  from  the  European  elections,  in  particular  the
renewed  focus  on  the  environment  and  climate  change.  Now,  focusing  more  narrowly  on  the
single  currency  and  monetary  union,  that  discussion  was  largely  absent  from  the  electoral
campaign, in all countries. And that’s a lost opportunity.
What remains to be done to complete Economic and Monetary Union is profoundly political. It’s
not a technical discussion. It’s about the appropriate degree of solidarity and of discipline that is
needed to make the eurozone more resilient and protect it in times of crisis, and that is highly
political. And you would need a broad discussion around it; ideally a pan-European one.
Ultimately the problem is that while European citizens see the benefits of the euro as a currency
and all want to keep it, they are not ready to accept the constraints on national economic policies
that come with membership of the Monetary Union. And that has to be explained: you cannot be a
free rider in a monetary union; you need to have the right policies at home and in Brussels. The
European elections could have been the right time to have the discussion. But it didn’t happen,
and misunderstandings and misgivings will stay with us. This creates a lingering fragility.
How involved should central banks be in combating climate change?
Climate change is a defining issue for the global economy. No one can ignore it, certainly not
central bankers. We cannot be blind and deaf to the discussion.
We  need  to  understand  how  climate  change  will  shape  the  economy.  The  time  horizon  has
shortened.  Climate  change  used  to  be  envisaged  as  a  very  long-term  issue,  but  it  is  not
anymore; some of the consequences are already visible today.
As a result, it becomes relevant for macroeconomic policy-making.
The  discussion  about  the  links  between  financial  stability  and  climate  change  has  started
already. Mark Carney has played a leading role in that discussion, in the Financial Stability Board
and  in  the  G20.  Considerations  such  as  the  carbon  footprint  of  our  pension  and  own  funds
portfolios can be– and often already are – taken into account. The discussion is now increasingly
shifting to monetary policy. There, we have to be much more cautious: we have a clear price
stability  mandate,  and  everything  we  can  do  to  combat  climate  change  has  to  be  assessed
against it.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
