Shaktikanta Das: Indian banking sector - current status and the way
forward
Speech  by  Mr  Shaktikanta  Das,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  15th  Annual
Convocation of Post Graduate Diploma in Management, National Institute of Bank Management
(NIBM), Pune, 8 June 2019.
 I am happy to be participating in the Fifteenth Annual Convocation ceremony of Post-Graduate
Diploma in Management (Banking and Financial Services) for the Batch of 2017-19. I thank Dr.
K.L. Dhingra, Director, National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM) and members of faculty for
inviting me to join the young minds at their convocation ceremony. This is indeed a moment of
pride for students as it marks the fruition of years of dedication, perseverance and hard work. To
the students, I would like to convey my best wishes as they embark on a new phase in their lives.
I am certain that it will be a life full of opportunities and challenges, and I hope you adopt a path of
integrity and ethics to be able to make tough decisions as you move forward. As the father of the
nation, Mahatma Gandhi, had said, “Always choose the right path and speak truth”. Your self-faith
and determination will provide you with the strength to march ahead. My congratulations are also
for the parents and guardians who are present here.
2. Let me now turn to the topic which I am going to address today. I propose to cover the current
status of the banking sector and would highlight some issues as a way forward.
Banking Sector
3. The last few years have been testing times for Indian banks as they grappled with deteriorating
asset  quality  leading  to  higher  provisioning  requirements,  falling  profitability  and  weak  capital
position. However, the banking system is on the cusp of a transformation, aided by recent policy
measures to reduce vulnerabilities and improve its financial health. Several initiatives have been
undertaken  and  are  also  underway  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks
aimed at increasing the resilience of the banking system.
Banking Regulation
4. As of March 2019, the capital to risk weighted assets ratio (CRAR) of scheduled commercial
banks (SCBs) at 14.2 per cent remains well above the regulatory requirement of 9.0 per cent.
However, if we take into account the capital conservation buffer (CCB), some banks, especially
Public-Sector  Banks  (PSBs),  are  falling  short  of  the  required  10.875  per  cent.  Overall,  the
Government’s  efforts  to  infuse  capital  into  PSBs  has  significantly  helped  them  achieve  these
targets.
5.  We  have  also  put  in  place  frameworks  on  countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCCB),  leverage
ratio,  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR)  and  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR) .  For  better
management  of  concentration  risks  and  in  order  to  align  Indian  banks  with  the  international
norms, the Reserve Bank proposed guidelines on large exposures which became effective from
April  1,  2019.  The  latest  round  of  reforms  published  by  the  Basel  committee  on  Banking
Supervision  (BCBS)  in  December  2017  have  implementation  timelines  stretching  up  to  2022.
The Reserve Bank is expected to come up with the draft guidelines by 2020 for consultations.
Non-Performing Assets
1
6.  The  deterioration  in  asset  quality  of  Indian  banks,  especially  that  of  Public  Sector  Banks
(PSBs), can be traced to the credit boom of 2006-2011 when bank lending grew at an average
rate of over 20 per cent. Other factors that contributed to the deterioration in asset quality were
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
adverse  macro-financial  environment;  lax  credit  appraisal  and  post-sanction  monitoring
standards; project delays and  cost  overruns;  and  the  absence  of  a  strong  bankruptcy  regime
until May 2016. The Reserve Bank set up a Central Repository of Information on Large Credits
(CRILC) in 2014 which was followed by an Asset Quality Review (AQR) in 2015. As a result of
these initiatives, the recognition of non-performing assets improved, leading to a sharp rise in the
gross NPA ratio from 4.3 per cent at end-March 2015 to 7.5 per cent at end-March 2016. It further
reached the peak of 11.5 per cent in March 2018. Recent supervisory data suggests that various
efforts made by the Reserve Bank in strengthening its regulatory and supervisory framework and
the resolution mechanism instituted through Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) are bearing
fruit. This is reflected in significant improvement in asset quality of scheduled commercial banks
(SCBs) during 2018-19 as gross NPA ratio declined to 9.3 per cent as on March 2019.
7. At the same time, there has been an improvement in provision coverage ratio (PCR) of SCBs
to 60.9 per cent at end-March 2019 from 48.3 per cent at end-March 2018 and 44.0 per cent at
end-March  2015.  Due  to  weak  capital  position  of  banks  and  risk  aversion  on  their  part,  credit
growth remained subdued in recent years. However, with incipient sign of improvement in the
health of banks, credit growth is picking up.
Resolution of Stressed Assets
8. It is now well recognised that an efficient bankruptcy regime is essential for timely resolution
and liquidation of stressed companies. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, (IBC) has
significantly altered the financial landscape as it provides a market mechanism for time-bound
insolvency  resolution  enabling  maximisation  of  value.  The  new  regime  is  a  paradigm  shift  in
which  creditors  take  control  of  the  assets  in  contrast  to  the  earlier  systems  in  which  debtors
remained in possession of the assets till its resolution or liquidation, leading to an improvement in
the credit culture of the country.
9. In the wake of the Supreme Court’s order nullifying the Reserve Bank’s circular of February 12,
2018  for  resolution  of  stressed  assets,  we  have  issued  fresh  guidelines  yesterday  (June  7,
2019).  The  new  guidelines  provide  a  system  of  strong  disincentives  in  the  form  of  additional
provisioning for delay in initiation of resolution or insolvency proceedings. The new framework
makes  inter-creditor  agreements  mandatory  and  provides  for  a  majority  decision  to  prevail.
Further,  wherever  necessary,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  issue  directions  to  banks  for  initiation  of
insolvency proceedings against borrowers for specific defaults so that the momentum towards
effective resolution remains uncompromised. It is expected that the revised prudential framework
for resolution of stressed assets will sustain the improvements in credit culture that have been
ushered in by the efforts of the Government and the Reserve Bank so far, and that, it will go a
long way in promoting a strong and resilient financial system in India.
Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs)
10. Let me now turn to Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs). They play an important role
in the Indian financial system given their unique position in providing complementarity as well as
competition to banks. They cater to diverse financial needs of a wide variety of customers, both
in urban and rural areas. This sector, with a size of around 16 per cent of the combined balance
sheet of SCBs, has been growing at a faster pace in recent years. As at end-March 2019, the
aggregate CRAR of NBFC sector was 19.3 per cent, while the gross NPA ratio was 6.6 per cent.
The credit growth of NBFCs, which was over 20 per cent earlier, slowed down in the third quarter
of 2018-19 after the debt default by a systemically important NBFC. However, market confidence
somewhat resurfaced in the last quarter of 2018-19 as the major sources of funding registered a
recovery.
11.  The  debt  default  by  a  large  NBFC  in  mid-2018  highlighted  the  vulnerability  and  need  for
strengthening  regulatory  vigil  on  the  sector  in  general  and  on  the  asset  liability  management
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
(ALM) framework in particular. The Reserve Bank has recently come out with draft guidelines for
a robust liquidity framework for the NBFCs.
12. Further, the Reserve Bank has relaxed the norms for NBFCs to securitise their loan books. In
addition, banks have been allowed to provide partial credit enhancement (PCE) to bonds issued
by the systemically important non-deposit taking NBFCs and Housing Finance Companies.
13.  With  a  view  to  eschewing  the  regulatory  arbitrage  between  banks  and  non-banks,  the
Reserve Bank has been aligning the regulatory and supervisory frameworks for NBFCs with that
of  SCBs.  A  comprehensive  Information  Technology  (IT)  framework  for  strengthening  off-site
surveillance  of  NBFCs  is  being  put  in  place.  Further,  multiple  categories  of  NBFCs  are  being
rationalised into fewer categories in order to provide them greater operational flexibility.
14.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  taken  steps  to  enhance  the  supervision  over  NBFCs.  These
efforts are primarily focused on improving the four supervisory pillars – on-site examination, off-
site  surveillance,  market  intelligence  and  annual  reports  of  statutory  auditors.  A  fifth  pillar  of
supervision  in  the  form  of  an  institutionalised  arrangement  for  periodic  interaction  with  all  the
stakeholders  including  statutory  auditors,  credit  rating  agencies  and  banks  having  large
exposures to NBFCs is being put in place.
Way Forward
15. I have already highlighted certain critical issues in the area of regulation and supervision of
banks and non-banks. As a way forward, I would like to highlight some important issues which
need to be addressed in the coming months. The first and foremost is governance reforms in
banks and non-banks. These would include the following:
1.  In order to improve the functioning of the PSB boards and to foster corporate governance, it
is important to enhance their quality and stability through further streamlining appointment
process,  succession  planning  and  compensation.  These  aspects  could  be  evaluated  by
bank boards and reviewed by the Banks Board Bureau. We also need to create a pool of
independent directors across various areas of expertise.
2.  The performance of MDs/CEOs of both public and private sector banks should be closely
monitored by the Board of Directors either through a sub-committee or through an external
peer group review.
3.  An effective performance evaluation system should also be put in place for banks to improve
their financial and operating parameters. The Government, the Bank Board Bureau and the
Reserve Bank are engaged in developing an objective framework for performance evaluation
of PSBs. This should redefine the contours of corporate governance in PSBs with a focus
on transparency, accountability and efficiency.
4.  Governance issues in private sector banks (PVBs) originate from altogether different set of
concerns. The issues here mainly relate to incentive structure of their managements, quality
of  audits  and  compliance  and  also  efficient  functioning  of  Audit  and  Risk  Management
Committees. The Reserve Bank has issued a discussion paper on proposed guidelines for
compensation in private sector banks which includes specification of minimum variable pay
component and clawback arrangements, among others. The Reserve Bank will continue to
play  a  positive  and  constructive  role  to  ensure  private  sector  banks  flourish  in  their
operations.
16.  Second,  to  create  potent  risk  management  systems  in  banks,  the  Chief  Risk  Officers
(CROs) have to play an effective role and should be directly accountable to Managing Directors
(MDs), Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) and Risk Management Committee of the Board.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
17. Third, along with risk management, compliance function in banks is one of the key elements
in their corporate governance structure. These have to be adequately strengthened and made
sufficiently independent. For the compliance function to be effective, it must be supported by a
healthy  compliance  culture  within  the  organisation.  Banks  should  review  their  compliance
function comprehensively to ensure compliance to all statutory and regulatory prescriptions in
addition to their own internal guidelines, directions of the Board and their Committees and audit
assessments. It is important that the Board of Directors are always sensitised of any compliance
failures.  A  group-wide  compliance  programme  would  help  managements  and  Boards  in
understanding the legal and reputational risks in the organisation, especially their concentration in
certain areas.
18. Fourth, it has been observed that most bank frauds can be traced to absence of effective
controls.  An  essential  element  of  an  effective  system  of  internal  control  is  a  strong  control
mechanism.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Board  of  Directors  and  senior  management  to
emphasise  the  importance  of  internal  control  through  their  actions  and  words.  Banks  should
regularly reorient and train their personnel so that they fully understand the importance of internal
controls  in  their  respective  stations.  The  boards  of  banks  should  specifically  pay  attention  to
creating and sustaining a culture of effective control in the banks.
19. Fifth, even though the Government’s capital infusion has helped public sector banks (PSBs)
to  improve  their  balance  sheets,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  PSBs  should  not  become  too
dependent on this source. Depending upon individual situations, PSBs should access the capital
market for mobilisation of capital.
20. Sixth, I have referred to the importance of the IBC and the new bankruptcy regime earlier.
There  are,  however,  delays  in  the  resolution  of  cases,  as  a  significant  number  of  them  have
extended beyond 180 or 270 days. The government has already announced two new National
Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) benches at Indore and Amravati. Nevertheless, more number of
benches as well as members are required. On our part, we are opening a new RBI Professorial
Chair at the Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs (IICA), Manesar, Haryana which is starting a two
year Graduate Insolvency Programme to increase the pool of trained insolvency professionals.
rapid 
technological 
financial  products  and 
innovations  which  give 
21.  Seventh,  in  the  light  of  various  developments  in  the  financial  sector  such  as  the  use  of
complex 
to
interconnectedness and spill over effects within and between entities, there has been a move
globally  towards  building  specialised  teams  of  bank  supervisors.  Even  in  the  Indian  context,
some  incidents  in  the  financial  sector  have  underscored  the  need  for  specialisation  in
supervision  and  regulation.  The  build-up  of  risks  among  regulated  entities  due  to  exposure
concentrations,  non-transparent  market  practices  and  the  associated  contagion  effects  in  the
banking sector have significant implications for financial stability. Considering these issues, the
Reserve  Bank  has  now  decided  to  build  a  specialised  regulatory  and  supervisory  cadre  for
regulation and supervision of banks, non-banks and co-operatives. This specialised cadre in the
Reserve Bank will play a pivotal role so that sound banking and non-banking sectors efficiently
intermediate the financing requirements of the entire economy.
rise 
22. Eighth, the Reserve Bank has been at the forefront of creating an enabling environment for
growth of digital technology for new financial products and services. We are strengthening the
surveillance framework and have issued draft guidelines on Framework for Regulatory Sandbox.
A committee on deepening of digital payments under the chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani
was  formed  which  has  submitted  its  report.  Recently,  the  Reserve  Bank  came  up  with  a
Payment System Vision 2021 to ensure uninterrupted availability of safe, secure, accessible and
affordable payment systems. The Reserve Bank will examine the recommendations of the report
of Nilekani Committee and dovetail the action points, wherever necessary, with Vision 2021, for
implementation.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
23.  Ninth,  we  also  need  to  address  the  existing  inadequacies  in  customer  service  and
benchmark  it  against  international  standards.  Efforts  in  developing  robust  customer  grievance
redressal mechanisms to increase customers’ trust and confidence in payment systems will be
continued.  Given  the  rising  popularity  of  digital  payments,  data  protection  and  cyber  security
norms  need  to  be  continuously  strengthened.  With  the  emerging  threat  landscape,  where
organised  cyber-crime  and  cyber  warfare  are  gaining  prominence,  working  towards  ensuring
continuous  protection  against  the  changing  contours  of  cyber  security  threat  becomes
imperative. As banks’ engagement with technology is increasing at a rapid pace, the challenge
for the regulator would be to balance efficiency with prudential measures to mitigate risks to be
able to harness the opportunities offered by Fintech.
24. Let me now turn to NBFCs. The conventional approach to their regulation and supervision
has been light-touch, so that they could complement banks with their diverse financial products
for niche areas and reach a large cross-section of population through innovative service delivery
mechanisms.  However,  with  a  view  to  strengthen  the  sector,  maintain  stability  and  avoid
regulatory  arbitrage,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  proactively  taking  necessary  regulatory  and
supervisory  steps,  keeping  in  mind  the  requirements  of  the  time.  In  the  light  of  recent
developments, there is a case for having a fresh look at their regulation and supervision. It is our
endeavour  to  have  an  optimal  level  of  regulation  and  supervision  so  that  the  NBFC  sector  is
financially resilient and robust. At the same time, NBFCs should be enabled to operate as well-
functioning entities with necessary capacity to reach wider sections of population. The Reserve
Bank will continue to monitor the activity and performance of this sector with a focus on major
entities and their inter-linkages with other sectors. We will not hesitate to take any required steps
to maintain financial stability in the short, medium and long-term.
25.  As  you  are  aware,  fine  tuning  and  improving  supervision  and  regulation  are  continuous
exercises. Towards this direction, we have reduced the periodicity of the NBFC supervision to 12
months from 18 months earlier. We expect the Board of Directors of companies themselves to
act diligently and take necessary action based on Reserve Bank’s supervision reports.
26. Further, our objective is to harmonise the liquidity norms between banks and NBFCs, taking
into account the unique business model of the NBFCs vis-à-vis banks. In this context, the final
guidelines on the liquidity risk management framework which we have proposed recently will be
issued shortly.
27.  Let  me  also  make  a  reference  to  Urban  Co-operative  Banks  (UCBs).  Our  experience
suggests  that  the  Board  of  Directors  of  UCBs  require  greater  expertise  and  skill  to  conduct
banking business professionally. The Reserve Bank is in the process of issuing guidelines on
this issue. A need is also felt for establishment of an Umbrella Organisation for UCBs which may
extend loans and refinance facilities, setup IT infrastructure and provide support for capital and
liquidity.  The  structure,  functions  and  the  regulatory  guidelines  of  this  organisation  are  being
examined by the Reserve Bank. Mergers and consolidation in the sector will also help in reducing
operating costs, encouraging greater risk diversification and economising capital. We propose to
put in place a mechanism for encouraging voluntary mergers in the sector through appropriate
incentives. We also propose to create a Centralised Fraud Registry for UCBs.
28.  I  have  highlighted  several  issues  in  the  banking  and  non-banking  sectors.  A  sound  and
resilient financial system is a prerequisite for a modern economy that involves all sections of its
society in sharing equitably the benefits of economic and social progress. As you would know,
reforms  are  an  ongoing  process.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  endeavour  to  be  proactive  in  its
approach.  In  the  fast-changing  financial  landscape,  we  will  continue  to  be  watchful  to  the
emerging challenges and respond to them appropriately to ensure a resilient and robust financial
system.
1
 To be implemented from April 1, 2020
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
