Adrian Orr: Opportunity or risk? Our choice
Speech  by  Mr Adrian  Orr,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  NZX  Issuer
Forum, Auckland, 26 September 2019.
Tēnā koutou katoa,
 Welcome everyone and thank you for inviting me to come and speak to you today at the NZX
Issuer Forum.
I want to talk about some of the near-unprecedented challenges facing monetary policy, and how
longer-term  thinking  can  assist  in  our  efforts  to  meet  these  challenges.  The  fact  that  we  are
celebrating the 150th anniversary of the NZX this year is a great prompt for longer-term thinking.
First,  the  here  and  now.  Yesterday’s  Official  Cash  Rate  announcement  follows  the  Monetary
Policy Committee’s August decision to reduce the OCR by 50 basis points to 1.0 percent, the
lowest rate since the OCR was introduced in March 1999.
When we made our August announcement we were rightly challenged by some commentators
as to whether we knew something more than the conventional economic indicators have been
showing? Our answer remains – no we don’t. We operate in a transparent manner with primarily
public data, but it is our job to be forward-looking.
In making our decision, we assessed that the impact on the New Zealand economy from slowing
global economic growth and persistently low inflation necessitated further monetary stimulus –
so as to maintain our inflation and employment objectives. We also judged that it would be better
to  move  early  and  large,  rather  than  risk  doing  too  little  too  late. A  more  tentative  easing  of
monetary  policy  risked  inflation  expectations  remaining  stubbornly  below  our  inflation  target,
making our work that much more difficult in the future.
We are pleased with the outcome of our decision to date. Interest rates have declined across the
board, as retail banks have passed lower lending rates to many businesses and consumers. The
New Zealand dollar exchange rate also eased, and the cumulative impact of the easier monetary
conditions is now working through the economy. Lower interest rates alter peoples’ investment
decisions, especially with the confidence that interests rates will stay low for a long time ahead.
In forming our policy position we spend significant effort monitoring domestic and international
economic trends. Over recent weeks, for example, we have visited and listened to a wide group
of New Zealand business people. What we heard is that demand for New Zealand’s goods and
services remains sound. However, there is a multitude of business concerns and challenges.
A common concern was that business capacity remains stretched, with some firms struggling to
fill vacant roles or even find accommodation for their workers in the same region. Likewise there
was a strong need to invest to expand capacity and productivity, but access to resources – land,
capability,  and  equipment  –  was  difficult.  These  are  signs  of  an  economy  with  ongoing
momentum.
However, there was also discussion of rising economic headwinds from slowing global growth,
and continued challenges to domestic business margins or profits. Many factors were sighted for
the margin squeeze – global competition, low global inflation, and rising input costs as labour and
capital  resources  become  more  scare.  There  were  also  plenty  of  stories  of  economic  policy
uncertainty, as global expectations rise with regard to environmental security, trade access, and
climate  change  action.  For  a  small  trading  nation,  these  issues  impact  confidence  and
investment.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overall, we heard about an economy that is maintaining momentum, but demanding more policy
certainty and business confidence, so that firms will invest for the long-term. These are quality
business challenges.
We also spend a lot of effort assessing global economic developments. And this is where we are
most challenged, but not alone. Global interest rates are now at a secular low level, in part for
positive reasons and, in part, providing reason for concern.
The low level of interest rates globally over recent years primarily reflects low and stable inflation
rates – a deliberate and desired outcome of monetary policy. This should be celebrated and not
forgotten. We must not fall into the ‘vaccination trap’, where, for example, people observe that
outbreaks of diseases are less frequent, and hence conclude there is less reason for continued
vaccination.
Monetary policy has and remains effective when it comes to determining aggregate consumer
price inflation.
Recently, in this restored low inflation environment, central banks across the world have faced a
new challenge – inflation that is too low, and running consistently below inflation targets. This has
prompted the need to reduce policy rates so as to stimulate spending and demand. However,
given  the  low  interest  rate  starting  levels,  some  major  central  banks  have  had  to  implement
negative interest rates and/or directly buy assets (increasing their balance sheets) so as to free
up cash for the economy.
Understanding  why  inflationary  pressures  have  eased  so  much  is  important  as  it  helps  us  to
calibrate our policy actions. As is often the case, there appear to be many reasons which we
must balance.
The low inflation pressures are in part due to the slowdown in global economic growth, a regular
cyclical event that central banks are well practiced in responding to. But there are also structural
factors  dampening  inflation  pressure  and/or  altering  the  impact  of  lower  interest  rates  on
investment and spending.
Some examples of structural changes include the changing nature of how we produce goods
and services, with more reliance on global technology which is often delivered by a handful of
global  suppliers  at  single  global  prices.  We  are  also  producing  more  services,  rather  than
physical goods as a proportion of total output, reducing our relative reliance on capital equipment
and reducing our sensitivity to the cost of investment. Production locations are also mobile, and
labour is highly mobile internationally, making wage bargaining harder even if there are domestic
labour  shortages.  And,  populations  are  ageing,  as  people  live  longer,  leading  to  different
preferences to save rather than consume.
By definition, these structural factors are slow moving, meaning they will anchor the historically
low interest rates for some time to come. Meanwhile, central banks will continue to vary policy
rates in response to cyclical factors, but rates will vary from a lower average, and possibly within
a lower range than in the past.
In  New  Zealand,  for  example,  we  believe  the  neutral  interest  rate  –  the  OCR  that  is  neither
contractionary nor expansionary for the economy – has drifted lower in recent decades. This is
from a mid-point estimate of around 5 percent in the early 2000s, to around 3 percent today, with
plenty of uncertainty around these mid-points.
The obvious challenge for many central banks, including us, is that the decline in the neutral rate
means we have less room to manoeuvre our policy interest rates without concern for the zero
per cent lower bound. What happens if we hit zero? Should the OCR go negative, and/or should
we  embark  on  direct  asset  purchase  programme,  and  what  other  monetary  policy  strategies
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
could be implemented?
We are currently thinking hard about these questions, because it makes sense to do so as a
precaution – it’s best to put the roof on when the sun is shining. Our current view is that we are
unlikely  to  need  ‘unconventional’  monetary  policy  tools.  But  we  would  be  remiss  not  to  be
prepared.
We are in a good position to learn what to do, and not to do, from other central banks globally. Of
course, one size does not fit all. New Zealand is a small, open, economy with a floating exchange
rate,  and  a  concentrated  banking  system.  Hence,  we  need  to  tailor  our  own  precautionary
solutions, and understand intended and unintended consequences of different monetary policy
tools.
We  are  certainly  aware  that  the  current  low  interest  rates  impact  sectors  of  the  economy
differently. However, the dominant force to stimulate activity, employment and inflation across the
economy as a whole is to bring forward spending and investment.
In  terms  of  distributional  impacts,  low  interest  rates  support  employment  opportunities  and
bolster asset prices and reduce the return on bank deposits. The opposite is true when interest
rates are high and the net impact on household balance sheets will depend on the mix of assets
they hold. Our role as a central bank is to contribute to overall economic prosperity by delivering
an environment where inflation is low and stable.
Of  course,  there  will  be  scenarios  where  monetary  policy  –  whether  conventional  or
unconventional – reaches its limits, and can no longer generate sufficient additional demand, or
can only do so with undesirable or untenable side effects.
This is why many central bankers globally have said ‘monetary policy needs friends’. The friends
of central banks are government fiscal policy (taxes and public spending and investment) growth
supportive structural policies, and the business confidence and capability to invest in productivity-
enhancing infrastructure.
The good news for New Zealand, unlike many other OECD economies, is that our government’s
books  are  in  good  shape  and  there  is  already  a  strong  fiscal  impulse  underway  from  public
spending  and  investment.  We  have  the  trifecta  of  sound  government  finances,  clear
infrastructure demands, and low hurdle rates for investing.
The same can be said for corporate balance sheets in New Zealand, with relatively low levels of
debt, and a strong demand for goods and services, our businesses are well placed to perform.
So  what  is  holding  businesses  and  government  back  from  further  increasing  investment  and
expenditure?
New Zealand’s economic ‘problem definition’ appears well advanced, and the good news is the
solutions sit largely with us as New Zealanders.
We have the macroeconomic stabilisers in place – well-established monetary policy practices
and sound long-term fiscal parameters. However, there remains a loud call from all quarters of
the  country  for  leaders  to  better  signal  investment  intent,  and  ensure  we  have  the  policy  and
goodwill to facilitate access to capital and resources to execute.
This call for investment-intent is to all collectively-owned (e.g., Iwi), Crown-owned (i.e., central
and local government), and co-operatively owned (e.g., traditional primary sector) sectors. It is
not just to traditional businesses, or any one party.
Easily said, harder to do without a clear desire to work together over an agreed horizon.
The  Reserve  Bank  is  working  on  a  few  long-term  projects  itself  to  ensure  that  our  financial
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
system  is  more  resilient  to  economic  slowdowns.  Our Annual  Report  will  be  made  public  on
Monday, outlining a wide range of investment activities.
Most importantly, we are acting to ensure New Zealand remains less susceptible to short-term,
sometimes  only  fair-weather,  funding  that  creates  pockets  of  excess  debt  and  exacerbates
economic cycles.
We  acknowledge  that  our  actions  at  time  may  look  confusing  to  the  casual  central  bank
observer.
On  the  one  had  we  have  set  low  interest  rates  to  deliberately  encourage  investment  and
spending, which may be funded with higher debt. This is how monetary policy works.
On the other hand we are saying we are concerned about some pockets of debt – especially in
some highly leveraged households (residential mortgages), and in some pockets of dairy farming
(rural lending).
So how can we achieve more investment and more resilience at the same time? The good news
is we have more than one tool at the central bank, and these tools work over different horizons
and achieve different purposes.
For example, by now you should all be aware of the Reserve Bank’s Capital Review proposal.
Our  proposals  would  see  significant  increases  in  shareholder  capital  in  banks.  With  banks
having more of their own ‘skin in the game’, the owners will sharpen their long-term customer
focus, and it will reduce the chance of a bank failure and the cost on society as a whole should a
bank  fail.  These  outcomes  are  highly  desirable  for  the  long-term  economic  health  of  New
Zealand, and should promote deeper and more liquid local equity and debt markets.
We finalise our decisions in early-December this year. Whatever our final decisions, we will be
insisting on transition to higher capital at a sensible pace. But we will be talking more and better
quality capital.
How have some lenders (banks) responded to date? Many of the large banks have spent the
past  10  or  so  years  lending  aggressively  to  households  and  the  dairy  sector  during  the  good
times.  They  have  also  spent  the  last  12  months  or  so  revisiting  this  wisdom,  and  have  been
raising their lending margins and/or making credit much harder to access for some customers –
especially rural customers.
Such  bank  activity  is  pro-cyclical,  fair  weather,  behaviour  that  leads  to  misallocated  capital,
industry  booms  and  busts,  and  larger  economic  hardship  on  broad  society  –  not  the  bank
shareholders themselves. Over the last 12 months or so – as we have been working with all
stakeholders  on  our  capital  proposals  –  we  have  reduced  the  OCR  by  more  than  the  banks’
estimated costs of the higher capital requirements. Yet, for some sectors of the economy, such
as agriculture, their borrowing costs have risen. This can only happen if banks are significantly
raising their margins.
This is not a sign of long-term thinking when it comes to bank borrowing and lending, and it is not
a sign of a highly competitive banking services in core sectors of the New Zealand economy. We
are monitoring this behaviour, to assess the degree of any ‘front-loading’ of our capital proposals,
and I encourage all customers to question their banks on issues of competition.
I have covered a lot of ground. Why are interest rates so low? Why is this a global issue? What
does it mean for New Zealand business and the Reserve Bank? What else can we do to take
advantage of these low interest rates? And how can we better bolster the financial system to be
more long-term in its capital allocation?
In summary, we are not alone in the low interest rate environment, this is a global phenomenon.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  what  we  do  have  is  more  policy  and  business  opportunities  than  most  OECD
economies and this is something that we need to take advantage of. We will need to be long-
term in our planning and investing, and now is a good time to get ahead – given the trifecta of
sound balance sheets in business and government, infrastructure gaps, and low hurdle rates to
invest.
Meitaki, thank you
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
