  An address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB),  
to the Rand Business Club dinner  
 Johannesburg 
28 May 2019 
 The role of the SARB  
in the context of growth and development in South Africa 
 Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good evening, and  thank you for allowing  me  the  honour to 
address this dinner hosted by the Rand Business Club.  
 Our country has gone through general elections in the past month. With it came and 
went the usual debates about what the results would mean for South Africa over the 
next five years. What is unlikely to go away, however, is the debate over the policy 
priorities for the years ahead, and what authorities should focus on to lift the country 
from what increasingly looks like a ‘slow growth trap’. Monetary policy is already part 
of that debate, and is likely to remain there. Hence the relevance of the topic chosen 
for  tonight’s  address:  The  role  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB)  in  the 
context of growth and development in South Africa. 
 I thought it might be useful to first address the SARB’s mandate, its independence in 
fulfilling that mandate, and why it often seems misunderstood. I will then look at how 
our institution has performed over the years in the fulfilment of that mandate, and what 
tasks still lie ahead, before tuning into the current debates on whether central banks 
Page 1 of 11 
 in general, and the SARB in particular, should reassess or broaden their mandates 
and strategy, looking specifically at the context of South Africa’s development needs. 
 On the SARB’s mandate, independence and ownership  
 The issue of the SARB’s mandate, as I have said earlier, is a topic that often raises 
emotions, partly because some people do not fully appreciate what the central bank 
can  and  cannot  do,  what  the  role  of  its  private  shareholders  is,  and  how  its 
accountability is ensured.  
 When South Africa’s Constitution was adopted in 1996, the drafters of our fundamental 
law insisted that the primary objective of the SARB was to  ‘protect the value of the 
currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth in the Republic’. 
They further said that the SARB, in pursuit of that goal, had to ‘perform its functions 
independently  and  without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice,  but  there  must  be  regular 
consultation  between  the  [SARB]  and  the  Cabinet  member  responsible  for  national 
financial matters’. 
 It is not by chance that these words were inscribed in our Constitution. Such wording 
was in line with international best practice at the time. Following the failure of many 
countries to deal with stagflation problems in the 1970s, the global trend was to give 
central banks increased independence from political authorities in their search for price 
stability.  
 But  the  South  African  context  also  played  a  key  part.  By  the  time  of  the 
1994 democratic  elections,  South  Africa  had  experienced  two  decades  of  high  and 
very volatile inflation – even as economic growth gradually came to a halt. Monetary 
policy,  in  the  absence  of  both  a  clear  framework  and  a  political  pledge  of  non-
interference, had struggled to contain these price gyrations. 
 But central bank independence never meant that the SARB would have completely 
free reign; neither did it mean lack of accountability. As indicated in Article 224 of the 
Constitution,  which  I  have  just  quoted,  there  has  to  be  (and  there  is)  regular 
consultation between the SARB and National Treasury.  
Page 2 of 11 
 It  is  also  this  consultation  that  produced  the  SARB  inflation  targeting  range  –  the 
‘yardstick’ against which we would measure the achievement of price stability.  
 The SARB has operational independence in how to best achieve its policy goals, but 
does not unilaterally shift these goalposts. Put differently, the SARB is independent 
within  the  overall  system  of  economic  governance,  but  not  independent  of  it. 
Furthermore, accountability extends beyond consultations with National Treasury. The 
Governor  and  senior  staff  meet  periodically  with  members  of  parliamentary 
committees,  and  the  SARB  also  submits  an  Annual  Report  to  Parliament. 
Consultations with the general public, in the form of publications as well as Monetary 
Policy  Forums,  have  also  become  the  norm,  as  the  SARB  seeks  transparency  in 
explaining the rationale for its policy decisions. 
 The  SARB’s  ownership  structure  has  also  raised  concerns,  albeit  misplaced  ones, 
about  control  and  accountability.  Admittedly,  the  SARB  is  one  of  only  a  handful  of 
central banks in the world with private shareholders. Yet these shareholders  do not 
have  the  power  to  amend  the  SARB  Act1,  which  can  only  be  done  by  Parliament. 
Neither can they appoint the Governor and Deputy Governors, who are responsible 
for  monetary  policy,  because  that  is  a  presidential  prerogative.  Through  their 
representatives on the Board of Directors, these private shareholders merely exercise 
oversight over the SARB’s governance. There is no way in which they can interfere 
with monetary policy or financial stability policy decisions, prudential supervision, or 
the SARB’s other day-to-day responsibilities. 
 The SARB’s performance: price and financial stability? 
 But how well has the SARB delivered on this mandate set by the Constitution?  
 Let us first recall how the technical modalities of the mandate evolved over the years. 
From the more eclectic approach that was in place in the 1990s, including a framework 
for monetary aggregates, the yardstick for the measurement of price stability moved 
to an inflation target in 2000.  
                                                           
1 SARB Act 94 of 1989 
Page 3 of 11 
 South  Africa’s  situation  at  the  time,  including  the  sensitivity  of  inflation  to  swings  in 
energy and food prices as well as the structural changes the economy was undergoing 
(such as the effects of an earlier reduction in tariffs and capital controls), led authorities 
to select a 3-6% inflation target range. It was always understood, however, that  this 
target was not cast in stone and could be reviewed if justified. 
 The 2008-09 global financial crisis then taught us that achieving price stability was not 
enough.  Many  countries  had  witnessed  a  significant  growth  in  financial  imbalances 
even as inflation remained muted. These countries faced major economic adjustments 
as  these  imbalances unwound. While  South  Africa’s  banks  and  its financial  system 
had  remained  sound  during  the  crisis,  and  domestic  financial  markets  had  kept 
functioning properly,  the  SARB felt that it  would be  wise to follow international best 
practice and place greater emphasis on monitoring the stability of the financial system 
while developing tools against the potential build-up of severe imbalances. 
 The  inflation-targeting  approach  has  yielded  gradual  yet  significant  results  over 
the years. So far in this decade, targeted consumer price inflation has averaged 5.2%, 
down  from  6.8%  in  the  previous  decade  (the  first  of  the  inflation-targeting  regime). 
Inflation volatility has declined too. The standard deviation of year-on-year consumer 
price  changes  since  2010  stands  at  0.9 percentage  points,  compared  with 
2.4 percentage points between 2000 and 2009.  
 Importantly, in the present decade, inflation has exceeded the 6% upper end of the 
target  range  for  only  26 months,  compared  to  70 months  in  the  previous  decade. 
Inflation  expectations,  as  measured  by  the  quarterly  survey  of  the  Bureau  for 
Economic Research, have also become more stable over the years, and while they 
remained  stuck  at  around  6%  from  2012  to  2017,  they  are  now  showing  an 
encouraging decline towards the midpoint of the target range. 
 Meanwhile,  our  financial  system  continues  to  enjoy  stability.  South  Africa’s  banks 
remain sound and appropriately capitalised. Growth in credit to the private sector has 
not deviated significantly from nominal GDP2 growth in the past few years.  
                                                           
2 gross domestic product 
Page 4 of 11 
 In fact, expressed as a deviation from its trend, the credit-to-GDP gap currently stands 
at  a  negative  3.9%.  In  contrast  to  many  other  emerging  markets,  inflows  of  non-
resident  capital  (be  they  portfolio  flows  or  bank  loans)  have  not  spilled  over  into 
excessive  domestic  credit  growth.  Equally,  residential  property  prices  have  been 
subdued since the global financial crisis. 
 Where does South Africa stand at present? 
 Improved  policy  performance  towards  the  goals  of  price  and  financial  stability  has 
resulted  in  lesser  volatility  of  interest  rates,  which  in  itself  is  good  for  long-term 
economic growth as it helps to smooth economic cycles and reduces the uncertainty 
that investors face when they assess capital spending opportunities. Between 2014 
and 2016, the policy rate increased by 200 basis points over a period of 26 months. 
By contrast, the previous tightening cycle, which began in 2006, saw the repo rate rise 
by 500 basis points over a period of equal duration. 
 Nevertheless, because of the nature of South Africa’s economy – which is a relatively 
small and open one, vulnerable to external shocks, yet one where the domestic price 
and wage formation process is fairly  rigid  – the fight to stabilise inflation is far from 
over. Throughout 2018, the SARB was concerned that the depreciation of the rand, 
together with higher oil prices, was skewing inflation risks to the upside and raising the 
odds of an overshoot of the target. This balance of risks informed the decision of the 
SARB’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to raise the policy rate by 25 basis points 
in November 2018, reversing a cut of a similar magnitude in March of the same year.  
 In  subsequent  months,  though,  the  combination  of  downside  inflation  surprises, 
continued softness in global food prices, and the stabilisation in the exchange rate led 
the  SARB  to  revise  downwards  its  inflation  projections.  As  of  the  MPC  meeting  in 
May 2019, the SARB projects headline inflation to average 4.5% in 2019, 5.1% and 
2020 and 4.5% in the fourth quarter of 2021. Inflation should thus remain within target 
over the forecasting period. 
  Page 5 of 11 
 Meanwhile,  core  inflation  is  expected  to  average  4.8%  in  2020  (compared  with  a 
forecast of 5.5% six months ago) and 4.5% in 2021. The MPC assessed the overall 
risks to the inflation outlook to be more or less evenly balanced. The recent downward 
trend in inflation outcomes were welcomed. As previously indicated, the MPC prefers 
inflation  to  inflation  to  stabilise  at  around  the  midpoint  of  the  target  range.  Future 
adjustment the monetary policy stance will be informed by a careful assessment of the 
balance of risks to the inflation outlook.  
 While oil  prices,  electricity  prices  and the  rand  continue  to  pose upside  risks  to the 
inflation outlook, these are offset by the downside risks emanating from the weakness 
in demand and the projected inability of sluggish economic growth to close the output 
gap even by the end of the forecasting horizon. Beyond the volatility of GDP from one 
quarter to the next, economic activity has disappointed over the past year. From 1.9% 
six months ago, our model’s projection for GDP growth in 2019 has now been revised 
to  just  1.0%.  And  while  an  acceleration  is  expected  over  the  next  two  years,  the 
projections for 2020 and 2021 (1.8% and 2.0% respectively) only indicate, at best, a 
sluggish  recovery  in  the  absence  of  implementing  reforms  to  restore  confidence, 
attract investment, support growth, and rebuild buffers.  
 Should the policy framework be reviewed? 
 As economic growth continues to disappoint, some observers might feel that the SARB 
is  not  doing  enough  to  help  kick-start  economic  activity  –  or,  in  a  word,  that  the 
inflation-targeting framework may be less appropriate now than it was in the previous 
decade,  when  growth  was  dynamic  and  inflation  cycles  were  more  demand-driven 
than is currently the case.  
 This  debate  does  not  occur  in  isolation.  In  many  countries,  economists  and 
policymakers are questioning the surprising lack of sensitivity of inflation to shifts in 
demand and unemployment, the trend decline in neutral real interest rates, and the 
efficacy of monetary policies as central banks get closer to the effective lower bound 
on interest rates.  
Page 6 of 11 
 The  mix  of  subdued  demand  growth,  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rates  is  keeping 
alive talk of  ‘secular stagnation’, although economists disagree  on whether this is a 
temporary phenomenon linked to post-crisis adjustments or a more permanent one. 
 It is, however, important to take into account the differences between countries and 
be wary of ‘one size fits all’ recommendations. Some people, for example, look at the 
rigidity  of  expected  and  actual  inflation  in  the  advanced  economies,  and  question 
whether monetary policy should more formally incorporate real economic targets in its 
framework.  In  South  Africa,  however,  the  period  of  relative  stability  in  inflation 
expectations  has  been  much  shorter  than  in  economies  like  the  United  States, 
Germany or Japan. There have been, admittedly, some encouraging developments of 
late,  like  the  lower  pass-through  of  exchange  rate  variations  to  prices  and  the 
moderation in unit labour costs. But these dynamics are not yet fully understood, and 
the  SARB  cannot  therefore  be  sure  whether  they  indeed  represent  a  structural, 
permanent shift towards lower and more stable inflation. 
 Consequently, alterations to the monetary policy framework at this stage would create 
the  risk  of  confusion  among  economic  agents  and  market  participants.  At  worst,  it 
could mean de-anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  reversing  the gains  of  the  past 
few years.  
 For now, it appears to us that a strategy of limiting inflation volatility and hence the risk 
premium  embedded  in  the  cost  of  capital  in  South  Africa  is  the  best  approach  to 
support medium-term economic growth. Our internal research, for example, suggests 
that  the  country  could  benefit  from  somewhat  lower  borrowing  costs  if  inflation 
expectations  were  credibly  anchored  at  around  4.5%.  But  because  of  its  structural 
current account deficit, South Africa has to compete with peers to attract international 
capital. Such gains, therefore, cannot be neglected. 
 Some people might also wonder whether our current inflation target range of 3-6% is 
too  high  or  not  wide  enough,  and  whether  it  consequently  imposes  unnecessary 
constraints  on  the  economy.  However,  as  I  have  alluded  to  earlier,  the  standard 
deviation of inflation since 2010 has been 0.9 percentage points.  
Page 7 of 11 
 This  suggests  that  the  current  band  is  wide  enough  to  allow  for  normal  cyclical 
fluctuations  in  inflation  while  limiting  target  misses  to  the  minimum,  provided  that 
expectations are anchored close to the target’s midpoint. It is also important to note 
that many of South Africa’s emerging market peers have lower or narrower inflation 
target bands than our country, yet their trend economic performance has been better 
over  the  past  few  years,  with  no  evidence  of  undue  constraints  from  the  monetary 
policy framework. 
 Equally,  alternative  anchors  to  the  inflation  target  would  be  difficult  to  implement  in 
South Africa. Prior to inflation targeting, the SARB, like many other central banks at 
the  time,  used  monetary  aggregates  as  a  key  guideline.  However,  the  relationship 
between  money  growth  and  inflation  became  too  erratic  to  validate  the  role  of  the 
former as a reliable lead guide to the latter. Private credit growth, which is the main 
counterpart of money supply, does at times play a role in driving inflation, yet economic 
and  financial  cycles  do  not  always  coincide,  and  the  latter  generally  has  a  longer 
duration.  Excess  focus  on  credit  growth  in  a  monetary  policy  framework  would 
therefore  risk  missing  key  cyclical  influences  on  inflation.  Finally,  using  a  currency 
anchor in an open economy like South Africa, with its large commodity share of exports 
resulting in strong terms-of-trade variations, would bring unnecessary real economic 
costs in the pursuit of exchange rate stability. 
 The SARB’s role in South Africa, a developing state 
 But does all of this mean that, under the current framework, there is little that monetary 
policy  can  do  to  assist  in  the  build-up  of  stronger,  sustainable  and  more  inclusive 
growth? We do not think so. Admittedly, the poor economic performance of the past 
few years highlights the urgency for South Africa to boost its growth rate and deal with 
the problems of high unemployment, poverty and inequality. Investment needs, both 
in public infrastructure and in the private sector, are large, and the need for capital to 
be adequately channelled to fund these needs is obvious. But in South Africa, like on 
the rest of the continent, many capital spending requirements can probably be met by 
a  more  efficient  use  of  existing  capital,  stricter  procurement  processes,  and  the 
reduction in wasteful expenditure. Many of these policies fall outside of the remit of a 
central bank. 
Page 8 of 11 
  Politicians  may  sometimes  query  why  central  banks  (like  the  SARB)  do  not  play  a 
greater role in funding development needs, especially in those sectors where the level 
of risk and the duration of projects make it a highly risky investment for private lenders. 
But public development finance institutions already exist in South Africa, and their role 
can  be  leveraged  through  more  efficient  partnerships  with  the  private  sector. 
Involvement of the central bank, by contrast, would risk creating conflicts with its other 
mandates and eroding its trust with the public. 
 What  a  central  bank  like  the  SARB  is  best  placed  to  do,  however,  is  to  create  the 
appropriate conditions for the flow of savings to investment in the economy. Price and 
financial  stability  are  indeed  crucial  to  building  the  confidence  of  households, 
especially lower-income households, for them to accumulate savings, as they are less 
likely  to  fear  future  capital  losses.  At  the  same  time,  properly  functioning  financial 
markets and a sound banking system would ensure that risk is fairly rewarded and, as 
such, this would reduce the risk of capital misallocation. 
 Whereas  the  SARB  fully  comprehends  that  it  should  carry  out  its  mandate  in  the 
interest  of  sustainable  growth  for  our  economy,  it  also  understands  that  inclusive 
growth  and  financial  inclusion  are  prerequisites  for  sustainable  growth.  While  the 
SARB  does not  currently  have  an explicit  financial  inclusion  mandate  (although  the 
Financial Sector Regulation Act of 2017 (FSR Act) mandates the Prudential Authority 
(PA)  to  ‘support’  financial  inclusion),  as  stated  in  the  SARB’s  National  Payment 
System (NPS) Vision 2025,3 financial inclusion is viewed as a ‘cross-industry public 
policy  initiative’.  Collaboration  is  therefore  imperative  as  it  helps  to  drive  the 
interoperability and ubiquity of payment services. It also enables payment services to 
meaningfully leverage new channels (such as mobile phones), new functionality (such 
as  instant  payments),  and  new  technologies  (such  as  application  programming 
interfaces (APIs) and distributed ledger technology (DLT)).  
                                                            
3  Available  at  https://www.resbank.co.za/RegulationAndSupervision/NationalPaymentSystem(NPS)/ 
Documents/Overview/Vision%202025.pdf.  
Page 9 of 11 
 From  a  payments  perspective,  measures  such  as  (a) promoting  competition, 
(b) enhancing  access  to  payment  systems,  (c)  making  the  regulatory  environment 
more enabling, and (d) promoting collaboration are therefore identified as being the 
most helpful in advancing financial inclusion.  
In line with this, one of the recommendations in the policy paper on the Review of the 
National Payments System (Act 78 of 1998) also advocates for the enablement of non-
bank institutions to provide payment services that involve the pooling of funds (e.g. e-
money, remittances, transactional accounts and others) independently and without the 
need to partner with banks. This is with a view to establish a level playing field for both 
banks and companies that offer money transfer services and/or transactional services 
while also establishing a regulatory framework that will address the pooling of funds 
by non-banks when they provide such payment services.  
 While central banks need to remain alive to changes in their operating environment 
and  stay  relevant  to  their  context,  the  German  Development  Institute  made  some 
interesting  observation  that  can  serve  as  guiding  principles  when  considering 
challenges  that  may  come  with  mandating  central  banks  with  developmental 
objectives: 
    Trade-offs between developmental and stabilisation objectives: central banks 
are likely to struggle if they are mandated to achieve too many objectives but 
have too few policy instruments to pursue these objectives.  
  A  wider  mandate  may  give  too  much  power  to  institutions  that  have  limited 
accountability: often when central banks seek to play a promotional role, the 
performance of relevant developmental policies is not systematically evaluated 
and regularly reported on.  
  Central  banks  with  a  wider  developmental  mandate  may  face  significant 
political pressure to pursue developmental policies at the expense of stability. 
Conclusion 
 To conclude, allow me to reiterate a few important issues:  The South African Reserve 
Bank certainly has a role to play in the context of growth and development in South 
Page 10 of 11 
 Africa, and I would submit that it is indeed playing its appropriate role, in line with its 
assigned  mandate.  The  SARB’s  mandate  forms  an  integral  part  of  economic  and 
development  policy,  and  this  is  what  our  founding  fathers  and  mothers  envisaged 
when they drafted the Constitution. 
 It is important to not conflate issues of mandate, ownership and independence.  
 The current monetary policy framework has served the SARB and South Africa well, 
and  while  continuous  improvements  and  refinements  should  be  welcomed,  any 
fundamental  changes  to  the  policy  framework  would  need  to  be  underpinned  by  a 
convincing problem statement.  
 The SARB serves development best by doing what it knows it can do well, and that is 
what forms part of our mandate. At a time when central banks, somehow against their 
will, became  ‘the only game in town’, in Mohamed El-Erian’s words,  trying to reach 
beyond their mandate would probably trigger too big a risk of a loss of legitimacy. Not 
well-considered  broadening  central  mandates  will  likely  complicate  the  trade-off 
between  independence  and  accountability,  whilst  also  complicating  the  conduct  of 
monetary  and  financial  stability  policies  given  likely  tension  that  may  arise  with 
developmental policies. 
 Thank you. 
  Page 11 of 11 
 