Burkhard Balz: Digital transformation – a central bank perspective
Speech by Mr Burkhard Balz, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at
the 2nd EBF Cloud Banking Conference, Brussels, 9 July 2019.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today. Having spent several years in the
European Parliament, it is always a pleasure to be back in Brussels.
Wim  Mijs  and  Roberto  Viola  have  already  given  us  some  very  interesting  thoughts  on  cloud
services. 
Now I would like to talk from the perspective of a central bank and supervisory authority and in
particular, about why digital transformation interests us, and what opportunities and challenges it
may have in store for us.
2 Digital transformation, cloud services and the Bundesbank
Ladies and gentlemen,
While  no  one  can  predict  the  future  with  certainty,  we  know  one  thing  for  sure  –  digital
transformation is here, it’s now and it’s big. It changes the way we live and work. 
In the financial sector, digital transformation has thrown up numerous questions, even leading
some to ask whether banks or central banks will still be needed in future. 
For  instance,  some  observers  have  already  declared  that  the  days  of  government-issued
currencies are numbered. 
Following the hype about crypto-tokens like Bitcoin, “stablecoins” – crypto-tokens or accounts
whose value is pegged to existing fiat currencies or a basket of currencies – such as Facebook’s
Libra have recently dominated the headlines. 
I will be brief on this point: crypto-tokens currently do not pose a risk to monetary or financial
stability. Yet gaps may occur where they fall outside the scope of regulators’ authority or where
there is an absence of international standards.
Any  wider  use  of  new  types  of  crypto-tokens  would  therefore  warrant  close  scrutiny.  Their
technical stability must be evaluated as well as their impact on monetary and financial stability. 
Be assured that we will monitor potential risks very closely and in a coordinated fashion, and
consider multilateral regulatory responses as needed. 
Let  us  now  take  a  step  back  and  talk  more  generally  about  digital  transformation  and  central
banks. Why does digital transformation interest us at the Bundesbank? 
First, digital transformation has far-reaching effects on the overall economy. It affects economic
activity, capacity and inflation. 
As a central bank with a mandate to ensure price stability, it is important that  we  are  able  to
gauge such developments and anticipate possible repercussions.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  addition,  digital  transformation  brings  about  fundamental  changes  in  working  modes  and
business models of the financial sector. 
Established banks are challenged by new, agile players. Existing value chains are disrupted
and redesigned. 
From  the  perspective  of  banking  supervision  and  financial  stability,  in  particular,  we  must
keep an eye on these developments and the potential risks they may create. I will address
this topic in more detail later on. 
Finally, digital transformation has very direct effects on the day-to-day work of central banks. We,
too, must become more digital so (that) we can do our job (even) better. 
Let me elaborate on this. We at the Bundesbank – much like other central banks, of course –
have already been in the process of going digital for a long time.
However,  digital  transformation  has  taken  on  a  different  dynamic  as  a  result  of  recent
technological  breakthroughs  in  fields  such  as  machine  learning,  process  automation  and
distributed ledger technology. 
We therefore decided to examine more closely the potential and possible applications of these
new  technologies.  We  wanted  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  larger-scale  digitalisation  concepts
early on and at the level of our institution as a whole. 
To achieve this, we set up an interdisciplinary committee to promote digitalisation topics at an
early  stage  and  across  departments.  Building  on  this,  we  are  currently  working  on  a  “digital
agenda” for the entire Bundesbank.
In this context, we are also discussing the opportunities and challenges related to cloud services.
Cloud service providers offer a wide range of services, supplying storage space or computing
power, making developer platforms available or providing software and web applications.
Outsourcing activities and processes by using such services can be an efficient way to benefit
from  the  division  of  labour.  It  allows  companies  to  save  costs  and  resources,  use  synergies,
optimise processes and gain access to specialist knowledge.
And  central  banks  may  benefit  from  this,  too.  The  Bundesbank,  for  instance,  already  applies
cloud services in several areas. 
In particular, we are examining how cloud services may help to improve agility, data analysis and
research methodologies.
In economic research, for instance, demands for scalability have become apparent that can
hardly be met by using exclusively internal IT resources.
This is due, amongst other things, to the increasing focus on microdata, which requires the
processing of considerably larger volumes of data.
That said, central banks, in particular, must be aware that relying on cloud services brings about
new challenges. 
Security  concerns  remain,  especially  as  most  large  cloud  service  providers  are  located
outside the European Union.
In an increasingly consolidated market with just a few big suppliers of cloud services, “lock-
in risks” should not be neglected.
The matter of how to effectively protect market-critical infrastructures needs to be analysed
thoroughly. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Concerns about data confidentiality must be dealt with. 
And reputational risks must also be kept in mind.
3 Implications for supervision and regulation
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  have  already  mentioned  that  digital  transformation  is  fundamentally  changing  the  financial
sector. 
Don’t get me wrong here. We are not talking about “evolution”, about banking adapting to the
wants  and  needs  of  a  digital  generation  –  we  are  talking  about  a  true  “disruption”  that  may
change the financial sector for good. 
Digital transformation is shifting basic economic forces that shape the sector in all respects. 
Technology and societal change  have  fuelled  new  business  models.  For  example,  the  rise  of
platforms  has  turned  existing  structures  provided  by  many  credit  institutions  in  parallel  –  like
branches, ATMs or product development – from strategic assets into costs. 
Conversely, scaling up business has become more important, as marginal costs of providing an
already existing digital service to an additional customer may be pretty much zero. 
Another  shift  concerns  cooperation:  given  the  speed  at  which  new  business  models  may
penetrate markets, cooperation has become even more important, as it helps to react to market
developments more quickly. 
With large technology firms operating across borders and being strong potential competitors to
existing financial institutions, pressure to cooperate has increased even more. 
This is just to give you an idea of the current thrust of change. However, digital transformation is
not a straightforward story. We do not know where it will lead us. 
Technology,  society  and  financial  services  co-evolve.  To  this  day,  we  have  not  seen  any
dominant pattern. 
Instead, digital transformation has even increased differentiation within the sector. In other words,
complexity has increased.
And all of this has implications for the Bundesbank in its role as a supervisory and regulatory
agency. 
Take  the  boundaries  of  the  financial  sector  as  an  example:  new  enterprises  have  joined  the
market which sometimes provide just one of the process steps that make up a banking service
(customer onboarding or credit scoring, for instance) or technical support processes (for mobile
payments, for example) in partnership with banks. 
As  a  result,  the  boundaries  of  the  financial  sector  have  become  somewhat  blurred.  And
regulators need to address this blurriness. 
Let me give you a more concrete idea of this problem by returning to the issue of cloud services. 
Banks increasingly outsource activities using cloud services from external providers. This gives
rise to new challenges, as I have already mentioned.
From a supervisory perspective, these challenges mean more risks. In order to deal with these
risks, someone – first of all – needs to assume responsibility. 
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the status quo, the rules are quite clear. External providers that do not themselves perform
business subject to the supervisory rules do not fall within the scope of regulation. 
It is the supervised institutions that bear full responsibility for any risks arising from cooperation
with an external service provider. 
Therefore,  the  institutions  themselves  must  ensure  that  the  risks  remain  manageable  –  for
instance, by including relevant terms and conditions to this effect in cooperation agreements. 
Or  by  considering  from  the  outset  how  they  can  keep  their  business  up  and  running  if  the
partnership is terminated unexpectedly.
So  this  sums  up  the  conditions  de  jure.  But  are  they  always  appropriate  to  the  economic
conditions? 
Depending  on  the  individual  case,  the  picture  can  be  quite  different.  Where  credit  institutions
work with large technology firms, such firms’ negotiating power might be so large that institutions
have difficulty imposing the conditions needed to make risks manageable. 
We also have to make sure that certain tasks are not outsourced simply because we can afford
to be more relaxed about dealing with the resulting risks outside the regulated enterprise.
The more the boundaries between sectors become blurred and the more intensively banks work
with non-licensed enterprises, the more relevant discussions like this will become.
One could ask whether certain activities of external providers should be supervised. This could
indeed help to contain risks to financial services. 
However,  it  is  by  no  means  clear  how  such  activity-based  supervision  could  be  organised.
What’s  more,  that  should  not  relieve  banks  and  other  supervised  financial  institutions  of  their
responsibilities. 
Therefore, we are still in the early stages of this debate.
Let me address another consequence of the digital transformation for supervisors. 
The sheer complexity of matters becomes challenging. For example, ten years ago, IT-related
supervisory standards were fairly manageable. 
Nowadays, specialisation within this risk category is playing an increasingly important part. 
Knowledge  of  IT  risks  needs  to  be  updated  constantly.  Information  sharing  between
supervisory authorities across national borders has become a major factor, and knowledge
management is becoming a key task in this regard. 
This relates to other topics as well. For example, when evaluating a technology-driven business
model of a new company involved in financial services, supervisory authorities today often need
to combine legal, economic and technical expertise.
In  these  situations,  it  is  no  longer  possible  for  a  single  person  to  make  a  comprehensive
assessment. 
Supervisory  authorities  thus  need  to  learn  to  cope  with  IT-related  content  and  an  agile
environment – much like the institutions themselves. 
This  means  that  supervisory  authorities  will  have  to  face  up  to  topics  such  as  maintaining  IT
skills  within  their  organisation  and  finding  a  suitable  organisational  setup  to  tackle  complex
questions that arise in today’s financial sector. 
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
So it’s not just about setting the right framework for digital finance. Organisational matters also
become crucial to the effective enforcement of our regulatory framework.
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
I  promised  you  to  shed  some  light  on  digital  transformation  from  the  perspective  of  a  central
bank. 
So  please  forgive  me  for  concluding  with  the  typical  remark  of  a  central  banker:  “There  are
opportunities. And there are also risks”. 
While  harbouring  enormous  possibilities,  digital  transformation  also  poses  quite  substantial
challenges.  In  particular,  it  reshapes  the  financial  system  in  a  way  we  still  do  not  fully
comprehend. This throws up new kinds of questions that require new answers. 
It  is  the  task  of  central  banks,  supervisors,  legislators  and  market  participants  alike  to  shape
these developments. 
Ultimately, digital transformation will be what we make of it.
Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
