John C Williams: Monetary policy and the economic outlook
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  Euromoney  Real  Return  XIII:  The  Inflation-Linked  Products  Conference
2019, New York City, 4 September 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Thank you for the opportunity to speak this morning. In a speech Chair Powell gave last month,
he said, “Low inflation seems to be the problem of this era, not high inflation.”  Persistently low
inflation is just one of the reasons the theme of this conference is very timely.
Our Dual Mandate Goals
1
And  inflation  is  one  of  the  topics  I’m  going  to  address  today.  The  Fed  has  two  goals  set  by
Congress:  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  These  are  also  known  as  the  dual
mandate.  When  I  talk  about  price  stability,  our  objective  is  to  keep  the  inflation  rate  near  our
symmetric  2  percent  goal,   so  understanding  inflation  data  and  how  it  fits  into  the  broader
economic picture is critically important.
2
This  morning  I’m  going  to  set  the  scene  for  that  broader  economic  picture  and  explain  how
changes in the landscape influenced the rate adjustment the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) made in July. I’ll then discuss the challenges on the horizon and how they feed into my
thinking on monetary policy.
This is as good a time as any to remind everyone that the views I express today are mine alone
and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  others  in  the
Federal Reserve System.
The Economic Outlook
If  you  do  an  online  search  about  recent  economic  developments,  the  word  “uncertainty”  will
come up a lot. And it’s true that uncertainty, both at home and abroad, is playing an important role
in my thinking about the economic outlook and monetary policy, as I’ll discuss shortly.
But when you take a step back and look at where things stand today relative to our goals, the
economy is in a favorable place. The current expansion is the longest on record. The economy
continues to grow at a moderate pace, as seen in the latest GDP numbers. And this growth has
supported  month  after  month  of  job  gains  and  a  pickup  in  wage  growth  in  the  past  couple  of
years.
Furthermore, the overall unemployment rate is near the lowest it has been in 50 years. And the
benefits of the strong labor market have been broad across the population: Unemployment rates
for African-Americans and Hispanics, while still higher than the overall rate, are near their all-time
lows.  These  low  rates  aren’t  just  a  fluke  of  how  unemployment  is  measured  in  the  official
statistics—the  broadest  measure  of  underemployment,  called  U-6,  is  at  its  lowest  level  since
2000. These are all very positive signs when it comes to assessing our maximum employment
goal.
The  economy  is  in  a  good  place,  but  not  without  risk  and  uncertainty  (there,  I  said  it!).
Persistently low inflation is a key area of my attention, with the core PCE inflation rate—which
strips out volatile food and energy prices—running at 1.6 percent, nearly half a percentage point
below our 2 percent longer-run target.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
On  its  own,  inflation  somewhat  below  our  longer-run  goal  would  not  be  such  a  big  deal,
especially with our economy strong. But the broader context is important. Ongoing disinflationary
pressures from abroad, and the risk that inflation expectations in the U.S. may have drifted down
after many years of inflation running below 2 percent, form an important part of this picture.
If we look beyond the headline GDP figure, which remains good, there are more mixed signals
coming  from  different  sectors.  Robust  consumer  spending  is  balanced  by  signs  of  slowing
business investment. We’ve also seen a decline in exports and weakening manufacturing data,
reflecting slowing global growth and uncertainty related to trade and geopolitical risks.
I am carefully monitoring this nuanced picture and remain vigilant to act as appropriate to support
continuing growth, a strong labor market, and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation.
Monetary Policy Adjustments
This brings me to our decision to lower the federal funds rate in July and how that fits into recent
history. Cast your minds back to a year ago, when the Fed was continuing along the path of
normalizing  monetary  policy.  This  context  provides  useful  information  for  how  and  why  our
stance has evolved over time.
During  the  summer  of  2018,  the  economy  was  growing  above  trend  as  businesses  rode  the
wave of fiscal stimulus. The unemployment rate had fallen below 4 percent, a figure not seen
since the peak of the tech boom in 2000. The global outlook was still quite positive, and inflation
was  close  to  our  2  percent  goal. Against  that  backdrop,  very  gradually  bringing  interest  rates
back to more normal levels was appropriate in order to keep the economy on a sustainable path
of growth.
But  the  economic  outlook  and  the  uncertainty  around  that  outlook  have  evolved  considerably
since then. While there’s not been a dramatic change seen in the overall numbers yet, the more
detailed picture that emerged by summer of this year pointed to an outlook of slowing growth and
inflation  falling  short  of  our  goal.  This  in  turn  argued  for  a  somewhat  more  accommodative
monetary policy stance.
The combination of muted inflation, slowing global growth, and uncertainties related to trade and
other global developments led the FOMC to adjust the federal funds rate down by a quarter of a
percentage point and conclude the run-off of the Fed’s balance sheet two months earlier than
previously indicated.
Our policy actions and communications have contributed to an easing of financial conditions that
should help sustain the expansion and get us closer to our dual mandate goals.
Challenges on the Horizon
When I think about the road ahead, my number one goal is to keep the expansion on track. This
is how we will keep unemployment low and bring inflation back to 2 percent. I will be watching
closely at how both domestic and broader, global developments unfold.
At present, slowing global growth and geopolitical uncertainty pose particular challenges. In its
latest World Economic Outlook report, the International Monetary Fund downgraded its projection
3
for global growth and highlighted downside risks.
Slower global growth reduces demand for our exports and puts a dampener on both U.S. inflation
and  growth  prospects.  And  these  aren’t  just  projections  for  the  future—we’re  seeing
manifestations  of  slowing  growth  around  the  world  now.  Germany,  the  UK,  and  China  are  all
experiencing slowdowns, and the euro area is of particular concern. In response, the European
Central Bank and several other central banks have either adjusted, or indicated they will adjust
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
their monetary policy stance to support their economies.
These concerns about global growth are compounded by broader geopolitical uncertainty. The
risk of a no-deal Brexit for the UK is looming large, the political situation in Italy remains fraught,
political tensions continue in Hong Kong, and Argentina’s economy is coping with a debt crisis.
On our own shores, concerns around trade policy with China are adding to an uncertain picture.
My  contacts  in  the  business  community  have  said  this  is  making  them  more  cautious  about
investment. The effects of this angst are already showing up in the investment numbers.
An additional fly in the ointment, if you will, is the recently released downward revision for GDP
growth covering last year and an announced estimate of a sizable downward revision to payroll
employment.  One  implication  of  these  revisions  is  that  the  economy’s  underlying  momentum
was already somewhat less robust than previously thought, even before recent developments
pointed to a less rosy outlook.
The Path Forward
So what will the response from the Fed be to all of these developments? Our role is to navigate a
complex and at times ambiguous outlook to keep the economy growing and strong.
As events unfold and conditions evolve, it’s critical we understand which developments are mere
bumps in the road and those that will affect the outlook in a material way over the longer term.
That  means  maintaining  a  data-dependent  approach  that  takes  into  account  the  risks  and
uncertainty that are weighing on the economy.
I  will  continue  to  consult  everything  from  very  granular  data  about  individuals’  experiences  of
employment conditions, through to the macro projections for global growth. We need to consider
all of the information available and be flexible in our response.
Conclusion
Low  inflation  is  indeed  the  problem  of  this  era.  The  current  outlook  of  moderate  growth,  low
unemployment, but stubbornly low inflation is a reflection of the broader economic picture—the
July  rate  adjustment  an  appropriate  response  to  ease  financial  conditions  and  support  the
economy.
How the U.S. outlook evolves in the future is fundamentally tied to the fortunes of the economies
around the world. As I look ahead, I’m keeping a keen eye on all the data, both domestic and
global, and the implications for our economy. With an uncertain outlook, vigilance and flexibility
are essential for achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability.
Persistently  low  inflation,  heightened  uncertainty,  and  global  cross-currents  make  this  a
particularly challenging time for monetary policy, and my laser focus is on doing the best we can
to support a strong economy and achieve our 2 percent inflation goal.
Thank you.
1
2
3
Jerome  H.  Powell, Challenges for Monetary Policy, speech delivered at the “Challenges for Monetary Policy”
symposium, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 23, 2019.
See the FOMC’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, as amended effective January
29, 2019.
International Monetary Fund. 2019. World Economic Outlook Update: Still Sluggish Global Growth. Washington,
D.C., July.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
