25th ASSIOM FOREX Congress
 Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Rome, 2 February 2019
Recent economic developments
Since  mid-2018  the  global  economy  has  been  slowing.  The  euro  area  has 
recorded a significant weakening of productive activity; in Italy it has declined. 
Several factors, some of which are temporary, have contributed to the deterioration 
of the macroeconomic situation; the foreign demand outlook, firms’ expectations 
and investment trends have also worsened.
In the second half of 2018, industrial production in the euro area declined by 
0.5 per cent. The fall was sharpest in Germany (2.2 per cent) and Italy (0.8 per cent), 
in part owing to the automotive sector’s compliance with the new international 
legislation on emissions from light-duty vehicles. 
In  Italy  domestic  demand  was  affected  by  heightened  uncertainty,  initially 
linked to doubts about the country’s stance on participation in the single currency 
and then to the difficult passage of the budget law, marked by clashes with the 
European Commission that were not resolved until the end of the year. The resulting 
increase in the risk premium on government debt was transmitted to private sector 
borrowing costs at a time when share prices were falling.
Our latest growth projections for Italy in 2019 published in January’s Economic 
Bulletin stand at 0.6 per cent, in line with those of the leading national and international 
forecasters,  but  with  significant  risks  on  the  downside.  Compared  with  the  early 
December estimates – when the central projection was for 1.0 per cent growth –  
the revision mostly reflects the incorporation of unfavourable economic data that 
have  since  become  available,  confirmed  by  those  for  the  fourth  quarter  released 
this week by Istat. Other contributory factors were the cutbacks in investment plans 
reported by firms in our surveys and the worsening of foreign demand expectations. 
The  projections  take  account  of  the  support  given  to  aggregate  demand  in 
the expansionary budgetary measures for 2019, whose effective contribution will 
depend on how they are implemented. The agreement reached by the Government 
and the European Commission has partially lowered tensions in the government 
securities market, with generally positive effects on demand. Economic activity 
will benefit from the maintenance of highly accommodative monetary conditions.
The  projections  for  this  year  and  the  subsequent  two-year  period,  which 
indicate  a  return  to  growth  of  around  1  per  cent,  are  subject  to  notable  risk 
factors originating both inside and outside of Italy. The main external factors are 
the performance of foreign trade, vulnerabilities in emerging countries, and the 
eventual  terms  of  the  UK’s  departure  from  the  European  Union.  On  the  home 
front, interest rates on government securities remain a significant risk factor.
The protectionist stance of US trade policy vis-à-vis China, with which a 
complex negotiation is under way, and the European Union, already hit by last 
year’s introduction of aluminium and steel tariffs, could be accentuated. Further 
uncertainty stems from the slowdown under way in the Chinese economy, partly 
linked  to  initiatives  designed  to  limit  private  sector  borrowing,  and  from  the 
difficult political and economic conditions of important emerging economies.
A no-deal Brexit could have serious consequences even if the direct impact 
on international trade, while strong for the United Kingdom, may prove limited 
for Italy and for the EU as a whole. Any financial market malfunctions could have 
major repercussions for all the countries involved and this issue is currently being 
looked at very closely. 
Together with the supervisory authorities the Italian government has prepared a 
number of contingency measures. These provide for an adequate transition period to 
guarantee the integrity and business continuity of the markets and of intermediaries 
– both British intermediaries operating in Italy and Italian intermediaries established 
in  the  UK  –  and  to  safeguard  investors  and  customers.  Important  decisions  have 
already  been  taken  by  the  European  Commission,  which  is  currently  working  to 
ensure  the  continuity  of  financial  transactions  between  European  intermediaries 
and  British  central  counterparties.  The  Single  Resolution  Board  (SRB)  has  also 
announced that it will be flexible with European banks in the event that securities 
issued in the UK no longer count towards the minimum requirement for own funds 
and eligible liabilities (MREL). As national and European authorities have recalled 
on many occasions, banks must nevertheless play an active role in the preparations 
for a no-deal scenario.
Since the mid-November peak, yield spreads between ten-year government 
bonds  and  the  corresponding  German  securities  have  narrowed  by  around  80 
basis points. At 250 basis points on average this week, the risk premium on Italian 
government bonds nonetheless remains high, around double what it was on average 
in the first four months of last year. 
4
The uncertainty surrounding fiscal policy has not disappeared. An agreement 
with the Commission was reached for 2019, but for 2020-21 numerous questions 
remain open, especially the future of the ‘safeguard clauses’, whose cost has now 
gone up to 1.2 per cent of GDP in 2020 and 1.5 per cent in 2021. Were they to 
be deactivated without any countermeasures in place, the deficit would be around  
3 per cent of GDP in both years.
For  budgetary  policy  to  support  economic  activity  effectively,  it  must 
preserve confidence in the improvement of the public accounts and the reduction 
of the ratio of debt to GDP. The volume of public sector securities to be placed 
annually on the market is still massive: almost €340 billion just for the rollover 
of securities maturing in 2019, on top of the roughly €50 billion expected to be 
needed to finance the deficit. 
Financial market conditions remain tense. Since last spring’s peak, share prices 
have come down by 12 per cent in the euro area and by 17 per cent in Italy. In the 
same period, private bond yields have risen by 40 and 100 basis points respectively 
(to 1.6 and 2.5 per cent). Italy’s divergence from the euro-area average has been 
most  evident  in  the  banking  sector,  where  stock  market  indices  have  fallen  by 
almost 40 per cent on average compared with 30 per cent in the euro area and bond 
yields have almost doubled, reaching 2.4 per cent, against an average increase of 
0.3 percentage points in the euro area as a whole.
The  higher  borrowing  costs  borne  by  Italy’s  banks  have  up  to  now  been 
transmitted to interest rates on loans to a lesser extent than in the past, thanks to the 
stronger balance sheets of credit institutions and the rebalancing of their liabilities 
towards financial instruments that are less vulnerable to changes in market interest 
rates. Signs of a moderate tightening in credit access conditions are nevertheless 
beginning to emerge from business surveys.
Last  week  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  expressed  concern  about  the 
increased downside risks surrounding the euro-area growth outlook, which could 
affect inflation developments over the medium term. The reduction in consumer 
price inflation, to 1.4 per cent in January, primarily reflects the slowdown of the 
energy component but at 1.1 per cent core inflation is still struggling to recover. 
The  transmission  of  the  increase  in  wages  to  prices  has  been  slowed  by  the 
weakness of economic activity in recent months, which has translated into lower 
profit margins for firms. The Council will continue to pursue the price stability 
objective – commonly defined as a rate of inflation below, but close to, 2 per cent 
in the medium term – with tenacity and patience. 
5
Significant monetary stimulus will be guaranteed by low key interest rates, 
the large volumes of securities in central banks’ portfolios and the reinvestment 
of  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities,  which  will  continue  for  an 
extended period of time. Should the macroeconomic conditions require it, the 
Council stands ready to utilize all the instruments at its disposal to ensure, with 
the support of aggregate demand, the rapid readjustment of inflation towards the 
price stability objective.
To reap in full the benefits of the expansionary conditions fostered by monetary 
policy requires the contribution of reforms to reduce the structural weaknesses of 
our economy, which magnify cyclical difficulties. Decisive progress must be made 
in promoting a more business and innovation-friendly environment, encouraging 
labour market participation, raising the quality of human capital and improving the 
efficiency of public services. Since 1999, Italy’s annual average growth has been  
1 percentage point below that of the euro area. In the absence of consistent structural 
progress, what at international level are cyclical slowdowns tend to be transformed 
here in Italy into stagnation and a decline in productive activity. 
The wellbeing of households depends on numerous factors but the capacity 
of the economy to grow is vital. Public investment can support it, in tandem with 
private investment, if rapidly and efficiently executed in the context of a gradual 
rebalancing of the public finances. Above all, however, interventions to strengthen 
and modernize the productive structure, to render it more dynamic and capable of 
creating additional job opportunities, must continue to play a central role in Italian 
economic policy. Even if, as with past initiatives, they will take time to bear fruit, 
their implementation can immediately support firms and households’ confidence 
and, in this way, their propensity to invest and consume.
Financial intermediaries
The  improvement  of  credit  quality  in  Italy,  under  way  since  mid-2015, 
continued in 2018. In the third quarter the non-performing loan rate decreased to 
1.7 per cent, in line with the figures prevailing before the global financial crisis. 
For business lending, the decline came to a halt in the closing months of 2018 
with the onset of the cyclical downturn. In the first nine months of 2018, also 
following a considerable number of disposals, the stock of non-performing loans 
(NPLs) decreased from €259 billion to €216 billion gross of loan loss provisions, 
and from €129 billion to €99 billion net of them. The NPL ratio declined from 
6.1 to 4.8 per cent in net terms; the coverage ratio rose by almost 4 percentage 
points, to 54 per cent.
6
For  the  significant  groups,  the  reduction  in  net  NPLs,  amounting  to  
4.5 per cent of total lending at the end of September 2018, is consistent with 
the plans that banks agreed with the supervisory authorities. The requests to 
raise the coverage ratios for the stock of NPLs, made to all euro-area significant 
banks,  take  account  of  each  bank’s  specific  situation;  they  will  be  effective 
as  of  next  year  and  envisage  the  attainment  of  full  coverage  over  a  period 
extending to 2026 for banks with relatively high net NPL ratios.
For the less significant banks, the net NPL ratio stood at 7.1 per cent at the end 
of September 2018; it exceeded 10 per cent for 50 of the 270 mutual banks, which 
accounted for about half of the total NPLs held by that category. Of the roughly  
100 intermediaries that are not mutual banks, an NPL ratio above 10 per cent was 
observed for 23 banks, accounting for one third of the NPLs of the sector. The plans 
to  reduce  NPLs  prepared  by  the  main  less  significant  banks  in  recent  months  on 
the basis of the guidelines issued by the Bank of Italy at the beginning of 2018 are 
now being examined by the Bank’s supervision department. Projects that envisage 
cooperation between banks and operators specializing in the management of NPLs 
can also be a good solution for unlikely-to-pay loans of firms in temporary difficulty.
Profitability  improved  in  2018.  In  the  first  nine  months  of  the  year,  the 
annualized  return  on  equity  rose  to  6  per  cent  for  Italian  banks  as  a  whole, 
from 4 per cent in the same period of 2017. The share of revenue absorbed by 
operating  costs,  which  averaged  65  per  cent,  nonetheless  remains  excessively 
high, especially for the less significant banks (which recorded an average share 
of 74 per cent). In the period considered, these banks saw their costs rise, while 
the  significant  groups  reduced  them;  the  gap  was  especially  wide  in  the  staff 
costs component. 
The ratio of common equity tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets (CET1 ratio) 
decreased from 13.8 to 13.1 per cent in the first nine months of 2018. The reduction 
reflected the losses connected to the tensions in the government bond market. The 
impact was greatest for the less significant banks, which generally invest a higher 
share of their assets in government bonds. 
Since the end of 2017, when it had reached a low of €280 billion, banks’ 
exposure to Italian government bonds has risen. At the end of November 2018, the 
value of the securities in banks’ portfolios stood at about €330 billion, just under 
10 per cent of total assets; it remains below the peak of €400 billion registered at 
the beginning of 2015. The purchases, which were concentrated in May and June, 
occurred in parallel with the rise in yields, at a time of weak credit demand. Banks’ 
7
investments help to stabilize government bond prices in periods of heightened 
tension and can enable subsequent capital gains if prices recover; however, they 
expose intermediaries to the risks associated with further drops in prices.
The share of securities classified in the portfolio valued at amortized cost, whose 
temporary changes in value do not affect capital, rose from 18 to 49 per cent on 
average between the end of 2017 and November 2018; it reached 61 per cent for the 
less significant banks. This increase helps attenuate the impact of fluctuations in the 
value of government bonds. The decrease from 4.2 to 3.6 years in the residual maturity 
of the securities classified in fair-valued portfolios goes in the same direction. The 
expansion in economic activity and orderly conditions on the sovereign debt market 
facilitates, together with renewed investor confidence, a gradual decline in the stock 
of government securities held in banks’ balance sheets, as shown by the significant 
reduction in exposures between the beginning of 2015 and the end of 2017.
The  global  financial  crisis,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  attendant 
double-dip  recession  led  to  a  significant  restructuring  of  Italian  banks’ 
liabilities. There has been a sharp reduction in market funding; risk premiums 
have increased owing to factors specific to the banking sector and to the changes 
in the conditions of the public finances. 
Since  2011,  the  decrease  in  interbank  funding  has  been  accompanied  by  a 
considerable increase in recourse to central bank refinancing. Over the last few 
years, in the four targeted longer-term refinancing operations carried out between 
June 2016 and March 2017, the Eurosystem allocated about €240 billion to Italian 
banks  of  the  €740  billion  destined  for  euro-area  banks.  These  operations  have 
helped to sustain the disbursement of loans to households and firms and to lower 
the cost. 
From 2011 to today, net bond issuance on the international markets, mostly 
by large banks, has been negative overall, at -€47 billion; the share of bonds in 
total  funding  has  gone  down  from  11.5  to  9.5  per  cent.  The  recent  resurfacing 
of  tensions  in  the  government  securities  market  has  made  it  harder  to  access 
international  markets.  The  rate  of  return  demanded  by  investors  on  uncovered 
senior bank bonds with a 5-year maturity is currently around 1 percentage point 
higher than that demanded for France and Germany’s main banks.
The Eurosystem’s liquidity support to banks will continue for as long as the 
euro  area’s  financial  situation  requires  it.  However,  restoring  normal  access  to 
wholesale markets is a prerequisite for the proper functioning of banking activities; 
8
it will also help to limit the costs incurred by medium-large banks for the creation 
of a buffer capable of absorbing losses, as provided for by the new European rules 
on crisis management. In the course of this year, the SRB will set an MREL target 
that is binding for most of Italy’s significant banking groups, providing an adequate 
transition period for them to reach it, if necessary.
During the debate that led to the agreement on the ‘banking package’ at the 
end of last year (which updates the rules on prudential requirements and reviews 
the criteria for setting the MREL), we pointed out on more than one occasion the 
importance of reconciling the need to guarantee appropriate amounts of liabilities 
that can be used in the event of resolution with that of ensuring they are issued 
in a gradual and orderly manner, thereby avoiding repercussions on the funding 
of the economy.
Aside  from  the  practical  difficulties  of  implementing  a  bail-in,  eligibility 
for the resolution procedure is in any case restricted to large banks when this is 
deemed to be in the public interest, justifying recourse to the Single Resolution 
Fund. In the event of a crisis for smaller banks, an orderly winding-up can only 
take place if a bank interested in acquiring assets and liabilities makes a rapid and 
systematic intervention. In the absence of a purchaser, however, there would be no 
alternatives to an ordinary or ‘atomistic’ winding-up.
This procedure, as well as destroying value, may compromise the continuity 
of  critical  services  at  local  level,  with  possible  episodes  of  more  widespread 
contagion. I believe further reflection is necessary at European level, also in light 
of the experience of the American Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FIDC), 
on the institutions and measures designed to make the exit of smaller banks from 
the market less traumatic and as economical as possible.
Italy’s  banks  must  continue  to  strengthen  their  balance  sheets  and  recover 
adequate  efficiency  and  profitability  levels  to  be  able  to  deal  with  the  current 
challenges  of  the  financial  sector  at  global  level.  More  resources  are  needed  to 
shoulder  the  costs  of  compliance,  an  area  which  has  expanded  considerably  in 
recent years and whose legislative framework still requires work in order to make 
it more proportional. Investment is required to exploit digital technology so as to 
improve the services provided to customers.
To assist growth and make the allocation of resources more efficient, we need 
a more diversified financial system. The financial needs of firms that are innovative 
and active at international level cannot be met solely by banks. Despite the progress 
9
made over the last few years, the role of capital markets is still too limited, also 
in  comparison  with  the  other  large  economies  in  continental  Europe.  Policies 
to support non-banking funding sources for firms should be pursued; banks can 
accompany and benefit from these developments by expanding and innovating the 
range of services provided.
Looking ahead, the biggest challenge is that of technology, which is drastically 
lowering  the  cost  of  transmitting,  processing  and  storing  information  and 
favouring the development of new forms of financial intermediation. Entire areas 
in the financial industry, from payment services to credit supply, from trading in 
securities to risk management, have already been heavily affected in some countries 
by  digitalization  and  the  rapid  growth  in  the  market  share  of  non-bank  entities 
(FinTech).  Additional  competitive  pressures  will  come  from  global  firms  at  the 
cutting edge of technological innovation (including the ‘Big Tech’ firms), which 
can exploit their presence in very big markets. 
The  authorities  must  ensure  adequate  forms  of  supervision  for  new 
intermediaries  that  take  account  of  their  potential  and  the  risks  associated  with 
their activities. It is especially important to encourage both FinTech companies 
and  banks  to  pay  due  attention  to  the  possible  negative  consequences  of  
cyber-attacks  in  a  system  now  steeped  in  digital  technology.  We  are  working 
alongside the other authorities and intermediaries on maintaining cyber security 
in  the  financial  sector.  We  have  also  reorganized  our  supervisory  department, 
creating dedicated structures for analysing FinTech, with the aim of anticipating 
market developments and updating the methods and tools of intervention. 
 The  prospects  for  the  Italian  economy  are  less  favourable  today  than  they 
were a year ago. They are affected by downside risks, partly originating abroad, 
but which still primarily reflect Italy’s own weaknesses, above all the uncertainty 
surrounding growth, the fiscal policy stance and the resumption of a credible path 
to reduce the burden of public debt on the economy.
A  high  sovereign  risk  premium  exacerbates  the  imbalance  of  the  public 
accounts,  undermines  the  capacity  of  fiscal  policy  to  support  the  economy  and 
limits the resources available for investment in infrastructure. The fall in the value 
of  government  securities  impacts  negatively  on  household  savings  and  leads  to 
capital losses for institutional investors, such as insurance companies and pension 
funds. Banks also face losses, with repercussions on their funding conditions on 
10
the  markets;  this  impairs  their  ability  to  supply  credit  to  the  private  sector  and 
thereby to support production.
The activation of this vicious circle has been slowed by the relatively high 
average maturity of the public debt, the expansionary monetary policy conditions 
and banks’ capitalization levels. These are positive factors that may, however, turn 
out to be insufficient in the event of sudden financial market movements, a risk that 
we have already faced in the past. 
This risk must be avoided by keeping a close watch on the public accounts  
‒ in the short and long term ‒ and through the decisive implementation of cohesive 
reforms to preserve the trust of savers and regain that of investors. The ultimate 
goal, requiring perseverance and determination, has to be that of a lasting return to 
a path of social and economic development.
11
Designed and printed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
