Anita  Angelovska  Bezoska:  Journalists  are  one  of  the  main
transmitters of monetary policy messages
Address by Ms Anita Angelovska Bezhoska, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of
Macedonia, at the Journalist Workshop - 2018, organized by the National Bank of the Republic of
Macedonia, Skopje, 25 December 2018.
 Distinguished media representatives,
Welcome to the fourth Journalist Workshop hosted by the NBRM. I am glad to see you in
greater numbers this year, which is confirmation of your interest in the topics that will be
the focus of today’s event.
Allow  me  to  take  a  brief  look  at  several  basic,  yet  important  aspects  of  central  bank
communication:
1. Why is central bank transparency and communication important and needed?
2. How has central bank communication evolved over the years? What were the challenges in
the period after the outbreak of the global crisis and how were they addressed globally?
3. Challenges in central bank communication in the Republic of Macedonia.
A  comparison  between  the  current  and  the  past  transparency  level  and  central  bank
communication  shows  an  exceptional  transformation  in  this  segment.  The  need  for
strengthening central bank transparency was brought to the fore for the first time in the 1990s,
implying  enhanced  communication  with  the  public,  including  the  media.  This  change  is
associated  with  the concept  of  central  bank  independence,  or  the  independence  of  the
monetary policy from fiscal policy. Namely, high inflation in the 1970s, feed by the inflationary bias
of  the  discretionary  fiscal  policy,  drew  a  clear  distinction  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy
objectives and instruments by granting a high level of central bank independence, on the one
hand, and setting fiscal rules, on the other. The aim was to eliminate any monetary financing of
governments and their excessive borrowing, which, as witnessed in the past, could lead to high
price volatility.
Alongside the concept of enhanced independence, greater central bank responsibility
was required, which is also achieved with greater transparency. This required introduction
of different communication and information on the policy conduct, and on central bank data and
positions,  assessments  and  expectations  for  the  economic  variables.  At  the  end  of  the  last
century, the central bank community realized that besides performing its function effectively, it
can  also  fully  achieve  its  independence,  only  if  it  applies  higher  level  of  transparency  and
developed communication within its mandate.
Yet another factor that emphasizes the need for greater central bank transparency is the
financial  market  liberalization  in  the  1990s.  The  perception  and  theory  that  the  monetary
policy is more effective if the central bank systematically surprises the markets has long been left
to oblivion, as it became clear that bringing policies through surprises and isolated steps cannot
have  a  lasting  effect  on  the  economy.  The  financial  market  liberalization  made  the  monetary
policy effectiveness increasingly dependent on market expectations for the interest rate policy,
which additionally raised the need for developed central bank communication with the public to
the degree of necessity. As an illustration of the central bank communication in the past, and
what  it  is  today,  I  would  remind  you  that  the  world’s  largest  central  bank  –  the  FED,  publicly
announced the decision on interest rates for the first time in 1994. Today, it seems unreasonable
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
for a central bank not to announce its decision on the interest rate. 
The recent global economic crisis has once again affirmed the necessity of developed
communication and transparency and has been an incentive for many central banks to
ensure proactive approach in promoting their transparency. Today, as the ECB President,
Mario Draghi, emphasized, “the central bank communication is actually a monetary policy tool in
itself”. Besides the numerous monetary instrument innovations aimed to stabilize the financial
markets  and  encourage  the  economy,  central  banks  have  begun  to  struggle  to  improve  the
quality  and  quantity  of  communication  of  their  measures,  including  their  future  measures.
Namely, the central banks not only tried to better explain the measures they took and the reasons
for doing this, but also reported on the future measures (monetary policy set-up), which is an
important novelty in the central banking operations.
Why is all this necessary? Effective communication will enable all economic agents to better
understand the reasons and the goal, and thus encourage their proper behavior for achieving the
goals. Unclear or poor communication, in turn, may jeopardize the achievement of the underlying
goals, since central banks do not directly influence the goals, but should influence the behavior of
economic agents to achieve  the  goal.  For  example,  the  central  bank  cannot  directly  influence
inflation,  but  through  its  measures  –  reducing  the  interest  rate,  or  increasing  liquidity  in  the
economy – can stimulate banks to improve the financing terms, but also borrowers to increase
demand,  which  will  move  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  in  the  desired  direction  and
achieve the inflation target. Empirical research in the central banking community does confirm
that,  globally,  the  central  bank  communication  is  key  to  maintaining  a  low  level  or  reducing
inflation and in many cases even reducing instability in the real economy.
Communication is an ongoing challenge for central banks.  It  is  undisputed  that  effective
central  bank  communication  will  always  be  marked  by  certain  flexibility  and  adaptability,
depending not only on the economic environment, but also on the public interest and trends in the
communication  and  information  networks  and  media,  which,  due  to  the  development  of
technology and digitization, are changing, advancing and improving on a daily basis. 
The constant strengthening of transparency, that is, the promotion and development of
communication with the public, including media, is a challenge for the National Bank of
the  Republic  of  Macedonia.  We  work  diligently  to  respond  to  the  challenge,  while  paying
attention to the two  points  of  communication  –  immediate  communication  with  the  public  and
communication with the media. We do our best to follow the best practices of the European
central  banking  union,  which  is  largely  confirmed  with  the  assessments  of  our
transparency.  In  doing  so,  we  not  only  struggle  to  increase  intensity,  but  also  quality  of  our
communication. Here  I  would  mention  the  practice  of  constantly  improving  the  quality  of
information and analyses we publish, improving the methodological explanations for the statistics
that we publish, timely informing of all novelties in statistical surveys, improving the structure of
our  website,  concurrent  publishing  of  statistics  and  statistical  press  releases  for  their
explanation, providing international comparability of our data through continuous implementation
of international standards. In this regard, we are in the final stage of creating an analytical tool for
easier access and search of statistics by all external users. We hope that our commitment is
noticeable for you as media representatives, who analyze our work on a daily basis, by following
the  press  releases,  data  and  positions  that  arise  from  the  central  banking  operations  in  the
country.
For us, you, the journalists, are one of the main conveyors of monetary policy messages
to the public. Not as our spokespersons, but as individuals and professionals respected by the
public, who daily follow our work, which is very often presented in tables, graphs, reviews and
data series that almost always require focused reading and analysis before being commented.
The same focus is required for our reports, where even footnotes contain important data that
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
ensure analytical and studious rather than only informative reporting. Accurately and precisely
communicated or analyzed data is crucial for timely and professional information to the public.
Unfortunately, even unintentionally inaccurate or incomplete communication or analysis of central
bank data and views, especially in times when the information/news are transmitted at the speed
of  light,  can  create  undesired  environment  for  the  economy,  especially  if  it  creates  an
unreasonable  panic  among  the  public.  Comprehensive  and  thorough  communication  requires
understanding of many methodological aspects, information and data that the NBRM uses, and
which we feel obliged to supply you with through our communication. 
Among other things, guided by our firm commitment to social responsibility, for several
years  now  we  have  hosted  this  workshop,  which  becomes  a  tradition.  This  year’s
workshop has a different format, which is the result of our attempt to follow your interest, as well
as your recommendations expressed during the successful cooperation so far. It will be focused
on  two  very  important,  but  so  far  insufficiently  covered  topics  –  the  Lending  Survey  and  the
profitability of the banking sector.
I am sure that in the period ahead, we will raise the level of transparency, by promoting the
way, the form and the channels of communication, and we will always make sure that we are
socially responsible institution whose communication with the media representatives will be at
the highest professional level and will be an example for others. I believe that we will succeed in
this by mutual correctness, respect and professionalism. 
I wish you a pleasant, successful and fruitful workshop.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
