Mugur  Isărescu:  15th  Anniversary  of  the  2004  EU  Enlargement  -
looking back, looking forward
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the
conference on the 15th Anniversary of the 2004 EU Enlargement: Looking back, looking forward,
National Bank of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 8 April 2019.
 Governor Nowotny,
Distinguished audience,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am greatly honoured by the invitation to address this audience at a time when we celebrate the
15th  anniversary  of  the  first  wave  of  EU  enlargement.  This  event  gives  me  yet  another
opportunity to say a few words about Romania, a country that I know very well. Romania was a
second wave country, the same as Bulgaria, but I am familiar with the case of the first wave
countries because I watched their course of development and I must say they paved our way to
EU membership. I will look back at Romania’s journey on the path of European integration, while
also  reminiscing  the  entire  transition  from  communism  to  democracy  and  from  a  centralised
economy to a market economy.
I believe discussing this subject is useful, since the lessons and challenges of the past have
been quite numerous and some of Romania’s peculiarities might be relevant for other countries.
Speaking of the past, I cannot help remembering that in the early nineties, when I took over as
Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  a  tremendous  effort  was  needed  –  not  only  in
Romania, but also in the other former communist countries in Central and Eastern Europe – to
go from a monobank-type system to a two-tier system. The effort was even bigger in a country
like Romania, where – after some attempts to implement reforms in the sixties and seventies –
the economic and financial system had become ever more centralised, more Stalinist-like in the
final decade of the communist regime.  
In hindsight, now that things have settled, these changes may seem like a piece of cake, but
please try to imagine how difficult it was to take the reins of an institution that had operated in the
context  of  centralised  state  planning  of  the  entire  economic  activity.  There  was  no  trace  of
monetary policy and commercial banking operations needed to be separated from central bank
operations. The former were taken over by Banca Comercială Română, later part of the Erste
Bank group, while monetary policy became the responsibility of the National Bank of Romania.
The “parting of the waters” occurred pretty quickly, but the new NBR only accounted for less than
5  percent  of  the  former  central  bank  employees,  most  of  them  in  cash  management  and
accounting. Therefore, key departments  to  the  functioning  of  a  modern  central  bank,  such  as
monetary  policy,  economic  research,  banking  supervision  and  regulation,  had  to  be  built  from
scratch.
As we have come a sufficiently long way to remember this with a smile on the face, I would like
to share with you two amusing stories I deem illustrative for the hardships of the beginning. One
dates back to the autumn of 1990. Having been recently appointed at the helm of the National
Bank of Romania, I held a press conference during which I stated that the banking system would
operate on two tiers or two floors, with the central bank on the first floor and commercial banks
on the second. The head of the institution’s commercial banking operations – the same person
who would later manage Banca Comercială Română after its separation from the National Bank
of Romania – took these words literally and immediately complained that he had just moved to
the first floor of the building and warned me that he had no intention of moving again! 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
At  around  the  same  time,  in  the  early  days  of  my  term  in  office  as  Governor,  someone
“encouraged”  me  with  the  words:  “Welcome  and  good  luck  running  an  empty  bank!”.
Unfortunately, the trials and tribulations of the first post-communist year had practically depleted
the country’s foreign exchange reserves in nine months’ time. I confess that I then felt the need to
go to the vault and feel with my own hands the gold bars – Romania’s last tangible reserve in
those days (in December 1990, gold reserves stood at 68.7 tonnes, amounting to approximately
USD 850 million) – for a boost of confidence that the rather complex economic situation might be
successfully  tackled.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  this  really  happened,  especially  now,  when
Romania’s international reserves amount to approximately 38 billion euros.
I will now move on to less amusing memories of those times. The avatars of economic transition
rendered difficult the mission of Romania’s central bank. Monetary policy, a fundamental task of
the National Bank of Romania, was facing numerous difficulties and constraints, as the process
of  lowering  inflation  was  often  undermined  by  the  need  to  pursue  conflicting  macroeconomic
objectives  or  avert  a  full-blown  banking  system  crisis.  This  was  because  Romania’s  path
towards  a  functional  market  economy  was  anything  but  smooth.  Quite  on  the  contrary,  the
process often shifted between step-ups and slowdowns, that is when it did not stall altogether. A
major  feature  of  the  domestic  economy’s  reform  was  the  priority  given,  at  the  onset  of  the
process,  to  ensuring  the  country’s  social  and  political  stability.  In  this  context,  the  preferred
choice was a gradual strategy, with reforms spread over many years, so as not to spark major
social tensions. The reason for the gradual approach was that, in December 1989, Romania’s
regime  changed  in  a  dramatic  manner,  which  was  more  painful  than  the  experience  of  other
former communist countries. 
A  completely  different  approach  was  noticeable,  for  instance,  in  Poland,  where  short-term
concerns  were  left  aside  in  order  to  create,  from  the  very  beginning,  a  climate  conducive  to
lasting economic growth based on solid foundations. This shock therapy, delivered by the then
finance minister Leszek Balcerowicz, who would later go on to become governor of the Polish
central bank, kicked off by triggering extremely high inflation (its annual average rate nearing 600
percent in 1990), but afterwards enabled a relatively steep decline in inflation to moderate levels,
where it stabilised.
In Romania, where the “shock therapy versus gradualism” dilemma was solved in favour of the
latter option, such a feat in taming inflation would not have been possible in the early years of
transition.  The  gradual  liberalisation  of  prices,  launched  in  the  autumn  of  1990,  was  broadly
concluded no earlier than towards the end-nineties, which translated into perpetually high inflation
rates. We named it corrective inflation, but it was difficult to explain repeatedly to the public that
this  kind  of  inflation  was  necessary. As  a  result,  an  inflationary  climate  became  the  norm  in
Romania. No matter which monetary policy the National Bank of Romania would have pursued at
the  time,  the  environment  in  which  it  was  implemented  was  utterly  unfavourable  for  ensuring
price stability.
Moreover, the delays in the restructuring or privatisation of state-owned companies paved the
way  for  high  levels  of  arrears. Acting  as  surrogate  money,  they  undermined  monetary  policy
restrictiveness and fuelled inflation. In addition, the disequilibria manifest at the level of the current
account could be adjusted only by purposely resorting to the exchange rate, whose depreciation
generated inflation as well. As a matter of fact, other countries which, during one transition stage
or another, had slowed down the engines of economic restructuring were also faced with such
issues, recording a more modest macroeconomic performance. Going back to the comparison
with Poland, I deem it relevant that the output loss associated with the structural changes implied
by  the  transition  to  a  market  economy  was  fully  recovered  in  1995  in  Poland,  whereas  in
Romania this occurred a hefty nine years later.
Now, it is almost two decades since Romania – EU accession negotiations had been opened.
Back then, in 2000, I served as prime-minister. In fact, I think I may say that my entire prime-
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ministership  in  2000  was  dedicated  to  laying  the  groundwork  for  Romania’s  accession  to  the
European Union. And it is worth noting that, if Romania managed to join the EU on 1 January
2007,  all  the  inherent  stumbles  notwithstanding,  the  preparation  process  started  in  2000  was
essential. And it would have been dramatic if this start had been missed.
Back then, I convinced the EU officials, particularly Romano Prodi, the President of the European
Commission, who visited Bucharest in January 2000, to have confidence in Romania’s capacity
to fulfill the accession conditions by 2007. That decision on Romania’s entry into the European
Union was a historical one, and gave further impetus to the transformation and modernization of
the Romanian society in its entirety. The tumultuous years with ups and downs in the first post-
communist  decade  were  followed  by  seven  good  years  (2000–2006),  featuring  substantial
reforms, robust economic growth and gradual disinflation.
In this context, the wager made in 2000 was won: Romania, like Bulgaria, managed to become a
EU member state in 2007, in the second enlargement wave, only three years after the group of
countries the accession of which we are now celebrating. And the medium-term development
strategy  adopted  back  then  proved  to  be  an  effective  roadmap  for  Romania’s  European
integration.
Romania has been an EU member for more than 10 years already – a long time for important
lessons to be learned. So allow me to share with you at least some of them, especially those that
cover the complex topic of economic convergence.
Having clear prospects for entering the EU favored Romania’s real convergence, acted as an
anchor and a catalyst for reform, and led to great strides towards a functional market economy.
This does not mean, however, that it was all a joyride, as we had our share of tough decisions to
make.
In the run-up to the EU entry and a few years before the outbreak of the global crisis, the National
Bank of Romania faced an economic and financial context that could be deemed as exceptional.
Massive capital inflows occurred given the existence of a significant interest rate differential and
abundant  global  liquidity,  in  the  context  of  the  gradual  removal  of  capital  controls  due  to  the
requirements  of  the  forthcoming  EU  membership.  This  led  to  a  rapid  rise  in  forex  credit,  a
sizeable nominal appreciation of the domestic currency, and booming domestic demand.
In this case, trying to cool down the economy through the standard recipe of policy rate hikes
would have been pointless, if not outright detrimental, by prompting even more capital inflows and
nominal  appreciation,  thus  creating  a  vicious  circle.  So  the  context  called  for  the  use  of
unconventional instruments. Such departures from conventional practices involved the full use of
direct  FX  interventions,  allowing  market  interest  rates  to  fall  significantly  below  the  policy  rate
through  liquidity  management,  the  active  recourse  to  reserve  requirements  and  deploying
administrative measures to control credit growth. To give you just a few examples, they involved
enforcing a maximum loan-to-value ratio, introducing debt service ceilings relative to households’
monthly disposable income (the scope of which was subsequently expanded to include non-bank
financial  institutions  engaged  in  lending),  setting  limits  to  banks’  forex  exposure  vis-à-vis
unhedged borrowers, and using differentiated coefficients in stress tests (higher for EUR than
local currency exposures, with even stricter coefficients for CHF- and USD-denominated credit).
These measures were efficient, at least to some extent. Although sometimes circumvented by
banks, they have managed to slow down forex credit growth, providing a wise solution to the
problems faced at that time by our economy.
Back then, we referred to them as unorthodox monetary policy measures, but after the crisis, the
IMF  mentioned  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  as  being  among  “the  pioneers”  of  what  later
became “macroprudential instruments”.
After the EU entry, the actual membership in this “convergence club” has fueled and enhanced
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the catching-up process. Being in the EU meant free exchange of goods and services, along with
the free movement of capital and labor, which increased trade, foreign direct investment, and
migration flows, for the benefit of economic growth in our country. Moreover, in the long run, EU
membership fostered convergence through investments from European funds.
Romania  has  certainly  come  a  long  way  in  terms  of  economic  convergence,  with  growth
resuming and gaining momentum after the global economic crisis: its GDP per capita as a share
in the EU average (based on PPS) more than doubled from 30.6 percent in 2003 to 62.7 percent
in 2017. The advance was the fastest within the group of peer countries that recorded similar
trends: for instance, Bulgaria went from 32.4 to 49.3 percent, while Hungary, the Czech Republic
and Poland, which started from a more advanced level, added between 7 and 22 percentage
points to the same indicator during 2003–2017. To a certain extent, the speed of convergence
was,  in  the  case  of  Romania,  fueled  by  the  flexibility  of  our  exchange  rate  regime.  The
movements  in  the  leu  exchange  rate  cushioned  some  unexpected  shocks  that  hindered
economic growth, keeping it at a higher level and avoiding excessive output volatility.
But, besides numbers and levels, I believe that the sustainability of real convergence is essential,
especially for EU member states like Romania, for which the obvious next stage is joining the
euro area. Indeed, to attain a certain degree of per capita income convergence before switching
to  the  euro  is  essential,  as  a  large  convergence  gap  may  complicate  business  cycle
management in the absence of independent monetary policy. And, unlike the EU, the euro area
proved it is not a “convergence club”, as its current members did not necessarily increase their
convergence level after adopting the euro. But, while the optimal level of real convergence for a
successful  euro  area  entry  is  still  a  controversial  issue,  the  consistency  and  sustainability  of
convergence are, in my opinion, at least as important as its level.
On this convergence path, I believe that it is very important to avoid divergence, even inside the
country. In Romania, one can find areas that are comparable, in terms of development and living
standards, to Western economies, but also regions that trail well behind: in 2017, the wealthiest
region in Romania was almost four times richer than the poorest one (based on regional per
capita GDP). So, even though the EU membership has acted as a catalyst for country-level real
convergence, the development gaps across the regions of Romania have actually increased.
Shortly  after  the  EU  accession,  there  was  a  surge  in  economic  optimism,  translating  into  an
acceleration in economic growth, along with a credit and real estate boom. Despite the efforts of
National  Bank  of  Romania,  which  maintained  a  prudent  policy  stance,  macroeconomic
imbalances  widened:  the  current  account  peaked  in  2007  and  remained  in  the  double-digit
territory in the next year. Unfortunately, fiscal policy poured more gas on the fire by switching to a
strongly expansionary stance after EU accession.
Thus, when the global financial crisis hit Romania in the fall of 2008, the country had already
expended all the bullets in its fiscal policy magazine and was in the unenviable position of having
the  second  largest  structural  general  government  imbalance  (around  9  percent  of  GDP)  after
Greece. There was no choice but to embark on a process of painful fiscal consolidation that was
one of the largest and least gradual in the EU. Having prudently built policy buffers in the run-up to
the financial crisis, monetary policy was able to maintain a countercyclical stance, yet it could not
preclude a large contraction in aggregate demand in 2009 and 2010. Nevertheless, the ensuing
correction in macroeconomic disequilibria created the conditions for resilient GDP growth and
the loss in output was made up for by the end of 2014.
Currently, we are in our ninth year of consecutive economic growth. There are, however, several
dimensions  of  recent  growth  that  could  have  turned  out  more  favorable.  For  instance,  the
contribution  of  investment  to  growth  was  smaller  than  it  should  have  been,  with  consumption
spending being the main driver of GDP dynamics in recent years. While there is no question that
welfare  has  increased  markedly,  the  concern  for  rendering  these  welfare  gains  sustainable
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
should prompt a switch to policies aimed at fostering investment, thus boosting the productive
potential of the economy, so that future economic growth would not lead to further widening of
macroeconomic  imbalances.  In  the  end,  the  lesson  of  the  crisis  is  that  a  short-term  focus  in
economic policies and paying no heed to accumulating macroeconomic disequilibria ought to be
avoided, as they eventually lead to suboptimal outcomes.
The  only  way  ahead  is  by  means  of  a  coherent  macroeconomic  policy  mix  and  resolute
structural reforms aimed to boost the growth potential of the economy, ensuring durable growth
and  enabling  the  economy  to  benefit  from  EU  membership.  In  Romania,  infrastructure
investment should be a major policy focus, as it would contribute the most to reducing regional
disparities  while  also  allowing  businesses  to  access  underutilized  labor  resources  –  a
particularly  welcome  development 
terms  of
macroeconomic  policy,  it  is  beyond  any  doubt  that  countercyclical  monetary  policy  favors
smooth  convergence.  This  has  always  been  one  of  the  guiding  principles  for  calibrating  the
stance  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania’s  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  for  developing  and
employing our policy tools.
the  nowadays 
labor  market. 
tight 
in 
In 
We  must  continue  on  the  road  ahead  keeping  in  mind  that  past  achievements  in  terms  of
convergence, however large, do not guarantee future success (the middle-income trap is a real
danger). For a sustainable economic convergence, we have to maintain a long-term perspective
and implement coherent policies and reforms. Moreover, having ambitious but, at the same time,
realistic  anchors  (such  as  the  EU  accession  was  for  Romania  before  2007)  does  help,  as  it
gives purpose and direction to policymakers and society as a whole.
What we need in order to move forward on the convergence path towards euro adoption is, first
of  all,  to  understand  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  coherent  economic  policy  mix,  which  should
remain  so  even  in  electoral  years.  Secondly,  it  is  important  that  Europe  remains  united. As  I
recently stated in a speech held in Bucharest, whenever things seem to look bad, I remember
the words of Jean Monnet, one of the EU founding fathers: “Europe will be forged in crises and
will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises”.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
