Benjamin E Diokno: Data Governance Seminar
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Data Governance Seminar, Manila, 14 June 2019.
 To my colleagues here in Bangko Sentral and  to our resource persons today, good morning.
Welcome to our data governance seminar. As we prepare ourselves with the data governance
seminar this morning, let me start with some food for thought:
It used to be that the problem of society is not having enough data and computing power.  Today,
what we are facing is clearly an abundance of data and almost unlimited computing power.
In  a  Forbes  magazine  article,  internationally  best-selling  author  and  strategic  business  and
technology advisor Bernard Marr notes that there are 2.5 quintillion bytes of data created each
1
day.  Further, 90% of  available data across the globe was created only in the last two years.
On  the  other  hand,  according  to  the  World  Economic  Forum,  the  entire  digital  universe  is
expected to reach 44 zettabytes by 2020, roughly 40 times more bytes than there are stars in the
observable universe.
Going by this, data is the new currency.  Understanding of data as a strategic asset is now quite
fundamental to every business and organization—the BSP included. In fact, in my recent policy
pronouncements, I always say that the Monetary Board’s decisions are always data driven and
evidence-based on market conditions.
Despite  the  significance  of  data,  even  highly  technical  and  professional  organizations  still
experience  issues  in  data  consistency,  quality,  and  timeliness.  This  affects  an  organization’s
ability to generate the data needed for high quality decisions and policies.
These seem to indicate that many organizations have yet to reach that point of being able to
effectively harness the power of their data assets.
This  is  where  data  governance,  our  topic  for  today,  becomes  most  relevant.  DAMA,  an
international  organization  of  professionals  and  standard  setters  in  data  management,  defines
data governance “as the exercise of authority and control over the management of data assets.”
Its purpose is to ensure that data is collected, processed, organized, protected, and consumed
properly,  according  to  agreed-upon  policies  and  best  practices.     It  is  about  determining  data
strategy  and  policy,  defining  standards  for  data  quality  and  delivery,  as  well  as  establishing
oversight and issue management processes. This is to ensure that the reliable and actionable
data are received by the ones who need it, when they need it, and in the way they need it.
2
Thus, a well-functioning data governance structure should guide decisions made about data and
how people and processes are expected to behave in relation to it.  Too many times, however,
this  is  left  to  chance  or  to  operate  within  silos  with  different,  if  not  competing  objectives,
sometimes to the detriment of the organization in general.
To establish a data governance program is to be able to exercise authority and deliberate control
over data and, as a result, increase the value that can be derived from our data assets. Data
governance  need  not  be  intrusive  or  invasive,  and  neither  should  it  be  restrictive.    Instead,  it
should  be  designed  around  the  best  way  data  processes  can  support  the  delivery  of  our
mandates.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Following the global financial crisis of 2007, the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision (BCBS) 
3
issued BCBS 239 covering the principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting.  
These principles, issued in January 2013, aim to strengthen banks’ risk data aggregation and risk
reporting  with  a  view  to  improving  their  risk  management,  decision-making  processes,  and
resolvability.
One of the key takeaways from BCBS 239 is Principle 1. It is entirely devoted to governance,
recognizing the importance of having a strong governance framework, risk data architecture and
IT infrastructure as preconditions to ensure compliance with the other principles in the guidelines.
The rest of the principles outline building data aggregation capabilities, reporting practices, and
tools to monitor compliance.
While  the  guidelines  are  principally  intended  for  systemically  important  banks,  many  of  the
principles may be ported over and applied to how an institution like our own should be governing
our data for our purposes, even while we explore the applications of other generally accepted
principles and best practices in data governance.
Our goal in today’s session is to jumpstart the definition of our data governance strategy.  We
have  invited  experts  from  the  industry  as  well  as  the  most  senior  data  stakeholders  in  the
organization to this workshop in order to accelerate our journey— because it will be a journey
towards a more efficient and effective data governance in the BSP.
We believe that with active support of the Monetary Board and the Office of the Governor and the
strong partnerships among the business users and the IT teams, we will be well on our way
towards  defining  our  data  governance  strategy  and  practices  to  address  not  only  our  present
needs but also to position us well for our future data and information requirements.
Thank you.
1
2
3
www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/05/21/how-much-data-do-we-create-every-day-the-mind-blowing-
stats-everyone-should-read/#3452202160ba; 
www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/04/how-much-data-is-
generated-each-day-cf4bddf29f/
DAMA-DMBOK to the Data Management Body of Knowledge, 2nd ed. DAMA International, 2017
Principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting. Bank of International Settlements. January 2013. 
www.bis.org/publ/bcbs239.pdf
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
