Sharon Donnery: Risks and resilience in uncertain times
Address by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the Institute
of International and European Affairs, Dublin, 8 March 2019.
 Good afternoon, it is a pleasure to address the Institute of International and European Affairs.
1
The ebbs and flows of a country’s economic and financial fortunes are not always predictable.
In Ireland, even less so.
While,  sometimes,  there  are  patterns  or  regularities  for  such  events  –  they  are  not  always  a
perfect indicator of what’s to come.
Uncertainty always accompanies predictions.
When  Seamus  Heaney  died  in  2013,  the  Economist  magazine  published  an  obituary
remembering him, with the by-line ‘a shy soul’. They noted that “during his years studying to be a
schoolteacher in the 1960s, he used the pen-name “Incertus”, meaning “uncertain”.….
Yet there is little that is hesitant in his poems.”
There are plenty who may think there’s no poetry in economics, but economics, like any field,
2
can learn from the greats in others.
A central theme of my remarks today is uncertainty.
Ireland  today  faces  considerable  uncertainty.  Put  simply,  the  Irish  macrofinancial  environment
could change significantly over the short and medium term.
The  UK  leaving  the  EU  is  not  the  only  risk.  The  international  economic  environment  has
deteriorated, yet the domestic economy is currently robust.
So, we find ourselves in the interesting position of assessing a potential slowdown in the external
international  environment,  the  UK  departing  the  EU,  while  also  worrying  about  potential
overheating from a domestic perspective.
Plotting  a  course  through  such  an  environment,  with  the  potential  for  a  wide  range  of  future
outcomes, is indeed challenging.
While we can state with certainty that we have greatly expanded and strengthened our toolkit to
deal with various risks, it is important that we maintain a sense of humility about what we can
forecast and, more to the point, what we can control.
Yet like Heaney, despite the uncertainty we face – we cannot be shy, hesitant or complacent in
our words, not least in our actions and policies.
Today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  economic  outlook,  both  for  Ireland  and  critically,  the
international environment. Then, I will elaborate on some of the risks that Ireland faces. I will finish
by giving some thoughts on what policy can do when facing these very different risks.
The economic environment and outlook
Given I have the opportunity to speak to the IIEA and given the timeliness of this speech following
the announcement of yesterday’s monetary policy measures, I will begin by focusing on the euro
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
area and global economic outlook.
Just  yesterday,  I  returned  from  a  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central
Bank. A key concern of the Council was uncertainty. Specifically, the persistence of uncertainties
related  to  geopolitical  factors  and  the  threat  of  protectionism  appear  to  be  leaving  marks  on
economic sentiment. On account of this, the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook are
still tilted to the downside.
Incoming data have continued to be weak, in particular in the manufacturing sector, reflecting the
slowdown in external demand compounded by some country and sector-specific factors. The
impact of these factors is turning out to be somewhat longer-lasting, which suggests that the
near-term growth outlook will be weaker than previously anticipated.
This assessment is broadly reflected in the March 2019 ECB staff macroeconomic projections
for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.1% in 2019, 1.6%
in 2020 and 1.5% in 2021.
Compared with the December 2018 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook
for real GDP growth has been revised down substantially in 2019 and slightly in 2020.
Ireland’s trade and financial openness is a fundamental structural characteristic of the economy.
This  is  most  evident  from  the  familiar  multinational  brands  headquartered  here.  The  Irish
economy  is  highly  integrated  with  the  international  economy,  both  in  terms  of  trade  and  with
global financial markets, and particularly with regard to cross-border capital flows.
Over  recent  decades,  Ireland  has  benefited  very  positively  from  developments  in  the  global
economy and the move toward high value, low volume trade. This has provided many benefits in
terms of revenue and employment. For example, multinationals are estimated to account for 22
per cent of total employment.  However, this means structural shocks emanating from abroad
can have an important bearing on the performance of the economy. These can include changes
in  global  trade  or  international  taxation  regimes.  Indeed,  the  structure  of  Ireland’s  economy
means  that  it  can  even  be  affected  by  idiosyncratic  shocks  facing  individual  sectors  or  firms
operating here.
3
Whilst  providing  many  positives,  this  openness  therefore  also  increases  the  propensity  –  and
sensitivity – of the Irish economy to global shocks – be they structural shocks I just described, or
cyclical – driven by the global economic cycle or by developments in global financial conditions
for example.
This is evident in the data. The Irish macrofinancial environment has been more volatile than its
European peers in the past. Cross-country volatility of a range of macrofinancial variables since
1980 – including house prices, GDP, household income, employment, and credit, for example –
4
illustrates this.
In  summary,  there  are  big  benefits  for  Ireland  being  a  highly  globalised  economy.    But  these
benefits also bring risks.  And the risks need to be managed appropriately.
Turning to home, a range of indicators we monitor and analyse show that the economy grew
robustly in 2018.
The strength of activity has been supported by strong growth in employment. This has, in turn,
stimulated incomes and supported consumer spending. We have also seen an acceleration of
investment in the economy, for example in building and construction.
Taking  a  slightly  longer-term  perspective,  the  strong  recovery  since  2013  has  yielded  several
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
important benefits.
One of the most clearly tangible places we can all see this, is in the number of people in work.
Nearly 420,000 additional people have found employment since the low point of 2012. Nearly 2.3
million  people  are  currently  in  employment,  exceeding  the  peak  of  2007.    Crucially,  growth  in
employment  has  been  broad  based  across  different  sectors  of  the  economy.  For  example,
construction employment accounted for 1 in 9 jobs in 2007. Today, it makes up just 1 in every 16.
The improvement in labour market conditions has also been felt across different regions.
We’ve also seen the overall size of the labour force grow. More people, particularly older people,
are participating in the work force. Net inward migration has also resumed. In the year to April
2018, it amounted to 34,000 people. This is equivalent to 1.4 per cent of the labour force. This is
a clear signal of the strength of domestic economic activity.
Looking  ahead,  our  central  forecasts  assume  that  the  UK  parliament  will  ratify  a  withdrawal
agreement and that a transition period will come into effect until the end of 2020.
Based on this key assumption, the outlook for the Irish economy over the coming years remains
broadly positive.
However, we expect that a tightening of conditions in the labour market and bottlenecks in the
housing market will contribute to a moderation in growth. This moderation also reflects the less
favourable international economic environment I discussed earlier, with prospects for growth in
our main trading partners less positive than previously anticipated.
We now expect GDP growth this year of 4.4 per cent. Our forecasts suggest this will moderate
to 3.6 per cent next year. Underlying domestic demand, a measure that gives a more accurate
picture of economic activity, is forecast at 4.1 per cent this year, moderating to 3.3 per cent in
5
2020.
We expect further growth in employment in 2019 and 2020, of the order of 2.2 per cent this year
and  1.7  per  cent  next  year.  Given  our  forecasts  for  labour  force  growth,  this  implies  that  the
6
unemployment rate will drop to 4.9 per cent this year and 4.7 per cent next year.
So, our central forecasts indicate that the current economic prospects for the Irish economy are
quite robust.
Risks from inside and out
Risks however are prevalent from both inside and out.
However, it is important that we are not complacent in thinking that the UK’s departure from the
EU  is  the  only  risk  to  the  Irish  economic  outlook.  The  international  outlook  is  uncertain. And
should we avoid a disorderly UK exit, and the dent to Irish economic growth that comes with it, a
continued fast growing economy is only desirable as long as growth is sustainable.
Events could result in outcomes well beyond what we expect from our current central forecasts.
In the current circumstances, much of the uncertainty arises from the lack of clarity regarding our
future relationship with the UK. From the spectrum of potential outcomes, a no-deal disorderly
departure  represents  a  worst-case  scenario  for  Ireland.  The  abrupt  ending  of  cooperation
agreements would have material and immediate economic implications.
In our latest Quarterly Bulletin, using our economic modelling tools, we examined the possible
macroeconomic implications of a sudden and disorderly Brexit. Given the unprecedented nature
of a ‘no deal’ scenario, quantification is highly uncertain and this exercise represents a scenario
analysis and not a forecast – it considers what could happen under certain assumptions, not
7
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
necessarily what is most likely to happen.
With a disorderly departure, significant additional frictions and costs would arise. These result
not just from the introduction of new trading arrangements, but from a breakdown in some of the
arrangements  that  make  trade  possible.  For  example,  regulatory  and  customs  issues,  border
infrastructure issues and legal uncertainties. People are likely to feel this in their everyday lives.
This would be likely to have immediately damaging consequences for trade and the functioning of
supply chains for production, distribution and retailing.
Models and forecasting tools can be used to estimate the impact of long-run changes to trade
arrangements.  However,  they  are  less  suited  for  predicting  the  short-run  effects  and  potential
disruption arising from a breakdown in those arrangements. The scale of disruption would also
be  influenced  by  the  ability  of  firms  and  retailers  to  respond  and  adjust.  Policy  responses  or
mitigating actions would also help to ameliorate the situation. Nevertheless, it is clear that a no
deal scenario would have very severe and immediate disruptive effects, which would permeate
almost all areas of economic activity.
Certain  sectors  would  be  disproportionately  affected,  particularly  agriculture  and  food.  Border
regions for example, would also be heavily affected.
We calculate that a disorderly Brexit could reduce the growth rate of the Irish economy by four
percentage points in the first year, albeit this figure is subject to much uncertainty.
However,  as  a  result  of  domestic  demand  and  the  strong  non-UK  multinational  sector,  our
assessment is that there would still be some positive growth in output over the coming years –
even  under  a  no-deal  scenario.  This  would  be  materially  lower  than  in  the  central  forecast  I
outlined earlier – and would be closer to one per cent growth in both years.
A fast-growing economy is desirable as long as growth is sustainable. However, sometimes the
economy can grow too fast and overheat. This happens when an economy reaches the limits of
its capacity to meet demand from individuals, firms and government. One element of this is the
concept of “full employment”, which occurs when almost everyone who wants to work has a job.
When  this  happens,  there  is  very  little  available  slack.  In  other  words,  the  amount  of  unused
resources, or spare capacity in the economy – is very limited or non-existent.
8
The problem with overheating is that it tends to result in a harmful downturn.  Temporary surges
create  dynamics  that  are  difficult  to  reverse.  For  example,  wages  can  rise  quickly  to
unsustainable levels.
Overheating  can  make  households  and  firms  over-optimistic  about  their  future  income
prospects,  and  lead  them  to  take  on  too  much  debt.  If  this  future  income  fails  to  materialise,
readjusting  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  can  be  painful.  The  result  can  be  bankruptcies,  job
losses, wage reductions and cuts to public services.
I  mentioned  earlier  that  our  central  forecast  suggests  some  moderation  in  growth  over  the
coming years. However, despite this, we still see labour market conditions tightening further.
Surveying a range of indicators reveals mixed evidence as to the extent of current overheating
pressures. Investment in the real economy remains well below its previous peak.  Overall credit
growth is subdued as households continue to reduce their debts.  The modified current account
of the balance of payments – an important indicator of imbalance –recorded a small surplus in
the most recent data.
10
9
While  these  measures  are  not  indicative  of  significant  overheating  pressures  currently,  past
episodes demonstrate that the position can change quickly. As the economy moves closer to full
employment,  there  is  a  need  to  guard  against  the  risk  that  economic  conditions  give  rise  to
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
overheating dynamics. To date, the tightening of the labour market has not been accompanied by
significant evidence of strong wage or price pressures. However, further increases in aggregate
demand may lead to overheating in the economy.
Financial system resilience and macroprudential policy
So,  we  find  ourselves  in  the  interesting  position  of  considering  a  potential  slowdown  in  the
international environment and the UK leaving the EU. And at the same time, also worrying about
potential  overheating  from  a  domestic  perspective.  The  potential  for  a  wide  range  of  future
outcomes, and associated uncertainty, is indeed challenging.
To guard against these risks, we need to build resilience.
Resilience  in  households,  resilience  in  businesses,  resilience  in  the  public  finances  and
resilience in the financial system.
This  is  important  to  withstand  future  downturns.  If  buffers  are  built  up  during  the  good  times,
policy can react during a downturn. Counter-cyclical policy therefore offers a way to moderate
the  effects  of  downturns,  supporting  demand  in  the  economy  when  necessary.  However,  the
ability to implement counter-cyclical policy relies crucially on taking advantage of positive growth
periods to build the buffers.
Given our continued strong growth right now, reducing Ireland’s high debt to safer levels should
remain a priority – both in order to protect the public finances in the face of risks and to lay the
foundations  for  sustainable  future  growth.  Ireland’s  debt-to-GNI
  ratio  remains  elevated  and
above 100 per cent. Reducing the debt burden is vital to future-proofing the economy to weather
possible shocks.
11
The unpredictability of corporate tax revenues in recent years points to the dangers of relying on
what  might  prove  to  be  a  partly  transitory  surge  in  revenues  to  fund  lasting  spending
commitments. In recent years, the public finances have benefited from an exceptional growth in
corporation  tax  revenue.  They  have  also  benefited  from  savings  on  national  debt  interest
payments  due  to  the  low  interest  rate  environment  internationally.  Since  2015,  revenue  from
corporation  tax  has  consistently  outperformed  the  Department  of  Finance’s  forecasts  by  an
average of almost €1.4  billion  per  annum.  Saving,  rather  than  spending,  such  windfalls  would
help to mitigate against potential overheating and allow the build up of buffers which can be used
in the event of future downturns.
So, just as fiscal buffers can be used to absorb shocks to the economy, the financial system
also needs to have such buffers. Without these, the financial system may react in a way that
further deepens the economic stress faced by households and firms in a downturn, by curtailing
the  supply  of  credit  for  example.  Indeed,  the  costs  of  the  financial  system  having  insufficient
buffers to absorb shocks became painfully obvious in the crisis.
The Central Bank’s mission is to serve the public interest by safeguarding monetary and financial
stability  and  by  working  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  operates  in  the  best  interests  of
consumers and the wider economy.
An essential outcome of this mission is strengthening the resilience of the financial system. This
is one of our five strategic priorities of our Strategic Plan 2019–2021.  Our aim is to ensure that
we at the Central Bank can, and do, play our part in strengthening the resilience of the system as
a whole, building on what has been achieved since the financial crisis.
So what has changed for the domestically relevant banking system since the crisis in terms of its
resilience to deal with negative shocks?
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
At a headline level, three things come to mind:
12
1.  Its capital position (relative to risk-weighted assets) has improved almost threefold relative to
2007.
 
2.  Reliance on short-term wholesale funding from international capital markets has reduced.
The  share  of  customer  deposit  funding  has  increased  from  less  than  half  to  around  four
fifths.
 
3.  Funding costs have fallen and, despite recent market volatility, have remained contained.
This  suggests  that  counterparties’  view  of  the  creditworthiness  of  Irish  banks  has  not
changed, which in itself is a reflection of the financial resilience of the core of the banking
system.
13
And what of the role of policy generally, and the Central Bank in particular, in promoting resilience
and safeguarding financial stability?
Changes  to  the  international  regulatory  and  supervisory  architecture  have  played  a  part  in
restoring confidence and promoting resilience in the financial system. We have also done much
work in preparing the financial system for the UK’s departure from the EU.
I spoke on Tuesday to central bank experts from across the EU who were visiting the Central
Bank of Ireland. There I highlighted some of the contingency planning we have undertaken. In
particular, I explained how the Irish market is unique in the area of securities settlement. In simple
terms, when shares in a stock or other securities – like government or corporate bonds – are
bought and sold, they are settled at a central securities depository or CSD. Securities settlement
systems provide the institutional and technical infrastructure that allows trading to happen. Due
to  the  fact  that  Ireland  has  no  domestic  infrastructure  and  utilises  a  number  of  settlement
systems  located  across  Europe,  following  the  departure  of  the  UK  from  the  EU  the  current
arrangements are not sustainable.
Therefore,  the  Central  Bank  in  conjunction  with  the  Department  of  Finance  has  engaged
extensively  with  European  counterparts  to  mitigate  against  the  potential  disruption  from  this
immediate cliff edge risk. I am happy to report that it has been largely mitigated – notably with the
European  Commission’s  decision  to  grant  temporary  equivalence  to  the  UK’s  legal  and
supervisory arrangements for CSDs until 29 March 2021. The Central Bank will continue to liaise
with the relevant stakeholders to ensure a long-term solution is implemented on time.
I am happy to discuss more on Brexit in the following Q&A but for the remainder of my remarks
today,  I  will  pay  particular  attention  to  how  our  macroprudential  policy  framework  aims  to
strengthen resilience to withstand adverse macroeconomic shocks.
Earlier in my remarks I discussed how as a small, open economy, Ireland is not only exposed to
risks  from  within  but  also  from  the  external  environment.  It  is  vital  that  a  small  and  highly
globalised economy like Ireland is proactive in using macroprudential policy to mitigate systemic
risk  and  build  resilience.  Our  macroprudential  framework  and  toolkit  builds  resilience  in  the
system  against  different  risk  factors,  and  complements  the  firm-specific  resilience  that  is  the
focus of micro-prudential regulation and supervision.
To date the Central Bank has activated a number of tools which, to a greater or lesser extent,
aim to enhance the resilience of the system.
The Other Systemically Important Institutions (O-SII) buffer looks to build additional resilience
for institutions whose failure would have a bigger impact on the economy and the financial
system.  The O-SII framework was introduced in Ireland in 2015 when two institutions were
identified as systemically important, with a buffer of 1.5 per cent phased-in between 1 July
14
2019 and 1 July 2021. Our latest review identified six Irish authorised institutions as O-SIIs.
 
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
Promoting resilience in the banking sector, for example, is the primary rationale underlying
our  policy  stance  for  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCyB),  which  we  announced  last
year.  We  introduced  the  CCyB  because  a  number  of  indicators  suggested  a  sustained
trajectory towards a gradual build-up of cyclical systemic risk. Our aim is to mitigate against
a negative reaction of bank lending to the real economy in any future downturn or period of
systemic stress.
Increasing bank and borrower resilience, so as they are more able to withstand the impact of
negative shocks, is one of the objectives behind the mortgage measures.
Each of the macroprudential policy interventions that the Central Bank takes has the objective of
protecting  financial  stability  by  targeting  different  elements  of  systemic  risk.  Individual
macroprudential tools have different objectives, operate through different transmission channels
and look to address different sources of systemic risk.
I began my remarks by discussing how the Irish economy is very integrated with the international
economy  both  in  terms  of  trade  and  with  global  financial  markets.  I  also  highlighted  the
vulnerabilities that this entails. It is important banks hold sufficient structural buffers as well as
cyclical buffers to guard against the higher levels of macroeconomic risk Ireland faces.
Having  buffers  means  capital  depletion  does  not  lead  to  instability  in  financial  markets.  This
makes a tightening of credit conditions less likely.
Resilience  in  the  banking  system  should  be  locked  in  through  the  more  active  use  of  capital
buffers.  This  is  important  given  the  higher  levels  of  risk  intrinsic  to  a  small  highly  globalised
economy. It also allows the system to withstand both unexpected negative developments and the
ebb and flow of financing conditions.
Conclusion
To  conclude,  the  wide  range  of  possible  future  paths  means  building  resilience  is  not  only
desirable, it is necessary.
Incertae – uncertainty – will always be a feature of the system, and therefore, we need to be
humble about the extent to which we can forecast and predict, while being aggressive in building
defences against potential risks.
The government, firms, households and financial sector participants should be cognisant of the
range of potential outcomes and the risks contained within.
The Central Bank has particular powers, and will use them to safeguard monetary and financial
stability and to ensure that the financial system operates in the best interests of consumers and
the wider economy.
This is how we best serve the public interest.
Thank you, I look forward to the discussion.
1
2
3
4
5
I would like to thank Eoin O’Brien, Martin O’Brien, Thomas Conefrey, Paul O’Brien, Paul Reddan and Mícheál
O’Keeffe for their contributions to my remarks. 
The Economist: Remembering Seamus Heaney – A shy soul (2013)
National Competitiveness Council: Ireland’s Competitiveness Challenge (December 2018)
Donnery, Sharon: When is the right time? Macroprudential policy and the cycle, National University of Ireland (31
May 2018)
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Underlying domestic demand is a measure of spending in the Irish economy. It excludes trade in aircraft by
aircraft leasing companies and imports of R&D related to intellectual property imports from headline investment.
This measure more accurately reflects economic activity within the domestic economy than standard measures
such as GDP and GNP.
Central Bank of Ireland: Quarterly Bulletin 1 (2019)
Conefrey, T, O’Reilly, G and Walsh, G: ‘ The Macroeconomic Implications of a Disorderly Brexit’, Central Bank of
Ireland, Box B Quarterly Bulletin No.1 (2019) 
Central Bank of Ireland: Explainer – What does overheating in the economy mean?
Underlying investment refers to overall investment excluding intangible assets and aircraft.
Central Bank of Ireland: Quarterly Financial Accounts
Source: Central Statistics Office – Current Account Balance for Ireland 2007 – 2017
Capital here refers to common equity capital less intangibles and deferred tax assets as a proxy over time for
CET1.
Sibley,  Ed: Safety  and  soundness  –  Strategic  priorities  for  the  next  three  years,  BPFI  Risk  Management  &
Supervisory Conference (January 2019)
Central Bank of Ireland: Identification of Other Systemically Important Institutions in Ireland and Announcement
of Associated Buffers (12 November 2018)
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
