Shaktikanta Das: Evolving role of central banks
Speech  by  Mr  Shaktikanta  Das,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Lal  Bahadur
Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie, 17 June 2019.
 It gives me great pleasure to be here at the LBSNAA for the inauguration of this Phase V mid-
career  programme  for  IAS  officers.  I  have  many  pleasant  memories  of  this  premier  training
institution where I had come after joining the IAS in the year 1980. I am thankful to Shri Sanjeev
Chopra, Director of the Academy and members of the Faculty for having invited me to address
such an august gathering.
2. I am sure each one of you has worked hard and achieved many milestones over the path of
your long careers. Where you stand today is perhaps the most important juncture in your career
as you prepare for even higher roles and responsibilities in the Indian administrative structure. I
understand that most of you would have spent around 28 to 31 years in the service. From now
on you would be occupying top positions in central and state governments. At these levels, you
would be responsible for policy making as well as guiding implementation of major programmes
and schemes. You have to carefully weigh and assess the suitability of various policy options
and  advise  the  government  on  the  way  forward.  While  discharging  your  role  at  such  high
positions, it is very important to remember two quotes from the father of the nation, Mahatma
Gandhiji: (i) “Be the Change that you wish to see in the World”; and (ii) “Recall the face of the
poorest and the most helpless man whom you may have seen and ask yourself, if the step you
contemplate is going to be of any use to him”.
3. In senior leadership positions, you will have the power to make a difference in the lives of the
people  of  this  nation.  Equally,  you  would  have  the  power  to  make  a  difference  in  the  lives  of
individuals whom you lead. Be sure to be their mentor, guide and inspire your team to dedicate
themselves to the service of the nation. My advice to you would be to work towards introducing
systematic changes in the functioning of our bureaucracy at various levels to further improve the
delivery  of  public  schemes  and  policies.  More  importantly,  adhering  to  transparency  and
elimination of corruption should also be your top priorities.
4. As policy formulation of any kind is a learning process, policy makers are often guided by past
experiences. Therefore, today I have chosen to speak on the topic of “Evolving Role of Central
Banks”.
Evolution of Central Banks
5. Since the beginning of central banking, which goes back at least to the 17th century with the
establishment of the Swedish Riksbank in 1668, the role and functions of monetary authorities
have undergone several changes. Some of the oldest central banks were set up with the primary
objective of providing war time finance to governments and managing their debts. Since then,
their role has evolved over time in line with the changes in economic systems. They have now
transitioned  into  modern  day  central  banks  which  function  with  the  objective  of  supporting
sustainable economic growth through the pursuit of price and financial stability.
6.  In  the  case  of  India,  the  Hilton  Young  Commission  (1926)  recommended  setting  up  of  the
Reserve Bank of India which was to be entrusted with pure central banking functions. There is,
however, a long history, which can be traced back to 1773, of the efforts to set up in India a
banking institution, with some elements of a central bank. Consequently, the Reserve Bank was
set up, and it commenced operations from April 1, 1935 with the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
providing the statutory basis for its functioning. It was originally set up as a shareholder’s bank,
which was nationalised later in 1949. Since then, its role has evolved over time from supporting
the planned development of the economy to a full service central bank.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Role of Central Banks during Global Financial Crisis
7. Let me now elaborate on the role of central banks during crisis period. While it is true that
crises lead to reforms, experience shows that other extraneous and complex factors can lead to
future financial crises. For instance, despite learning lessons on inadequacies of regulation and
supervision in many emerging economies during the East-Asian crisis of 1997, the occurrence of
global financial crisis of 2008 originating from advanced countries could not be avoided. While
macroeconomic  vulnerabilities  derived  from  large  current  account  deficits,  fiscal  imbalances,
excessive leverage and inadequate regulation and supervision of financial institutions were some
of the most common features of this crisis, it was of truly global nature with much more intensity
and depth.
8.  Given  the  speed  of  transmission  of  the  impact  of  global  financial  crisis  across  countries,
central banks were once again at the forefront of policy response. This time, however, typical
monetary  policy  responses  of  central  banks  were  not  enough  to  curb  the  turmoil  in  financial
markets. In the summer of 2007, major central banks began with traditional monetary policy tools
and reduced the interest rates. The economic situation, however, deteriorated precipitously and
central  banks  were  not  left  with  much  headroom  in  their  traditional  policy  tool  kit  to  preserve
domestic  financial  stability.  Thus,  central  banks  –  particularly  in  advanced  economies  –  took
recourse  to  quantitative  easing  through  unconventional  policy  measures  to  contain  systemic
risks, shore up confidence in the banking system and arrest economic slowdown. These policy
measures were unconventional in terms of instruments and operational targets.  Undoubtedly,
the quantitative easing adopted by central banks was one of the boldest policy experiments in the
modern  history  of  central  banking. Another  unconventional  measure  was  the  use  of  negative
policy 
these
unconventional monetary policies is well known by now as large amount of liquidity created in the
international financial system was channelled to EMEs in search of yield, creating boom and bust
cycles in those economies.
Regulatory Response to the Crisis
for  achieving  different  objectives.  The 
interest  rates, 
impact  of 
though 
1
9. From a supervisory and regulatory perspective, the crisis revealed some significant fragilities
in the system. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) succinctly summarised these
weaknesses:  an  excessive  build-up  of  on  and  off-balance  sheet  leverage,  accompanied  by  a
gradual  erosion  in  the  level  and  quality  of  the  capital  base;  insufficient  liquidity  buffers;  a  pro-
cyclical deleveraging process; and the interconnectedness of systemic institutions through an
array of complex transactions . The global regulatory response which took shape in the form of
the Basel III framework focussed on increasing the level and quality of capital, constraining bank
leverage, improving bank liquidity and limiting pro-cyclicality, along with adding macro-prudential
elements to regulations.
2
10. Keeping up with the traditionally prudent approach, India’s implementation process for Basel
III  reforms  has  been  somewhat  more  stringent  in  terms  of  schedule  as  well  requirements.
Domestic factors and policy priorities continue to guide the Indian approach to financial sector
regulation.  Thus,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  put  in  place  the  frameworks  of  capital  requirements,
countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCCB),  leverage  ratio,  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR)  and  Net
Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) . More recently guidelines on large exposures were issued which
became effective from April 1, 2019.
3
11. Another episode of stress witnessed across EMEs including India was during the taper talk
period of mid-2013. The Indian economy was vulnerable due to the then prevailing high inflation of
around 10 per cent and large current account deficit at 4.7 per cent of GDP. The Reserve Bank
resorted to a host of policy measures including monetary tightening, restriction on gold import,
special dollar swap window for public sector oil companies, special concessional swap window
for banks for attracting Foreign Currency Non-Resident (Bank) deposits, increase in overseas
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
borrowing limit of banks, and raising FII investment limit in government debt.
What do we Learn?
12. Though there is no unique solution to these policy issues confronting the global economy, we
could clearly draw three broad inferences:
1.  First, as we have discussed earlier, central banks’ role is important, both during normal as
well as crisis times. While mandates for central banks broadly remain the same during both
normal and stress periods, the weightage attached to competing objectives and the choice
of policy instruments become crucial in the crisis periods.
2.  Second, communication by central banks is very important which may be different in crisis
times than in normal times. Not only it helps convey decisions in a more transparent way, it
also signals the present and future policy stance of central banks. In fact, unconventional
monetary  policy  measures  undertaken  by  central  banks  during  the  crisis  period  worked
mainly through the confidence and signaling channels. The US Federal Reserve’s statement
on  December  16,  2008  provided  a  clear  forward  guidance  for  the  markets.  On  the  other
hand, only a mere hint of monetary policy normalisation by the US Fed (popularly known as
taper  tantrum)  in  May  2013  triggered  portfolio  outflows  from  some  emerging  market
economies (EMEs) . This led to high volatility in equity, debt and currency markets. In fact,
such  market  volatilities  in  EMEs  could  have  been  avoided  through  clear  advance
communication on calibrated withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation.
4
In  the  Indian  context,  the  Reserve  Bank  communicates  its  monetary  policy  decisions  in
terms of changes in the ‘Policy Repo Rate’ and ‘Stance’ based on an assessment of the
current  and  evolving  macroeconomic  situation.  The  stance  of  the  monetary  policy  is
communicated as neutral, accommodative or calibrated tightening in consonance with the
mandate  of  achieving  the  medium-term  inflation  target  of  4  per  cent  ±  2  per  cent,  while
keeping in mind the objective of growth. The Reserve Bank’s approach to communicate the
policy  stance  is  to  explain  it  with  rationale,  information  and  analysis  to  enable  market
participants and stakeholders to have better clarity about the Reserve Bank’s assessment of
the evolving situation.
3.  Third, the global financial crisis was also a testimony to the fact that coordination of policies
both  at  the  global  and  domestic  level  is  important  for  macro-financial  stability.  It  is  only
through  better  coordination  between  central  banks  and  between  monetary  and  fiscal
authorities in the domestic sphere that adverse consequences of spillovers and spillbacks
could be contained. The fact remains that as most policy makers (monetary and fiscal) have
domestic  mandates,  international  cooperation  may  be  hard  to  engender  if  international
outcomes militate against domestic policy preferences. Therefore, success of coordination
will depend on deft calibration of policies by major stakeholders.
Issues in the Current Context
13. Even after more than a decade of global financial crisis and six years after taper-tantrum, the
global economy is still not on a stable growth path. Following an upward swing in 2017, there has
been growing evidence that global growth and trade is weakening. Unsettled trade tensions and
developments around Brexit are imparting further downside risks to the outlook. While signs of
weakening  world  industrial  production  and  trade  volume  were  discernible  in  early  2019,  other
business  confidence  indicators  have  also  dampened  in  many  OECD  countries.  Taking
cognisance of these factors, projections of world growth for 2019 have been revised down by the
IMF, World Bank and the OECD in their latest assessments. Likewise, global trade is projected
to expand at a moderate pace in next two years in line with the subdued investment outlook for
many major economies.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
14. While the global economy is still to recover to the pre-crisis growth path, India has continued
to exhibit robust growth driven by consumption and investment demand in the last three years.
However, in more recent period, we have seen a loss of speed in the second half of 2018–19 as
some  drivers  of  growth,  notably  investment  and  exports,  slowed  down.  On  the  supply  side,
activity in agriculture and manufacturing moderated sharply. It is expected that the end of political
uncertainty associated with an election season and continuation of economic reforms would lead
to a reversal of the current weaknesses in some of the indicators in our economy.
15. To reinvigorate growth by improving investment climate, a healthy financial sector, inter alia,
plays an important role. In this context, the Reserve Bank has accorded high policy attention to
reform both banking and non-banking sectors. We have been taking several steps to strengthen
the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  in  order  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  banking
system. New guidelines have been issued for resolution of stressed assets, which will sustain
the improvements in credit culture.
16. In the non-banking sector, the Reserve Bank has recently come out with draft guidelines for a
robust liquidity framework for the NBFCs. We are also giving a fresh look at their regulatory and
supervisory framework. It is our endeavour to have an optimal level of regulation and supervision
so that the NBFC sector is financially resilient and robust. The Reserve Bank will continue to
monitor the activity and performance of this sector with a focus on major entities and their inter-
linkages  with  other  sectors.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  not  hesitate  to  take  any  required  steps  to
maintain financial stability.
17. We are also taking a number of steps to improve commercial viability of Urban Co-operative
Banks (UCBs). These steps include proposed establishment of an Umbrella Organisation and a
Centralised Fraud Registry for UCBs and governance reforms at the board level. We are also
encouraging  voluntary  merger  and  consolidation  in  the  sector  to  help  reduce  operating  costs,
diversify risks and economise on capital.
Interplay between Inflation and Growth Objectives
18. At the end, let me highlight the role of the Reserve Bank in the context of the mandate under
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934: “to regulate the issue of Bank notes and the keeping of
reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the currency
and credit system of the country to its advantage”. This mandate has been interpreted over time
as to maintain price stability, financial stability and economic growth with the relative emphasis
between these objectives governed by the prevailing macroeconomic conditions. This role of the
Reserve Bank has been restated as per the amendment in the RBI Act in May 2016 according to
which “the primary objective of the monetary policy is to maintain price stability while keeping in
mind  the  objective  of  growth”.  Therefore  it  has  been  our  endeavour  in  the  Reserve  Bank  to
ensure  price  stability  under  the  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime  and  simultaneously  focus  on
growth when inflation is under control.
19. In a flexible inflation targeting framework, a delicate balance needs to be maintained between
Inflation  and  growth  objectives.  The  relative  emphasis  on  inflation  and  growth  depends  on
prevailing  macroeconomic  scenario,  inflation  and  growth  outlook  and  signals  emerging  from
incoming data. Post global financial crisis, it has been recognised that price stability may not be
sufficient  for  financial  stability  and  therefore  financial  stability  has  emerged  as  another  key
consideration for monetary policy, though jury is still out as to whether it should be added as an
explicit objective of monetary policy. The fact remains that though the focus of monetary policy is
mainly on inflation and growth, the underlying theme has always been financial stability.
Concluding Observations
20. While India emerged relatively unscathed from the global financial crisis, there should be no
room  for  complacency.  As  a  member  of  the  several  multilateral  institutions,  India  actively
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
participated  in  post  crisis  reforms  of  the  international  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework
under the aegis of the G20 and the Basel Committee. India remains committed to adoption of
international  standards  and  best  practices  in  a  phased  manner,  calibrated  to  our  domestic
conditions, wherever necessary.
21.  From  the  perspective  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  will  continue  to  focus  on  effective
communication  and  coordination  with  all  stakeholders  to  achieve  broader  macroeconomic
objectives of price stability, growth and financial stability.
1
2
3
4
For instance, these included lending to financial institutions, targeted liquidity provisions for credit markets,
outright purchases of public and private assets, purchase of government bonds and forward guidance.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010): “Basel III: A global regulatory framework for more resilient
banks and banking systems”, December.
To be implemented from April 1, 2020
Mainly on five emerging-market countries, viz., Brazil, India, Indonesia, South Africa, and Turkey (which were
referred to as the ‘Fragile Five’)
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
