  01.07.2019 
 “Banks and society. Looking to the future” 
Círculo Financiero de la Sociedad Económica Barcelonesa de amigos del país  
Margarita Delgado 
Deputy Governor  
 
  Good evening. 
I would like to thank Fundación La Caixa for their kind invitation to me to take the rostrum 
today  at  the  Círculo  Financiero.  It  is  firstly  an  opportunity  to  address  an  eminently 
distinguished audience. But it also allows me to visit Barcelona again, a city I know very well 
from my time as a bank supervisor and to which it is always a pleasure to return. 
You know better than me that Círculo Financiero has, throughout its long history, always 
offered a forum for open and frank debate on current topics. It has sought to tackle, from a 
constructive and European-oriented approach, the problems and difficulties we face as a 
society. 
Admittedly, the challenges before us at present are most significant ones. But it is no less 
true that Spain, throughout the history of this institution, has experienced and overcome 
even more turbulent times. Each of these convulsive periods was seen by our society as a 
crisis. 
Crisis and change 
The word “crisis” is from the Greek. Despite the adverse emotional reaction we all feel on 
hearing the word, the Greek term does not necessarily have a negative connotation. 
The  root  of  “crisis”  means  “choice”,  “dispute”  or  “decision”.  Originally,  then,  the  word 
“crisis” necessarily implied a change. But, above all, it reflected the need to act resolutely 
and decidedly in the face of such a change. 
In this respect, the world we live in is the outcome of how we have handled, reacted to, 
faced and resolved each of the crises we have experienced as a society. 
It’s no big revelation to state that the financial sector has recently undergone one of the 
biggest crises in its history. The crisis was deep-seated, lasting and, most regrettably, it had 
severe consequences for groups that had little or nothing to do with it arising. 
As banks and supervisors, we share a responsibility for what happened. We should learn 
from our mistakes. But, above all, we should correct whatever is needed to prevent anything 
like this happening again. 
Much has changed since the global financial crisis broke in the summer of 2007. It is widely 
acknowledged that the banking sector has undergone far-reaching change, but supervision 
has also been enormously affected. 
The old institutional framework has been replaced. In this process, we have sought to draw 
on the lessons from the crisis, equipping supervision with a set of tools that allow us to act 
in  a  coordinated  and,  we  hope,  preventive  manner.  Further,  we  have  moved  decidedly 
towards a truly European-based supervision. This is an essential step towards a Banking 
Union  that  will  make  the  overall  European  financial  system  safer,  thereby  promoting 
sustainable growth in the economy. 
 3/13 
 Much still has to be done to complete the Banking Union. In particular, we are still lacking 
a pan-European and adequately funded deposit guarantee scheme and a recapitalisation 
fund. But, in my opinion, we are moving in the right direction. 
Were we to compare the snapshot of 10-12 years ago with what we can see today, I believe 
we could describe events as a revolution rather than evolution. Despite this revolution, what 
has not changed over this period is the type of relationship that we supervisors have with 
banks. The supervisor/supervisee relationship is not straightforward, and nor is it free from 
tensions and differences. 
These  tensions  and  differences  are  inevitable  and  part  of  the  so-called  “supervisory 
dialogue”. I would go so far as to say that these differences in our relationship are not only 
inevitable but indeed positive. As Gonzalo said earlier, we should understand one another 
both  in  our  agreements  and  disagreements,  constantly  maintaining  a  transparent  and 
sincere dialogue. 
Despite  these  differences,  supervisors  and  supervisees  share  a  common  goal.  We  both 
want banks to be sustainable and continue servicing their customers, both now and in the 
future. To achieve this goal society needs solvent banks, with a sufficient level of capital to 
withstand  economic  ups  and  downs,  and  profitable  banks,  with  enough  capacity  to 
generate profits to remunerate capital. 
In my public appearances. I usually go on now to give an itemised list of “duties” for banks. 
It’s a familiar list and the duties are constantly referred to and published in the press. But 
for once I will sidestep this list of duties, something which both banks and, very possibly, all 
of you will appreciate. 
Instead, I would like to reflect today on how relevant a role banks still have to play in society 
as an engine of healthy economic growth. I shall also refer to the lessons we should draw 
from the crisis and the changes that have come about in how we work as supervisors. I shall 
conclude by focusing on the changes which, in my opinion, are under way in society, and 
on the type of influence that these changes may exert on the banking business model and 
on our actions as supervisors. 
Validity of the role of banks 
While the height of the crisis is now some way behind us, we continue having to deal with 
its consequences. Every day the headlines report some news on the legacy of the crisis. 
Being a banker or, more modestly, working in the banking industry has now lost a lot of 
popularity. And something similar can be said about working at the banking supervisor. We 
have to acknowledge that our work has lost out in terms of repute, and we must reflect and 
work hard to recover this. 
Naturally, the crisis and its consequences, which we continue to experience, largely explain 
this change in attitude. Yet it is fair to say that the criticism levelled at the banking sector is, 
on many occasions, somewhat contradictory. Public opinion shifts rapidly from criticising 
banks  for  their  mistakes  –  frequently,  for  the  mistakes  “inherited”  from  banks  that 
disappeared  some  time  back  –  to  criticising  them  for  not  sufficiently  easing  the  way  for 
4/13 
  credit to reach economic agents; indeed, for the risk of financial exclusion stemming from 
potential branch closures. 
Like the song, it would seem we can’t live with or without them. But the truth is, with or 
without criticism, the role of banks remains as essential today for our economy as it was 20 
or 30 years ago. 
However, debate has arisen over the future role of banks, set against the emergence on the 
scene of the so-called Fintech. This can be seen as a threat or as an opportunity. I believe 
it  entails  both.  But  in  any  event,  banks  must  evidently  adapt  their  business  model  to 
technological change, as Gonzalo so rightly said. 
If instead of looking at the small, innovative and nimble Fintech, we assess the potential 
effect that the irruption of one of the so-called Big Tech may have on the system as a whole, 
the debate takes on a systemic dimension. In this connection, the recent announcement of 
the  launch  of  the  “Libra”  project,  the  virtual  currency  sponsored  by  Facebook,  has 
potentially systemic implications. These are so serious that supervisors, central banks and 
credit institutions must all evaluate the possible consequences. Evidently, we must be sure 
that the project will not compromise the integrity of payment systems and the stability of 
the system as a whole. The type of regulation to which it should be subject is also uncertain. 
Irrespective of what the future may hold, banks’ classical role remains fundamental today 
to economic development. In the absence of deep secondary markets at the European level, 
where it would be possible to convert long-term funding into liquidity through the market, 
the banking sector is still the main vehicle through which savers’ wish to have their savings 
available can be reconciled with the need of those demanding funds to have stable funding 
over time.1 
Naturally,  this  does  not  mean  that  credit  growth  should  always  be  positive,  as  we  were 
painfully reminded by the crisis. In this respect, the debt ratios of households and firms in 
Spain reached excessive levels of 85% and 133% of GDP, respectively, before the crisis 
broke.  Fortunately,  since  their  2008/2009  peak,  debt  ratios  have  moved  on  a  markedly 
downward trend, converging late last year with the average EU levels of 60% for households 
and 90% for firms. 
Bank  lending  has  been  decreasing  throughout  this  period  of  household  and  corporate 
deleveraging. Nonetheless, this decrease has recently reversed. Specifically, if we look at 
12-month cumulative data, the net flow of financing granted to households turned positive 
in June 2018, posting a year-on-year growth rate of 0.5% in April 2019. Firms’ net global 
financing  flows  have  also  held  at  positive  levels  since  October,  attaining  year-on-year 
growth of 2.6% in April 2019. 
Irrespective  of  credit  developments,  I  believe  we  all  agree  that  wealth  and  economic 
development  always  go  hand  in  hand  with  entrepreneurial  initiative.  A  country  cannot 
progress without entrepreneurs and companies deploying their resources, efforts and work, 
while risking their reputation and assets, to service society, on many occasions creating 
                                                                                              
1 As is known, some economies, such as the United States, depend less on bank financing as their markets are much 
more developed. In the EU, attempts are being made to develop the so-called Capital Markets Union (CMU), but we are 
still far from having a truly alternative financing channel to banks, excepting large corporations. 
 5/13 
 something  new,  different  and  innovative.  Of  course,  this  is  an  area  where  Catalonia  has 
always been a point of reference within Spain. 
Though we may tend to forget, Spain continues to have European and even global leaders 
among its companies, which are a benchmark in their sector. 
Undoubtedly,  to  develop  and  grow,  business  activity  needs  financing.  Hence  the 
significance of banks for economic development. In this respect, when institutions manage 
their risks appropriately, they are promoting an effective allocation of available economic 
resources. 
Banks’  risk  analysis  and  evaluation,  prior  to  granting  financing,  means  they  act  as  an 
essential  filter  for  the  functioning  of  the  economy.  They  enable  the  correct  allocation  of 
available financial resources by distinguishing between those projects with a high probability 
of success and those lacking in medium-term viability. 
True, excessively tight lending standards may act as a brake on innovation and growth. But, 
as we have seen, when this filter does not work properly, and when lending standards are 
excessively  loose,  ultimately  too  many  projects  that  prove  non-viable  are  financed, 
destroying value for the economy. 
Lessons from the crisis 
One thing the crisis has reminded us of, sadly, is that financing a firm or individual which, a 
priori, has little chance of meeting its payment obligations is very poor business, for three 
reasons. First, economically, this is a bad agreement both for the customer concerned and 
for  the  bank.  Second,  it  is  too  for  the  country’s  legal  system,  which  sees  a  significant 
increase in its workload, thereby delaying and hampering its workability. And third, from a 
social standpoint, what is involved is very poor business with harmful consequences for 
society in the form of dismissals and evictions. 
It is always better not to have granted a loan than to have to deal with a non-performing 
loan, although some error in granting loans is inevitable. Moreover, looking at our real estate 
bubble, it is likewise obvious that any loan should be granted thinking of the likelihood of 
both the principal and the associated interest being repaid, instead of basing oneself on the 
value of the collateral. 
Of course, the responsibility for analysing the ability to pay falls on the bank, not on the 
customer.  Undoubtedly,  applying  strict  standards  means  having  to  say  “no”  on  many 
occasions to applications for funds. And at times of heady growth, this entails very bad 
press and is difficult for the bank to assume, particularly if the competition is lax in its lending 
standards. 
Naturally,  it  is  tempting  to  imitate  the  competition  when  a  strategy  produces  short-term 
profit. Those banks that decide not to follow this path will undergo pressure from the market 
and  shareholders  to imitate  their  rivals  and  boost  those  business  areas  that  are  proving 
profitable  at  that  time.  Risk  culture  plays  a  crucial  role  in  being  able  to  withstand  such 
pressure. 
6/13 
  Let  us  not  forget  that  runaway  credit  growth  and  the  subsequent  build-up  of  structural 
imbalances on the balance sheet do not produce evident negative effects during an upturn. 
On the contrary. Such growth enables banks to increase their profitability, entailing a false 
sense of security and of good times that – mistakenly – warrants growing risk-taking. Even 
the supervisor itself may succumb to this false sense of security. 
However,  this  strategy  is  heading  for  disaster  if  there  is  a  change  in  cycle.  The  scale of 
potential losses will be directly proportionate to the volume of lending irresponsibly granted. 
Both supervisors and banks must be fully aware of the road ahead in this situation, looking 
always to the long term. As I said earlier, supervisors and supervisees have an interest in 
common:  for  banks  to  continue  servicing  their  customers  in  the  future.  The  problem,  of 
course, is one of terms: the long-term business sustainability objective clashes with other 
short-term  objectives,  in  particular  the  search  for  swift  profit,  under  the  pressure 
occasionally of shareholders. 
Changes in bank regulation, management and supervision 
Keynes once criticised those unprofessional bankers who imitate the short-term strategies 
of their rivals only to hide behind the behaviour of the sector as a whole as justification for 
their own mistaken decisions.2 
Unfortunately,  the  crisis  suggests  Keynes  may  have  been  right.  Though  not  so  in  all 
instances, the search for short-term profit may lead to the pursuit of risky strategies, despite 
the fact that this may compromise the bank’s future in the medium and long term. We have 
also seen that, if a large number of banks coincides in a mistaken strategy, entailing future 
problems, the problem ceases to be an individual one and become systemic, and individual 
responsibility is diluted. 
I  appreciate  that  the  question  we  must  ask  ourselves  here  is  what  we  have  changed  in 
attempting to correct this type of behaviour. Or, expressed otherwise, why should this time 
be different? 
Regulatory changes 
Firstly, deep-seated changes have been made to the regulations applicable to banks. The 
biggest  revolution  is  in  the  Basel  capital  framework,  which  has  been  reformulated  in  its 
virtual entirety so as to incorporate the lessons from the crisis. 
The  changes  are  far-reaching,  and  describing  them  would  alone  take  up  the  rest  of  my 
address  today.  I  shall  confine  myself  to  saying  that  the  changes  have  affected  all  the 
elements  making  up  the  well-known  capital  ratio,  which  is  the  centrepiece  of  solvency 
regulations.3 
                                                                                              
2 “A sound banker, alas, is not one who foresees danger and avoids it, but one who, when he is ruined, is ruined in a 
conventional way along with his fellows, so that no one can really blame him.” 
3 Any regulatory ratio is structured on the basis of the definitions of what should eligible for calculation purposes, both 
in the ratio’s numerator and denominator, and of the level it should reach. The new regulations have changed these three 
elements of the ratio: (i) the numerator shows a figure for capital calculated in keeping with a new, much more demanding 
definition; (ii) the way in which risks are translated into weighted assets has been changed in the denominator and various 
caveats have been added regarding the use of internal models; and finally, (iii) the required ratio level has been raised 
considerably, and additional "buffers" have been added, inter alia, to cover the risks systemic institutions evidence. 
 7/13 
 While the capital ratio is important, it is not by any means the only significant measure. The 
crisis has shown that focusing solely on one metric may be counter-productive. Thus, other 
elements have been added. These complement the classic solvency metric, and relate to 
banks’ liquidity or leverage. Moreover, the focus has been placed on banks’ business model 
and governance. 
Lastly,  specific  remunerative  arrangements  have  also  played  a  significant  role  in 
encouraging  short-termist  behaviour.  One  rather  controversial  novelty,  especially  in 
investment banks, has been to introduce ceilings on and restrictions to credit institutions’ 
remunerative  policies,  the  aim  being  to  correct  or,  at  least,  mitigate  certain  perverse 
incentives. 
Supervisory changes 
Yet despite all these regulatory changes, we must be aware that no rules can stand in for 
proper supervision. The role of supervision remains essentially the same: it is preventive. 
It  is usually  said that  July  and  August  forest  fires  are  controlled  and  extinguished in  the 
preceding months of March and April. At this earlier time, scrub is cleared and firewalls are 
set in place, enabling the future advance of the flames to be controlled. If the homework is 
not done in the spring, we pay the consequences in the summer. 
Likewise, the fundamental role of the supervisor is to prevent. This means ensuring that, 
during upturns in the economy, the lending granted by banks has been correctly analysed 
and its price set so that the risks assumed are covered. That prevents excessive growth in 
lending that may lead to bubbles emerging. 
Sadly, one of the lessons from the crisis is that our ability to act as supervisors is limited 
once the banking crisis has broken, and the solutions are always costly and painful. 
New perspective: macroprudential supervision 
So  far  I  have  referred  to  the  so-called  microprudential  perspective  of  supervision.  This 
focusses on ensuring the robustness and solvency of banks individually without evaluating 
their  potential  interconnectedness  with  other  banks  and  markets,  and  their  exposure  to 
common economic factors of risk. 
Something  particularly worrying is the  fact  that  banks  fully  complied with solvency  rules 
during the build-up of our real estate bubble. Although the rules have changed so as to 
correct and avoid specific incentives, it cannot be ruled out that structural imbalances may 
accumulate again on bank balance sheets, just as they did during the pre-crisis phase. 
Nor  can  it  be  ruled  out  that  assets  located  in  segments  or  geographical  areas  may  be 
overvalued. If we look, for example, at real estate credit, we can see that we are far from the 
pre-crisis situation, since new real estate credit shows much healthier loan-to-value and 
affordability ratios. Nor are house prices overvalued if we look at Spain as a whole. However, 
and I believe here that Madrid and Barcelona are similar markets, in some places prices are 
reaching pre-crisis levels. 
Consequently, and as a complement to the micro view, so-called macroprudential policy 
has emerged. Its aim is to boost financial stability by preventing and mitigating systemic 
8/13 
  risks and vulnerabilities, while also assessing potential imbalances or overvaluations that 
may affect a specific sector in our country. In this respect, it is not only individual risks that 
are considered; these are assessed in an aggregate fashion. 
In  sum,  macroprudential  policy  complements  microprudential  supervision.  Both  are 
necessary, though both differ in terms of focus, instruments and the way risk is evaluated. 
Micro-supervision seeks to improve the safety and soundness of financial institutions, while 
macro-supervision focuses on the health of the financial system as a whole. 
Since 2014 the Banco de España has indeed been identifying and monitoring vulnerabilities 
in the financial system, and it also has the possibility of introducing countercyclical capital 
buffers. Along these same lines, we have recently been given the possibility of using tools 
other than the mere activation of capital buffers. These tools are more specific, enabling us 
to take action focusing on the credit segment where imbalances may be concentrated. 
Changes in banks, governance and business models, and changes in society 
In any event, as supervisors we cannot ensure the sustainability of banking business in the 
long run. Actually, the keys to such sustainability have always been in the hands of banks 
themselves. 
I  should  like  to  talk  about  some  of  these  in-house  keys.  Specifically,  I  shall  refer  to 
governance and those aspects that should have a bearing on banking business models, 
some of which in direct response to changes in society. 
Bank governance 
As  many  of  you  are  aware,  governance  is  an  aspect  I  often  bring  up  in  my  speeches.  I 
consider it to receive little attention, despite the fact that, in my view, it is a necessary though 
not sufficient condition for the proper functioning of banks. 
Governance is not something totally quantifiable or directly measurable. Unlike any of the 
ratios we are used to handling, there is no minimum level of governance that banks should 
reach. Governance is a means of doing things and a culture. And attaining it is an objective 
that takes some time to be implemented. All this makes it difficult to transmit a sense of 
urgency. 
Yet without proper governance, the conflicts of interests that arise daily at banks cannot be 
managed.  When  a  conflict  of  interest  arises,  the  bank  must  create  a  control  function. 
Evidently, the control function will only work if it is independent and strong; otherwise, it will 
be neutralised or absorbed by the pressure of daily business. 
We have seen how, without proper governance, control functions are lacking in weight and 
effective  power.  This  gives  business  units  excessive  influence  and  even,  occasionally, 
exclusive influence over day-to-day bank management. 
Ultimately, then, it is governance that allows banks to manage the conflict in question which 
arises between the search for short-term profit and the bank’s sustainability and viability in 
the long-run.  
 9/13 
 Regrettably, we have seen how, as the crisis was brewing, a good number of banks behaved 
just as Keynes had predicted they would. Others, in contrast, decided not to emulate their 
competitors  or  to  do  so  to  a  much  lesser  extent.  I  believe  the  quality  of  governance 
structures  had  much  to  do  with  this  uneven  behaviour.  But  there  is  always  room  for 
improvement. 
Business model and relationship with customers 
I would like to offer some thoughts now on the reputation of banks and the relationship with 
customers  in  the  context  of  the  sustainability  of  banks’  business  model  in  the  long  run. 
Needless to say, banks face the challenge of re-forging their image before the public at large 
and their reputation with customers. 
As regards reputation, banks are hostages to their past, as has occurred with the credit 
crisis. The economic and reputational losses they have incurred are directly related to past 
actions and behaviour. 
Here, we must accept that it is very difficult to combat the sector’s negative image while 
cases from the past are cropping up. 
I believe the lesson here is the same as that for bank solvency: we must draw a line in the 
sand. We must move forward, and change behaviour and the relationship with customers 
to construct a viable business model for the medium and long term. 
Four years back the Banco de España reinforced its conduct-related supervisory activity. 
We have observed how, in general, banks have been striving to set in place the measures 
needed to correct behavioural practices. But much remains to be done. 
I stated once that we should be fair to the financial sector and acknowledge that customer-
protection  regulations  have  changed  significantly  in  recent  years.  True,  society  has  also 
evolved,  and  with  it  the  demands  in  respect  of  the  transparency,  diligence,  rigour  and 
integrity expected of banks. 
A good reflection of this new manner of conduct is in the recent real estate credit legislation. 
The financial crisis has given rise to more demanding legislation that calls on banks not only 
to inform but also to act impartially, transparently and professionally, taking into account 
the rights, interests and needs of their customers. It may be said that the regulations now 
transcend mere transparency in form. 
One very positive aspect of the legislation is the improvement in legal certainty. Clearly, by 
properly protecting the customer, the risks of litigation are being significantly reduced. And 
such risks are one of the main costs the sector has been bearing. 
Let us not forget that the cost of litigation far exceeds any potential benefit that some banks 
might have obtained in the short term through questionable conduct. Moreover, improper 
conduct does not only affect those banks guilty of it, but the reputation of the sector as a 
whole. 
To conclude, this new type of customer-bank relationship must be the starting point for any 
sustainable banking business model. Naturally, if it is to be successfully set in place, a top-
to-bottom cultural change is essential in the organisation. This change will be headed for 
10/13 
 failure if the bank’s senior officers and management do not offer their resolute support. Once 
again, we are talking about governance as a precondition for change to occur. 
 Financial education 
I have highlighted how society’s demands with regard to banks’ behaviour with customers 
have  increased  considerably.  This  awareness  also  reflects  the  difficult  economic  and 
financial context in which we have been moving. 
Evidently,  financial  end-consumers,  especially  individuals,  are  the  weakest  party  in  the 
customer-bank relationship.4 
Hence  the  importance  of  banks  behaving  irreproachably  when  it  comes  to  advice  to 
customers  to  engage  their  services.  However,  we  should  acknowledge  that  the  starting 
point is a significant shortfall in financial knowledge among citizens, a fact that may have 
been conducive to erroneous decision-making. 
Evidently,  to  be  able  to  take  an  economic  decision  properly,  a  customer  must  be  in  full 
possession of all information and capable of understanding the implications that may arise 
in  the  future  from  what  is  to  be  signed.  For  instance,  the  consequences  of  taking  on  a 
variable  interest  rate  throughout  the  life  of  a  30-year  loan  need  to  be  understood,  and 
variable income must be assumed to be so-named because of its variability. 
Admittedly,  the  younger  generations  are  facing  growing  challenges  arising  from  labour 
market aspects. These include the lack of job security, the need for flexibility and mobility, 
and  property  market  developments.  They  are  also  especially  affected  by  the  structural 
changes in society, such as increased life expectancy or the reduction in the birth rate. This 
all involves the need to plan carefully for the future. 
We should not forget that education and financial knowledge are essential for improving 
financial  inclusion.  Clearly,  digital  transformation  may  help  in  this  respect,  especially  in 
remote or thinly populated areas. However, this poses a new challenge for users with little 
prior experience with digital tools, or with little financial knowledge, as they will not be given 
personalised advice when engaging services. 
Mirroring  what  I  have  said,  concern  over  citizens’  level  of  financial  knowledge  has  been 
increasing  in  recent  years.  In  developed  and  emerging  countries  financial  education  is 
viewed today as an essential element of stability and balanced economic development in 
society. 
On OECD recommendations, many countries have developed national financial education 
strategies. In Spain, since 2008, the Financial Education Plan has been rolled out by means 
of a collaboration agreement between the CNMV (National Securities Market Commission) 
and the Banco de España, subsequently entered into also by the Ministry of the Economy 
and Enterprise. We consider these efforts to be essential and wish to boost them further in 
the future. 
                                                                                              
4  It  is  widely  known  that  the  engagement  of  banking services  is  through  standard form  contracts, which  hamper  or 
prevent negotiation between the two parties. 
 11/13 
 In addition, it has been opted to integrate financial education into the compulsory secondary 
education system, and specific subjects address these matters in greater detail in higher 
secondary education. 
Notwithstanding these efforts, much clearly remains to be done. According to the results of 
the 2015 PISA report, which evaluated for the first time the financial capabilities of pupils at 
the end of their secondary education, Spain stands significantly below the average for the 
15 countries that participated in this evaluation, and it is ranked eighth out of the 10 OECD 
member countries that participated. 
Sustainable finance 
One last change directly affecting us, and which merits highlighting, is the environmental 
challenge.  The  term  “environment”  should  be  viewed  as  broadly  as  possible  here. 
Previously, when talking about the environment, I was referring to the regulatory framework 
in which we move, to the prudential supervision we undertake, to the economic reality in 
which  agents  act  and  to  society  as  a  whole.  Now,  “environment”  must  go  beyond  this, 
referring also to climate and to the consequences human actions have on it. 
It is here, moreover, that the aforementioned conflict between short-term actions and future 
benefit, in the very long term, are most manifest. The long term in this case is related to the 
life of future generations, which magnifies the importance of the matter. 
If we turn to look at society again, there is clearly growing awareness regarding the climate 
challenge. 
What are the public authorities doing in this respect? Though not with sufficient speed, it is 
to be acknowledged that the ecological transition is gaining visibility and importance on the 
agenda of international financial organisations. 
There  are  a  wealth  of  initiatives  at  present:  the  G20,  the  United  Nations,  the  Financial 
Stability Board and the OECD are all involved. And notable within the EU, undoubtedly, is 
the European Commission’s action plan on sustainable finance. In the case of Spain, we 
should mention the Draft Climate Change Law. 
In  the  central  banking  and  banking  supervisory  milieu,  I  would  mention  the  work  of  the 
Network for Greening the Financial Sector (NGFS). We participate actively in this network, 
which has just published its second report. This includes best practices for boosting the 
role of the financial sector in complying with the Paris Agreement. 
Banks  themselves  are  increasingly  joining  ethical  or  responsible  banking  initiatives, 
observing international principles that not only look at environmental sustainability aspects, 
but  also  at the social  impact  of  investments. The  development of so-called “sustainable 
bonds”  is  also  being  encouraged.  These  are  much  in  demand  by  investors,  for  which  a 
growing market is being created. 
We should be mindful that compliance with the Paris Agreement goals necessarily entails 
very  substantial  changes  in  our  productive  model.  Clearly,  too,  to  be  successful,  any 
transition  of  this  type  must  include  far-reaching  measures  and  instruments  that  affect 
practically all economic agents, not only credit institutions. 
12/13 
  However, banks can and should play a key role in this transition. At the start of my address 
I talked about the fundamental role of banks as a necessary filter for distinguishing between 
viable economic projects. Likewise, if banks incorporate the risks arising from the ecological 
transition into their analysis, they will become an engine for change: they will help financing 
reach those activities which, in addition to being economically profitable, contribute to the 
sustainable transformation of the economy. 
In  turn,  as  a  central  bank  we  are  also  in the  process  of incorporating  the environmental 
factor into the internal ratings used to evaluate the eligibility of banks’ collateral, and into 
the criteria used for taking own-portfolio investment decisions. 
Conclusions 
That  brings  me  to  the  end  of  my  address.  The  crisis  has  been  severe  and  has  had 
consequences  at  all  levels.  We  have  overcome  its  acute  phase,  but  its  legacy  remains 
present. In response, regulation and supervision have changed radically, taking on board 
lessons we must never forget and equipping supervision with a set of tools necessary for 
preventing future crises. 
Society has also changed. Specific values, such as growing awareness about climate and 
inclusion,  have  become  more  important.  The  demands  made  of  financial  institutions, 
supervisors  and  the  public  authorities  have  increased,  along  with  society’s  financial 
knowledge. However, we must continue to boost education, as a tool for fomenting stability 
and balanced economic development in society.  
We must all take note of these changes and rise to the demands being made of us. What 
we do today will determine the type of future we will have.  
As Woody Allen said, the future is where we will be spending the rest of our lives, so we 
should all take an interest in it.  
Thank you. 
 13/13 
