Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Risques
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in  Risques,  conducted  by  Messrs  Jean-Hervé  Lorenzi,  François-Xavier  Albouy,  Arnaud
Chneiweiss, Pierre-Charles Pradier and Philippe Trainar, on 4 February 2019 and published on 2
April 2019.
 Is it true to say that we’re in a more risky world today than we were ten or fifteen years
ago?
We’re in a period of political and technological change. This change is accelerating, especially in
the  field  of  technology,  and  market  participants  are  probably  underestimating  it.  In  certain
industries, including the financial industry, rapid technological change can lead create risks as
well as opportunities. Political risk is also evolving; it’s moving into developed countries. I’ve just
returned from meetings in South Africa with African central banks. My African colleagues were
saying: “We Africans have always known that we had to manage economic and developmental
challenges  and  challenges  stemming  from  political  transition.  But  that  was  in  an  environment
where  we  had  some  stability  and  an  overview  of  what  was  happening  in  Europe,  the  United
States  and  China.  But  now  the  instability  is  coming  from  the  United  States  and,  to  a  certain
extent,  from  Europe  and  China.  So  now  we  have  to  learn  to  become  a  pillar  of  stability
ourselves.” That line of thinking, which is new for Africa, is one we in Europe have been following
since 1957: how, with our own economic and political tools, can we become self-sufficient and a
pillar of stability ourselves?
Ever since Frank Knight’s work in the 1920s, economists have made a distinction between risk
(which is based on quantifiable probabilities) and uncertainty (which doesn’t lend itself to being
quantified). To take up this distinction again, you could say that we also find ourselves in a world
where there is more uncertainty than risk, because the issues have become political in nature:
uncertainty  about  the  relationship  between  the  United  States  and  China  –  with  all  its  trade,
security and intellectual property consequences; uncertainty about Brexit… Market participants
are at a loss to form opinions in these circumstances. In fact, everyone is! This creates non-
diversifiable risk which has no market price and leads to heightened anxiety. So it’s not surprising
that  markets  are  turning  to  the  public  sector,  in  particular  central  banks  such  as  the  Federal
Reserve System and the ECB, for reassurance.
One  of  the  sources  of  uncertainty  for  insurers  (and  others,  too)  is  interest  rates.  In
particular,  quantitative  easing,  or  QE,  which  affected  the  entire  yield  curve.  Aren’t
interest  rates  gradually  eluding  market  participants’  expectations,  leading  them  to
wonder what sort of market equilibrium will exist at these rates? What constraints could
affect the ECB’s decision-making? Isn’t this a strong driver of cycles and uncertainty?
Market participants can see the benefits of central banks managing the yield curve, because it
fosters economic activity and stability. It is true that part of how interest rates are set is eluding
market mechanisms. Nevertheless, we have to put this discussion into perspective. On the one
hand, it’s nothing new: by design, monetary policy always has an impact on interest rates. On the
other hand, since the start of QE and in all market segments, including sovereign debt as well as
corporate debt, the ECB has always taken care not to suppress the price formation mechanism.
As an example, this is one of the reasons why the ECB does not purchase more than 33% of a
sovereign issuance.
Central banks now have a strong influence on the entire yield curve, over a very long horizon.
The  counterpart  to  this  is  to  be  transparent  towards  the  market  and  to  provide  visibility  and
predictability concerning how we are going to act. That’s the purpose of our forward guidance,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
which  clarifies  our  reaction  function.  Forward  guidance  is  not  an  unconditional  commitment
about what we are going to do. That’s not something we would be able to do and we wouldn’t be
credible, as we necessarily react to new information flows we receive. It does, however, provide
clarity  about  how  our  monetary  policy  incorporates  these  information  flows.  If  we  explain  this
reaction  function  to  the  markets  clearly  enough,  then  they  can  incorporate  it  into  the  price
formation mechanisms. And we feel that this has worked rather well. The markets find the way
we conduct forward guidance useful.
Today,  particularly  in  the  United  States,  there  is  a  debate  about  whether  forward
guidance  should  be  abolished  and  replaced  with  completely  opportunistic  policy  that
could be fairly arbitrary.
This discussion makes sense when monetary policy normalisation is at a more advanced stage.
After all, our monetary policy before the crisis did not include forward guidance and that seemed
perfectly normal to everyone. Once monetary policy has completely normalised, the reference
tool  will  once  again  be  the  interest  rate  and  not  the  size  or  composition  of  the  central  bank’s
balance sheet. So it is valid to wonder whether forward guidance then still serves a purpose. But
that is not the situation the ECB is in. The normalisation of our monetary policy will depend on
economic  indicators  and,  in  any  case,  it  will  be  a  very  long  and  gradual  process.  So  forward
guidance will be needed for a good while yet – for as long as this normalisation process takes.
For  economists  who  have  taught  courses  on  monetary  economics,  this  is  all  very
surprising.  Nobody  would  have  imagined  that  central  banks  could  affect  long-term
interest  rates  and  that  the  huge  pool  of  liquidity  wouldn’t  stoke  inflation.  This
assumption is being fundamentally challenged. It goes well beyond the monetary aspect.
We are in a period where theory is lagging behind reality, as has already happened in the past. In
recent  years,  monetary  economics  has  progressed  significantly.  For  example,  we  have  a
substantial body of theoretical work on quantitative easing from Curdia, Woodford and others.
We have also made a lot of progress in incorporating financial frictions into the models used by
central  banks.  This  began  in  the  United  States  before  spreading  to  Europe.  It’s  also  an
opportunity  to  revive  monetary  schools  of  thought  that  had  disappeared.  Discussions  about
negative  interest  rates,  for  example,  have  provided  an  opportunity  to  revisit  the  work  of  Silvio
Gesell  and  his  theory  of  banknote  demurrage,  which  had  become  a  theoretical  oddity  but  is
becoming significant once more. The crisis was an opportunity to test the vitality of economic
theory and its responsiveness, and I think this was a positive thing for this field of study.
The euro is 20 years old. What conclusions can we draw so far? What is missing that
would enable Europe to be more than just a pillar of stability; that would enable it to be a
pillar of growth?
The  euro  has  provided  price  stability,  which  is  a  necessary  condition  for  growth. And  it  has
protected countries that would have been more severely affected by the financial crisis if they
hadn’t been part of the euro area. Contrary to widespread public opinion, purchasing power has
been better protected since 1999 than it ever was before then. On average, inflation has been
lower  since  1999.  So  one  of  the  euro’s  concrete  objectives,  to  control  inflation,  has  been
achieved. But it was a mistake – or false hope – to think that the euro would, in and of itself,
create long-term growth. Euro area governments would have had to take advantage of the stable
environment  provided  by  the  euro  to  implement  more  investment  and  education  policies,  and
reform policies focused on long-term growth. For example, in France at the time the euro was
created there was a rather naive belief that the euro would automatically generate convergence
between the participating economies. But that was not at all what happened; the euro actually
created divergence, rather than convergence, because it lacked supporting policies, which, for
the most part, were a matter for the national level.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Eventually  we  grew  to  understand  that  good  monetary  policy,  while  clearly  necessary,  isn’t
enough  on  its  own.  The  euro  area  needs  a  much  more  structured  economic  policy,  with
instruments that we still don’t have today, and it needs responsible fiscal policies. That’s the part
that still needs to be completed.
The situation in Europe is not just linked to stability or the lack of industrial policy. The
countries with declining populations are not driving forces. What are the positive signs
for Europe?
The ECB’s diagnosis of the euro area economy is the following. The slowdown we have seen
since 2018 didn’t come as a surprise. 2017 saw a very strong cyclical recovery supported by
dynamic global trade and strengthened, somewhat artificially, by a mistimed fiscal boost in the
United States. We knew that it couldn’t last. Growth is now returning to rates that are closer to
potential, albeit sooner and faster than expected. In the last quarter of 2018, GDP grew by 0.3%
in  France,  so  we’re  a  long  way  off  from  a  recession.  Even  assuming  that  growth  remains  at
similar levels in the coming quarters – which is not in line with the ECB’s staff projections, which
expect growth in the euro area to rise from 1.1% in 2019 to 1.6% in 2020 – that is, even if growth
in France were to stabilise at around 1.2%, that would probably be fairly close to the potential
growth rate in France, which corresponds to productive capacity. Potential growth is weaker than
it was before the crisis, because a lot of investment and human capital has been lost. It will take
time for potential growth to recover, and in the meantime the demographic slowdown continues.
A topic that is attracting increasing attention in the academic debate in the United States, and one
that Europe should look at more closely, is the link between competition and productivity. Several
economists, such as Thomas Philippon, are now saying that there is not enough competition and
profit margins are too high in the United States, and that this has been bad for productivity gains.
We need to look at this topic in Europe; and it may be that we reach different conclusions for
different sectors. The link between competition and productivity isn’t the same for manufacturing
and  services.  In  the  services  sector,  opening  up  regulated  professions  increases  competition
and improves productivity, while for the manufacturing sector, which is already very exposed to
international competition, the question is a more open one. Relatively little is known about these
topics, but they have a significant bearing on the diagnosis for potential growth.
On the same subject, there is a debate in France about whether reductions in the cost of
unskilled labour need to have a limit. In the very short term, this would create more jobs,
of course, but isn’t it just as important to lower the cost of high-skilled labour, which is a
driver of economic growth?
My view as an economist is that we need to support both types of employment, but with different
instruments.  We  need  a  strong  services  sector  because  there  is  a  social  demand  for  low
productivity services, in particular human services, and because there need to be jobs for low-
skilled  workers.  But  we  also  need  to  support  the  manufacturing  sector,  because  it  is
manufacturing that creates productivity, exports, and so on. That doesn’t mean that we have to
use  the  same  instrument.  Empirical  studies  have  shown  that  cutting  payroll  taxes  is  more
effective at the lower end of the wage scale. That doesn’t mean that the manufacturing sector
doesn’t need any support,  but  it’s  better  to  target  support  towards  research  and  development
(R&D), as well as training, rather than lowering payroll taxes far above the minimum wage, which
would push up wages instead of creating jobs.
It  isn’t  the  ECB’s  responsibility,  but  why  hasn’t  there  been  enough  employment  and
growth in the euro area? It’s a question of labour, linked to cutting costs. In all advanced
economies, we have recently seen that the wave that hit low-skilled labour is starting to
hit routine skilled jobs. And these routine skilled jobs are not at the minimum wage.
In  the  1990s,  and  up  until  China  joined  the  World  Trade  Organization,  there  was  a  general
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
acceptance that the unchecked globalisation of trade and finance – the Washington consensus –
was  the  best  way  of  creating  prosperity.  Any  remaining  reservations  on  the  subject  were
abandoned.  Economists  and  politicians  gave  it  their  blessing  and,  in  developed  economies,
made  an  incorrect  diagnosis  that  went  along  the  following  lines:  it’s  no  problem,  for  sure
technological  progress  and  globalisation  will  destroy  low-skilled  jobs,  but  we  will  still  have  an
advantage, because we’re going to invest in R&D and education, and the goods and services we
produce will be of better quality and we will sell them to less advanced economies. But it didn’t
work that way, and there are two reasons for this, in my view. First, emerging economies, and
China in particular, have seen much quicker improvements in quality than expected, and at the
same time technological disruption has meant that technical progress hasn’t just destroyed low-
skilled jobs, it is also destroying medium-skilled jobs and maybe soon, as a result of artificial
intelligence, start affecting high-skilled jobs. Second, we didn’t manage to invest in education and
R&D  that  would  have  enabled  us  to  stay  ahead.  Education  is  an  area  that  is  particularly
concerning and one of the big challenges for France, looking at the findings of the OECD and of
the public think tank France Stratégie.
By 2030, one in five people will be over 65. Is it possible that, at some point in the future,
there will be quantitative easing for financing of the voluntary sector? For the kinds of
investment  in  associations  which,  since  they  provide  support  for  elderly  people  and
employ large numbers of people, are known to generate wellbeing, health, and so on?
I  disagree,  but  for  institutional  reasons  rather  than  economic  ones.  It’s  clear  that  significant
demographic developments change the structure of our economies and, thus, the way in which
we  conduct  monetary  policy.  For  instance,  the  Japanese  presidency  of  the  G20  has  made
demographic change one of its priorities for 2019. We’ve had seminars, among central banks
too, on its impact on relative prices, inflation and the structure of production. But the ECB doesn’t
have  a  mandate  to  finance  adjustments  in  the  economy.  Money  creation  holds  a  certain
fascination, and there is always a temptation to project public policy failings onto the ECB by
asking it to remedy them. There is the same debate about adjusting to climate change, which
some expect the ECB to finance. But asking the ECB to finance adjustment to climate change,
to  finance  demographic  transition,  to  finance  infrastructure…  that  would  mean  giving  a
technocratic institution the power to set priorities for public spending, which is the essence of
political  debate. And  some  people,  sometimes  the  same  people,  already  accuse  the  ECB  of
acting  politically!  Politicising  the  central  bank  is  the  best  way  of  weakening  its  actions.  Our
contribution is to have created a monetary environment that is conducive to such investments.
The  current  environment,  with  rates  at  zero  or  close  to  zero,  also  at  a  very  long  horizon,  is
exceptionally favourable. The question of how this favourable environment should be put to use –
by investing in climate-related matters, ageing or something else altogether – that is a political
debate for parliaments.
Your experience means that you are just as familiar with the German economy as with
the  French  economy.  The  recent  social  unrest  in  France  has  revealed  a  divergence
between Paris and the regions that isn’t seen at all in Germany, where the regions are
extremely  developed.  Can  you  explain  this  phenomenon?  In  France,  all  regional
development policies have failed.
You’re right, one advantage of having European experience is that it makes it possible to stand
back and look at the French situation a bit more objectively! The field of operation of the French
elite  is  geographically  very  concentrated.  The  German  elite  are  more  dispersed:  they  hold
positions  in  large  corporations,  in  foundations,  in  the  world  of  politics.  They  are  spread  quite
widely in Germany. In France, most of them are based in Paris and have graduated from the
same  elite  universities  (“grandes  écoles”),  not  to  mention  the  lack  of  diversity  with  regard  to
background  and  gender,  where  Europe  lags  far  behind  the  Anglo-Saxon  world.  So  it  is  not
surprising if the system of administration and economic support is organised in such a way as to
benefit first and foremost certain large companies and significant players, which in turn holds
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
back innovation and growth.
The  European  insurance  market  is  very  fragmented.  The  Spanish  market  leader,  for
example, is unknown in France. Why have markets remained national in the insurance
sector?
The  ECB  has  no  competence  in  the  field  of  insurance.  In  fact,  it’s  one  of  the  things  that  the
Treaty forbids it to do. So it’s not a sector that we follow very closely. But if we look at non-bank
financial intermediation more generally, there is still a high degree of fragmentation. There has
not been the institutional integration that we have seen in the banking sector. This will take time,
because  once  you  get  into  non-bank  territory,  you  very  quickly  come  up  against  non-financial
barriers related to corporate law and different legal traditions. National laws differ, especially – but
not  only  –  with  regard  to  bankruptcy,  and  there  are  27  different  approaches  to  mobilising
collateral,  and  so  on.  These  are  all  barriers  to  capital  markets  integration.  We  need  a  legal
environment  that  allows  integration,  and  this  presupposes  far-reaching  changes  to  legal
traditions.
When you joined the ECB, did you expect such an environment, including the dynamism?
Quantitative easing was something that was unimaginable for our generation.
When  I  joined  the  ECB  in  2012,  some  people  said  to  me  that  it  would  be  interesting  from  a
technical and human point of view, because the world of central banking operates on a very high
level  in  intellectual  and  human  terms,  but  that  it  would  be  a  bit  boring. As  you  can  probably
imagine, it has not once been boring since 2012! The most cherished dream of central bankers
is for their profession to become boring again, but we haven’t got to that point yet...
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
