Benjamin E Diokno: The Philippine economy - a story of cautious
optimism
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Wallace Business Forum, Makati City, 19 June 2019.
 Wallace  Business  Forum  (WBF)  Managing  Director  Gary  Teves,  distinguished  officers  and
members of WBF, esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
I  am  pleased  to  address  you  in  this  forum  organized  by  the  Wallace  Business  Forum.  Your
continued  interest  in  the  Philippine  economy  has  greatly  helped  in  shaping  the  quality  of
information  provided  to  the  international  community.  Events  such  as  this  offer  the  BSP  an
excellent  opportunity  to  engage  with  various  stakeholders  in  policy  dialogue  and  discuss  the
developments in our core mandate of promoting price stability and financial stability as well as
our views on the current challenges we are facing.
Let me begin my speech with the concept of a Goldilocks economy, a state of having a “just
right” mix of high growth and low inflation. Has the Philippines entered this state? The answer is
DEFINITELY YES.
Allow  me  to  clarify.  There  has  been  an  encouraging  development  in  the  decelerating  trend  in
inflation.  This  has  allowed  us  to  reduce  the  interest  rate  on  the  BSP’s  overnight  reverse
repurchase (RRP) facility by 25 basis points to 4.5 percent in our latest policy meeting held last
May 2019. This decision was aimed at helping inflation move towards the middle of the target
range and give due consideration to growth, in line with the BSP’s flexible approach to inflation
targeting.
In  addition,  although  the  country  experienced  lower-than-expected  growth  for  Q1  2019  at  5.6
percent, growth is expected to pick up in the second half of 2019 with the catch-up government
spending  plan.  Let  me  emphasize  that  the  country’s  economic  expansion  streak  is  now  81
quarters, which translates to more than 20 years of uninterrupted growth.
In  terms  of  the  BSP’s  outlook  for  inflation,  our  latest  baseline  projections  in  May  indicate  that
inflation will likely settle within the target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point for both 2019
and 2020. This positive alignment between growth and inflation has been a constant narrative
and is expected to further lend support to the country’s long-run growth momentum.
Both liquidity and credit conditions in the country continue to be in line with the country’s overall
economic growth. As of end-April 2019, bank lending and liquidity grew by 12.7 percent and 7.0
percent, respectively.
Other  aspects  of  the  economy  offer  a  sound  basis  for  optimism.  The  country’s  external
payments  position  remains  manageable  and  sustainable  as  it  enjoys  support  from  different
fronts. These include remittances from one, overseas Filipinos (OFs); two, revenues from the
information technology – business process outsourcing (IT-BPO) industry; three, receipts from
the robust tourism sector; and four, sustained inflows of foreign direct investments.
As  a  result,  the  country’s  Gross  International  Reserves  (GIR)  now  stands  at  around  US$85.0
billion as of end-May 2019—the heftiest level of GIR ever. It is roughly equivalent to 7.5 months’
worth of imports of goods and payments of services and primary income.
In other words ladies and gentlemen, the Philippine economy continues to fire on all cylinders
and is expected to see steady economic growth without possible risks of overheating.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  terms  of  financial  stability,  we  want  to  maintain  a  “Goldilocks  economy”  by  not  allowing
markets  to  create  new  risks  and  vulnerabilities.  This  means  that  we  do  not  only  concern
ourselves  with  growth  and  price  stability,  but  also  take  into  account  resiliency.  Implementing
measures  that  would  further  enhance  the  existence  of  flexible  systems  and  develop  financial
markets remains a policy imperative.
Toward this end, the BSP’s policy agenda has endeavored to promote greater market efficiency
and transparency by relying on market-based instruments in our operations.
For instance, the BSP continues to refine its Interest Rate Corridor (IRC) framework. The IRC is
expected to support capital market development by fostering more active liquidity management
by individual financial institutions. This, in turn, could strengthen the price discovery process and
facilitate the effective and efficient pricing of financial products in the domestic market.
This operational reduction in reserve requirement (RR) is also part of the BSP’s broad financial
sector reform agenda to promote efficiency in the system by lowering intermediation costs. This
is  in  line  with  the  BSP’s  medium-term  objectives  of  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  monetary
policy and deepening the domestic money market.
Over time, the IRC system will also help reduce the country’s reliance on RR for sterilization
purposes, shift to market based instruments, and allow the BSP in the future to bring the RR in
line with regional norms.
The  BSP  is  also  committed  to  foreign  exchange  (FX)  reforms  toward  a  more  organized  FX
market  that  supports  a  flexible  and  market-determined  exchange  rate.    This  includes  further
liberalizing FX rules to reduce the cost of doing business and to improve data capture for FX
transactions.
Overall, our commitment to lowering friction costs in the banking sector will foster more efficient
financial intermediation, which will be further enhanced by the availability of alternatives offered by
fintech and digital innovation.
Towards  a  more  internationally  integrated  financial  sector,  BSP  has  been  supportive  of  the
ASEAN financial integration process and has actively cooperated and collaborated with ASEAN
central  banks  through  responsive  regulations  and  measures  to  support  regional  financial
integration and capital market development.
Likewise,  the  BSP  has  recently  put  in  place  various  enhancements  in  its  arsenal  of
macroprudential  tools.  These  include  the  recent  approval  to  impose  counter-cyclical  buffers
(CCyB)  and  the  approval  of  the  extension  of  the  observation  period  for  the  Basel  III  Liquidity
Coverage Ratio (LCR) and Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), among others. These tools allow
the  BSP  to  manage  the  build-up  of  systemic  risk  in  the  financial  system  by  setting  aside
additional capital as reserves during good times and as insurance or buffers for bad times.
Despite all these positive developments, there are still challenges on the horizon. As International
Monetary Fund (IMF) Chief Christine Lagarde aptly puts it, “the global economy is at a delicate
moment”—as  we  see  uncertainty  as  well  as  lack  of  trust  and  confidence  by  the  business
community  as  to  what  the  global  economic  landscape  is  going  to  be.  Under  such  condition,
markets and economies, including the Philippines could possibly become more susceptible to
risks. Allow me to identify some of the key challenges that we need to address.
First is the risk of a sharper-than-expected global economic slowdown. In its most recent World
Economic Outlook (WEO), the IMF revised its global growth forecast for 2019 downward from
3.7 percent last October 2018 to 3.3 percent this April 2019. 
Second, with global growth  slowing,  advanced  economies  have  shifted  from  a  restrictive  to  a
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
more  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy.  While  this  could  be  beneficial  for  emerging
economies like the Philippines, it could also potentially provide the impetus to a cycle of capital
flow surge and sudden stop.
Third,  we  are  observing  the  tendency  in  some  economies  to  move  away  from  globalization
towards the rise of protectionist policies such as the protracted trade tensions between the US
and China. While the Philippines is not directly affected with the tariff impositions, the continued
trade friction could take its toll on the country’s external sector.
Fourth, there is also the so-called rise of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. While technological
innovation  in  itself  is  not  bad,  and  indeed  often  brings  benefits,  the  velocity  and  depth  of
transformation could have potentially disruptive effects, especially in the short term. In fact, rapid
technological  innovation  has  already  ushered  in  broad  structural  economic  changes  that
policymakers are only just beginning to understand. Certainly, this would have significant impact
in the conduct of economic policy and the way we do business.
On top of these global risks, we also have to deal with the  infrastructure gap on the domestic
front.
Nonetheless,  despite  these  risks,  we  are  cautiously  optimistic  that  the  Philippine  economy  is
poised to sustain its growth momentum amid lingering global headwinds.
Let me close by assuring everyone that the BSP will continue to adhere to sound policies and
remain  focused  on  its  mandate.  You  can  continue  to  count  on  us  to  remain  steadfast  in  our
primary  objective  of  price  and  financial  stability,  factors  that  reinforce  the  vibrant  investment
environment.
Having said all these, I am looking forward to a productive, open, and stimulating discussion with
you and will be receptive to your insights.
Thank you and mabuhay.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
