Joachim  Wuermeling:  Banking  regulation  and  the  benefits  of
international cooperation - Basel III and beyond
Speech  by  Prof  Joachim  Wuermeling,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, Washington DC, 7 February 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Welcome to the “Gold Room” of the Konrad Adenauer Foundation. I am honoured to welcome
you all – your attendance today surely makes this lunch a golden opportunity to exchange ideas
and perspectives on the future of transatlantic and international cooperation.
We are probably all having quite difficult conversations in our jurisdictions at the moment about
what  transatlantic  cooperation  –  and  what  international  cooperation  –  can  do  to  achieve  a
prosperous  economy  over  the  coming  years  and  decades.  How  can  cooperation  support  the
goals of prosperity, stability and progress?
My  personal  view  is  this:  our  prosperity  hinges  heavily  on  the  interdependencies  of  our
economies.  That‘s  what  makes  cooperative  frameworks  that  create  reliability  and  trust  so
important.
Take  banking  regulation  as  an  example  —  here  we  have  a  fairly  successful  track  record  of
international cooperation: the Basel Committee of Banking Supervision is a semi-formal network
of supervisors from currently 28 jurisdictions.
Since 1974, regulators in the Committee have been developing international minimum standards
and guidelines to harmonise the supervision of internationally active banks.
Even though its standards are only non-binding agreements, these are typically implemented in
more than 100 countries.
During its 45 years of international cooperation, the Basel Committee has achieved a lot:
It  ensures  a  clear-cut  separation  of  work  and  cooperation  between  home  and  host
supervisors, so that the activity of international banks cannot fall through the cracks.
It  fosters  the  continuous  exchange  between  supervisors  and  thereby  helps  build  mutual
trust.
The Basel minimum standards reduce the opportunity for regulatory arbitrage.
And in the process, they reduce the likelihood of a regulatory race to the bottom.
I like to think of Basel as an example of the value of international cooperation.
And as such, the Basel Committee was crucial as a forum to make sure that regulatory reforms
after the financial crisis were developed in international accord.
The final pieces of this international reform effort were achieved with the Committee finalising the
Basel III standard. The Basel III package, which includes reforms developed between 2009 and
2019, will make internationally active banks safer in the future.
And  yet  I  would  like  to  bring  one  sobering  fact  to  your  attention:  since  the  Basel  Committee
started its work, financial crises have not become fewer but more frequent.
How can that be? One reason is regulatory loopholes that emerge due to financial innovation –
this calls for a confident, strong supervision in the face of new developments that are not covered
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
by international standards.
But  another  source  of  weakness  of 
implementation.
the 
international  Basel  standards 
is 
insufficient
I was recently discussing with my staff the implementation of Basel III in the EU. At some point,
the discussion turned to the less than optimal experiences with the previous Basel standards.
Some  pointed  out  that  the  US  did  not  implement  the  Basel  II  standard  in  full,  despite  having
pushed for it in the first place. That led to the question how complete the implementation could be
if other jurisdictions simply cherry-picked.
But then I saw two colleagues whispering and laughing – and I asked what it was about. One of
them,  quite  reluctantly,  explained  that  it  may  be  true  that  Basel  II  implementation  in  the  US
diverged from what the EU had hoped for – but that it was the EU which had been found to be
materially non-compliant with the Basel III standard. The room suddenly fell silent.
Finally, someone asked: will it be different this time around?
The purpose of this tale is not to blame and shame. My concern is rather to highlight where we
are  right  now  in  terms  of  finalising  regulatory  reform  after  the  financial  crisis  –  and  that  the
system of national implementation does not favour full implementation.
So where are we? We are getting closer, we can already make out the finishing line. But the last
leg of national implementation is a steep upward climb.
Without reaching the last milestone, Basel III would lose dramatically in value in terms of financial
stability.
What we need is complete implementation, nothing less: all internationally active banks – be they
American,  European, Asian  or  from  any  other  region  –  need  to  be  subject  to  these  minimum
standards – otherwise we have failed to achieve a truly international compact.
Does this mean that, in future, every community bank should apply internal models to estimate
its risk of credit valuation adjustment in derivative positions?
Of course not. International cooperation would reach beyond what is sensible. The Basel rules
are  highly  complex  and  call  for  big  compliance  departments  –  something  that  is  beyond  the
reach of a community bank business model, for example.
That’s  why  smaller  institutions  which  are  not  internationally  active  should  be  subject  to  less
complex rules.
And that’s why the US and the EU have begun to reduce operationally burdensome rules for such
institutions  –  a  path  that  we  are  pursuing  further,  within  the  Basel  Committee  as  well  as  in
national implementation.
However, we should not take this too far. For example, I am concerned about tendencies in both
the EU and the US to exclude from key regulations internationally active mid-sized banks. The
last crisis erupted not only due to what large banks did, but also because of the activities at mid-
sized banks.
International cooperation can serve us well. In banking regulation, cooperation can contribute to
building  a  safer  banking  system. As  Basel  III  has  been  finished  by  the  Basel  Committee,  the
focus  will  now  shift  towards  evaluation  and  implementation  monitoring.  Though,  some  topics
have  to  be  kept  on  the  agenda  of  the  Basel  Committee.  One  example  is  the  regulation  of
sovereign exposures in times of historically high sovereign debt levels and rising interest rates
worldwide.  There  is  a  considerable  reputational  risk  for  the  Basel  Committee  if  it  ignored  the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
sovereign risk issue.
Furthermore,  new  risks  are  emerging  and  will  determine  the  Basel Agenda.  I  am  thinking  of
climate risks in banks’ balance sheets or risks stemming from crypto assets as well as new
players like BigTechs expanding to banking business. Those examples also show that risks and
stakeholders can’t be grasped within national borders which shows very clearly that there is no
alternative to international cooperation.
However,  international  cooperation  can  only  work  if  national  politics  are  able  to  overcome  the
tendencies towards less than full implementation.
International cooperation does not cause national responsibility to vanish.
Thank you for your attention – I look forward to our discussion.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
