Cleviston  Haynes:  Critical  minds  for  critical  times  -  economic
research  as  a  building  block  for  transformative  growth  in  the
Caribbean
Speech by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 39th Annual
Review Seminar, Bridgetown, 25 July 2019.
Good morning,
 th
It is my distinct pleasure to welcome you to this 39  Annual Review Seminar. This seminar has
developed  a  rich  tradition  for  sound  economic  thought  and  quality  research  on  Caribbean
economies  that  has  contributed  to  public  discourse  and  the  betterment  of  our  societies.  Its
success  has  led  to  the  evolution  of  similar  seminars  at  other  regional  central  banks.  This
seminar continues to serve as an incubator for nurturing our young economists to the practice of
economic research and has provided opportunities for us to discuss and debate research ideas,
establish collaborative relationships and to learn from each other’s shared experiences. I would
also  like  to  acknowledge  other  institutions  in  the  region,  such  as  the  Caribbean  Development
Bank  and  the  IADB  that  are  also  making  available  their  valuable  research  on  key  aspects  of
economic development in the region.
At  the  Bank,  our  focus  in  the  past  year  has  been  on  implementation  of  Barbados  Economic
Recovery  and  Transformation  (BERT)  programme.  To  this  end,  our  economists  have  been
intimately involved in programme design and monitoring. I believe that there is a nexus between
operational  work  and  research  because  research  is  integral  to  the  design  of  good  economic
policy. I wish therefore to commend our young economists who have risen to the challenge of
preparing papers for this conference.
As I reflected on this year’s theme, Critical Minds for Critical Times: Economic Research as
a Building Block for Transformative Growth in the Caribbean I wish to share a few thoughts
with you.
Firstly,  the  theme  challenges  each  of  us  to  critically  think  about  the  type  of  research  we
undertake  and  how  the  resultant  findings  contribute  to  national  economic  policy  initiatives
designed  to  drive  transformative  economic  growth.  We  must,  therefore,  conduct  relevant  and
timely research that includes economic ideas and models that capture the essence of Caribbean
economies, namely small size, high import propensity and a binding foreign exchange constraint
to name a few. More importantly, we must market our research through discussion forums such
as  these,  on  social  media  platforms,  and  on  websites  or  in  the  traditional  and  non-traditional
media so that our publics understand our work, and any ensuing policy initiatives. The research
shows  that  an  informed  and  educated  public helps  with  the  successful  execution  and
transmission of the national economic strategies.
Secondly, what do we mean by transformative growth and what role can economic research play
in fostering such growth. Transformational growth is a long-run phenomenon, which involves at
its core the structural transformation of the economy, the basic premise being the repositioning
and reallocation of economic activity across the broad sectors of the domestic economy. For the
majority  of  Caribbean  countries,  these  sectors  are  services,  primarily  tourism  and  financial
services, and to a lesser extent manufacturing, mining and agriculture. In the case of Barbados,
the Government has articulated a national digitisation strategy to transform the economy. The
aim  is  to  build  a  new  economy  that  is knowledge-intensive,  technologically  driven,  and  that
promotes innovation, creativity and inclusiveness.
Indeed, technological advancements are fuelling the pace of digitisation of the global economy,
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
which represents the greatest potential to drive transformational growth through changes in the
economic  structure  of  production.  We  at  the  Bank  recognise  that  changes  in  technology  are
transforming the way financial institutions are interacting with their customers. In particular, the
impact of technological advancements on financial regulation and supervision should be an area
of  research  focus,  as  central  banks  must  adapt  to  these  changes  and  engage  with  key
stakeholders to ensure the appropriate safeguards are in place to manage the inevitable risks
that  the  new  developments  present.  We  must  also  conduct  more  micro-based  studies  to
develop a deeper understanding of the behaviours our societies. The initiative to reduce the use
of cash is a prime example of how such research can help us better understand the payments
landscape in our economies.
The goal of structural transformation and ultimately the realisation of transformative growth must
be  inclusive.  This  means  that  everyone  benefits  from  or  shares  in  the  income  and  wealth
generation  when  the  economy  expands.  From  an  economic  perspective,  research  on  the
strategies  that  increase  total  factor  productivity,  competitiveness  and  economic  diversification
within and across economic sectors are essential.  Finally, our research must examine how we
can  reduce  the  unsustainable  use  of  natural  resources  to  ensure  that  natural  disasters  and
climate change do not put the prospects for transformational growth at risk.
The seminar programme reveals an interesting mix of research papers, the launch of the 2019
Financial  Stability  Report  and  a  Barbados  Economics  Society  discussion  forum  on  the
effectiveness of the BERT programme. On behalf of the Central Bank of Barbados, welcome
once again and I wish you fruitful, stimulating and enjoyable seminar over these three days, and
may we all be inspired to conduct more research that transforms our economies.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
