Olli  Rehn:  Living  with  populism  -  reflections  on  the  economy  and
democracy in Europe
Speech by Mr Olli Rehn, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at "Waiting for Populism? Problems of
Interpretation  and  Policy  Issues:  Four  Lectures  and  a  Conversation",  Central  Bank  of  Malta,
Valletta, 9 May 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
 Let me first wish you a very good Schuman Day – or Europe Day. It is a great pleasure and
honour to meet and talk with you today.
It is indeed appropriate that precisely on the Schuman Day 2019 we discuss one of the major
political developments in Europe of our time, the rise of political populism. All over Europe we are
currently  living  with  populism,  which  calls  for  broader  reflections  on  the  economy  and
democracy, and I will discuss these matters today in my talk.
These issues are also of paramount importance for central banking. That’s why I want to warmly
thank the Central Bank of Malta for organising this conference and Governor Mario Vella for taking
the initiative to create an interdisciplinary European research network to look into the notion of
populism in central bank communication. Populism has become a normal part of the democratic
process in today’s Europe, and as democratically-minded people we have to recognise the role it
plays.
Why does this matter for central banking? Because the central banks, including the ECB and
euro area central banks, do not live in a vacuum, but are reflections of the society at large –
independent  reflections  and  actors,  I  should  add.  In  this  context,  let  me  refer  to  Joseph
Schumpeter,  one  of  the  greatest  economists  of  all  time,  who  wrote:  “The  condition  of  the
1
monetary system of a nation is a symptom of all its conditions."
SLIDE 2. Schumpeter’s Triangle
What  Schumpeter  said  about  a  nation,  goes  today  as  well  for  Europe  as  a  whole,  for  our
Economic and Monetary Union. What happens to our money, is a reflection of the state of our
union and its economy, of the society and the democracy.  So we have to take a broad view.
1. Let me start by pondering the root causes of populism. Pinpointing a single underlying reason
for  this  development  is  impossible.  However,  there  seems  to  be  broad  agreement  that  a
combination of increased economic insecurity, perceived threats to identity i.e. identity politics,
and failures of the political decision-makers to address citizens’ concerns, all these have acted
as a key trigger for populist surges in recent years.
Many countries have faced a host of challenges in the decade following the global financial crisis.
The euro area was particularly hard hit following the sovereign debt crises in several member
states. On top of all economic hardship, a refugee crisis exploded in Europe. Nowhere else were
these impacts felt as strongly as here in the Southern Europe.
SLIDE 3. Economic recovery of the Eurozone from 2013 onwards
With the help of a strong policy response by member states and EU institutions, not least the
European Central Bank, and by reforming the Eurozone economic governance and institutional
set-up, Europe eventually managed to overcome the financial and economic crisis.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  the  institutional  response  has  not  yet  been  completed.  More  remains  to  be  done  to
complete the job with the banking union, and the EU fiscal framework needs to be amended to
better protect against the highs and lows of the economic cycle, and support economic reforms.
Apart from the economic and financial policies, it is particularly regrettable that the EU has been
unable to decide on and implement sufficient measures to address the refugee crisis, which you
know  only  too  well  here  in  Malta  and  more  broadly  in  Southern  Europe.  This  is  a  policy  area
where more consequential joint European efforts are critically needed.
2. Populism is a multidimensional phenomenon and difficult to define. There is no single definition
of populism. That is probably because the roots of populist parties and their political agendas
vary by country. Let’s look at some varieties of definitions of political populism.
SLIDE 4. Timo Soini’s Pro Gradu
On this, the views of the present Finnish foreign minister, Mr. Timo Soini, are particularly worth
reading, as he has for long time combined both the theory and practice of populism: he wrote his
master’s thesis on populism some 30 years ago , and was a party leader for the True Finns for
over 20 years, before leaving the party in 2017 – so he very much practiced what he preached,
and indeed preached what he had studied!
2
Soini wrote in his 1988 thesis that “populism is an ideology of the people, but it requires almost
always a charismatic leader and a group of intellectuals to lead it.” He regards the nationalist
ideology  as  the  basis  of  populism  and  as  the  common  denominator  of  all  populist  parties  in
Europe.
The  distinguished  historian  of  theworld  economy,  Professor  Barry  Eichengreen  comes  in  fact
very close to this definition, having written in his recent book The Populist Temptation as follows:
“[populism]  involves  the  reaction  of  voters  against  the  political  establishment,  nationalist  and
racialist  sentiment  directed  against  foreigners  and  minorities,  and  a  yearning  for  forceful,
charismatic leadership”.
In line with Eichengreen and Soini, populism typically focuses on a handful of ideas with anti-elite,
authoritarian,  and  usually  nationalist  tendencies  in  appealing  to  their  base  of  supporters.  Both
rightly point out that populist movements have been part and parcel of the democratic political
landscape for a long time, from the United States to Finland.
3. What about the relationship of populism to economic hardship? Does economic crisis breed
populism?  One  can  make  an  interesting  observation  that  the  recent  rise  of  populism  is
widespread,  and  not  just  contained  in  the  countries  experiencing  the  biggest  economic
difficulties.
The country I know best, Finland, is a case in point. Finland was recently named – for what is
worth,  I  don’t  know  how  much  –  in  the  World  Happiness  Report  the  “happiest  country  in  the
world”, for the second year in a row. In this ranking, all Nordic countries have fared well over the
years.  I  should  add  that,  instead  of  happiness,  we  should  in  my  view  really  speak  about  life
satisfaction in this context. The Report’s results suggest that it is not just high national income,
but supportive social systems and institutions that play a big role in creating ‘happy’ societies.
The good performance of Finland and its Scandinavian neighbours in these rankings is largely
explained by the so-called Nordic model. This is a system that combines a market economy with
highly inclusive social policies – strong safety nets, universal health care and free education.
SLIDE 5. Vote for populist parties over time in advanced democracies
The average share of vote for the populist parties in advanced democracies has substantially
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
grown over the past decades, as seen from this slide: from below 5% in the 1980s to 10–15 % in
this millennium, and it has been growing in recent years, as we know.
You may find it then a bit surprising that populist political forces have fared so well in Finland and
the  other  Nordic  countries.  In  the  Nordic  countries,  support  for  populist  parties  has  ranged
between 15–20 percent in recent years. In Finland, the (True) Finns Party has scored between
17–19 percent of the vote in the last three national elections in 2011–19.
So why is it so that even the “happiest people in the world” are so prone to populist temptations?
As mentioned, the combination of economic insecurity and threats to national identity appear to
trigger populist surges. This is amplified if the political system fails to address citizens’ concerns.
In  fact,  the  economic  argument  about  populism  seems  to  be  as  much  about  distribution  as
aggregate  growth  –  a  favourable  macro-economic  development  may  mask  big  differences
across different groups.
The  distributional  impacts  of  a  key  driver  of  today’s  changes  –  especially  technological
development, such phenomena as artificial intelligence, automatization, digitalisation, robotics –
have been widely recognised for some time. Initially, technological development mainly crowded
out low-skilled labour. But more recently, with the latest advances in artificial intelligence, it is
many medium-skilled jobs that are being threatened, thus placing an even bigger premium on
high-skilled jobs and education.
One  very  relevant  and  realistic  recent  book  that  relate  to  populism  is  by  Torben  Iversen  and
David Soskice called Democracy and Prosperity – Reinventing Capitalism through a Turbulent
Century. They refute the crisis of democracy, and rather call the present state of affairs as a
challenge  for  democracy.  As  comparative  or  international  political  economists,  their  point  of
departure is the ongoing economic transformation into a fully-fledged knowledge economy, which
is very skill-intensive.
For them, the question is how the majority of the people – or voters – can feel that they have a
place, stake and future for their children in the society. The key intervening variable is education.
Not primarily as a civilizational project, but rather as a way of maintaining one’ position in the
reasonable  prosperous  middle  class,  or  at  least  keeping  up  the  aspiration  for  one’s  children.
They underline the ‘aspirational vote’ of the middle class.
Iversen  and  Soskice  also  counter  the  argument  that  states  are  powerless  in  the  face  of
international capitalism. For them, location matters, and it is the clusters of industries that drive
the economy and the thriving cities that attract people. Again, education and training are critical to
keep  the  people  on  board.  And  the  democratically  elected  governments  can  decide  on  the
policies  for  competitiveness  and  on  the  nature  of  the  welfare  state.  As  political  economists
Iversen and Soskice coin their argument as follows:
“We suggest that the essence of democracy is not redistribution or equality, as so commonly
assumed,  but  the  advancement  of  middle  class  interests,  and  we  capture  this  idea  as  the
“fundamental equality of democracy” (to distinguish it clearly from Piketty’s (2014) “fundamental
3
inequality of capitalism”.
Likewise, in two recent books, Paul Collier and Raghuram Rajan highlight the role played by the
widening geographic divide and the loss of shared identity between the thriving metropolis and
the  declining  provinces.   This  is  related  to  technological  development.  In  particular,  the  rapid
evolution  of  the  knowledge  economy  has  significantly  boosted  specialisation  to  harness
productivity  gains.  Thus,  specialists  need  to  work  near  other  specialists  with  complementary
skills  to  maximise  their  productivity  –  and  cities  provide  an  opportune  environment  for  close
connections.
4
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
For the firms eager to harness economies of scale, cities offer large pools of both workers and
customers. As the economies of scale have become more important, many provincial towns find
it hard to keep up with the competition. At the same time, increased global competition has led to
the demise of traditional manufacturing industries in the advanced economies, many of which
have been situated in these provincial towns.
4. The geographic redistribution of growth is also associated with the diminished role of local
communities and the decline in different forms of belonging to society. This case is particularly
strongly made in Raghu Rajan’s recent book “The Third Pillar”: the three key pillars of society –
the state, the market, and the community – need to be in balance for strong, sustainable and
inclusive growth and development. If any of the pillars weakens too much relative to the others,
the society suffers. According to Rajan, this is exactly what has happened to the community pillar
due to the centrifugal pull of global markets and new technologies.
In the populist agenda, localism matters and any actual or perceived transfer of power to a more
distant elite is viewed with suspicion. This was clearly a key factor behind the Brexit vote, and
many  others.  The  regional  reaction  to  rapid  urbanisation  has  been  called  “the  revenge  of  the
regions”.
Finally,  two  significant  shocks  coincided  with  the  rapid  changes  driven  by  globalisation  and
technological  development.  First,  the  2008  global  financial  crisis,  followed  by  the  economic
recession; second, the European refugee crisis. These amplified citizens’ fears and frustrations
towards the elites and the immigrants, thus further feeding to populist tendencies.
Overall,  I  see  three  stages  in  the  development  of  populism.  The  first  stage  is  recognition  of
protest or issues. In the second stage, there are increasing demands for policy change. And in
the third stage, there are actions for a regime change – for more illiberal and authoritarian. In
many advanced liberal democracies, we are normally in stage two.
5. Since economic policies of populist parties seldom provide real solutions, and the impact of
populists  on  political  institutions  can  be  erosive,  the  liberal  democracies  need  to  find  ways  to
contain the rise of populism. Otherwise, we face both fragmentation and un-governability.
SLIDE 6. Vote for the broad political centre in Finland
To illustrate this, in Finland the combined share of votes for the three main centre-left and centre-
right parties has declined from a steady 65–70% up until the global financial and economic crisis
to below 50 per cent in the most recent elections. At the same time, the share of votes for the
largest party has declined from roughly 25 percent to less than 20 percent.
More generally in the advanced liberal democracies, the rise of populism has led to an increased
fragmentation of the political system. It has made governing effectively harder, and also made it
more difficult to form functioning coalition governments and to carry out structural reforms.
Another notable consequence of the rise in populism is its impact on the policies pursued by the
mainstream  parties.  In  some/many  cases,  the  mainstream  parties  have  shifted  their  policies
towards the populists’ agenda in fear of losing many more of their voters.
So what can the liberal democracies do to curb or accommodate populist pressures? In theory,
the required policies are simple, but modern societies have shown little capacity to be able to
respond in the correct way.
SLIDE 7. Agenda for reform in Europe
First  step,  reinvigorate  economic  growth.  Second,  and  equally  important,  ensure  that  fruits  of
growth  are  widely  shared.  This  includes  not  only  that  individuals  displaced  by  technological
progress and international competition are assured sufficient social support but also assistance
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
to seek alternative ways to fulfil a meaningful role in society.
As underlined e.g by the IMF, the big changes affecting our economies and labour markets may
require a new social contract to provide citizens with a greater sense of security and confidence
in  the  face  of  imminent  changes.  This  also  involves  making  choices  about  the  division  of
responsibilities between the community, the market, and the state.
In economic policy, it needs to be asked whether a more even balance between monetary and
fiscal policy stances would be desirable in order to sustain the growth momentum. In our view it
is important to underline that, in order to reap the full benefits from the ECB’s monetary policy
measures, other policy areas should contribute more decisively to raising the growth potential
and reducing vulnerabilities. For the longer term, implementation of structural reforms is key for
boosting  euro  area  productivity  and  growth  potential.  In  this  way,  one  would  enable  a  more
balanced  macroeconomic  policy  mix.  Monetary  policy  should  not  be  the  only  active  player  in
town.
FT’s Martin Wolf recently presented a list of issues to be tackled in order to contain a new wave
of  populism.  These 
local
communities,  public  services,  and  better  management  of  globalisation.  It  is  a  long  and
challenging list and needs to be adapted to country-specific circumstances.
inclusion,  economic  reform, 
leadership,  citizenship, 
include 
There  are  fundamental  value  judgements  to  be  made  in  this  process  and  it  is  up  to  the
democratic political system to come up with them. On some controversial issues, we need to be
able to take a pragmatic approach. Immigration is a case in point – a balance needs to be found
between  addressing  the  demographic  headwinds  by  work-based  immigration,  while  avoiding
populist backlashes in the advanced economies.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
6. As we have seen, populism is here to stay and pose a challenge to liberal democracies and
the rules-based international system, which has been pivotal in the global economic development
and helped to lift a vast number of people from poverty over the last century. Nowhere else are
the benefits felt more strongly than in small, open economies like Malta and Finland. The gains of
commerce  and  free  trade  have  been  immensely  important  for  both  countries’  catching-up
process and prosperity.
The values that underpin our economic and political models in advanced liberal democracies are
being challenged both politically and socially, from inside and outside. It is a common challenge
for all of us to defend the values of liberty and democracy and the rules-based world order. I do
hope  that  we  realise  the  urgency  of  this  effort,  especially  now  as  the  role  of  Europe  as  the
standard-bearer for liberal democracy is even more crucial.
In my view, the best and most effective way to defend liberal democracy is simply by finding and
enacting  such  policies  that  solve  practical  problems  of  our  citizens  –  be  they  related  to
employment,  environment,  immigration,  climate  change,  or  other  things.  We  certainly  need
bolder joint efforts to steer our societies towards a more sustainable future.
Many thanks for your attention.
1
2
3
4
“Der Zustand des Geldwesens eines Volkes ist ein Symptom aller seiner Zustände."
Timo Soini, Populismi – Politiikkaa ja poltinmerkki. Yleisen valtio-opin pro gradu -tutkielma. Helsingin yliopisto,
Valtiotieteellinen tiedekunta, huhtikuu 1988. The University of Helsinki.
Iversen – Soskice, Democracy and Prosperity Reinventing Capitalism through a Turbulent Century, Princeton
University Press 2019, p. 20.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
 Paul Collier,  ”The Future of Capitalism” and Raghu Rajan “The Third Pillar”.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
