Donald Joshua Jaganathan: Non-Performing Loan Resolution
Opening remarks by Mr Donald Joshua Jaganathan, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the World Bank Regional Conference on NPL Resolution,
Kuala Lumpur, 29 April 2019.
 It gives me great pleasure to be here this morning, to welcome you to this Regional Conference
on Non-Performing Loan Resolution. I would like to congratulate the organisers for successfully
gathering  a  selection  of  distinguished  speakers  to  share  their  thoughts  and  invaluable
experiences.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  record  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s
appreciation to Mr. Alfonso Garcia Mora and the World Bank for giving Bank Negara Malaysia the
opportunity to co-host this event in Kuala Lumpur.
The journey to a high-income economy is not always a smooth one. Often, there will be hiccups,
setbacks, and false starts. Those entrusted with the responsibility to steer the economy and the
financial system will often have to make policy adjustments and overcome one obstacle after
another. And at times, the economy or the financial system can overextend itself, similar to how
a  ship  can,  midway  in  its  journey  steer  in  the  wrong  direction.  The  pullback  in  the  form  of
economic or financial crisis and the subsequent regeneration of economic activities is both trying
and difficult.
As  most  of  you  would  know,  economic  and  financial  crises  often  result  in  high  volumes  of
impaired credit or bad debt that can linger and become a drag to economic growth and recovery.
During such periods many households and businesses default on their loan obligations resulting
in  the  erosion  of  banks’  profit  and  capital.  This  adverse  financial  implication  coupled  with  an
environment of uncertainty inevitably make banks more risk-averse to new lending and shift their
focus to NPL recovery as they seek to minimise losses.
Consequently, creditworthy households and businesses face greater difficulty in sourcing new
funds,  thus  further  reducing  their  consumption  and  investment,  resulting  in  lower  economic
activity. Ultimately, this negative feedback loop dampens economic growth and destroys value as
viable businesses are unable to operate due to lack of financing.
Therefore, it is imperative for regulators and supervisors to ensure that these NPLs are managed
and  resolved  in  a  timely  fashion.  Decisive  leadership  on  the  part  of  authorities  in  addressing
rising NPL level in the financial system can slow-down the adverse economic impact, dampen
banks’ knee-jerk reaction and jumpstart the economic machinery.
Like most countries, Malaysia has seen her fair share of financial and economic crises in the
past. Although twenty years have passed since the Asian Financial Crisis, it has left a legacy of
important  lessons  for  those  who  are  affected  by  it. Allow  me  to  share  with  you  some  of  the
lessons, which may be relevant to this conference.
Early preparation by regulators
There is a simple saying in the Malay language that goes like this –  ‘Sediakan payung sebelum
hujan’ which translates into English as having an umbrella ready well before it rains. I am sure
that this is not unique to Malaysia and many of you here have similar phrases in your own native
language. As regulators, we always strive for the best but at the same time, must always prepare
for the worst. And the best time to prepare is during good times, when the sun is still out so that
our  preparations  can  guide  us  to  be  clear-headed  and  decisive  in  the  midst  of  turbulence  or
stormy weather. In the context of today’s conference, early preparation means that the national
authorities create a conducive environment so that NPLs can be resolved in a timely and orderly
manner during good times as well as during crisis episodes.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
NPLs  can  be  resolved  either  via  market-led  or  government-led  initiatives  or  through  a
combination  of  both,  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  situation  and  the  resources  available.
Regardless of the preferred approach, there are many areas within the NPL management and
resolution  process  that  will  greatly  benefit  from  early  preparation.  For  one,  having  clear  legal
frameworks and regulatory requirements would significantly enhance the viability of market-led
NPL  resolution.  A  clear  legal  and  regulatory  framework  will  shorten  the  sale  and  purchase
process, reduce the discount factor and improve the overall outcome of the NPL sale.
As regulators, early preparation in developing an active and liquid capital market and broadening
of investor base would increase the likelihood of a market-led approach to resolution. We can
also  use  this  lead  time  to  address  common  hurdles  experienced  during  the  NPL  resolution
process such as valuation subjectivity, misaligned incentives of different stakeholders and tax
treatment of NPL write-offs.
However,  despite  authorities’  best  intentions,  the  market  for  NPL  resolution  is  unlikely  to  be
sufficient to absorb the build-up of NPL during a crisis. Behaviourally, there will be players that
are  unwilling  to  dispose  of  their  assets  due  to  the  endowment  effect,  whereby  they  often
misguidedly believe the value of their NPLs to be much higher than the price offered by potential
buyers.  Some  market  participants  will  take  a  wait-and-see  approach  and  look  towards  the
authorities  for  either  leadership  or  some  form  of  guidance.  In  view  of  this,  we,  the  national
authorities should always be prepared to play a more active role in NPL resolution.
In Malaysia’s experience during the Asian Financial Crisis, the nascent capital market and small
investor base at the time of the crisis made a market-based resolution approach implausible. It
was quite clear then that the financial crisis would evolve into a full-fledged banking crisis if no
intervention  measures  were  taken.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s  intimate  understanding  of  market
forces at play and the nature of crisis enabled it to swiftly coordinate with key stakeholders such
as the government, legislative bodies and the banks, which led to multi-pronged measures to
safeguard the financial system. In a few short months in 1998, we quickly established Danaharta,
our  public  asset  management  company  (AMC);  Danamodal,  our  special  purpose  vehicle  to
address the erosion of bank capital; and the Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee (CDRC) a
mechanism to resolve debt of large corporations. Looking back, our decision to intervene early
and decisively gave us precious lead time to mitigate the crisis before the build-up of NPLs could
take a greater toll on the banking system.
Role of financial institutions in developing their internal capabilities
As we, national authorities and regulators strengthen our bases, it is equally vital that financial
institutions play their part and develop the agility and competency to manage their NPL resolution
process.  Without  robust  internal  capabilities  such  as  a  good  IT  infrastructure  and  sound  risk
governance, financial institutions will be at a great disadvantage if they are unable to adequately
resolve their NPL book, especially during a crisis.
In  this  increasingly  digitised  age,  financial  institutions  with  good  IT  and  risk  management
infrastructures  are  able  to  swiftly  assess  their  portfolio  asset  quality  and  risk.  Adopting
technology  does  not  only  provide  a  competitive  advantage  during  good  times  but  also  during
stress  periods,  whereby  timely,  accurate  and  actionable  data  are  urgently  required. A  robust
information  management  system  would  allow  banks  to  identify  weak  borrowers  across  the
various business lines and determine the estimated recovery value from each borrower in the
event of default. Combined with strong risk management, banks would be able to forecast the
build-up  of  NPLs  in  a  timely  manner,  identify  potentially  impaired  assets  eligible  for  sale  and
determine the appropriate value and the estimated loss that they would have to bear.
In this regard, recent global reforms in financial regulation have had a largely positive effect of
nudging  financial  institutions  in  the  right  direction  by  providing  incentives  to  enhance  their  risk
management framework and IT architecture. With reforms such as Basel III, recovery planning
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and IFRS 9, financial institutions have had to re-think their entire approach to risk management
and crisis preparedness. These reforms position financial institutions to better navigate during
stress  episodes  and  reduce  their  likelihood  of  failure. As  part  of  implementing  these  reforms,
financial institutions will have to continuously assess their existing systems and people readiness
and  make  the  necessary  investments  to  strengthen  their  defences.    Such  efforts  will  yield
significant benefits in the long-run as financial institutions become more agile and resilient.
Value Preservation
As regulators and banks strengthen their internal preparedness and coordination to enable timely
resolution of NPL, it is worth taking a step back to re-examine the purpose of NPL resolution. The
purpose, as we see it in Bank Negara Malaysia, is to ensure that financial institutions continue to
play  an  effective  role  in  financial  intermediation,  thereby  supporting  the  needs  of  the  real
economy.
This brings me to my final point on value preservation. In approaching NPL resolution, national
authorities and banks ought to balance the need for a swift execution process against the need to
preserve  value  in  good  businesses  that  might  be  temporarily  facing  setbacks.  In  a  crisis,
borrowers – whether individuals, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and large corporates –
may experience temporary difficulty in meeting their loan obligation. In such an instance, banks
would be inclined to write-off these loans and to initiate foreclosure of collateral properties.
While a one-size-fits-all approach will yield short-term gains, in that banks will have a cleaner
balance sheet and are able to focus on lending, it carries negative unintended consequences to
the economy in the long-run, whereby good functioning businesses facing temporary setbacks
will be put out of business. Once dismantled, these businesses and their productive capacity
may never be fully restored especially in industries with high barriers to entry. And when the tide
turns, the crisis abates and the economy turns to recovery, authorities will be left with a slower
economic recovery as there are fewer firms to generate economic activity.
During  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  Danaharta,  our  public  asset  management  company  was
cognisant of this and took a balanced approach in managing the NPLs. A soft-approach on viable
businesses to restructure their financing arrangement was coupled with a hard-approach that
began  foreclosure  proceedings  on  non-viable  businesses.  The  Bank  then  later  extended  the
Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  Committee  (CDRC)  and  set  up  the  Small  Debt  Resolution
Scheme (SDRS) which provides  even  small  businesses  an  avenue  to  work  out  feasible  debt
resolution  without  having  to  resort  to  legal  and  foreclosure  proceedings.  Meanwhile,  for
individuals, the Bank set up the Credit Counselling and Debt Management Agency (AKPK) with
the aim of assisting individuals to take control of their financial situation via a debt management
programme. A balanced response of this nature is in my view critical, especially for emerging
market  economies,  as  the  dismantling  of  productive  capacity  will  have  adverse  long-term
consequences on the economy.
Final Note
In conclusion, the experience from both the AFC and GFC has taught us, regulators and national
authorities a great deal about NPL resolution. Since then, there have been many new and recent
developments  in  the  NPL  management  and  resolution  space.  I  look  forward  to  hearing  from
many  of  you  of  your  respective  country’s  experiences  and  unique  viewpoints  on  this  subject.
With that, I wish all of you a productive conference ahead and thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
