Adrian Orr: We are not alone with monetary policy
Comment by Mr Adrian Orr, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 28 August 2019.
 It was clear that even in the remote mountain region of the US state of Wyoming we were among
the crowd.
The annual August Kansas Federal Reserve’s summit of many of the world’s central bankers
vividly highlighted our commonality. Inflation has been low and stable, and many labour markets
are near their peak loading. New Zealand included. Independent central banks have successfully
achieved their inflation goals, promoting economic wellbeing.
Yet, there was no vigorous back patting. There were mostly furrowed brows.
A  slowing  global  economic  outlook,  increasingly  prompted  by  pockets  of  volatile  politics,  is
keeping  the  world’s  central  bankers  busy.  In  response  to  the  economic  chill,  central  banks
around the world have lowered interest rates – often to record lows – to promote investment and
spending. They continue to pursue their mandated low inflation goals.
That’s our job. We aim to keep inflation low and stable and contribute to maximum sustainable
employment. This is the best we can do as a central bank to promote economic wellbeing. We
have the one main instrument – the interest rate lever or price of money – and we use this tool
with  our  best  view  of  what’s  on  the  horizon.  We  provide  forward  guidance  on  our  expected
activity, but remain flexible to incoming data.
Monetary policy remains as effective as ever, and for small open economies like New Zealand,
the exchange rate plays a significant additional role in competitiveness. Our research gives us
confidence that even at these low levels of interest rates, monetary policy remains as effective
as ever at providing timely economic stimulus.
As the Governor of the Swedish central bank noted – those who think that monetary policy is
losing its vigour should think of the alternative. Higher interest rates over recent times would have
meant we undershot our inflation and employment goals, have significant weaker activity, and a
rising domestic exchange rate – until it was unsustainable.
But  there  are  natural  limitations  to  what  central  banks  can  achieve  with  their  tools,  and  if
operating alone.
Global  integration,  productivity  and  technology,  governments’  fiscal  and  regulatory  policies,
changing  demographics,  consumer  preferences  and  climate,  and  unanticipated  events  –
including political volatility – play the dominant role in long-term prosperity.
Central banks operate within this context and need all policy levers working. My colleagues at the
summit were very humble as to our influence over long-term economic growth prospects beyond
our  stable  inflation  contributions.  Undoubtedly  we  are  in  new  low  inflation  and  interest  rate
territory collectively. Colleagues were interested to hear about each others’ experiences and our
recent decision to cut the Official Cash Rate by 50 basis points – as were most New Zealanders.
First, the interest rate lever is blunt. It is not personalised.
Savers  (investors)  and  consumers  are  treated  equally,  and  are  often  the  same  person  doing
various activities. We make our interest rate decision to best bring about prosperity and wellbeing
of all New Zealanders in the long-term. This decision is repeated frequently – aimed at the same
inflation and employment goal – as circumstances change.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Our recent OCR cut reflected an expected decline in trading partner growth, lower NZ inflation
expectations, and a global swing to lower interest rates. It also reflected the ongoing funk global
and domestic business confidence is in. Geopolitical uncertainty is paralysing decision making in
major business centres – trade tensions, Brexit, Hong Kong, North Korea and so on – have all
meant investment is lower than normal.
The NZ waka is tied off to the global ‘risk free’ interest rate wharf. When the global rate declines,
we need more rope – or face a rising exchange rate and tighter financial conditions than needed.
Second, how you respond to lower interest rates is personal.
Lower interest rates stimulate investment (funding costs are lower as are expected hurdle rates
of return). Income derived from passive savings in the bank is lower – prompting more active
investment decisions. Asset prices rise as the present value of their future earnings rises. And
spending – both government and the public – becomes more affordable, at least until consumer
prices start to rise again. And a lower than otherwise NZ dollar will promote export earnings.
So  how  you  feel  about  low  nominal  interest  rates  personally  comes  down  to  which  of  the
activities you may be involved in. The central bank can only focus on the long-term wellbeing of
all. There are different outcomes for different people. Home owners may feel wealthier, those
outside  of  this  asset  market  would  be  facing  a  higher  price  to  buy  but  at  more  affordable
servicing costs. Savers in low risk deposits will need to invest more actively – and so on.
Finally, a key concern amongst my international colleagues is that central banks are being tasked
with more and more challenges – and public expectations continue to rise also.
The discussion was clear. Monetary policy (the domain of central banks) has its limitations and
needs  to  be  partnered  with  broader  fiscal  and  structural  economic  policy  (the  domain  of  the
government of the day). Likewise, business people need to consider a much longer-term horizon
when investing, looking through the omnipresent political uncertainties de jour.
We are not alone in the Aotearoa waka. Other economic levers need to be utilised effectively to
enhance  social  cohesion  and  wellbeing.  The  Bank’s  regulatory  activity  includes  promoting
financial stability. We have our prudential tools set to ensure our financial institutions are robust
financially and culturally. This is our best lever into financial soundness and inclusion.
Providing certainty in uncertain times is a great skill to have, and central bankers world-wide are
working hard to do just that. They are being challenged on communication – what they can and
can’t influence and how they are doing this.
We understand that lower interest rates do not remove the global political uncertainty. But they
do  offer  greater  certainty  on  the  financial  and  investment  front.  Businesses  and  governments
should  be  re-assessing  their  hurdle  rates  on  their  investment  projects.  Low  and  stable  global
interest rates mean that what was once costly may now be a sound investment for the future.
The Reserve Bank is among the global central banking crowd – we are not alone. But we need
other actors to assist and understand.
Kia kaha.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
