Dimitar Radev: Eurozone slowdown likely temporary
Publication in the MNI based on an interview with Mr Dimitar Radev, Governor of the Bulgarian
National Bank, conducted by Mr Luke Heighton and published on 17 May 2019.
 The eurozone slowdown may prove temporary, the governor of the Bulgarian National Bank told
MNI,  but  whether  Europe  emerges  from  the  current  soft  patch  by  the  second  half  of  2019  is
uncertain.
"The euro area’s economy beat many economists’ expectations in the first quarter. But the pace
and direction of the economy over the coming months and quarters are yet to be seen,” said
Dimitar  Radev,  a  member  of  the  European  Central  Bank’s  General  Council  since  his  2015
appointment,  noting  the  persistence  of  global  trade  tensions  and  “political  developments”  in
Europe.
"Recent data may be interpreted as signs that the region’s slowdown may be temporary,” he said
in an emailed response this week to questions.
Asked whether slow eurozone growth pointed to ‘Japanification', he replied: “comparisons with
previous historical episodes and other economies do come to mind when we observe prolonged
periods of slow growth, very low interest rates and aging population in Europe."
"Policy  responses  may  be  effective  only  as  long  as  they  target  structural  areas,  such  as
education, labour market and pension reforms. The focus needs to remain clear: to stimulate
productivity and competitiveness,” he said, calling for more growth-oriented fiscal policies.
"This  does  not  necessarily  mean  higher  spending.  Moreover,  higher  spending  would  be
counterproductive in countries with no fiscal space."
—POLICY REVIEW
Radev,  was  circumspect  regarding  recent  calls  for  a  review  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy
strategy. He also expressed caution in response to suggestions the institution should lower its
mandated medium-term inflation rate target from close to but below 2% to around 1%.
"There may be reasons to start thinking if an overhaul needs to be considered,” he said. But he
added: “Whatever, if anything, the ECB decides in this regard should be shaped into a carefully
communicated  process.  I  cannot  but  fully  agree  with  a  recent  comment  by  Peter  Praet  who
warned that such public announcements may be misread and, furthermore, interpreted as the
ECB admitting to having failed on its mandate, which is not the case."
The ECB has “plenty of instruments” at its disposal in the event of a severe economic downturn,
he said, adding: “The door is not closed to asset purchases, and there is no rule-set limitation on
moving rates such as those on the standing facilities or the regular open market operations.
"We  know  there  may  be  varying  degrees  of  support  within  the  Governing  Council  for  certain
especially non-standard measures, if those are to be considered. Hence it is also true that the
effectiveness of any firepower of the ECB ultimately depends on its determination and leadership
rather than variety or size of the tools."
Offsetting  the  negative  effects  of  sub-zero  interest  rates  has  been  a  key  topic  for  discussion
since March, when remarks made by ECB President Mario Draghi in Frankfurt led to speculation
he was considering the introduction of a tiered central bank deposit rate.
—NEGATIVE RATE CONCERN
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
"There are good reasons to be concerned about the very low or negative rates, particularly if they
persist. Banks may be less motivated to improve efficiency, given their low funding costs. At the
same time, the asset side of their balance sheets may erode and is exposed to a future turn of
the cycle, and this risk needs to be adequately priced."
Bulgaria, which joined the European Union in 2007, already meets key criteria for adopting the
euro, and its national currency is expected to enter the EU’s Exchange Rate Mechanism II later
this year.
Nevertheless, the country is unlikely to enter the currency union until at least mid-2022, Valdis
Dombrovskis, EU Commission Vice-President for the euro said in January, with Radev agreeing
that obstacles to accession remain.
"We need to speed up the process of real convergence,” he said. “The challenges we face are
structural, rather than fiscal or monetary ones. More needs to be done also on the institutional
front. While the institution of public financial management is exemplary, as evidenced by results,
some other institutions need major improvement."
In  Bulgaria  popular  and  political  support  for  further  deepening  European  integration  “remains
above the EU average, despite, and probably, to some extent, because of recent developments,”
Radev said.
"It is becoming a rational rather than an emotional choice, and this is good news."
All original text can be read here.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
