Luis de Guindos: Building the EU’s capital markets - what remains
to be done
Speech by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Association
for  Financial  Markets  in  Europe  Conference,  Supervision  and  Integration  Opportunities  for
European Banking and Capital Markets, Frankfurt am Main, 23 May 2019.
 It is a pleasure to be here today to share my thoughts on the future  of  capital  markets  union
(CMU).  CMU  is  undoubtedly  a  key  project  for  the Association  for  Financial  Markets  in  Europe
(AFME), but it is also important for the European Central Bank (ECB).
The primary objective of CMU is to foster deep and diversified capital markets that provide a wide
source  of  financing  options  to  European  companies  and  citizens  and  act  as  an  engine  for
investment, innovation and growth. Vibrant EU equity markets and truly diversified cross-border
1
debt markets would complement traditional bank lending by fostering risk-taking and investment.
Indeed,  capital  markets  can,  for  instance,  provide  different  forms  of  funding  sources  that  are
better tailored to firms’ needs along their stage of development. A well-functioning CMU would
also complement the banking union by providing channels to mobilise the large existing pool of
savings  towards  financing  the  economy.  It  could  help  facing  tomorrow’s  challenges,  such  as
climate change and digital innovation.
2
Within  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  more  integrated  capital  markets  can  also  help  to
cushion shocks to parts of the euro area, thereby enhancing the resilience of the euro area as a
whole.  From the companies’ point of view, cross-border ownership would mean that they have
a  wider  pool  of  investors  and  potentially  more  stable  sources  of  capital  available  for  their
investments.  From  the  side  of  investors,  diversified  portfolios  would  help  them  hedge  against
country-specific risks. Cross-border capital markets and banks would thus provide the level of
private risk-sharing we need to ensure the long-term resilience of the euro area.
In my remarks today I will argue:
First,  that  financial  markets  are  playing  an  increasingly  important  role  in  funding  the
economy, but more needs to be done to foster sustainable cross-border financial integration
and risk-sharing;
Second, that a revamped CMU agenda should be geared towards addressing the challenges
facing Europe, such as Brexit, and ensuring that capital markets growth does not endanger
financial stability;
And finally, I will highlight the important synergies that exist between the capital markets and
banking union projects.
How far away is a European capital markets union?
First, the good news: we are seeing a change in the structure of financial markets. The non-bank
sector continues to grow. It is playing an increasing role in providing a stable source of funding to
the  European  economy.  Financing  of  euro  area  companies’  via  debt  securities  and  non-bank
loans has increased from 24% to 36% in the last ten years.  In fact, in this period, issuance by
4
 Turning to equity financing, listed equity issued by
companies grew from 8% to 10% of GDP.
non-financial companies increased from 36% of GDP in 2014 to 41% in 2018. The total market
capitalisation of listed companies in the EU is now above pre-crisis levels.
3
Another positive is that European investment funds are playing an increasingly important role in
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
cross-border  integration.  This  helps  investors  spread  their  holdings  across  countries  and
achieve  better  diversification  than  they  would  through  direct  holdings  of  assets.  The  sector  is
also  contributing  to  integration  in  the  euro  area  corporate  bond  markets:  almost  80%  of
investment funds’ holdings of euro area-issued bonds are non-domestic, i.e., issued outside their
5
own domicile.
But the picture for the overall financial system is mixed. We see positive developments in the
convergence  of  asset  prices  across  the  euro  area  –  what  we  call  price-based  integration.
However,  the  post-crisis  reintegration  of  cross-border  asset  holdings,  which  we  call  quantity-
6
based integration, has stalled.
Consequently, while most initiatives under the CMU action plan are on the path to completion, a
“CMU effect” on the cross-border integration of capital markets is yet to be seen. One reason is
that despite general support for the CMU project, progress in addressing core barriers to further
integration has been too slow.
Let  me  take  a  few  examples:  steps  have  been  taken  in  harmonising  elements  of  insolvency
frameworks,  such  as  ‘early  restructuring’  and  ‘second  chance’.  But  these  do  not  cover  the
conditions for opening insolvency proceedings nor the ranking of claims. As such, they are not
enough to facilitate cross-border investment. Similarly, more should be done to remove overlaps
in cross-border withholding taxes and reduce home bias in investment strategies. In my view, we
need a single rulebook in a wide range of areas also covering consumer protection, anti-money
laundering, or accounting rules for a successful CMU.
Another reason for a limited “CMU effect” is that some of the agreed initiatives were only recently
implemented. Take the securitisation package, for example. Important technical regulatory acts
are still pending which prevent the new framework from being applied in full and are a source of
uncertainty for those who would like to use it. It is therefore too early to assess the success of
this measure.
More importantly however, some proposals will not deliver their full potential. In the case of the
pan-European personal pension product, the recent agreement gave birth to a rather complex
product for which key elements are left to the discretion of Member States. Lack of ambition in
the cross-border portability of the instrument may limit its capacity to facilitate labour mobility and
the  mobilisation  of  savings  across  borders  in  the  absence  of  geographical  diversification
requirement for investments.
This underpins the relevance of the CMU agenda for the coming years and the importance of
making CMU a reality.
Revitalising the CMU agenda to face new challenges
My second point today is that a revamped CMU agenda would help the EU to face up to new
challenges.
The  departure  of  the  United  Kingdom  from  the  EU  is  undoubtedly  one  such  challenge. As  a
response, CMU should continue to aim to develop and integrate the EU’s capital markets in a
context in which capital market activities throughout Europe are being reorganised.
In the new post-Brexit reality, we could see one or more financial centres emerge in continental
Europe, possibly in competition with each other, or perhaps each specialising in certain areas.
CMU should facilitate this transition by creating a framework that supports the emergence of an
integrated financial market and avoids a return to a fragmentation of activities.
In this context, a successful CMU means that the continued expansion of the non-bank sector
should be accompanied – rather than followed – by a revision of the prudential and supervisory
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
framework. Importantly, we need to develop macroprudential policies for the non-bank sector at
the system level to ensure that the system absorbs shocks, rather than amplifying exuberance
and stresses.
Ultimately,  this  would  warrant  a  discussion  on  a  potential  move  towards  more  centralised
supervision of financial markets. The recent reform of the European Supervisory Authorities falls
short of adapting Europe’s supervisory framework to the ambition of CMU. The review did not
result in a broad revision of the powers and mandate of the ESAs, nor in a strengthening of the
European perspective in the ESAs governance. Ultimately, the growth and integration of capital
markets need to be reflected in the EU’s supervisory set-up.
Reaping the synergies between CMU and banking union
This brings me to my last point: we should take advantage of the synergies between CMU and
banking union.
More efficient markets could complement banking union by offering ways to mobilise EU savings
to finance young and innovative firms. Fostering equity investment by addressing the debt-equity
bias would support the development of an equity culture and increase households’ return on their
savings,  for  example.  It  could  furthermore  enhance  financial  stability  through  the  reduction  of
leverage in the corporate system. At the same time removing barriers to the functioning of cross-
border debt markets would facilitate a smooth allocation of the savings surplus across the euro
area.
Creating  an  EU  playing  field  in  terms  of  insolvency  regimes,  taxation  and  supervision  would
support both the objectives of CMU and the banking union. In fact, strong cross-border banks and
cross-border ownership of assets would reduce the risk of disruptive capital flight in crisis times,
while also reducing the bank-sovereign nexus.
To achieve CMU and banking union, we should also look at controversial issues such as the
need for a European safe asset. There is no other currency union in existence in which regional
debt  is  considered  to  be  the  safe  asset. Addressing  this  gap  would  support  the  banking  and
capital markets by creating a homogeneous product of a high quality and significant size that
could become a benchmark for investors. If designed in a way that doesn’t undermine incentives
for sound national fiscal policies, a safe asset would help to mitigate the bank-sovereign nexus,
reduce cross-border safe-haven flows and improve financial integration, thereby also enhancing
the  effectiveness  of  our  monetary  policy.  And,  last  but  not  least,  this  would  contribute  to
enhancing the attractiveness of European capital markets and ultimately support the international
role of the euro.
Promoting European responses to achieve CMU
Let me conclude with two messages.
First, convincing investors and companies to venture outside their borders requires certainty and
homogeneity on the regulatory conditions that apply abroad. This means that the core aspects of
national policies need to be further harmonised and implemented in a consistent way to support
the integration of capital and banking markets. Banks and capital markets should complement
each  other  in  channelling  savings  for  productive  uses  and  fostering  investment  in  innovative
firms.
Second,  moving  towards  CMU  and  banking  union  should  also  reflect  the  ambition  we  have
shown in our supervisory and regulatory set-up. It should support a coherent European response
to new challenges such as Brexit and the development of non-bank finance. And it should not shy
away from addressing gaps in our regulatory and institutional framework.
1
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
ECB (2018), “Special feature A: Financial development, financial structure and growth: evidence fromEurope”,
Financial integration in Europe.
ECB  (2016),  “Special  Feature  A:  Financial  integration  and  risk  sharing  in  a  monetary  union”, Financial
integration in Europe.
ECB Financial Stability Review, (2019), forthcoming, May.
European Commission (2019), “Capital Markets Union: progress on building a Single Market for capital for a
strong Economic and Monetary Union”, European Commission contribution to the European Council.
ECB (2018), “Special feature B: Integrating euro area corporate bond markets: benefits and potential financial
stability challenges”, Financial integration in Europe.
The ECB’s price-based composite indicator of financial integration shows a pronounced increase during 2017,
while quantity-based integration has stalled since 2015 (see Indicators of financial integration in the euro area).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
