Cleviston Haynes: Bio-digestion - benefits to Barbados
Speech by Mr Cleviston Haynes, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the conference on
"Bio-Digestion: Benefits to Barbados", Bridgetown, 17 May 2019.
 Welcome to this conference on “Bio-Digestion: Benefits to Barbados.”
At the outset, we thank Mr. Joseph Tesar, President of Quantalux, and the spouse of the Bank’s
2019  Distinguished  Visiting  Fellow,  Dr.  Linda  Tesar,  for  offering  to  share  his  expertise  and
experience in converting waste to energy in a clean and sustainable way.  
We  are  also  thankful  for  the  support  provided  by  members  of  the  local  alternative  energy
community.
This conference is important, opportune, and necessary because our national energy policy is
focused  on  shifting  to  the  use  of  renewables  and  cutting  our  reliance  on  fossil  fuels  that  are
currently  central  to  meeting  our  transportation  and  electricity  needs.  Indeed,  government  has
announced an ambitious goal of 100% reliance on renewables for energy generation by 2030.
It is ambitious because at present only an estimated 4% to 6% of our energy needs are being
met by renewables. It is ambitious because the transition requires significant investments.
But ambitious it needs to be so that we can promote greater energy security, enhance our long
term competitiveness and address the negative spillovers that accompany the use of fossil fuels.
I wish therefore to commend the efforts of local agencies such as the Ministry of Energy and
Water  Resources  and  the  Barbados  Renewable  Energy  Association 
that  have  been
championing  this  thrust  towards  renewables.  As  we  seek  to  promote  greater  stakeholder
engagement in this process, it is important that we enhance our knowledge about how we can
benefit from alternative energy sources such as solar, wind, hydro, and waste.
Today’s conference fits neatly into that vein as Mr. Tesar will help us to better understand how
the waste we generate can fit into the new energy mix; how we can turn our organic waste into
economic value; and how we can protect a fragile environment and mitigate the risks associated
with climate change to which the carbon produced by fossil fuels contributes. 
We must see the shift to renewable energy in the context of leveraging our biological resources,
while  building  resilience:  building  environmental  resilience,  financial  resilience,  and  economic
resilience.
You may recall the topic of our 2004 Sir Winston Scott Memorial Lecture, “The Economy or the
Environment: What is the Bottom Line?” that award-winning scientist and environmentalist, Dr.
David Suzuki, delivered next door.
That  theme  remains  of  great  significance  because,  as  a  small  open  economy,  we  are  very
vulnerable to the disastrous effects of fossil fuels. 
We  are  especially  vulnerable  to  the  environmental  degradation  that  fossil  fuels  cause.  Global
warning created by fossil fuels makes us susceptible to the hazards of climate change. A recent
IMF  blog  quoted  scientists  as  warning  that  in  the  absence  of  mitigating  actions,  global
temperatures may rise by more than four degrees Celsius above pre-industrial revolution levels
by the end of the century. This phenomenon will lead to inundation of low-lying island states and
extreme weather events, the scientists predict. The attendant beach erosion would bode ill for
our main industry tourism.
Indeed, we in the Caribbean are among the top 25 most vulnerable nations exposed to shifting
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
weather  patterns  and  global  climate  change. And  we  have  already  started  to  experience  the
extreme weather conditions about which scientists warn. We only have to flashback to Dominica
2017 and recall how Irma and Maria wrecked our neighbour. Those storms wiped out over 200
percent  of  Dominica’s  GDP  in  fewer  than  two  days.  That  is  an  astronomical  cost  to  pay  and
requires sustained coordinated global action to minimise the impact on small island economies
like ours. And this is not the only price that comes along with our dependence on fossil fuels. 
High fuel prices impinge Barbados’ economic growth, stymie our competitiveness, and erode our
foreign reserves, the lifeblood of our economy. In 2008, when oil prices hovered around US$90
per barrel, our Balance of Payments felt the impact. As the cost of fuel imports sky rocketed,
shipping costs also rose, pushing up the price of imported goods. These increasing costs had an
inflationary effect, while our valuable foreign exchange was used to help pay for these imports.
High oil prices do have ripple effects for us.
Consider  the  savings  in  foreign  exchange,  therefore,  if  we  were  to  move  to  renewables,
harnessing  the  sun,  wind,  water,  and  now  biological  resources  and  organic  waste.  These
savings have the potential to facilitate projects that stimulate greater economic activity and fuel
growth.
Today, the Bank is concerned about the current global uncertainty, created in part by geopolitical
tensions, surrounding the price of oil. Significant increases in the price of oil now that we are
stabilising  the  economy  represent  a  distinct  downside  risk  that  could  offset  our  economic
recovery efforts.
Much emphasis has been placed on solar energy but bio-based renewables also present a win-
win! They have the potential to power the economy while minimising waste and enabling us to
make the best use of our resources. They generate energy. They help us to manage our carbon
footprint.  They  boost  local  agriculture  production  by  supplying  organic  fertilizers.  And  they
improve our tourism value-added because the oceans and the island are cleaner.   
We support all efforts to promote and encourage the use of clean energy sources and commend
the government for accelerating the shift to 100 percent renewable energy.
The  move  has  the  potential  to  create  more  sustainable  jobs.  New  opportunities  will  rise  for
engineers,  technicians,  technologists,  investors  and  entrepreneurs.  The  oil  rich  nation,  Saudi
Arabia, is harnessing the sun and expanding its solar capacity to create new jobs. We can and
must do the same.
Our switch to renewables will lead to new industries as well and create the potential for greater
investment diversification, as investors look for “green” options for pension funds, etc.
So, as we reflect on David Suzuki’s 2004 Sir Winston Scott Memorial Lecture topic, I say: the
bottom  line  is  that  we  must  protect  our  environment,  and  our  economy.    Let’s  all  do  so  by
supporting  the  conversion  of  waste  to  energy  as  a  part  of  our  energy  mix,  by  embracing
sustainable  sources  of  renewables,  and  by  reducing  our  carbon  footprint.  That’s  how  we  will
make our environment and our economy more resilient. The ball is in our court. I thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
