Jens Weidmann: Opening – “Building a Dialogue.
Two Corporate Collections of Contemporary Art”
Opening by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  of  the  joint  art  exhibition  of  the
Deutsche Bundesbank and the National Bank of Belgium "Building a Dialogue. Two Corporate
Collections of Contemporary Art", Brussels, 16 May 2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
art lovers and friends of the central banks,
dear Pierre,
It gives me great pleasure to join you here today in opening this exhibition of artworks from the
collections of the National Bank of Belgium and the Deutsche Bundesbank. I must say, this is an
impressive  and  exceptionally  pleasing  space  for  an  exhibition  of  this  kind.  We  jumped  at  the
chance  of  sending  exhibits  from  our  collection  on  a  journey  to  Brussels,  to  our  friends  at  the
National Bank of Belgium in the capital city of Europe. It’s a premiere for us – never before have
we shown our works outside Germany.
Many are the areas in which the National Bank of Belgium and the Bundesbank can look back on
a rich history of cooperation: indeed, our collaboration stretches back to the days when we each
still had our respective national currencies – the Belgian franc and the Deutsche Mark – and our
partnership is just as close today in the era of the single currency, the euro. Not only do Pierre
and I see each other every two weeks on the ECB Governing Council and also in places like
Basel – there are a great many colleagues from our respective institutions who work hand in
hand in Eurosystem committees and working groups. And I am particularly delighted to now see
that  the  curators  of  our  art  collections  have  also  teamed  up  to  organise  this  outstanding
exhibition.  They  have  brought  together  large-scale  paintings,  photography  and  all  manner  of
sculptures.  All  the  works  on  display  here  are  taken  from  the  collections  of  our  respective
institutions.
Both the National Bank of Belgium and the Bundesbank have been avid collectors of art for many
decades  now.  Over  the  years,  we  have  each  gathered  quite  sizeable  collections  which  shed
some light on how art has evolved in Belgium and Germany. But why do central banks collect art
in the first place? There are two reasons for that. First, because we’re looking to engage with
society at large. As public institutions, we have a sense of commitment to the arts and culture in
our respective countries. Second, we also feel that it is crucial to incorporate art into working life,
because that brings our colleagues, and our guests and visitors, too, face to face with artistic
expression. So over the years, collecting and exhibiting art has become part of our institutions’
DNA.
Encountering  artworks  on  an  everyday  basis  makes  art  part  of  our  routine,  a  commonplace
occurrence  in  our  daily  lives.  Not  just  that:  art  also  has  the  ability  to  surprise,  challenge  and
inspire us. It lets us see things from a different angle and opens up a world beyond our own
horizons. And in my experience, it can quite often be a cue for some fascinating conversations.
This exhibition now marks our own attempt to spark a special type of dialogue. Not just between
visitors and the artworks, but also between two art collections which have evolved at two similar
institutions in neighbouring countries. And that’s what makes the title of this exhibition – “Building
a Dialogue” – so apt.
In this day and age, it’s certainly not a question of finding out what aspects of the collections are
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
“typically Belgian” or “typically German”. Not least because artists in Europe, as we know, have
been seeking to build a dialogue across national borders for centuries now. And yet for all that,
it’s interesting to observe how well the works from the respective collections complement each
other, and how the individual artistic statements interact.
To  channel  this  dialogue  between  the  artworks,  the  exhibition’s  curators  chose  six  different
themes  and  sought  out  exhibits  which  add  their  own  perspective  to  each  of  them.  Thematic
groups  such  as  “Autonomous  Form”  and  “Back  to  Figuration”  focus  on  different  artistic
movements, while others explore specific contemporary issues – the “Cityscape” heading, for
example, looks at architecture and urban planning, while “History and Society” examines how we
look at history.
The  exhibition  starts  off  with  the  theme  “Art  &  Viewer”,  the  very  fundamentals  of  which  are
addressed by Ann Veronica Janssens. In her sculpture, the perception of materiality ceases to
be a given, leaving the viewer feeling slightly disorientated. She challenges us to take a closer
look  and  reflect  on  what  we  are  experiencing. And  then  there  are  the  works  of  photographer
Barbara  Klemm,  who  photographed  visitors  to  museums  and  exhibitions  in  various  countries
over the course of several decades, and thus, very different ways of observing art. Her images
range from protagonists deep in contemplation all the way to what appears to be a jolly family
outing.
The  different  ways  in  which  we  experience  artworks  would  appear  to  be  a  rich  seam  of
inspiration, particularly given our respective banks’ collections. “Art in the workplace” does, after
all, offer a very special situation in which to encounter creativity. Day-to-day working life tends to
revolve around performing a clear set of tasks and the routines they entail. There’s no denying
that artworks in the workplace can sometimes also be a disruptive element, or quite literally “get
in the way” whenever technical equipment or the like is being installed. And yet time and again,
there are moments in which a work of art does indeed catch our eye, thereby creating another
setting in which the topic “Art & Viewer” comes to the fore.
The thematic group entitled “Back to Figuration” brings together works whose very format alone
makes them stand out. For the most part, these are paintings dating back to the 1980s – a time
in which a group of artists deployed gestural brushstrokes and applied layer upon layer of paint in
revisiting figurative art. Representational though these works may be, there is more to them than
just a depiction of reality.
These brief remarks are all I would like to say about the exhibition. No doubt you will make many
more discoveries this evening – particularly in the way the exhibits contrast with one another –
and be inspired to “build dialogues” of your own. And you wouldn’t be alone – on our first tour of
the exhibition, Pierre Wunsch and I both found that this setting made artworks we knew from
offices and conference rooms appear in a whole new light.
Before I conclude, let me just say how grateful I am to everyone who made the exhibition project
such a success. I owe particular gratitude to Yves Randaxhe and Anne Bambynek, the curators
of the Belgian art collection. Together with their counterparts from Frankfurt, Iris Cramer and Anja
Hägebarth, they have devised the exhibition in an ongoing dialogue, and the end result is most
impressive.
This art exhibition is uncharted territory for us, too. We’re delighted to have this forum to present
our collections beyond the confines of our respective central banks. Let’s hope that our invitation
to “build a dialogue” with artworks which are otherwise reserved for our colleagues, guests and
visitors will meet with the interest of the general public.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
