  Bank of Albania and LSE Conference 
 MONETARY POLICY, ECONOMIC INTEGRATION  
AND „ THE NEW NORMAL“ 
Closing panel with the Governor's Roundtable:  
What does all this mean for integrating small economies? 
 Governor Senad Softić, Ph.D. 
 Tirana, 1 November 2018 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Mr. Chairman, fellow Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure and privilege to participate in today's Bank of Albania 
and  London  School  of  Economics  and  Political  Science  co-organized 
conference  entitled:  Monetary  Policy,  Economic  Integration  and  “the  New 
Normal”. There is no doubt that the topic is relevant. We are talking about 
the  Southern-Eastern  Europe  (SEE)  joining  the  EU.  What  can  be  more 
relevant for the future of our countries? After the fall of the Berlin wall, three 
decades ago, joining EU for our region seemed like a done deal, something 
that might happen quite soon.  After the initial adjustment to the basics of the 
market economy, convergence was (relatively and depending on a country) 
fast. But, as always in history, processes are neither simple, nor linear. Global 
Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  has  changed  the  world  we  live  in,  especially  for  us, 
central  bankers.  Indeed,  as  our  organizers  pointed  out  in  the  Conference 
agenda, it is time for some serious reconsideration of previous experience, 
but even more so of some future challenges.  
  1 of 7 
 Having  in  mind  the  Organizer’s  guidance,  for  the  rest  of  my  speech,  I  will 
focus on the following questions:  
  What are the consequences of monetary policy changes in developed 
countries after the global financial crisis (GFC) on the Central Bank of 
Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  (CBBH)  and  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  itself 
(BH)? 
  What do we expect from "normalization" of the policy and when do we 
expect it to happen? 
  Role of foreign banks and the capital market, 
  About FINTECH and Artificial Intelligence and  
  What can the CBBH do on BH's road to EU? 
So, let me start.  
 2. What are the consequences of monetary policy changes in developed 
countries after the GFC on the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina 
(CBBH) and on Bosnia and Herzegovina (BH)?  
 BH is a small open economy trying to be part of the European Union (EU), 
and therefore the euro area. That is our strategic goal. We have applied for 
the  EU  membership  two  and  a  half  years  ago,  but  we  are  still  a  potential 
candidate  country.  Awaiting  avis,  we  hope  to  become  a  candidate  country 
soon. Joining the EU will most probably be a long process, as nobody expects 
SEE countries to become the EU members before 2025.  Since 1997, the CBBH 
has  been  operating  the  Currency  Board  arrangement,  under  very  strict 
criteria.  Our  currency,  the  convertible  mark  (BAM)  was  pegged  to  the 
Deutsche  Mark  and  then,  to  euro,  after  its  introduction.    In  addition, 
supervision of banks is not in the CBBH mandate, but nested in two separate 
Banking Agencies. There are  certain stands that operating under Currency 
Board  arrangement  means  we  have  no  independent  monetary  policy  or 
exchange rate policy. At a surface it might seem true. But, we are far more 
 2 of 7 
 than a „big exchange office”, as some call us. In other words, operating under 
Currency  Board  regime  does  not  mean  that  the  CBBH  does  not  play  an 
important  role  in  this  process  of  joining  the  EU  and  euro  area  and  in 
monetary  policy  itself.  And  this  has  not  changed  with  the  GFC,  i.e.  we  still 
have limited powers to stabilize the economy. So, we might be one of rare 
institutions that have not changed way we operate due to the GFC. Let me 
remind you that we have some important instruments at our disposal and we 
do our best to use them efficiently on BH's way to the EU, including firstly 
reserve  requirement;  The  CBBH  is  in  charge  of  regulating  reserve 
requirement imposed on commercial banks. We used it actively in the past, 
especially after the GFC, boosting the liquidity in the system. Furthermore, 
we amended the Decision on required reserves also in order to harmonize 
with the ECB policies. When ECB increased its „penalty” on banks overnight 
deposits  in  March  2016,  as  part  of  non-conventional  monetary  policy 
measures,  we  almost  immediately  introduced  negative  interest  rates  on 
excess  liquidity  that  commercial  banks  hold  with  us.  Currently,  we  charge  
-0.2%, i.e. 50% of the ECB overnight deposit rate. We will continue to follow 
trends in the euro area and in our economy and use our decision on reserve 
requirement and excess reserves in the future, as well.  
Secondly, the CBBH is in charge of the overall payment system in BH. We 
constantly improve it, adhering to the SEPA (Single European Payment Area) 
and  the  PSD2  (Payment  System  Directive  2).    As  you  know,  changes  in 
payment systems are dynamic and we are ready to continue building a robust 
and resilient payment system in the future that will serve our economy in the 
best  possible  way.  Fintech, 
in  general  disruptive 
technologies in this area are something that will keep us busy for a long time 
to come.   
innovations  and 
Thirdly, we are learning to use „the latest” monetary policy instrument i.e. 
communication policies, as well.  
Fourthly, the CBBH research function, including Financial Stability Report 
and our Annual Report is a significant contribution to better understanding 
of  economic  trends  in  BH  and  contribution  to  the  financial  system’s 
 3 of 7 
 development in BH. In addition, coordination of the Banking Supervision 
Agencies in BH and chairing of the SCFS (Standing Committee for Financial 
Stability) are part of the CBBH mandate. During the „collateral damage“, done 
to BH in the aftermath of the GFC, we used very actively those coordinating 
mechanisms and reserve requirement. We intend to intensify coordination 
to be ready for the future crisis. Nobody knows when or how the next crisis 
will hit us, but there is no doubt there will be one before we join the EU and 
we want to be ready for it. 
Finally, if the exchange rate is nominally linked to the euro, i.e. we cannot 
use nominal exchange rate as a policy tool, this does not mean that we cannot 
influence  competitiveness  of  the  BH  economy.  I  am  referring  to  the  real 
exchange  rate.  First  by  maintaining  price  stability  (by  adhering  to  the 
Currency  Board  arrangement)  and  second,  we  try  to  use  our  public 
appearances  and  publications  to  advocate  quicker  and  deeper  structural 
reforms.  For  the  region,  monetary  history  is  important  and  one  must  not 
forget ours, the hyperinflation and misuse of permanent devaluation in the 
former state. That is why we want a different step forward. Having in mind 
constant political pressures for the Currency Board to be "weakened" or to 
be  abandoned,  it  is  very  important  for  the  CBBH  to  maintain  the  existing 
policy independence and thus, maintain and strengthen the credibility of the 
Currency Board. So we do not think about the  proper  moment to exit the 
Currency Board and have „independent policy“, because we consider that we 
should enter the EU with the Currency Board and then the euro area, too, in 
the same or similar way as Baltic states successfully did, not long time ago. 
 3. What do we expect from „normalization" of the policy and when do 
we expect it to happen?  
 First, will interest rates increase? For our Central Bank, it is the ECB policy, 
but also the global situation in the world, that are of primary importance. For 
example, low or negative interest rates on our assets (bonds, deposits) have 
 4 of 7 
 led  to  a  fall  of  our  revenues.  When  the  ECB  changed  its  overnight  deposit 
interest rates of banks (March 2016) we introduced a negative interest rate 
on  excess  reserves  in  bank  accounts  in  the  CBBH.  In  the  future,  we  will 
continue along similar lines. We have noticed that some major central banks 
started to raise the rates, especially the FED. The ECB keeps its „gunpowder 
dry“  on  interest  rates,  at  least  for  the  time  being.  Their  forward  guidance 
indicates that there might not be increase in their rates until mid-next year. 
In  October,  the  ECB  decided  that  “net  purchases  under  the asset  purchase 
programme  (APP)  at  the  new  monthly  pace  of  €15  billion  (will  continue) 
until the end of December 2018“. This may affect commercial banks interest 
rates in the euro area thus influencing indirectly ours. So, it seems reasonable 
to  expect  that  interest  rates  will  start  increasing  in  the  euro  area,  but  we 
believe  very  gradually.  True,  it  is  difficult  to  predict,  especially  the  future.  
Second,  to  answer  the  question  when  normalization  will  be  achieved,  we 
would need to define what „normalization" is. Is it simply the average value 
of  the  past  rates?  If  yes  for  how  many  years?  Five  years  before  the  GFC? 
Difficult to say. But I think most of us in this room would agree that levels of 
interest rates, we see now, are „not normal“ but „exceptional“. But will „the 
new normal“ be around 5% nominal rates or closer to 2%, is not clear at this 
point.  If the rates go up, we will look for the „silver lining”, i.e. we expect this 
will  have  a  positive  impact  on  our  revenues.    As  far  as  commercial  banks 
interest rates are concerned, in our view, the ECB policies and external world 
do influence local rates, but the main causes of relatively higher lending rates 
in BH are primarily within Bosnia and Herzegovina like: the sovereign risk, 
inadequate foreclosure procedures or more generally lack of enforcement of 
contracts – rule of law, etc. Thus, we in Bosnia and Herzegovina should worry 
less  when  the  ECB  will  start  raising  rates  and  focus  more  on  our  own 
domestic problems, instead. And we have no influence on the ECB anyhow. 
As the saying reads: Why worry about things we cannot change?  
    5 of 7 
 4. Role of foreign banks and the capital market.  
 In BH, the capital market remains underdeveloped.  The fact is that on the 
very  small  market,  both  Entities  created  their  own  stock  market 
infrastructure  with separate  stock  exchanges.  One  in  Sarajevo  (SASE),  and 
another  in  Banja  Luka  (BLSE).  Operations  on  them  started  more  than  15 
years  ago.  But,  due  to  the  usual  factors  in  such  cases  i.e.  small  size  of  the 
markets, lack of privatization, and public mistrust in previous privatization 
programs, these resulted in very shallow market.  Unfortunately, as a result 
of the GFC, foreign investments are not growing. Most probably, the political 
instability contributed to the fact that foreign investors shy away from BH. 
Thus, commercial banks are the main financial intermediaries. Most banks 
are  foreign  owned.  Our  systemic  stability  is  influenced  by  behavior  of 
systemically important banks in BH. As most of them are foreign owned, we 
strongly  support  the  Vienna  Initiative,  including  Vienna  2.0  and  maybe 
Vienna 3.0 in not so distant future. All the countries in our environment are 
small and for all of them foreign banks play a dominant role. NPL remain high 
in BH, compared to other countries covered by Vienna 2.0.  That is why we 
strive  for  even  stronger  cooperation  among  our  countries.  Maybe  this 
Conference can communicate urbi et orbi the support for this?  
 5. About FINTECH and Artificial Intelligence:  
 Financial  sector  is  heading  toward  significant  changes,  as  digitalization  is 
changing  the  landscape  of  the  financial  industry  very  rapidly.  There  is  an 
abundance  of  literature  on  this  topic,  without  a  consensus  view  of  the 
outcome for central banks. Some play with the idea to issue their own digital 
currencies,  the  Central  Bank  Digital  Currency  (CBDC),  like  Riksbank,  the 
Reserve Bank of India, the People’s Bank of China, etc.  But harsh reality is 
that distributed ledger technologies (DLT) i.e. blockchain and numerous and 
various cryptocurrencies make not only main headlines of mass media, but 
 6 of 7 
 are increasing their share in the financial world. One cannot say what shall 
prevail in the future. Our approach is that we want to be careful with our own 
regulation  on  those  issues.  We  believe  that  the  conservative  approach  to 
cryptocurrencies is optimal for us and we will continue closely to monitor 
the development and attitudes of central banks in the world, especially the 
ones of Financial Stability Board (FSB), the BIS and the IMF and, of course, 
the main central bank for our Currency Board, the ECB.  Because, it is better 
to be safe than sorry. We have been building our credibility for two decades 
now, and we are well aware that we can lose it in a moment. Yes, we know 
from Argentina's Currency Board history, in particular, that confidence in the 
Currency Board can quickly be lost. And vice versa, especially from the Baltic 
States,  it  is  possible  to  enter  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  with  the  Currency 
Board  regime.  An  example  of  Latvia,  although  extreme,  says  that  when  in 
economic policy we have a clear goal (entering the euro area) and all policies 
should be subordinated to it, then success is guaranteed. As the old saying 
goes: „An obstacle is something that you see when you take your eyes off your 
goal“.  This is why we want to continue our conservative policy, of course, by 
following  developments  in  the  environment.  Let  me  make  a  comment  on 
Argentina, a case sometimes used as an argument that Currency Boards are 
not  sustainable.  Recent  negotiations  with  the  IMF  on  the  new  program 
clearly show that it is not the Currency Board, per se, that is „crisis prone“. It 
is not following the necessary preconditions for its stability that will „kill it“.  
As we all know, it is the economic fundamentals and credibility that are the 
main „ingredients” for a sustainable Currency Board. More specifically, we 
think that a sound banking system and fiscal discipline, as well as focus on 
structural  reforms  and  convergence  toward  the  EU  are  among  the  most 
important preconditions for a sustainable  Currency Board and prosperous 
Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
 7 of 7 
 