Governor   	
Title 	
Date 	
Event 	
Venue 	
: Mr. Tariq Bajwa 	
: Remarks by the Governor, State Bank of Pakistan	
: April 19, 2019 	
: SBP Head Office Karachi 	
: 23rd Zahid Husain Memorial Lecture  
 Remarks by the Governor, State Bank of Pakistan 
23rd Zahid Husain Memorial Lecture 
19th April 2019 
 
Honorable Chief Guest Justice (r) Nasir Aslam Zahid, learned Speaker Dr. Zhou 
Xiaochuan, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen! 
 
1. 
I  feel  honored  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  23rd  Zahid  Husain  Memorial 
Lecture today, on “Lessons from the role of People’s Bank of China in 
China’s economic rise” by Dr. Zhou Xiaochuan, former Governor of the 
Peoples Bank of China.  
 
The Zahid Hussain Memorial Lecture series is one of the most prestigious 
events organized by the State Bank of Pakistan every year, and serves a 
dual purpose: it symbolizes our humble effort to acknowledge the services 
2. 
Page 1 of 7 	
rendered to the nation by Mr. Zahid Husain – the first Governor of the State 
Bank.  And  second,  the  lectures  offer  an  opportunity  for  intellectuals, 
academics and policymakers to come together and engage in healthy and 
constructive  debates  on  contemporary  economic  issues  and  challenges. 
While we may be in variance with some of the viewpoints expressed by 
our  eminent  speakers,  we  nonetheless  wholeheartedly  welcome  the 
opportunity  to  learn  from  their  understanding  and  interpretation  of 
complex economic interactions, and their efforts to deal with the identified 
issues.  
 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
3.  But  before  I  introduce  our  eminent  speaker,  please  allow  me  to  briefly 
recognize the services rendered to our country by Mr. Zahid Husain. As 
we are all aware, this country faced incredible challenges immediately after 
independence. In the words of Quaid-i-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah, we 
got a ‘mutilated, truncated and moth-eaten’ country.1 Pakistan’s chances 
of survival did not appear encouraging during those earlier years. It was 
during these testing times that Mr. Zahid Husain stood out amongst the 
dedicated lieutenants of our founding father.  
 
4.  Mr.  Zahid  Husain  was  among  the  principal  architects  of  Pakistan’s 
financial  and  planning  system.  His  commitment  to  public  service  and 
nation-building,  and  his  resolve  and  ability  to  overcome  multiple, 
significant challenges faced by the new-born country, set him apart from 
1 “Truncated State, Divided Nation” (Ch.2, p.40‐60) from “The Struggle for Pakistan: A Muslim Homeland and 
Global Politics” (Ayesha Jalal, 2014).  
 Page 2 of 7 	
others. This was evident from the fact that he was Pakistan’s first High 
Commissioner to India; the first Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, 
the first Chairman of the Planning Commission Board and the Taxation 
Inquiry Committee; and the author of Pakistan’s first Five Year Plan. We, 
at the State Bank of Pakistan, feel honored to have had him as our first 
Governor, and hope that we can carry his legacy forward with the same 
ideals that he embodied. 
 
6. 
5.  Mr.  Zahid  Husain  personified  a  kind  of  leadership  that  automatically 
commanded respect, and this was critical as he set out to lay the building 
blocks of governance institutions in the country after independence. In this 
day and age, we often take these pillars of the state for granted, while being 
nearly oblivious of the untiring efforts of our predecessors. As aptly noted 
by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  “If  I  have  seen  further,  it  is  by  standing  on  the 
shoulders of Giants.”  
 
Today, as we are gathered here, I would like to avail this opportunity to 
recognize and give a token of thanks to our honorable Chief Guest, Justice 
(Retired) Nasir Aslam Zahid – the son of Mr. Zahid Husain. He has been 
very generous in accepting our invitation to grace this occasion as the Chief 
Guest. In continuing his father’s legacy, Justice Nasir Aslam Zahid has 
been at the pinnacle of public service, having served as Chief Justice of the 
Sindh High Court, a judge of the Federal Shariah Court, and finally as a 
justice in the Supreme Court of Pakistan. Since retirement, he has been 
actively  involved  in  judicial  education,  and  human  and  women’s  rights 
issues. Like his father, he is a man of ideals, and commands enormous 
 Page 3 of 7 	
respect  across  society.  And  the  State  Bank  would  never  forget  the 
contributions of his father. It was in 1973, the Silver Jubilee of the SBP, 
when it was decided that a lecture series would be instituted in Mr. Zahid 
Husain’s  name.  Since  then,  the  SBP  has  hosted  22  globally  acclaimed 
economists, policymakers and intellectuals, who have delivered lectures on 
a  multitude  of 
topics  with  enormous  significance  for  economic 
policymaking.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen! 
7.  With  that  said,  please  let  me  now  introduce  our  highly  esteemed  and 
learned speaker for today,– Dr. Zhou Xiaochuan. During his long career, 
Dr. Zhou has served as a seasoned and successful banking executive, and 
as a reformist government official. He retired from the People’s Bank of 
China (PBoC) after serving for a record period of 15 years as Governor. 
He was also a member of the PBoC’s Monetary Policy Committee from 
2003 to 2018. 
 
8.  After completing his PhD in automation and systems engineering from the 
Tsinghua University, Dr. Zhou worked at multiple economic and finance-
related positions, and quickly proved himself to be a capable technocrat, 
administrator and policymaker. He served as: Vice-Governor of the Bank 
of China from 1991 to 1995; Vice-Governor of the People’s Bank of China 
from 1996 to 1998; President of the China Construction Bank from 1998 
to  2000;  and  then  chairman  of  the  China  Securities  Regulatory 
Commission from 2000 to 2002. He distinguished himself during the Asian 
financial crisis of the late 1990s by helping keep China’s currency stable 
 Page 4 of 7 	
while at the same time protecting the Chinese economy from adverse trade 
shocks. 
 
empirical 
9.  But it is arguably Dr. Zhou’s role as the Governor of the People’s Bank of 
China that won him international acclaim. He stood out for his integrity, 
intellectual aptitude and the bold reforms introduced during his tenure that 
have ably served the public interest in China and allowed the country to 
emerge as a global economic powerhouse. Dr. Zhou played a pivotal role 
in  his  country’s  exchange  rate  and  interest  rate  liberalization,  financial 
services and capital market reforms, and capital account convertibility in 
China. All of these reforms were enacted on the basis of robust theoretical 
and 
the 
internationalization of the Renminbi, to minimize the systemic risks to the 
global  economy  by  diversifying  the  basket  of  reserve  currencies  and 
addressing  Triffin’s  dilemma,  which  is  the  predicament  that  reserve 
currency-issuing countries face while trying to simultaneously meet the 
needs of the domestic and the global economy. He has advocated for a 
formal settlement mechanism, and regretted that John Maynard Keynes’s 
farsighted  idea  of  ‘BANCOR’  was  not  accepted  at  the  Bretton  Woods 
Conference. 
 
foundations.  Dr.  Zhou 
actively  pursued 
10.  Dr. Zhou’s rich legacy at the People’s Bank of China can be gauged from 
the Bank’s emergence on the global level as a macroeconomic problem-
solver.  The  inclusion  of  the  Renminbi  in  the  IMF’s  SDR  basket  has 
increased  China’s  and  the  People’s  Bank’s  role  in  the  global  financial 
system. Great reserves build-up, smooth sailing during the global recession 
 Page 5 of 7 	
steering  monetary  policy  while 
and sustained high growth are all hallmarks of his era. Christine Lagarde, 
the IMF’s Managing Director, has commended Dr. Zhou’s role in, and I 
quote,  “successfully 
structural 
transformation  was  in  full  swing,  contributing  importantly  to  China’s 
sustained growth to become the second largest economy in the world.” End 
quote. 
 
11.  Dr. Zhou is currently a member of the Group of Thirty (G30) and Chinese 
Economists 50 Forum, and also holds teaching responsibilities at Tsinghua 
and other institutions. He has written several books and over one hundred 
academic  articles  on  various  aspects  of  financial  and  economic  policy. 
Some  of  his  important  articles,  such  as  “Rebuilding  the  Relationship 
between the Enterprise and the Bank” and the “Social Security: Reform 
and  Policy  Recommendations”  touch  upon  development  and  inclusive 
growth. I would also strongly recommend his book “Marching Toward an 
Open Economic System” to the audience here, as it offers relevant insights 
about China’s successful journey in the age of globalization. 
 12.  Given  Dr.  Zhou’s  extensive  experience  at  the  highest  levels  of  central 
banking, as well as his intellectual and research output, I am sure that his 
unique  perspective  and  insights  will  be  of  enormous  relevance  for 
developing economies like Pakistan. 
 
13.  We are therefore delighted that Dr. Zhou Xiaochuan has joined us today as 
we honor the memory of one of our country’s finest civil servants. I would 
 Page 6 of 7 	
14. 
like to thank Dr. Zhou, on behalf of this forum, for taking time out of his 
very busy schedule and speaking to us here today.  
 
I would also like to thank all of you all for attending today’s lecture. In 
keeping with our past lectures, I hope this one will also challenge your 
beliefs, encourage you to think outside your comfort zone, and hopefully 
trigger a lively, thoughtful and constructive debate. 
15.  Without further ado, let me now invite Dr. Zhou to share his thoughts 
with us.  
 
Dr. Zhou Xiaochuan…! 
   Page 7 of 7 	
