Benoît Cœuré: Interview with BFM Business TV
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and BFM Business TV, conducted by Ms Hedwige Chevrillon, and published on 9 July 2019.
 Mr Cœuré, your name has frequently been mentioned in recent days, and the European
Central Bank (ECB) has been very much in the news, with the proposed appointment of
Christine Lagarde as President of the ECB. Your name had been mentioned – do you
understand the reasons for the choice that was made?
It’s  an  excellent  choice.  It’s  an  excellent  choice  because  Christine  Lagarde’s  career,  first  in
France and then at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Washington, makes her eminently
qualified to be President of the ECB.
In what way?
She  understands  perfectly  how  the  global  economy  works,  and  how  the  euro  area  economy
works; she knows how to speak to the financial markets; she knows the institutional set-up in the
euro area. So she will do an extremely good job.
There are many economists here in Aix. You are a distinguished economist with a fine
reputation.  It  has  been  pointed  out,  with  some  justification,  that  Christine  Lagarde
doesn’t have a technical background in economics, or in monetary policy. Do we need to
worry about the future of monetary policy in Europe?
No. It’s a criticism that has been made of Christine Lagarde, but she knows the economy very
well  –  she  has  led  the  IMF,  she  has  been  finance  minister,  so  she  knows  how  the  economy
works. In addition, she will have, a team of excellent ECB economists who will work alongside
her and advise her, and she will manage things very well.
Yes, but the first one of you – and that would be you, Mr Cœuré – you may, for legal
reasons, for reasons of nationality, end up leaving the ECB. This is worrying a lot of
people, I won’t hide it from you, even people here, who are saying that if Benoit Cœuré
were to leave, having been one of the main architects of the current monetary policy
framework, that would leave a huge void at the ECB.
I’ll be leaving the ECB on 31 December 2019 because that’s when my eight-year term comes to
an end. Irrespective of Christine Lagarde’s appointment, I’ll be staying until the end of December,
until  the  end  of  my  term.  The  ECB’s  chief  economist,  my  colleague  Philip  Lane  –  who  was
previously Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland – is an excellent macroeconomist and he will
be able to steer things extremely well.
Isn’t  the  biggest  challenge  the  question  of  the  team,  the  future  team  surrounding
Christine Lagarde?
It’s a challenge that everyone faces when they take on a new role, of course. But she will make
good decisions.
As you said yourself, you’re going to be leaving the ECB. Are you a candidate to become
Managing Director of the IMF?
No, I’m not a candidate for the IMF. There are plenty of good candidates. Don’t ask me who my
preferred candidate would be, because the decision is not up to me. My speciality is Europe, and
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
so I’d rather stay in Europe and continue to serve Europe. The way in which I do so remains to
be seen; there are various ways. But I’m not a candidate for the IMF.
Listening to the statements made by Mario Draghi, one has the impression that he is
inclined to continue the ECB’s current interest rate policy, meaning a policy of very low
interest  rates.  That  policy  is  giving  rise  to  considerable  side  effects,  which  we  will
discuss. Do you think this policy will be in place for a long time?
It’s a policy that has side effects, and this is something that we are monitoring. We are aware of
the side effects, but our policy is necessary. Why is that? It’s because our objective is to ensure
that inflation comes back to our objective which is close to, but below 2%, and we’re not there
yet. So, monetary policy needs to be accommodative until that objective is met.
But what if there is deflation with this interest rate policy?
It’s  a  policy  which  has  created  tens  of  millions  of  jobs  in  the  euro  area,  which  is  supporting
activity and thus a return of inflation towards 2%, and which is all the more necessary right now,
when we are facing a slowdown in the global economy and significant global risks – which are
not related to Europe, but rather to trade tensions caused by various countries, and which are
affecting confidence. In this environment, an accommodative monetary policy is needed more
than ever. The Governing Council of the ECB has said that we are ready to act if new downside
risks materialise. So, the policy is necessary to fulfil our mandate.
But what monetary tools do you have at your disposal if you do need to act?
We  have  used  various  tools  up  until  now:  the  forward  guidance,  through  which  we  steer
monetary  policy  expectations;  interest  rates,  which  are  very  low  and  which  we  have  said  we
would be ready to lower further still, if necessary – and I always stress “if necessary”; and the
reinvestment  of  our  securities  portfolio,  which  ensures  that  the  ECB  has  a  very  significant
presence in the markets. And theoretically, we could also resume making net asset purchases,
again if warranted by the circumstances.
But what are the circumstances? There are lots of questions about the circumstances. Is
it the growth rate? The rate of inflation? A lack of inflation? I used something of a dirty
word before when I referred to deflation. I apologise for that, but at the same time, isn’t it
a kind of sword of Damocles hanging over you?
There is no deflation in the euro area; we are not talking about a risk of deflation. Inflation is well
above zero. The risk is that a series of negative shocks might move us further away from our
objective of 2% – that is what we are looking at, what we are trying to understand, particularly in
the light of the global economy.
What some people are worried about – and we talk about a lot here – is the possibility of
a financial crisis, even a financial explosion, whether in the short or medium term I don’t
know. Maybe you will give us a time scale. Is there a risk of the bubble bursting or a
liquidity crisis on the horizon?
There are always risks in the financial sector, and as central bankers we are paid to worry about
them. The role of central bankers and regulators is to worry about risks. Our first conclusion is
that we have to maintain and protect the system of financial regulation that has been built since
the great financial crisis, since 2007–08. As time goes by, people are tending to forget this crisis,
and the temptation returns – particularly under the pressure of different lobby groups – to relax
financial regulation. This temptation must be resisted, both in terms of banking and finance more
generally.
Then we have to identify the new risks. I see two main risks; there are many but I would like to
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
highlight  two  of  them.  First,  we  have  the  risk  that  part  of  the  financial  sector  slips  out  of  the
domain of banks and into the domain of non-banks.
That’s already the case...
Yes, it’s already the case. The size of banks is now under control; the large banks are handling
risk much better than they were before the crisis. But the price to pay for that has been that part
of the financial sector has moved to the domain of non-banks – investment funds, money market
funds, etc. – which is regulated differently, where we don’t have the so-called macroprudential
instruments, in other words, a way to control the bubbles, as one might say. These instruments
barely exist, or don’t even exist at all, in the domain of market-based finance. That’s a challenge
for regulators, particularly for the next cycle of European regulation over the next five years.
Do you think we need to create new regulatory instruments for this non-bank finance?
Yes, exactly. And the second risk I see – which is of a different nature – is cyber risk, the risk
linked to cyber attacks. At the ECB, and elsewhere in Europe, we are paying close attention to
this issue. We can’t rule out the fact that the next financial crisis may come from a cyber attack
on a big financial institution or a financial infrastructure. It’s our priority to prevent this risk.
Do you think the chances of a cyber attack are quite high? It’s fairly logical given that
we’re already seeing cyber attacks against companies…
Ask any company director; there are thousands of cyber attacks every day. We’re being tested
all the time, including at the ECB. It’s part of being a company. But the financial system has weak
points – there are systemic infrastructures that could be targeted by cyber attacks. At the ECB
we’ve reacted by creating a forum – the Euro Cyber Resilience Board – which assesses the
resilience of major European infrastructures. We’ve also reacted at the level of the G7, with a
recent cyber crisis coordination exercise.
Has the ECB already experienced a major, significant cyber attack?
We experience thousands of small ones every day, like everyone…
So no “massive” attack?
Not for now, no. No significant attack. But it will come, and we have to be ready.
You talked about this parallel finance that is becoming increasingly important; there is
also a huge amount of money flowing into private equity. Why? Because there is not
enough money to be made anywhere else? Is that an amber warning light for you?
Not private equity specifically, no. But there are other areas we are monitoring at euro area level,
like real estate financing, which is not a problem in general, but there are small warning signs in
certain countries. There are also these so-called leveraged loans – more in the United States
than in Europe – but which are starting to become a global problem. So there are a number of
warning  lights  that  are  starting  to  flash  on  the  global  dashboard.  These  are  signs  of  financial
fragility and we’re keeping a close eye on them.
And when exactly will we have a financial crisis? In the relatively short term? Maybe as a
central banker you can’t say…
I  don’t  know  how  to  answer  that  question.  My  job  is  to  make  sure  the  financial  system  is  as
robust  as  possible. At  the  level  of  the  financial  institutions  themselves,  that’s  the  work  of  the
banking supervisors, my colleagues at the ECB who supervise the banks, who check that they
have enough capital and liquidity to withstand a crisis, and at the level of big global infrastructures
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
like payment systems and clearing systems.
There is a major economic debate around the topic of “low rate policies mean we have
to  completely  revisit  our  traditional  macroeconomic  models”.  Olivier  Blanchard,  in
particular,  has  been  vocal,  but  not  just  him...  Olivier  Blanchard,  the  former  IMF  chief
economist, whom you know well. Shouldn’t we revisit our macroeconomic criteria? Can’t
debt help, as long as it takes the form of infrastructure investment?
I  didn’t  interpret  Olivier  Blanchard  as  saying  that  we  had  to  radically  change  our  economic
models, quite the contrary. What he said was that, within the framework of our traditional models,
there are indicators, or parameters, that have changed, especially the gap between the interest
rate and the growth rate, which is very different from how it has been in the past and that, he
says, warrants a policy of re-indebtedness in certain countries.
The idea is that current policy is causing countries to pursue a rather tight fiscal policy,
particularly as regards the level of debt…
That does not call for a change in economic theory; it is actually in line with standard economic
theory.  The  parameters  have  simply  changed  because  interest  rates  are  lower  than  before.  I
think  he  is  basically  right,  but  the  analysis  needs  to  be  done  for  each  country  individually.  In
Europe  we  would  need  to  carefully  identify  those  countries  where  interest  rates  will  be
persistently low relative to growth rates. I don’t think that countries such as Italy, or even France,
fall into that group. Interest rates have indeed fallen but they will climb up again one day, and
long-term growth rates – potential growth rates as economists would say – are rather low. And
the European Commission’s assessment, like our own at the ECB, is that there are actually very
few countries in Europe with the resources to actively deploy fiscal policy. Germany is one of
them but France and Italy are not.
Can we permanently have such low interest rates and no return on savings?
Yes,  people  are  earning  a  lower  return  on  their  savings,  but  savers  are  employees  and
consumers  too. And  the  low  interest  rate  policy  has  enabled  a  revival  in  employment  and  a
recovery in economic activity, which also boost savings.
So you don’t see a risk in this policy over the long term? Is there no systemic risk?
Our current monetary policy is designed to respond to a very specific situation, namely to a low
growth, low inflation environment which should not last forever. Monetary normalisation will have
to  set  in  at  some  point,  but  the  prospect  of  that  normalisation  is  moving  a  little  further  away.
That’s because of the risks for the global economy generated by shocks in the United States, in
China and in the global trade system. So for the moment, this prospect of normalisation will need
to be slightly postponed, but I am convinced that normalisation will have to occur eventually.
Yes, the question is the long term, isn’t it?
We conduct monetary policy based on the data at our disposal and we now see a slowdown in
the global economy.
Another  issue  that’s  very  important  because  it  has,  and  will  have,  a  huge  impact  is
cryptocurrencies, like the famous Libra, which will be launched by Facebook with the
backing of large investors. As chair of the working group on these currencies, do you
see them as a threat or, on the contrary, as an evolution of traditional currencies?
A G7 working group on stable coins, set up at the request of the French presidency, will present
an initial report to the meeting of the G7 in Chantilly in around ten days’ time. Stable coins are a
global topic affecting all countries, so work will also be carried out at the level of the G20 and the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial  Stability  Board.  I  think  we  need  a  balanced  approach  to  this  question;  it  obviously
involves many and varied dimensions of risks, which makes this debate rather complex. There
are risks related to anti-money laundering, the anonymity of transactions and the use of these
instruments for illicit transactions. And there are financial stability risks and risks relating to the
use  of  the  personal  data  that  are  generated  by  these  transactions.  So  we  need  a  multi-
disciplinary approach and, most of all, we need a coherent approach at global level, because
these are projects which have a global dimension from the outset. The difference between these
new projects and the fintechs, as they are traditionally known, is that we have been looking at
small  projects  in  what  are  known  as  regulatory  “sandboxes”  and,  now,  we  have  an  elephant
entering the sandbox. That is the issue. So we need to understand what this elephant looks like.
Yes, an elephant!
We need to understand the elephant. But we also need to look at the opportunities, the advances
offered by these technologies. They pose a challenge to the traditional banking system, which
has not been quick enough to seize the new technologies, particularly in the field of payments.
They do more than challenge them; couldn’t they put them at risk?
Yes, but a technological innovation enabling less costly and quicker international payments is a
welcome innovation. Banks need to react and adapt to it, but innovation in itself is a good thing.
And it demands a response from us central banks too. Our instant payments projects at the ECB
are a case in point. At the ECB we now have an instant payments system known as TIPS which
is  inexpensive  and  works  extremely  well.  We  need  to  learn  to  link  these  systems  with  our
colleagues in other countries to facilitate cross-border payments. Innovation is also an incentive,
a stimulus that enables us to work more effectively.
Currencies  are  normally  minted  by  states.  Don’t  you  find  it  shocking  that  a  private
concern is “minting currency”, so to speak?
We are not talking about currency, but rather what is known as ‘’stable coins’’.
It’s a means of payment…
They are payment systems, a means of payment as you say, but they may eventually evolve to
become  financial  instruments,  perhaps  even  debt  or  funding  instruments.  We  will  identify  all
these  functionalities  and  we  will  have  to  have  a  regulation  for  each  functionality  such  that
equivalent activities are regulated in the same way, regardless of the technology behind them.
So you have no concerns about these currencies?
They are not currencies. There is only one currency in the euro area, only one which is legal
tender, and that is the euro. There is no other.
Benoit Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, thank you for this interview.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
