Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, conducted by Mr Johannes Pennekamp and Mr Philip Plickert
on 17 April 2019 and published on 23 April 2019.
 Mr Cœuré, the fire at Notre-Dame was a catastrophe for France and Europe. My sincere
condolences! We hope that the cathedral can be rebuilt as quickly and as beautifully as
possible.
I found it all very moving; I lived in Paris for twenty years. But what also moved me greatly and
impressed me was the great sympathy and solidarity from the whole of Europe. Notre-Dame is
the most visited historic building in Europe – it embodies many of Europe’s values. It is good to
see that there was such a strong sense of commonality after the disaster.
Let’s  turn  to  monetary  policy.  Complaints  about  the  ECB’s  negative  interest  rate  on
deposits have increased significantly. Each year Europe’s banks are paying around EUR
7.5 billion in “penalty interest”. Mario Draghi has indicated that a tiering of the negative
interest rate could be considered in order to relieve the burden on them. Would you be
in favour of that?
I find the intensity of the discussion surprising, because it focuses on a narrow aspect of our
monetary  policy.  The  debate  about  interest  rates  being  low  for  long  should  be  broader.  We
understand the concerns of those affected by the harmful side effects of very low interest rates.
These  are  increasing  with  time.  There  are  possible  concerns  about  financial  stability;  asset
prices are rising. Bank profitability is also a concern. However, the negative deposit rates are
really not the biggest problem. Their contribution to low bank profits is limited. Banks should think
more about their costs.
Does that mean that you are not in favour of a softer, tiered negative interest rate?
No,  it  doesn’t.  It  is  a  useful,  relevant  discussion  that  we  have  had  before  and  should  revisit
regularly. Japan and Switzerland have tiered systems. But the negative deposit rate is not the
most important reason why interest rates are so low. If we change something, there has to be a
monetary policy reason for doing so. At the current juncture, I do not see the monetary policy
argument for tiering. However, we must keep a close eye on developments. Those who would
profit from tiering are, above all, banks with high excess liquidity, of which many are located in
France and Germany where bank lending is already running high. Thus there is no evidence so
far that the negative deposit rate is bad for lending. On the contrary.
The Governing Council of the ECB says that key interest rates will remain as low as now
until  at  least  the  end  of  2019.  However,  some  bank  analysts  do  not  expect  the  first
interest rate rise until late 2020.
We are not tied to such market expectations; they are an important input, but we are not led by
them.
Are those who do not expect an interest rate rise until later completely wrong?
Well, that reflects an assessment of the downside risks which is different to that of the Governing
Council.
There  has  been  a  lot  of  bad  news  on  the  economy  recently:  sentiment  indexes  and
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
industrial new orders have fallen. How bad is the economic situation in the euro area?
I  have  mixed  feelings.  On  one  hand,  the  slowdown  in  growth  is  probably  only  temporary.  We
expect growth to return in the second half of the year. There are no grounds for overly gloomy
thoughts. On the other hand, it is very uncertain how long and how strong the downturn will be.
The reasons for the uncertainty are political: the trade tensions stemming from the United States,
and also Brexit to some extent. Growth will only return in the second half of the year if there are
signs of a resolution to the trade dispute.
The ECB’s growth forecast for this year in the euro area is 1.1%, and next year 1.6%.
Yes, that is the current staff forecast, which will be revised in June.
Germany  is  very  dependent  on  exports;  it  is  particularly  hard  hit  by  the  weakness  in
trade.  Is  a  recession  –  at  least  according  to  the  technical  definition  of  two  negative
quarters – thinkable?
No,  we  do  not  expect  a  recession.  But  it  is  true  that  the  economic  slowdown  in  Germany  is
stronger  than  we  had  expected.  There  were  temporary  factors,  such  as  the  problems  with
emission tests in the car industry. Now things depend mainly on growth in emerging economies,
above  all  China.  The  German  export-oriented  growth  model  also  entails  risks.  It  was  very
advantageous during the upturn of the global economy, now things are not so good.
Would you advise the German Government to increase domestic demand?
The  ECB  does  not  lecture  the  German  Government.  In  its  “European  Semester”  reports,  the
European  Commission  made  it  clear  that  Germany  should  balance  its  growth  and  increase
domestic  demand.  That  could  be  done,  above  all,  through  more  investment,  which  would  be
good for the Germany economy. In Europe there is much discussion about the level of budget
deficits. Of course the amount of the deficit is important for keeping debt under control, but it
would be at least as important to talk more about the composition of expenditure. Most countries,
including my home country France and also Italy, have no fiscal room for manoeuvre for more
spending. However, through reallocation, the expenditure could become more growth-friendly.
To return to the more technical side of the ECB’s policy: you gave banks four-year loans
in the order of hundreds of billions of euro, so-called “TLTROs”, which will soon expire.
For this there will be follow-on loans. Again with such favourable conditions, even in part
a negative interest rate?
The TLTRO loans are not a subsidy for the banks; they are a monetary policy instrument aimed
at ensuring adequate lending. The Governing Council will presumably decide on the conditions,
including the interest rate, in June. The remarkable progress in lending to the real economy will
have to be taken into account. The situation today is very different to 2016, when we issued the
last TLTROs to actively support lending. However, we want to protect this achievement.
So the conditions no longer need to be so generous?
The Governing Council will decide on that based on economic data.
The key measure of the success of the ECB’s policy is price stability. Contrary to what
the ECB repeatedly forecasts, the rate of inflation remains below the target; the curve is
not upward-sloping, but is flat. Inflation could still remain very low for a long time. And
that is in spite of the fact that wages are rising significantly. Consumer prices are not
following. Is that a puzzle?
It is half a puzzle. At least wages are now rising, following the fall in unemployment, as we had
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
expected. But what is missing is the transmission from wage costs to product and consumer
prices. That is a bit puzzling. Businesses are apparently accepting narrower profit margins rather
than raising prices. That may be because they do not think demand is strong enough yet and
because of strong global competition. But that cannot go on forever. At some point they will raise
prices. However, the most recent slowdown in the economy is a setback.
This autumn, ECB President Mario Draghi will step down after eight years in office. So
far the ECB has had a Dutchman, a Frenchman and an Italian at its helm, but so far no
president  from  Germany.  Can  you  understand  why  many  Germans  want  the  next
President of the ECB to come from here?
I understand that, but it’s the wrong way of looking at things. The choice of ECB President should
not be based on nationality, but on competence.
But  we  should  not  pretend  to  be  so  naïve  as  to  think  that  political  and  national
considerations do not play a role!
Yes,  of  course,  I  understand  the  political  process.  But  the  selection  should  be  based  on
competence. And, if you ask me, I would also be happy to see a woman at the helm of the ECB.
Ultimately, there are various criteria – and it is a political decision.
So, what must an ECB President have in terms of qualities, abilities and knowledge?
You will have to ask the European Heads of State or Government; they decide that. What I would
say as a central banker is that you have to be a good central bank manager, you must have a
strong  background  in  and  knowledge  of  economics,  and  you  must  understand  the  capital
markets  –  without  being  a  hostage  to  market  expectations  –  and  you  should  uphold  the
independence of the ECB. And you need to have the ability to lead and to make compromises.
You have ambitions yourself. Some say you have a 10 percent chance of becoming ECB
President. However, you are on the Executive Board, and it is crystal clear in the EU
Treaty that a re-appointment of Executive Board members is prohibited.
I won’t give any legal interpretations. That is up to the EU Heads of State or Government. I have
worked for Europe for the last seven years. I also want to continue to serve Europe. The central
bank is a place where I can be useful. But, of course, I can also be useful elsewhere.
The ECB leadership has apparently already obtained legal advice which played out the
case of you briefly stepping down and then being “re-”appointed as President. Would
that not be a blatant ploy? A breach of the spirit of the rules?
I am not a lawyer.
But you would like to do it?
Who wouldn’t? But it is not a position that you apply for. We must respectfully wait to see what
the politicians decide.
The next President of the ECB will have no easy task. He …
He or she …
He  or  she  must  drive  forward  the  “normalisation”  of  monetary  policy.  What  is  that,
actually? What is normal?
An interesting question. A lot of thought is given to that at the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Federal Open Market Committee of the US central bank, the Federal Reserve System, asks
its  members  explicitly  for  their  estimate  of  the  longer-term  development  of  interest  rates.  We
don’t do that. We in Europe are also lagging far behind the US economic cycle. I don’t know what
the long-term aim for interest rates in Europe should be. But for me, “normalisation” means that
the key interest rates are again the main instrument of monetary policy – as they were before the
crisis. We are not there yet. The bond purchase programme – “quantitative easing” – is not yet
over,  because  we  are  reinvesting  the  proceeds  from  the  maturing  bonds.  Each  month  we
reinvest a substantial sum. Second, the “forward guidance” is now our main instrument; steering
the  market  through  words,  not  through  interest  rate  changes.  We  are  not  abandoning  the
prospect of normalisation, but it has been delayed by the economic downturn.
In the medium term, should the ECB reduce its balance sheet again?
Yes,  like  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  The  Federal  Reserve  kept  its  bond  holdings  for  a
considerable time after the end of the net purchases and then started winding down its holdings.
But in Europe we have not got that far yet.
With all due respect for your optimism regarding the economy, what will happen if there
is a really strong downturn, perhaps even another full-blown recession? What could the
ECB actually still do?
The  best  answer  is  that  we  have  managed  in  the  past.  Every  time  there  has  been  a  major
challenge, we have found a solution. I am confident that, in the event of a shock, we will find a
solution  in  our  toolkit  that  is  within  our  mandate.  Monetary  financing  is  prohibited.  But  I  would
caution against the view that only the ECB should have to react to a crisis. We do not know what
the next crisis will look like. Every crisis is different. There will be another crisis; there will always
be more crises. It would be very unwise to think that the next crisis will be managed by the ECB
without any measures having to be taken by governments. The burden of tackling crises must
not rest on the shoulders of the ECB alone.
However, you have already used up most of your ammunition: key interest rates are at
zero; the bond purchases have almost reached the limits you set yourselves. What more
could you do?
We do not answer this question because it all depends on the type of crisis that we are facing at
the time. We have not had a discussion about this in the Governing Council either. Experience
has shown, however, that we have a broad range of instruments.
Do  the  possible  instruments  also  include  a  devaluation  of  cash,  to  make  even  lower
negative  interest  rates  possible? After  all,  there  are  already  working  papers  on  this
subject in the IMF and the ECB. What would citizens make of that?
Simple answer: it is up to the citizens to decide whether they want to use cash. For instance,
Sweden is moving in the direction of a cashless society; in the euro area countries, demand for
cash  is  still  growing.  The  central  banks  are  working  on  digital  central  bank  money  as  an
alternative to cash. We are investigating that. But we do not want to abolish cash.
The question was a different one. The academic working papers of the IMF and the ECB
are not about the abolition of cash, but a devaluation through negative interest rates, a
kind of penalty interest on banknotes.
That  is  not  a  new  idea.  Silvio  Gesell  came  up  with  it  100  years  ago.  But  it  is  not  a  practical
discussion for us.
In  the  forthcoming  European  elections,  anti-EU,  anti-euro  and  populist  parties  will
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
probably gain seats. Are you worried that the EU and EU institutions will be weakened by
that?
There will probably be a more fragmented Parliament. The legislative decision-making process
will  be  more  difficult.  Politics  as  a  whole  will  be  more  difficult  and  more  complex.  We  hope
nonetheless that European Economic and Monetary Union will be completed. A push towards a
capital markets union is needed.
What is that exactly?
A capital markets union means greater integration of the capital markets; a better cross-border
allocation of savings. By way of a specific example, a German company investing in French or
Spanish companies and vice versa. We don’t see enough of that yet. Capital should go where it
is most productive.
A  few  years  ago,  Wolfgang  Schäuble,  as  Finance  Minister,  once  complained  that  the
ECB’s low interest rate policy was 50% responsible for the rise of the Alternative for
Germany (AfD) party in Germany. Perhaps he wasn’t being entirely serious but the fact is
that many citizens are frustrated about the low interest rates which, for example, make
retirement provision more difficult. Has the ECB played a part in the success of populist
parties?
When the ECB is given the blame for political outcomes, that says more about politics than it
does about the ECB. We clearly have a political framework in Europe that has not delivered what
the people expect; not the growth, the employment nor the income that people in many countries
want. The ECB is an easy scapegoat. Our tower here in Frankfurt is highly visible; many eyes
are  on  us.  Yes,  we  must  take  into  consideration  the  side  effects  of  our  policy,  the  effects  on
savers, on house prices, etc. We take that very seriously. But the bottom line is that our low
interest rate policy has benefited savers more than it has harmed them, since savers are also
workers  and  borrowers.  And  in  the  housing  market  the  low  interest  rate  has  also  helped
encourage more construction. The criticism is often too simplistic.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
