Louis Kasekende: Overview of the Bank of Uganda’s activities and
current concerns
Remarks  by  Dr  Louis  Kasekende,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda  at  the  Bank  of
Uganda Town Hall Meeting, Jinja Town, 17 April 2019.
Hon Ministers,
The Members of Parliament,
 Owek. Katuukiro of Obwa Kyabazinga Bwa Busoga, Dr. Joseph Muvawala,
The Jinja District Leadership and leaders of other districts in Busoga,
All leaders in your respective capacities,
Members of the Fourth Estate (The Media),
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Good morning!
Let  me  start  by  thanking  you  all  for  honouring  our  invitation  to  this  event.  Special  gratitude  is
extended to the Honourable Ministers, Members of Parliament, Deputy Governor Emeritus, Mr
Bukumunhe, and Dr. Joseph Muvawala, the Katuukiro of Busoga Kingdom.  
Today’s event is a continuation of a series of activities that were started in 2016 as part of the
Bank of Uganda’s golden jubilee commemoration. Over time, Bank of Uganda Management and
the Board of Directors had observed various misrepresentation/misunderstanding of its mandate
and sometimes a clear lack of information about BOU services by the public especially in our
upcountry communities. Therefore public outreach activities such as these were instituted as an
avenue for the Bank of Uganda to explain its mandate and account to the public for its policies
and  actions.  More  importantly,  it  is  an  avenue  to  strengthen  the  linkage  between  the  Bank  of
Uganda and the local area leadership, and the general population for both sensitization purposes
and seeking feedback from all our stakeholders. 
In my remarks today, I will provide an overview of what the Bank of Uganda is set out to do and
also address a few topical issues before I call upon my staff to deliver brief presentations on
some selected areas of our mandate. One of the presentations shall be on the operations of the
Agricultural Credit Facility.
First;  what  is  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda? Article  161  and  162  of  the  Constitution  of  the
Republic of Uganda, 1995, clearly set out the Bank of Uganda as the “only authority to issue the
currency of Uganda” and to “…promote and maintain the stability of the value of the currency of
Uganda; regulate the currency system in the interest of the economic progress of Uganda; and
ensure an effective and efficient operation of a banking and credit system..” The Bank of Uganda
Act, 1993 under section four goes further to detail the specific functions including the supervision
and regulation of financial institutions.
One of our major pre-occupations as a central bank is to control inflation, i.e. maintaining the
value of the Uganda shilling by keeping at a minimum, the changes in overall prices of goods and
services. Moderate changes in prices are supposed to enable households and businesses to
save and plan long term, without fear of significant erosion of their monetary value. I wish not to
discuss monetary policy today, as I believe it is one aspect of our mandate where we may have
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
consensus with most stakeholders to the effect that the Bank of Uganda has performed very well
especially since the mid-1990s, compared to what the economy experienced in the 1980s and
1970s.
Second; let me speak briefly about our mandate with respect to the supervision and regulation of
financial institutions. It is critical to note that not every financial institution falls under the regulatory
purview of the Bank of Uganda. 
Bank  of  Uganda  currently  oversees  deposit  taking  institutions  that  fall  under  three  categories;
Commercial banks, Credit Institutions such as Postbank Uganda Limited, Opportunity Bank and
BRAC Uganda Limited; and the Micro-deposit taking institutions like Pride Microfinance, FINCA
and UGAFODE Microfinance. Bank of Uganda also oversees the foreign exchange bureaus and
licenses any entity wishing to engage in money remittance services. At the moment, the Bank of
Uganda  also  oversees  the  mobile  money  services  jointly  with  Uganda  Communications
Commission. However, this is bound to change with the enactment of the National Payments
Systems  Law  that  is  in  the  offing  that  will  have  Bank  of  Uganda  taking  sole  responsibility  for
regulation  and  supervision  of  the  mobile  financial  services.  Money  lenders  and  other
microfinance institutions are therefore not the responsibility of the Bank of Uganda. Non-deposit
taking Microfinance institutions and entities like SACCOs are regulated by other agencies such
as Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority.
With respect to SACCOs, I want to urge the members to reflect on the unutilised potential of
these groupings in fostering job creation and wealth for our community. Often, the SACCOs are
only used by members as some form of safe custody or saving to spend on later festivities and
sharing  out  the  proceeds  of  any  interest  earnings.  Such  operational  modalities  often  result  in
returns that are so small to undertake any meaningful investment by an individual member. I wish
therefore  to  request  members  to  consider  transiting  SACCOs  into  Producer  cooperatives  by
utilising the pooled funds as capital for investments in commercial agro-based enterprises. Such
a  move  coupled  with  proper  record  keeping  can  also  facilitate  easier  access  by  members  to
government funds like the Agricultural credit facility (ACF).
Having  set  out  the  range  of  institutions  supervised  by  the  Central  Bank;  I  want  to  echo  the
benefits that the public accrues from dealing with only regulated financial institutions. Regulated
institutions are best placed to ensure safety of people’s savings because they are demanded to
act diligently in accordance with the set laws and regulations; offer a recourse to the regulator for
consumer protection in case of complaints or irregular activity, and in the event of having to be
closed and liquidated, there is a final recourse to the deposit protection fund for depositors in
these regulated financial institutions.
As such, the public should not be duped into dealing with unlicensed and unregulated financial
institutions that are in many ways disguised schemes to defraud the community. Members of the
public  should  heed  warnings  or  advice  coming  from  agencies  like  Bank  of  Uganda  regarding
operations of certain investment schemes or institutions. In addition, the public should also take
keen interest in physically inspecting the licenses of any institution that claims to be licensed by
the Bank of Uganda or any other regulator.  The licenses are supposed to be displayed in all the
branches of these regulated institutions and whenever a customer is in doubt; they should inquire
from the regulators. The security agencies and other arms of government should also take a firm
stand to wipe out the Ponzi schemes and other unregulated financial institutions. Otherwise, if
we  leave  unregulated  financial  institutions  to  operate  leading  to  public  loss  of  funds,  it  could
damage confidence in the entire financial system with dire consequences for the economy.
Third,  permit  me  to  speak  briefly  about  the  recent  parliamentary  proceedings  related  to  our
execution of the bank supervision and regulatory role. One issue that featured quite extensively in
the discussions with COSASE and in the media related to the speed of resolution of some of the
financial institutions and the recommendations by some sections of the public to introduce strict
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
procedural guidelines with fixed timelines for the Bank of Uganda. I wish to draw your attention to
a regulator’s perspective on that issue.
The Bank of Uganda only intervenes in a financial institution when it has reasonable belief and
evidence  that  continued  operations  of  that  institution  pose  serious  risk  of  loss  to  depositors’
funds.  Moreover,  the  dire  condition  of  any  institution  that  is  the  subject  of  a  Central  bank
intervention  is  a  result  of  failure  of  the  management,  shareholders  and  Board  of  directors  to
execute their responsibilities as per the set laws, ethical and corporate governance procedures.
For instance, nearly all the banks closed or sold in Uganda since the turn of the century failed
because of outright fraud by shareholders, excessive lending of funds to insiders – managers
and  shareholders,  collusion  to  cover  up  irregularities  between  board  of  directors  and  the
management,  and misreporting of the true state of the bank’s financial position, among many
factors.
Therefore, speed is of the essence to preserve the residual assets of any failing bank so as to
fully  cover  the  deposit  liabilities.  Otherwise,  any  delay  in  intervention  and  resolution,  is  an
opportunity to shareholders and management of these commercial banks that have caused their
collapse in the first place, to further strip these institutions of the remaining residual assets and
value; thereby shifting the burden of paying the depositors funds to the tax payers.  
I wish to urge some level of caution to those advocating for bureaucratic and static procedural
guidelines in the resolution of financial institutions. While there is some merit in the proposal,
such  procedural  guidelines  should  recognise  the  dynamic  nature  of  banking  crises;  allow
flexibility  and  the  need  to  not  curtail  the  ability  of  the  regulator  to  proactively  respond  to  an
evolving  state  of  a  failing  institution  and  the  predatory  behaviour  of  a  bank’s  managers  and
shareholders.
Overall, the current supervision and resolution framework may not be perfect but it has served
this  country  well,  especially  in  the  period  after  the  enactment  of  the  Financial  Institutions Act,
2004. The primary objective of bank regulation is to protect depositor’s funds and no depositor
has lost any money in the resolution of any commercial bank since 2004.
Finally, I have been reliably informed that counterfeiting of currency is quite prevalent in this area.
Counterfeiters are simply robbers of people’s hard earned monetary value and should be dealt
with firmly. Indeed, the Bank of Uganda in the proposed amendments to the Bank of Uganda Act
has  included  tougher  penalties  and  sanctions  as  a  means  to  deter  this  vice.  However,  the
population also has a responsibility of acquainting themselves with the security features of our
currency, through the various public awareness “Know your money” campaigns carried out by
the  Bank  of  Uganda.  For  business  units  that  deal  with  relatively  high  volumes  of  cash,  they
should consider buying the necessary detection gadgets. 
  I  wish  to  end  my  remarks  by  once-again  thanking  you  all  for  attending  this  event  and  I  look
forward to hearing your own perspectives and assessments of the Bank of Uganda’s mandate,
policies and actions. We are here to listen to you!
Mwebale inho mwebalile ilala
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
