Mahesh  Kumar  Jain:  Consumer  protection  in  a  digital  financial
world - initiatives and beyond
Speech by Mr Mahesh Kumar Jain, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Annual
Conference of Banking Ombudsman, Mumbai, 21 June 2019.
 Deputy Governor Shri Kanungo, Executive Director, Mrs. Marandi, other Executive Directors of
the Reserve Bank of India, Managing Directors/ Chief Executive Officers from banks, overseas
guests, colleagues from the Reserve Bank of India and other institutions.
I am happy to be here for delivering this address at this annual event of the Consumer Education
and Protection Department (CEPD), Central Office (CO) on a historic moment as we enter the
silver jubilee year of the Banking Ombudsman Scheme which was started on June 14, 1995.
John F Kennedy, while addressing the US Congress on March 15, 1962 had said and I quote,
‘Consumer by definition include us all. They are the largest economic group in the economy,
affecting and affected by every public and private economic decisions. Two thirds of all spending
in the economy is by consumers. But they are the only important group in the economy who are
not effectively organised, whose views are often not heard.’
And we all know how important this day is for all of us pursuing consumer protection.
Reserve Bank’s measures on consumer protection
We,  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  have  come  a  long  way  since  then  as  we  recognised  the
significance of customer service and consumer protection in the banking sector early on. The
Reserve  Bank  has  remained  mindful  of  the  need  to  empower  the  common  man,  the  retail
customers and the small entities to ensure balance in a bank/ Financial Service Providers’ (FSP)
approach to this segment of customers vis-à-vis large and corporate customers. The Reserve
Bank, as a multi-service central bank, has been proactively engaged in initiatives to build a strong
financial system, expand the reach and access of financial services and ensure protection to
customers  of  banks/FSPs.  Since  the  1970’s,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  progressively  created,
reviewed and updated, an elaborate guidance framework for banks on good customer service,
including an internal grievance redressal mechanism with reporting to a Board level Committee.
Let  me  start  with  a  brief  account  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  the  area  of
consumer protection. Consumer confidence and trust in a well-functioning market for financial
1
services  promotes  financial  stability,  growth,  efficiency  and  innovation  over  the  long  term .
Effective  customer  protection  regulations  together  with  an  easily  accessible  mechanism  to
resolve disputes between customers and the regulated entities in a timely manner, are essential
for promoting consumer confidence. Further, awareness measures for customers on financial
matters instills in them knowledge about their rights and responsibilities and helps them to make
right financial decisions.
Specifically, in its pursuit of the objective of consumer protection, the Reserve Bank introduced
the Banking Ombudsman Scheme on June 14, 1995, for the customers of banks, which has
been reviewed periodically so that it retains its relevance as an apex level complaint redressal
mechanism  for  customers  of  banks.  Reserve  Bank  has  also  launched  the  Ombudsman
Schemes to include the customers of non-banking financial companies and Pre-paid Payment
Instrument  (PPI)  Providers.  These  Schemes  have  evolved  over  time  as  apex  level  complaint
redressal mechanisms for customers of entities regulated by the Reserve Bank. I may mention
here that these Schemes provide a cost-free and expeditious redressal of complaints relating to
deficiency in the services by eligible entities covered under respective Schemes.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Reserve Bank had created a dedicated Customer Service Department in 2006 to act as the
nodal department in the Reserve Bank for grievance redressal of complaints received from the
public.  The  department,  has  since  been  renamed  as  Consumer  Education  and  Protection
Department (CEPD), and continues to focus on providing a level playing field between suppliers
and  consumers  of  financial  services,  by  easing  the  imbalances  emanating  from  information
asymmetries, inadequate disclosures and unfair treatment. In addition, the Charter of Customer
Rights , put in place by the Reserve Bank in December 2014, comprising of broad over-arching
principles to be adopted by banks has been playing an important role in protecting the interests of
their customers.
2
In India, we have a well-defined grievance redressal structure, the first resort on the complaint
being  the  branch  itself  with  proper  escalation  level  in  the  banks/FSPs.  It  is  expected  that  the
grievances of the customers are redressed in a hassle-free manner at the first point of contact
with  the  Ombudsman  being  the  last  resort.  An  important  milestone  in  strengthening  the
grievance redressal mechanism available to bank customers was the institutionalisation of the
Internal Ombudsman (IO) mechanism in 2015 in all public sector banks, select private sector
and foreign banks. Based on a review of the framework in September 2018, the coverage of the
IO Scheme was extended to all scheduled commercial banks (other than Regional Rural Banks)
having 10 or more banking outlets in India. The objective of setting up the mechanism of IO was
to ensure that there is undivided attention to resolution of customer complaints in banks and the
customers of banks get an independent and auto-review of their grievances which are partially or
wholly unaddressed before they approach the Banking Ombudsman (BO). The IO mechanism is
expected to strengthen the consumer protection and grievance redressal processes in banks.
In this era of digitalisation, given the increasing use of technology by service providers and their
customers, being mindful of occurrence and potential of unauthorised transactions, the Reserve
Bank  has  issued  regulatory  instructions  keeping  the  interests  of  the  customer  in  mind.  The
‘Framework  on  Limiting  the  Liability  of  Customers  in  Unauthorised  Electronic  Banking
Transactions’ issued on July 6, 2017 is a defining development in the wake of risks arising out of
rapid  digitalisation  of  payments  and  money  transfer  transactions,  where  there  is  a judicious
balance between ease of use and security of the transactions. The provisions, initially applicable
to scheduled commercial banks, have in January 2019, also been extended to cover authorised
non-banks that issue PPIs.
In keeping with the rapid evolution in the financial sector, the Reserve Bank has progressively
reviewed  and  updated  its  instructions  and  guidelines  relating  to  customer  service  such  as,
simplification  of  know  your  customer  (KYC)  procedures,  mandating  issue  of  Europay,
Mastercard and Visa (EMV) chip/pin cards, transparency in pricing of credit, etc., of which, you
are all aware.
The  current  strategy  of  the  Reserve  Bank  for  consumer  protection  is  to  create  an  enabling
environment for developing a customer-centric financial system by instituting mechanisms for
addressing information asymmetries between the providers and consumers of financial services,
enhancing standards of disclosures and ensuring a better alignment of product design vis-à-vis
the  customer’s  requirements  while  providing  an  efficient  and  effective  grievance  redressal
mechanism. Through all the changes and developments in the financial world, the Reserve Bank
has endeavored to ensure a robust consumer protection mechanism that is visible and credible.
The Role of the Ombudsman
Before I delve into the role of the Ombudsman, let me say that in this journey of 25 years, several
milestones  have  been  achieved  by  the  Ombudsmen  and  their  staff.  They  have  handled
complaints  with  increased  volume  and  complexity.  Further,  they  are  now  handling  complaints
under  two  other  Ombudsman  Schemes  which  have  been  recently  added  to  the  redressal
framework.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The financial sector in general, and banks in particular, are in the midst of a major revolution. A
fintech  wave  is  sweeping  across  financial  products,  processes  and  delivery  channels.
Digitalisation  and  electronic  facilities  have  transformed  the  payments  system.  New  types  of
financial entities are competing for traditional banking functions, though on a much smaller scale.
Technology  application  and  digitalisation  have  ensured  that  financial  services  can  be  availed
anytime, anywhere, at the click of a button. Convenience, cost rationalisation and competition are
the hallmarks of the day.
However, we are simultaneously being exposed to innumerable known and unknown risks and
uncertainties – cyber security breaches, phishing/ vishing frauds, data thefts and misuse, data
privacy breaches, malware attacks, etc. While it is known that these risks exist, the garb in which
they  manifest,  when  and  at  what  severity,  is  unknown.  With  convenience,  there  are  new
challenges for customers, entities and regulatory authorities. In this background, the role of the
Ombudsman has become challenging; considering the increasing number of complaints, their
complexity, as well as ability to deal with the dynamic financial environment.
The  position  of  the  Ombudsman  –  so  to  say  is  that  of  the  ‘Third  Umpire’  in  financial  dispute
resolution – being quasi-judicial, comes with authority and independence. Clearly authority and
independence  are  synonymous  with  responsibility  and  objectivity.  Accordingly,  Ombudsman
should remain mindful of their conduct and behaviour, as also the quality of their decisions. They
should also be aware of the need to proactively guard against any cognitive bias. Also, while it is
a fact that they are technically not assigned an investigative role or investigation tools to carry out
their responsibility, Ombudsmen should, at least, adopt an exploratory approach to identify the
exact  issue  or  deficiency  within  their  limited  mandate  of  summary  disposal.  While  being
disciplined, fair, straightforward and upright, Ombudsmen should also remain accessible to the
customers  so  as  not  to  put  to  peril  the  reputation  of  the  Reserve  Bank  or  jeopardise  public
confidence in the consumer protection mechanism.
The responsibility of objective dispute resolution cast upon Ombudsmen, while being significant
is not singular. The Ombudsmen must, therefore, refrain from self-limiting their role as that of
mere grievance redressal. In fact, Ombudsmen should leverage their vantage position to obtain a
fair  idea  of  the  business  conduct,  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  banks.  In  particular,
Ombudsmen should ensure that regulated entities remain responsible and accountable to their
customers, and their behaviour is consistent with the principles of sound financial conduct as
prescribed through various guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank.
In order to ensure that consumer awareness reaches to persons in the remote corners of the
country, we need to spread awareness through both physical and digital modes. Conducting and
participating  in  the  Town  Hall  activities  and  other  awareness  programmes  in  their  jurisdiction
should  remain  an  ongoing  agenda  for  Ombudsmen.  Since  the  programmes  are  conducted
outside  the  Ombudsman  Offices,  could  these  be  used  as  opportunities  to  redress  the
grievances of the complainants by going near to them? In that case, the Ombudsman can plan
well in advance and take on board the complainant and the concerned entities. This will have a
positive impact with regard to the accessibility of the Ombudsman.
Educating  and  spreading  awareness  through  digital  modes  are  being  undertaken  from  the
Central Office level. While such effort should continue at an enhanced scale, awareness should
be spread in local languages for easy understanding and effective communication. The content
should  be  carefully  designed  to  spread  financial  literacy  and  awareness  regarding  customer
rights,  their  obligations,  their  responsibility  in  the  conduct  of  financial  transactions  and
safeguarding financial information in a simple way to be easily understood by the common man.
This is critical for the success of any programme designed for their protection and welfare.
Complaint Management System
In  order  to  effectively  support  the  Ombudsman  framework,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  started
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
implementing a technology enabled Complaint Management System (CMS) as an upgrade to the
currently operational Complaint Tracking System (CTS). The new system will integrate the entire
grievance redressal mechanism of the Reserve Bank, which includes the Banking Ombudsman,
the  Ombudsman  for  NBFCs,  Digital  Ombudsman  as  well  the  Consumer  Education  and
Protection Cells (CEPCs) at Regional Offices that handle complaints which are not covered by
the Ombudsmen Schemes. The  new  system  will  also  encompass  all  the  regulated  entities  –
banks, NBFCs and PPI providers – as also allow the customers themselves to keep sight of
grievances and their redressal. The system will reduce manual process resulting in reduction of
Turnaround Time (TAT) and facilitate improved data analytics for use by stakeholders. Further,
CMS  has  an  awareness  module  on  the  front  page  containing  information  materials  in  audio,
video and text formats.
The Role of banks/FSPs
Let me now turn to the role of banks/FSPs. All financial entities have a special relationship with
their  customers  and  thus,  it  is  their  duty  to  recognise  issues  raised  by  them  in  their  financial
transactions  and  provide  a  fair  redressal  of  their  customer  grievances.  Banks/FSPs  need  to
maintain transparency in pricing, service charges, fees, and penalties.
3
Banks/FSPs not only need to make sufficient disclosures on all aspects of their functioning and
operations but also need to play a proactive role in educating customers on the products offered,
the operational techniques, risks involved, safeguards and redressal options available. Liability for
customer losses due to lapses on the part of banks/FSPs should lie with the latter. The Reserve
Bank  guidance  on  limiting  customer  liability  in  unauthorised  electronic  banking  transactions
targets this perspective . More important than compensation, however, should be on ‘prevention’
through  awareness  initiatives.  This  would  also  help  minimise  complaint  origination  at  the
bank/FSP level and reduce complaint clogging at the Ombudsman level. As I have mentioned
earlier, I would like to add that the Reserve Bank has issued guidelines last year strengthening
the Internal Ombudsman Scheme in banks. While it is envisaged that the IOs appointed by the
banks would be independent in their functioning; it is imperative that banks understand that all
complaints which are partially or wholly rejected by the banks must necessarily pass through the
desk of IO before final closure. I am sure the banks are taking steps to appoint adequate number
of IOs, in line with the volume of complaints received by them as provided in the scheme.
A critical aspect of consumer protection that calls for dedicated attention within banks/ FSPs is
management engagement. Top and Senior Management in charge of grievance redressal need
to take responsibility for the performance and robustness of the redressal framework and engage
through  deep  involvement,  close  monitoring  and  oversight  of  issues  involved.  They  and  their
staff, need to be driven by ‘true service’ sentiments. Customer service and consumer protection
should  not  be  relegated  to  the  sidelines  by  goals  driven  by  hard  targets  and  sales  related
incentives  for  on-boarding  customers.  Banks/FSPs  are,  at  times,  found  wanting  in  these
aspects. The rising number of complaints on mis-selling of products by providing incorrect or
incomplete information to customers, fraudulent transactions caused due to breach in security
protocols, breach of customer privacy, etc., point in this direction.
Finally, agility in addressing customer grievances needs to be inculcated at all levels of staff. The
turnaround time (TAT) for complaints received within banks/FSPs and those referred to them by
the Ombudsmen offices could then be reduced even further from the existing level of TAT.
Issues to address in Consumer Protection and Grievance Redressal
The G20 High Level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection, adopted by the Organisation
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in October 2011, inter alia, mandate that
jurisdictions should ensure that consumers have access to adequate complaints handling and
redressal mechanisms that are accessible, affordable, independent, fair, accountable, timely and
efficient.  Such  mechanisms  should  not  impose  unreasonable  cost,  delays  or  burdens  on
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
consumers. What is the scope for improvement for us vis-à-vis these guidelines? Let me talk
about some specific issues in this context.
1.  Timeliness  in  complaint  disposal  –  Irrespective  of  the  minimum  time  requirement  for  a
complaint examination with all required inputs/documentation from the involved parties, the
time frame for disposal has to be reasonable. In this context, you may be aware that we are
currently  working  on  a  framework  to  harmonise  the  TAT  for  resolution  of  customer
complaints and charge-backs in all the electronic payment systems. Public expectations are
high for early redressal and we too need to evolve a zero-tolerance framework for delays in
responses from regulated entities.
2.  High level of non-maintainable complaints – While non-maintainable complaints cannot be
wished away, given that 48.9 per cent of the total complaints received during 2017–18 were
non-maintainable could point to two things: first, the complainants are not aware about the
procedural requirements for filing their complaints; and second, there could perhaps be a
tendency  to  routinely  close  complaints  without  adequate  examination  in  some  cases.  In
either case, there is scope for more work from the Ombudsman.
3.  Large  proportion  of  rejections  – A  sizeable  proportion  of  the  maintainable  complaints  are
being  rejected,  mainly  on  the  ground  that  the  bank  was  not  deficient,  and  the  complaints
were  not  justified.  During  2017–18,  33.82  per  cent  of  the  maintainable  complaints  were
rejected, which though down from 57.23 per cent in the previous year is still rather high given
that  the  objective  of  the  Scheme  is  to  facilitate  resolution  of  issues  through  mediation.
Further, 8.27 per cent of the total complaints were rejected citing requirement of elaborate
documentary and oral evidence. However, in some of the appeal cases, it was observed that
a better focused review of the facts could have resulted in a satisfactory outcome for both
parties without taking recourse to the appellate mechanism.
4.  Communication issues – Many a time, we deal with persons who may not understand the
meaning  or  the  implications  of  our  communication.  After  all,  if  the  recipient  does  not
comprehend what was intended, there is no purpose served in such cases. Therefore, a
concerted attempt should be made to de-jargonise the terms in all our correspondence and
awareness materials. It is also essential that soft skills of the dealing staff are developed so
that a customer visiting our premises goes out as a satisfied person.
5.  Effectiveness of redressal system in banks  –  The  secular  trend  in  volume  of  complaints
shows significant increase in most offices. As I mentioned earlier, this could be a positive
indicator  signifying  increasing  trust  in  the  functioning  of  the  Ombudsman  mechanism.
However, a portion of the increase could also be attributed to: a) the growing complexity in
products, also enabled by technology, b) greater penetration of financial services covering
even consumers with less than desired level of financial literacy, c) lack of monitoring and
sensitisation of the dealing staff / Banking Correspondents (BCs) by banks, d) inadequate in-
house redressal mechanisms, e) unfair business practices, f) ineffectiveness of the IO and
g)  not  carrying  out  root  cause  analysis  resulting  in  recurrence  of  similar  complaints.
Effective steps need to be taken to address these issues in banks/FSPs, both at the ground
level and at the policy level.
Expectations from the Ombudsmen
I  would  say  that  overall,  the  performance  of  the  Ombudsman  offices  has  been  good.
Nevertheless,  given  the  enormous  challenges  in  terms  of  increasing  customer  awareness,
innovations,  digitalisation  and  expectations  of  stakeholders,  we  should  constantly  be  on  the
lookout  for  areas  that  need  our  attention.  Let  me  now  talk  about  some  expectations  that  the
Reserve Bank has from the Ombudsmen:
1.  Quality  outcome:  The  Ombudsman  should  meticulously  examine  complaints  and  use
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
his/her specialised knowledge of financial services. This would ensure that the consumer is
not placed at a disadvantage due to any lack of resources or technical knowledge. Decisions
and outcomes should take into account extant regulations, applicable law and good industry
practice. For this, the Ombudsman and the supporting contingent of staff members should
keep themselves updated with the latest developments in policy and practices.
2.  Fairness:  The  Ombudsman  must  exemplify  a  commitment  to  procedural  fairness.  The
complainant, the regulated entity against which the complaint has been received and any
person/entity directly affected by an Ombudsman’s decision should be given an opportunity
to respond before the final decision is taken. I would like to mention here that there were
occasions  when  a  case  warranted  reference  back  to  the  BO  at  the  appeal  stage  as  an
opportunity was not provided to all parties to present their case.
3.  Consistency: We should aim for consistency of outcome in similar cases. Else, banks will
not know how they are expected to handle complaints themselves. There could also be a
tendency to game the system by regulated entities in such a scenario. Frequent interactions
and sharing of information among the BOs would help in this regard. I am glad to note that a
Committee comprising of various stakeholders, viz., Banking Ombudsmen, Department of
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  Department  of  Banking  Regulation,  Department  of
Banking  Supervision,  Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Techonology
(IDRBT)  and  National  payment  Corporation  of  India  (NPCI),  has  looked  into  increasing
instances  of  frauds  related  to  digital  transactions  and  recommended  certain  operational
procedures  to  facilitate  better  resolution  and  suggested  a  review  of  relevant  regulatory
instructions. The report of Committee may be examined for implementation.
4.  Public awareness initiatives: Unless people are made aware of the ‘what and how’ of the
entire  ‘grievance  redressal’  structure  in  banks/FSPs  and  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the
procedures for lodging complaints especially the grounds of complaints under the various
Ombudsmen Schemes, the effectiveness of the grievance redressal mechanism would not
be  fully  realised.  In  addition  to  targeted  awareness  campaigns  by  the  Ombudsmen  and
those  driven  through  banks  and  other  consumer  organisations,  feeding  information  to  the
communications  media  with  resolved  case  studies  can  be  explored.  The  latter  will  have
broader reach and it can also be effective.
5.  Use of data: Though it is not a stated objective of the Schemes, data on complaints should
be analysed by the Ombudsmen carefully for providing meaningful insight and support to the
regulatory, supervisory and other departments of the Reserve Bank for policy formulation.
Further, data in the CMS should be effectively leveraged for data analytics to derive useful
information  such  as  commonalities  across  complaints,  causative  factors  and  details  of
banks / branches / delivery channels / products presenting adverse features. The data can
be useful for appropriate policy and operational actions.
6.  Quality  assurance:  The  International  standard  ISO  10003:2018,  a  quality  management
standard  for  customer  satisfaction,  gives  guidelines  for  an  organisation  to  plan,  design,
develop, operate, maintain and improve an effective and efficient dispute resolution process
for complaints that have not been resolved by an external organisation. It would be useful to
examine our processes vis-à-vis such/similar standards for possible improvements. In this
context, I would be keen to learn the outcome of the consumer satisfaction survey on the
banking Ombudsman Scheme being commissioned by CEPD. We need to also study the
procedures  and  practices  followed  in  select  jurisdictions  with  well-developed  dispute
resolution systems for adoption/adaptation by the Reserve Bank.
Conclusion
As I conclude, let me also quote John F. Kennedy once again who said:
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
‘There are risks and costs to a program of action – but they are far less than the long range cost
of comfortable inaction’.
Living  with  the  status  quo,  without  significant  effort  to  change  it,  would  lead  to  ineffective  and
unsuitable long range outcomes. So, let us continue to move with times and resolve to evolve!
I  am  sure  that  the  deliberations  during  this  Conference  will  seek  to  arrive  at  concrete  action
points  for  time-bound  implementation  towards  the  betterment  of  consumer  protection  in  the
financial sector.
I wish you all the very best!
1
2
3
G20 High-Level committee Principles on Financial Consumer Protection.
RBI has issued a ‘Charter of customer rights’ in December 2014. The Charter enunciates five basic rights of
bank customers. These include right to fair treatment, right to transparency, fair and honest dealing, right to
suitability, right to privacy and right to grievance redress and compensation.
In July 2017, RBI issued instructions to banks indicating that in any unauthorised electronic banking transaction,
the liability of a customer would be zero or limited if the unauthorised transaction/s is reported to the bank timely
and there is no contributory negligence on the part of the customer. Further, the onus of proving contributory
negligence will lie with the bank.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
