Shaktikanta  Das:  India’s  relations  with  the  International  Monetary
Fund
Remarks by Mr Shaktikanta Das, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Release of Shri
V.  Srinivas’s  book  on  "India’s  Relations  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund:  25  Years  in
Perspective 1991-2016", New Delhi, 26 July 2019.
 I  am  delighted  to  be  part  of  this  event  for  the  launch  of  Shri  V.  Srinivas’s  book  on  “India’s
Relations with the International Monetary Fund”. A respected civil servant of the 1989 batch, he
has drawn extensively on his hands-on stint as Advisor to the Executive Director for India at the
IMF during 2003–06, combining it with his scholarship and experience in policy making. The book
and the function today will promote readership on an important subject and spur more thoughts
and analysis. As you are aware, RBI as an institution is closely involved with the functioning of
the IMF both to project our Macro economic interests as well as from the angle of governance of
the IMF.
2. Against the backdrop of previous Fund programs with India in 1966 and 1981, the book trains
its focus on perhaps the most eventful period of India’s engagement with the Fund, beginning
with the balance of payments crisis of 1991 and covering the period up to 2016 that brings to the
fore the dramatic transition in India’s status with the IMF from a debtor to a creditor. In the same
period,  the  Indian  economy  also  witnessed  a  transformation  from  an  inward-looking  economy
driven by import substitution to an increasingly open and emerging global power in a dynamic
world order. This period also witnessed the transformation of the Fund from a stigmatised lender
of last resort focused exclusively on exchange rate surveillance towards a more central role in
the international monetary system after the global financial crisis. Over this period, the Fund has
not  only  focussed  on  macroeconomic  policies  but  embraced  a  wider  gamut  of  issues  that
covered  women’s  empowerment,  poverty  alleviation,  sustainable  development,  fintech  and
climate  change. As  Dr  Y.V.Reddy  has  stated  in  his  Foreword  to  the  book  :  “The  book  fills  a
serious gap in the existing literature on the subject….”. I congratulate Srinivas for his scholarly
contribution in writing this book.
3. I thought I would take this opportunity to share some of my own thoughts on the Fund and its
role in the international monetary system, drawing on my experiences, including as G20 Sherpa
and now as Alternate to the Finance Minister in the Board of Governors of the Fund. Speaking on
the sidelines of the Fund-Bank spring meeting in April this year, I had alluded to labels such as
“currency manipulation” and called for greater understanding all around, to the compulsions of
Emerging Market Economies (EMEs) in building up their own buffers. I would like to point out that
the origin of the phrase ‘currency manipulation’ itself is of recent vintage, dating to 2015, when
the US Treasury started publishing a semi-annual report on the subject. In this backdrop, it has
acquired  a  predominantly  bilateral  connotation.  Currently,  the  semi-annual  Report  judges
countries as currency manipulators on the basis of three criteria: (i) a bilateral trade surplus with
the US of at least US $ 20 billion; (ii) a material current account surplus of at least 2 per cent of
GDP; and (iii) persistent one-sided net purchases in 6 out of 12 months adding to at least 2 per
cent of an economy’s GDP over a 12-month period. A country is put on the monitoring list even if
two out of the three criteria are met. India was recently removed from that list after featuring in it
from 2018. In the more recent period, the term has gained greater focus in the heat and dust of
trade wars.
4. A question that crops up is why has labelling become a bilateral prerogative when a multilateral
institutional architecture exists for the purpose? After all, Article IV, Section 3 (a) of the Articles of
Agreement that established the Fund, invests it with the oversight of the international monetary
system. Article IV, section 1(iii) enjoins each member country to avoid manipulating exchange
rates to gain unfair  competitive  advantage. Article  VIII,  Section  3  obligates  members  and  their
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
fiscal  agents  not  to  engage  in  discriminatory  currency  arrangements  or  Multiple  Currency
Practices (MCPs) unless they are approved by the Fund or maintained under Article XIV, Section
2.3. The application of the MCP concept has been reasonably considered, explained and applied
by the Fund with suitable changes carried out when needed.
5. After  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  and  the  eventual
floating of currencies from 1973, the second amendment of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement in
1978 made its mandate more explicit by fixing its oversight over individual countries’ exchange
rate policies. The Fund’s mandate was updated in 2007 to clarify that exchange rate manipulation
was  associated  with  ‘fundamental  misalignment’  that  results  in  external  instability.  Fears  of
labelling among the membership led to several reviews culminating in 2012 when an Integrated
Surveillance Decision was adopted, which emphasised the connection between domestic and
external stability as well as global risks and spillovers.
6. In pursuit of this mandate, the Fund, in its Article IV Consultations every year, undertakes in-
depth assessment of members’ economic developments and policies, including and especially
exchange rate policies. This is backed by rigorous technical evaluation through a suite of models.
The  Consultations  report  is  published  and  any  case  of  exchange  rate  misalignment  and/or
multiple currency practices is candidly brought to the notice of national authorities for correction.
This is mandatory, as the Articles of Agreement constitute an international treaty; and in India,
they are underpinned by parliamentary legislation in the form of the International Monetary Fund
and Bank Act, 1945. Given this multilateral framework, the overlay of bilateral labelling that I talked
about earlier raises questions, including on the role of the Fund itself.
7. Admittedly, like any policy-making institution, the Fund’s policies and practices will not always
be the right or the best in terms of their efficacy. As its own Independent Evaluation Office (IEO)
pointed  out  in  2005,  a  major  reason  for  the  Fund  failing  to  meet  its  core  responsibility  of
exchange  rate  surveillance  was  a  strong  sense  among  some  member  countries  of  a  lack  of
even-handedness in surveillance – that somehow, it was tolerant of currency depreciations but
not of countries resisting appreciation. This criticism by the IEO persists in its Evaluation Update
of 2017. Notwithstanding such criticisms, the IMF is open to learning and deservedly remains a
well-respected institution. We, therefore, look forward to engaging with the Fund on its April 2019
proposal for a more integrated framework encompassing the interaction of monetary, exchange
rate, macro-prudential and capital flow management policies. I strongly believe that a multilateral
framework under the aegis of the IMF is the most appropriate approach to deal with these issues.
8.  It  is  important  to  appreciate  the  context  in  which  EMEs  operate  so  as  to  foster  a  shared
understanding of their challenges.  First,  the  nature  of  shocks  which  these  countries  face  has
changed from balance of payments strains to full-blown financial crises. Second, in the years
following  the  global  financial  crisis,  EMEs  and  financial  markets  have  been  buffeted  by  global
spillovers  which  have  amplified  both  sudden  surges  and  sudden  stops  or  reversals  of  capital
flows.  The  existing  state  of  financial  safety  nets,  regional  or  multilateral,  fall  grossly  short  of
providing  the  necessary  buffers  against  such  turbulence.  Moreover,  access  to  swaps  from
systemically  important  central  banks  is  not  available  to  the  EMEs.  For  many  EMEs,  high
fluctuations in currency movements have pronounced macroeconomic consequences. This is
corroborated  in  a  recently  articulated  view  by  Mark  Carney,  Governor,  Bank  of  England  that
significant  improvements  in  the  institutional  frameworks  of  EMEs  are  being  offset  by
asymmetries  in  the  international  monetary  system  and  market-driven  finance.   Against  this
backdrop,  these  countries  have  accumulated  reserves  over  the  past  two  decades  which  has
significantly reduced the sensitivity of capital flows to push factors. Governor Carney adds that
this extra insurance, however, has come at a high cost for EMEs. In this context, I may mention
that in spite of the insurance coming at a high cost, there is enough evidence to indicate that
costs of financial crises have been very high in relation to costs of insurance. Thus, it is evident
that build-up of reserves by EMEs, so far is not so much to prop up their currencies as to self-
insure themselves against global contagion.
1
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
9. How do we collectively ensure that multilateral principles and frameworks for orderly exchange
rate  and  payment  arrangements  are  not  superseded  by  bilateral  hegemony?  The  best  way
forward  is  to  strengthen  existing  institutions  like  the  Fund  and  make  them  more  relevant  and
trusted. Through its Articles of Agreement, the Fund is a quota-based organisation, but quotas
currently constitute only 49 per cent of its resources. At the height of the global financial crisis
and  in  the  years  following  it,  the  Fund  activated  borrowing  arrangements  such  as  the  New
Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) and the bilateral Note Purchase Agreements (NPAs), to which
India also contributed. These borrowing arrangements are, however, intended to be temporary
bridges. The solution lies in commitments of quota resources by members in order to secure the
legitimacy  of  the  Fund  as  a  global  lender  of  the  last  resort,  the  overseer  of  the  international
monetary system and a trusted policy advisor. This adds urgency to the completion of the 15th
General Review of Quotas, delayed for the fourth year now.
10. The global order today faces several challenges that will test the skills of the international
organizations  as  well  as  those  of  national  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities.  International
coordination  has  become  somewhat  weaker  in  the  very  recent  years.  Many  advanced
economies  (AEs)  have  been  pursuing  low  interest  rate  policies  for  long  without  perhaps
adequate  recognition  of  their  adverse  impacts.  Today  at  the  global  level,  the  total  amount  of
bonds  with  negative  yields  has  risen  to  nearly  $13  trillion;  implying  that  nearly  a  third  of AE
government bonds trade at negative yields. Equity premium has crossed 4 per cent, which is 1
standard deviation higher than its long-term average. Return to lower interest rates in AEs poses
challenges  as  leverage  has  already  built  up  in  the  EMEs  and  the  needed  deleveraging  is  not
complete in many European economies. Amid low global interest rates, total credit to the non-
financial sector in the EMEs went up from 107.2 per cent of GDP at the end of 2008 to 194. 4 per
cent of GDP by March 2018, before it dropped to 183.2 per cent at the end of 2018. Net private
capital flows to EMEs in the form of direct and portfolio investments also nearly doubled in the
post-crisis period. This has posed risks to some EMEs. Some of these risks have surfaced in
form  of  weak  bank/  non-bank  balance  sheets  and  some  remain  latent  and  can  surface,
especially when the global interest rate cycles turn decisively. The world will be looking to the IMF
to  suggest  dependable  solutions.  EMEs  on  their  part  need  to  follow  policies  that  promote
macroeconomic and financial stability, while focussing on growth.
11. Solutions are turning more difficult to come by as the global economy seems to be moving
into  a  new  and  unsettling  phase  in  an  environment  of  stressed  trade  negotiations,  rising
geopolitical confrontation, and limited policy space and high debt levels in several economies.
General government debt of AEs as a group has surpassed 100 per cent of GDP. Fiscal space
is also constrained in many of the advanced economies.
12. It is important in the backdrop of slowing global growth that policies of monetary and fiscal
authorities are well-calibrated so that they support growth without further build-up of leverage and
asset  price  bubbles.  Prudent  policies  are  critical  to  growth  with  macro-economic  stability.
Globally,  we  need  to  focus  on  policy  space,  judiciously  use  it  and  simultaneously  undertake
structural reforms to improve productivity, innovation and job creation. The coming year will test
IMF  for  its  policy  advice  in  these  areas.  How  the  IMF  and  the  central  banks  provide  forward
guidance will be key to sustaining global economic growth while maintaining financial stability.
13. I have highlighted a few concerns that have caused me to introspect considerably on the
future of the global monetary and financial system, especially as we confront these challenges
on a day-to-day basis at the RBI. A global search for effective solutions is underway. This quest
must be armed with the lessons of history and experience, and in this context, I commend this
book for your reading.
Thank you.
1
Carney, Mark (2019), “Pull, Push, Pipes: Sustainable Capital Flows for a New World Order”, speech at the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Institute of International Finance Spring Membership Meeting, Tokyo, June 6
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
