Lawrence Schembri: The merits of a floating exchange rate
Remarks by Mr Lawrence Schembri, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Economics
Society of Northern Alberta (ESNA), Edmonton, Alberta, 17 June 2019.
Introduction
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  in Alberta  for  my  speech  today,  given  the  importance  of  commodities,
including oil, and their prices to the Albertan and Canadian economies.
While it may seem that many of us think about the value of the Canadian dollar only when we are
about  to  travel,  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  view  it  as  the  most  important  price  facing  our
economy because it directly affects much of what we produce, consume and trade.
That’s why this is the right place to explore the critical role our flexible exchange rate plays in
Canada’s economy. And the time is right as well. Canada has just entered its 50  consecutive
year with a floating currency, the longest of any country, dating from when it was last unpegged
from the greenback in May 1970.
th
This is my second speech in our public engagement campaign called “Toward 2021.” We call it
that because 2021 is the next renewal date for our five-year inflation-control agreement with the
Government  of  Canada,  first  adopted  in  1991.  For  the  renewal,  we’ve  committed  to  a  wide-
ranging review of our monetary policy framework to ensure it best achieves our mandated goal of
price stability and thereby promotes strong and sustainable output and employment growth for
the benefit of all Canadians. The framework has two components: our 2 per cent inflation target
and our flexible exchange rate.
The inflation target normally gets most of the attention, so the value of our floating dollar risks
being overlooked at a time when the performance of flexible exchange rates is coming under
greater scrutiny in international policy circles.
My purpose today is to review the evidence and make the case that Canada and many other
open  economies  have  been  well-served  by  a  market-determined  flexible  exchange  rate.  In
particular, Canada’s experience with inflation targeting underpinned by a floating currency is an
instructive example of the most durable monetary policy framework in the post-war period.  The
flexible exchange rate has helped our economy adjust to external shocks, primarily changes in
commodity prices. Although our floating currency does not completely offset the impact of all of
these shocks, it has complemented the Bank’s inflation target to help achieve low and stable
inflation and keep our economy functioning well.
1
While  we’re  not  going  to  alter  the  flexible  exchange  rate  component  of  our  monetary  policy
framework,  it  is  incumbent  on  policy-makers  to  review  even  successful  regimes  regularly  to
ensure  that  they  are  serving  the  best  interests  of  Canadians.  To  this  end,  it’s  worthwhile  to
explore the four main benefits of our floating dollar:
It allows monetary policy independence to achieve domestic price stability.
It  facilitates  adjustment  to  external  shocks,  thereby  buffering  their  impact  on  economic
activity.
It contributes to policy clarity and effectiveness.
It promotes financial sector development.
We  also  examine  recent  criticisms  of  flexible  exchange  rates.  Because  exchange  rates  are
market prices that trade daily, they are intrinsically volatile. This volatility increases the cost of
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
making  international  transactions  and  poses  risks  that  have  to  be  managed,  especially  by
exporters and importers. Nonetheless, we come down squarely on the side that the benefits of a
flexible exchange rate for Canada far exceed any such costs.
The Canadian case
Canada  exports  a  wide  range  of  commodities,  representing  about  45  per  cent  of  our  exports
(Chart 1 and Chart 2). Consequently, their prices, whether it is for oil, gold or wheat, are critically
important,  both  to  the  success  of  Canadian  exporters  and  to  the  Canadian  economy  more
broadly. Their prices, however, are largely determined by the global market forces of demand
and supply. Most of Canada’s key commodity exports are also priced in US dollars—a point I will
come back to later.
Canada’s flexible exchange rate is also determined by market forces, though the Bank of Canada
clearly has some influence on it through our policy interest rate. When we raise interest rates, or
raise  expectations  for  higher  interest  rates,  the  loonie  tends  to  appreciate  against  other
currencies—and vice versa. In this way, the dollar is an important channel for the transmission of
monetary policy.
We typically measure the value of the Canadian dollar relative to the US dollar, since the US
dollar is widely used in the valuation of both commodities and other currencies. That’s because
of its dominant place in the global economy and its widespread use as a global reserve currency.
But, as important as the currency’s value is to exports, imports and the overall economy, the
Bank of Canada does not have a specific target for the dollar. The flexible exchange rate works
best  when  it  is  determined  by  market  conditions  within  a  credible  policy  framework.
Consequently,  we  haven’t  intervened  in  currency  markets  on  our  own  behalf  in  more  than  20
years.
Our  analysis  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations  indicates  that  major  movements  in  the  dollar  are
largely  driven  by  the  market  forces  theory  would  predict,  namely  movements  in  commodity
prices  and  in  interest  rate  differentials.   Fortunately,  deep  and  liquid  financial  markets  have
developed  to  help  Canadian  trading  firms  manage  at  low  cost  the  risk  associated  with  such
volatility.
2
Price stability, not a fixed exchange rate, is our main monetary policy objective. Maintaining low
and stable inflation around 2 per cent provides a credible nominal anchor. Well-anchored inflation
expectations allow monetary policy and our flexible exchange rate to respond to external shocks
and help shelter the Canadian economy and its workforce from excess fluctuations.
To illustrate how the flexible exchange rate fits with the inflation target within our monetary policy
framework, consider Figure 1. Our monetary policy framework has two pillars: the inflation target
3
and the flexible exchange rate.
Figure 2 illustrates the framework in action. The policy interest rate is controlled by the Bank of
Canada and is primarily influenced by our outlook for economic activity and inflation. In contrast,
the exchange rate is determined by global market forces, both real and financial, that encompass
the global demand and supply for Canadian goods and services as well as assets.  Because our
flexible exchange rate responds to and helps absorb those external forces, it allows us to target
inflation with the policy rate.
4
Our success, and that of similar countries that also target inflation, speaks for itself. Our inflation
target of 2 per cent within a 1 to 3 per cent range has been jointly reviewed and renewed by the
Bank and the government five times since 1995.
While the value of the loonie has ranged from a value in the low 60 cents US to above parity with
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
the US dollar during that quarter century, inflation has remained within the 1 to 3 per cent range
roughly 80 to 85 per cent of the time,  with an overall average of just below 1.9 per cent. That
price stability came despite the financial crises of the 1990s in emerging-market economies, the
strong expansion at the turn of the millennium, the global financial crisis, the Great Recession
and the subsequent slow recovery—all of which have generated large fluctuations in commodity
prices.
5
Our monetary policy framework is supported by several critical advantages we have as a nation
that enhance its credibility and effectiveness. They include sustainable fiscal policy, which the
Canadian  government  has  followed  since  the  mid-1990s.   Such  a  policy  leaves  space  to
stimulate  the  economy  in  the  event  of  an  economic  downturn,  through  countercyclical  fiscal
measures, such as regional transfers. It also includes a flexible labour market and a high degree
of internal economic integration and capital mobility as well as a resilient financial system, which
7
I’ll circle back to later.
6
Given this context, let’s turn to the four benefits of our flexible exchange rate.
Steering our own course
Through  its  history,  Canada  has  relied  on  foreign  trade  and  investment  for  its  economic
prosperity. But this economic openness leaves Canadians vulnerable to events in the rest of the
world. Like a freighter ship, which benefits from trade, Canada is exposed to the winds of global
economic storms. The best strategy to minimize this vulnerability is to keep our own ship in good
order, including a monetary policy aimed at achieving price stability.
How does a flexible exchange rate give us the leeway to set our own course for monetary policy
and  inflation?  To  illustrate,  it’s  worth  going  back  to  September  1950,  when  Canada  first
abandoned  the  post-war  Bretton  Woods  pegged  exchange  rate.  The  decision  was  widely
criticized—it  was  seen  as  a  radical  move  because  Canada  had  been  one  of  the  original
signatories to the post-war system. The passage of time has proven it was a trail-blazing policy
shift. It demonstrated the value of a flexible exchange rate, likely sparing Canadians several years
of double-digit inflation.
At the time, the US economy was growing strongly, fuelled by military spending for the Korean
War. Because of the increased US demand, inflationary pressure was building and commodity
prices  were  rising.  In  Canada,  foreign  exchange  rate  reserves  were  accumulating  under  the
pegged  exchange  rate.  Rather  than  continue  to  allow  US  inflationary  pressure  to  spill  over  to
Canada,  authorities  allowed  the  exchange  rate  to  float—in  other  words,  to  be  determined  by
8
market forces. The Canadian dollar rapidly appreciated, helping stem the inflationary pressure.
It’s  insightful  to  compare  our  experience  with  Mexico’s  over  the  same  period.  In  contrast  to
Canada, Mexico maintained the peg of the peso to the US dollar. We can see what happened by
looking at Chart 3a. Canada’s flexible exchange rate absorbed the inflationary spillover, and we
had much lower rates of inflation.
Canada returned to a pegged rate for the period from 1962 to 1970 but left the Bretton Woods
system for good in 1970. The circumstances were similar to those in 1950. Replace the Korean
War with the Vietnam War, and the same story can be told for Canada and Mexico, so I won’t
repeat it, except to draw your attention to Chart 3b.
Similar lessons can be drawn when we compare Canada with Latin American countries from
1970 to the mid-1990s. It was a relatively unstable period, both economically and politically, yet
many  Latin  American  countries  tried  to  maintain  pegged  exchange  rates  to  the  US  dollar.
Consequently, they experienced frequent exchange rate crises as their pegs became untenable
and collapsed.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
With pegged rates, their monetary policy was being largely driven by US monetary policy, which
often proved inappropriate for domestic circumstances. In contrast, Canada’s floating currency
allowed our policy to deviate from US monetary policy as needed, and this contributed to our
better economic performance.
As mentioned, Canada adopted its current monetary policy framework with an inflation target and
flexible exchange rate in 1991. Right from the outset, it was successful in lowering inflation and
making  it  more  stable.  This  experience  was  shared  by  the  other  early  adopters  of  inflation
targeting,  including  New  Zealand  (1990)  and  Sweden  (1995).  With  the  success  evident,  other
countries with close ties to the United States followed suit: Brazil (1999), Chile (1999), Colombia
(1999), Mexico (2001) and Peru (2002), and their adoption—along with broader reforms—also
led to much lower and stable rates of inflation.
In  summary,  Canada  and  many  other  countries,  almost  40  in  total,  have  been  able  to
successfully chart an independent course for monetary policy and exert domestic control over
inflation because of the leeway provided by a flexible exchange rate.
And  yet  the  events  leading  up  to  the  global  financial  crisis  and  its  aftermath  have  led  some
observers to question the value of the flexible exchange rate in insulating the domestic economy
against external financial forces and providing sufficient monetary independence.  According to
these  observers,  domestic  financial  conditions  were  largely  determined  by  global  forces,
irrespective of the exchange rate regime, thereby rendering domestic monetary policy ineffective.
Consequently,  to  increase  monetary  policy  control,  they  recommend  using  capital  controls,
particularly  in  emerging-market  economies.  Imposing  capital  controls,  however,  would  distort
incentives  and  likely  hinder  financial  sector  development,  which  is  necessary  for  the  effective
transmission of domestic monetary policy.
9
The  theoretical  backdrop  for  this  thinking  is  known  as  the  impossible  trinity,  or  Mundell’s
trilemma. Simply put, it means that a country that wants monetary policy independence and free
capital movement cannot also have a fixed exchange rate. It can have only two of those three
things.  In  other  words,  a  flexible  exchange  rate  is  necessary  for  achieving  monetary
independence and influence over domestic monetary conditions.
Rey  (2013)  has  recently  argued  that  the  trilemma  is  no  longer  appropriate  because  a  global
financial  cycle  drives  capital  flows,  and  these  flows  primarily  determine  domestic  financial
conditions,  not  domestic  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  policy-makers  face  only  a  dilemma
(between free capital movement and independent monetary policy), and countries would need
capital controls to conduct independent monetary policy.
However, Shambaugh (2004) and Obstfeld, Ostry and Qureshi (2019) show that exchange rate
regimes do matter, even for emerging-market economies, when it comes to the transmission of
global financial shocks. Both studies find that flexible exchange rates provide greater monetary
independence and are consistent with the trilemma.
10
More fundamentally, in a world of open capital markets, the Mundell framework would imply that,
while the impact on interest rates from monetary policy actions may be more muted, more of the
transmission of monetary policy will take place through the exchange rate. Simply put, flexible
exchange rates still preserve some degree of monetary policy independence.
In  summary,  for  commodity  exporters  like  Canada,  the  need  to  chart  a  course  for  domestic
monetary policy independent of that in the United States typically arises when there are large
swings  in  commodity  prices.  Because  the  United  States  is  a  net  commodity  importer,  such
movements  have  a  large  differential  impact  on  the  two  countries,  necessitating  a  different
monetary policy, made possible by a flexible exchange rate, to maintain price stability.
Facilitating adjustment
11
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
A flexible exchange rate helps attain price stability not only by allowing domestic monetary policy
to  focus  on  this  goal  but  also  by  facilitating  the  domestic  economy’s  adjustment  to  external
shocks.  Whether  that  shock  is  a  global  trade  war  or  a  recession  in  a  key  trading  partner,
commodity prices are typically hit first. They are the bellwether for global economic conditions
because they are actively traded in global markets where new information is rapidly processed
and embedded in their prices.
Chart 4 shows how commodity prices respond to global forces. For example, the entry of China
into the World Trade Organization and into the global economy sparked a run-up in the demand
for commodities and their prices from 2002 to 2007, while the opposite occurred during the Great
Recession of 2008–09. In both cases, the exchange rate moved largely in tandem with the index
of commodity prices.
But how does our flexible exchange rate actually smooth economic adjustment to a commodity
price shock? Let’s analyze a recent example in more depth.
During the oil price shock of 2014–15, the price of West Texas Intermediate declined by about 67
per cent, from US$103 per barrel in the second quarter of 2014 to US$34 in the first quarter of
2016. Over the same period, the Canadian dollar depreciated by about 20 per cent from 92 cents
US to 73 cents US.
But  what  if  we  had  attempted  to  hold  the  Canadian  dollar  steady,  even  as  our  key  export
commodity was dropping in value? It wouldn’t have been easy. The obvious way to limit the fall of
the dollar would have been for the Bank to raise interest rates. We estimate that propping up the
loonie—avoiding that 20 per cent depreciation—would have required us to increase the policy
rate to 6.75 per cent in 2015 and by an additional 25 basis points in early 2016.
 You will recall
that in 2015 we actually cut our policy rate twice, by 25 basis points each time, from 1.0 to 0.5
per cent.
12
Those hypothetical rate increases to hold the dollar fixed would have had tremendous adverse
effects on the real economy. Instead of stimulating growth with our rate cuts, our rate increases
would have lowered the level of gross domestic product (GDP) by $60 billion by early 2016—3.1
per cent below what was actually achieved.
In addition, total hours worked would have been 4.7 per cent lower in early 2016. That translates
into about 900,000 fewer jobs—increasing the unemployment rate by up to 4 percentage points
in 2016. In addition, nominal wages would have been 2.5 per cent lower. Finally, inflation would
have been 0.8 percentage points lower in 2016.
13
But how did the 20 per cent depreciation of the dollar facilitate economic adjustment? Because
the dollar declined less than the price of oil, the relative price of other goods and services rose
compared with oil. This relative price change provided a strong signal to firms to allocate people
and capital away from the oil sector and toward other sectors of the economy. The depreciation
also made foreign goods and services more expensive, causing Canadian firms and households
to  switch  their  spending  away  from  foreign  goods  and  services  toward  those  that  are
domestically produced. Therefore, the flexible exchange rate doesn’t absorb the commodity price
shock  as  much  as  it  helps  the  economy  adjust  more  easily  to  the  shock  by  smoothing  the
adjustment in relative prices.
14
This relatively smooth adjustment is in stark contrast to the counterfactual exercise where the
relative  price  adjustment  occurred  from  a  sharp  fall  in  output,  a  pronounced  rise  in
unemployment and lower wages and prices.
In Alberta, you’ve seen both sides of this adjustment. When oil prices rose between 2002 and
2008,  the  Canadian  dollar  soared  alongside  to  reach  parity  with  the  US  dollar.  Ontario’s
manufacturing sector lost competitiveness as its goods became more expensive overseas, and
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
investment and workers flowed into the energy sector in Alberta and Saskatchewan.
Of course, the flow reversed in 2014–15 as oil prices fell and the dollar depreciated. Alberta’s
economy  ebbed  while  other  regions  expanded,  and  the  Canadian  economy  was  forced  to
adjust.
15
Recently, some economists have argued that this adjustment benefit of a flexible exchange rate
is  less  than  advertised,  in  part  because  the  US  dollar  has  become  the  dominant  currency  in
pricing many goods that are traded between countries. Consequently, exchange rate movements
may not affect the relative price of imports and exports (also known as the terms of trade). This,
in  turn,  would  reduce  the  role  of  exchange  rate  movements  in  facilitating  adjustment.
  For
example,  because  commodity  exports  are  typically  priced  in  US  dollars,  an  exchange  rate
depreciation would not have a large impact on their US-dollar price and thus not lead to more
export sales.
16
However, the evidence for Canada does not support this argument. Even though more than 80
per  cent  of  our  imports  and  more  than  90  per  cent  of  our  exports  are  priced  in  US  dollars,
exchange rate movements have played a critical role in helping the Canadian economy adjust to
large commodity price movements.
17
Recent work by Gopinath (2017), for example, maintains that the prevalence of US-dollar pricing
implies that export prices in US dollars do not fall when a country’s currency depreciates, so the
traditional stimulative effect on exports does not occur. But her evidence is based on exports of
non-commodities. Such differentiated goods normally carry profit margins that can be used to
absorb exchange rate movements. Consequently, her argument is less relevant for Canada and
other  major  commodity  exporters  because  their  exporters  will  see  their  profits  rise  with  a
depreciation and will tend to expand production and exports. Moreover, US-dollar pricing does not
necessarily  entail  fixed  US-dollar  prices  in  all  cases;  large  and  persistent  exchange  rate
depreciations may encourage exporters to reduce their US-dollar prices to expand sales.
Clarifying and enhancing roles
Before  the  adoption  of  our  current  inflation-targeting  framework,  the  goals  of  monetary  policy
were unclear.
 Market participants often perceived that the Bank of Canada placed some weight
on  stabilizing  the  exchange  rate  as  an  objective  for  monetary  policy,  clouding  its  role  and
diminishing its ability to respond to external shocks.
18
However, the primary goal of monetary policy became much clearer once inflation targeting was
adopted, especially as the 2 per cent target gained credibility. With monetary policy now more
clearly and credibly focused on price stability, the role of the exchange rate also became sharper
—specifically responding to external shocks, and, in particular, commodity price movements.
19
The  most  compelling  evidence  of  this  clarification  of  roles  comes  from  recent  research
conducted at the Bank. This research finds that, before 1991, the Bank’s policy rate responded to
movements  in  both  the  exchange  rate  and  the  US  Federal  Reserve  funds  rate  in  addition  to
economic conditions.
 Since 1992, however, the reaction of the policy rate to the exchange rate
essentially disappeared. Simply, inflation targeting allowed the Bank to focus its monetary policy
on price stability.
20
This  finding  is  corroborated  by  evidence  that  suggests  that  the  exchange  rate  became  more
sensitive  to  commodity  price  movements  after  inflation  targeting  was  adopted.  In Chart 4  and
Chart  6,  the  correlation  between  the  exchange  rate  and  country-specific  commodity  price
indexes increased in Canada, in Australia and in Chile, for example, after inflation targeting was
introduced.
21
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Chart 7 illustrates the success of our framework. When inflation targeting was adopted in 1991,
inflation became low and stable. At the same time, the flexible exchange rate helped facilitate
adjustment to commodity price movements and other global shocks.
Hence, monetary policy became more effective with the adoption of inflation targeting because
the roles of monetary policy and the exchange rate became clearer and more credible.
Promoting financial development
But even with independent monetary policy and a flexible exchange rate buffering the worst of the
economic  storms,  sustaining  strong  economic  growth  in  Canada  requires  a  well-developed
financial  sector.  Over  our  history,  our  financial  markets  and  institutions  have  developed  to
support  the  free  flow  of  capital  and  trade. A  strong  macrofinancial  policy  framework  and  our
flexible  exchange  rate  have  contributed  importantly  to  this  financial  deepening.  Moreover,  this
financial deepening has, in turn, enhanced the transmission of monetary policy and improved the
functioning of the flexible exchange rate.
Our financial system has evolved to provide the safe and efficient intermediation of foreign capital
flows. In addition, the stability of the Canadian financial system and the credibility of Canadian
economic and political institutions has allowed domestic firms and governments to issue debt
abroad in Canadian dollars.
With  the  adoption  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate  in  1950  and  again  in  1970,  financial  markets  in
Canada  came  into  being  not  only  to  trade  currencies,  but  also  to  help  manage  the  risk
associated with the floating currency. These markets remained relatively thin in the 1970s and
1980s, and the Bank of Canada had to intervene on an ongoing basis to provide liquidity and
reduce volatility. However, by the 1990s, this intervention ended as the foreign exchange market
and forward FX and FX swap and interest rate swap markets all became much deeper and more
liquid.
  These  markets  allow  Canadian  firms  to  manage  exchange  rate  risk  and  other  risks
associated with international transactions at relatively low cost.
22
Canada’s experience indicates that having a market-determined exchange rate, especially with
an inflation target—in conjunction with a robust financial regulatory and supervisory framework
and  sustainable  fiscal  policy—fosters  financial  development.  In  other  words,  markets  become
more complete. The intermediation of foreign capital flows becomes safer and more efficient and
a country’s ability to issue debt in its own currency increases, thereby reducing the likelihood of
currency mismatches on its balance sheet.
23
The lesson is not unique to Canada. There is much evidence of such financial deepening as
countries adopted monetary policy frameworks that target inflation. Recent Bank research finds
that adopting a monetary policy framework consisting of an inflation target and a more flexible
exchange  rate  has  led  to  an  increase  of  about  10  to  20  per  cent  in  measures  of  financial
development.
 This finding is illustrated in Chart 8.
24
Some  observers  have  expressed  concerns  about  the  impact  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate  on
financial stability, especially in emerging-market economies. They argue these countries should
more  actively  manage  their  exchange  rates  or  impose  capital  controls  because  of  their
underdeveloped financial sectors, their lack of credibility in monetary and fiscal policy and their
widespread use of the US dollar in debt issuance and trade. Consequently, they are exposed to
balance sheet currency mismatches and broader currency risk and are thus vulnerable to wide
swings  in  their  exchange  rates.  In  these  circumstances,  exchange  rates  should  be  managed
judiciously to limit extreme volatility in thin markets. Active use of exchange rate intervention or
capital  controls,  however,  risks  reinforcing  this  second-best  argument  for  such  market
intervention by distorting market incentives and inhibiting the development of financial markets
and institutions that are best suited to mitigate these risks. Clearly, the best solution would be to
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
work toward addressing these shortcomings as Canada and other similar countries have done.
Concluding remarks
Let me conclude. Canada’s long-standing commitment to a flexible exchange rate has served us
well. It has contributed importantly to low and stable inflation and strong and sustainable output
and  employment  growth.  It  has  done  this  by  supporting  and  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of
independent  monetary  policy  and  by  helping  the  economy  adjust  to  external  shocks,  primarily
significant fluctuations in commodity prices.
As you know, we are conducting a formal review of our monetary policy framework leading up to
the 2021 renewal of our inflation-control agreement with the federal government. As part of this
review, we are engaging with academics and other central banks as well as a wide range of
private sector stakeholders and interested Canadians.
While  the  inflation  target  gets  most  of  the  attention,  our  flexible  exchange  rate  is  a  critical
component of the framework and is necessary for its success. We have operated with a largely
market-determined flexible exchange rate for 61 of the past 69 years—by far the longest of any
country.
25
At the same time, we know that the ingredients that have contributed to the success of Canada’s
system  are  not  in  place  everywhere.  Emerging-market  economies  may  need  more  time  to
develop  well-functioning  financial  markets  and  institutions  and  to  achieve  sufficient  policy
credibility to realize the benefits of a floating exchange rate.
26
But Canada’s experience is not unique. Many other countries have learned from our experience
and have realized many of the same benefits I have described today by adopting a framework
anchored on a flexible exchange rate and an inflation target. Just as the gold standard was once
accepted  as  orthodoxy,  this  monetary  policy  framework  has  proven  to  be  the  most  durable
monetary  policy  standard  in  the  post-war  period.  None  of  the  40  or  so  countries  that  have
credibly adopted it has subsequently abandoned it. It has truly withstood the test of time.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Minnie Cui, Hélène Desgagnés, Edouard Djeutem, Jacob Dolinar, Wei Dong,
Geoffrey Dunbar, Natasha Laponce, Amy Li, Eric Santor and Jing Yang for their help in preparing
this speech.
References
Amano,  R.  A.  and  S.  van  Norden.  1995.  “Terms  of  Trade  and  Real  Exchange  Rates:  The
Canadian Evidence.” Journal of International Money and Finance 14 (1): 83–104.
Bank of Canada. 2016. Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target—Background Information.
Bank  of  Canada.  2017.  “Appendix:  Recent  Changes  to  ToTEM.” Monetary  Policy  Report
(October): 24–25.
Blanchard, O. and J. Galí. 2007. “Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model.” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (s1): 35–65.
Bordo, M., T. Gomes and L. Schembri. 2010. “Canada and the IMF: Trailblazer or Prodigal Son?”
Open Economies Review 21 (2): 309–333.
Carney,  M.  2013.  “Canada  Works.”  Speech  to  the  Board  of  Trade  of  Metropolitan  Montréal,
Montréal, May 21.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Cerutti, E., S. Claessens and A. K. Rose. 2019. “How Important Is the Global Financial Cycle?
Evidence from Capital Flows.” IMF Economic Review 67 (1): 24–60.
Champagne, J. and R. Sekkel. 2018. “Changes in Monetary Regimes and the Identification of
Monetary Policy Shocks: Narrative Evidence from Canada.” Journal of Monetary Economics 99
(November): 72–87.
Cui, M. Forthcoming. “Exchange rates and commodity prices: inflation targeting or oil prices?”
Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note.
Devereux,  M.  B.,  W.  Dong  and  B.  Tomlin.  2017.  “Importers  and  Exporters  in  Exchange  Rate
Pass-Through  and  Currency  Invoicing.” Journal of International Economics  105  (March):  187–
204.
Djeutem, E. and G. R. Dunbar. 2018. “Uncovered Return Parity: Equity Returns and Currency
Returns.” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2018–22.
Dodge, D. 2007. “The Importance of Appropriate Exchange Rate Regimes.” Speech to the 46th
ACI Financial Markets Association World Congress, Montréal, May 4.
Dorich,  J.,  M.  K.  Johnston,  R.  R.  Mendes,  S.  Murchison  and  Y.  Zhang.  2013.“ToTEM  II:  An
Updated Version of the Bank of Canada’s Quarterly Projection Model.” Bank of Canada Technical
Report No. 100.
Dunbar,  G.  R.  and  Li,  A.  Q.  forthcoming.  “The  Effects  of  Inflation  Targeting  for  Financial
Development.” Bank of Canada Staff Analytical Note.
Friedman,  M.  1953.  “The  Case  for  Flexible  Exchange  Rates.” Essays  in  Positive  Economics.
University of Chicago Press.
Gopinath,  G.  2017.  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy:  International  Economy  Issues.”  In
Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy  IV,  proceedings  from  a  conference  held  by  the  Peterson
Institute  on  International  Economics,  October.  Washington:  Harvard  and  National  Bureau  of
Economic Research.
Gopinath,  G,  O.  Itskhoki  and  R.  Rigobon.  2010.  “Currency  Choice  and  Exchange  Rate  Pass-
Through.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 304–336.
Hammond, G. (2012). State of the art of inflation targeting. Centre for Central Banking Studies,
Bank of England, 4 (29).
Issa,  R.,  R.  Lafrance  and  J.  Murray.  2008.  “The  Turning  Black  Tide:  Energy  Prices  and  the
Canadian Dollar.” Canadian Journal of Economics. 41 (3): 737–759.
Laidler, D. 1999. “The Exchange Rate Regime and Canada’s Monetary Order.” Bank of Canada
Staff Working Paper No. 1999–7.
Mundell, R. A. 1961. “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas.” American Economic Review 51 (4):
657–665.
Murchison, S. and A. Rennison. 2006. “ToTEM: The Bank of Canada’s New Quarterly Projection
Model.” Bank of Canada Technical Report No. 97.
Murray, J. 2000. “Why Canada needs a flexible exchange rate.” The North American Journal of
Economics and Finance 11(1):41–60
Obstfeld, M., J. D. Ostry and M. S. Qureshi. 2019. “A Tie that Binds: Revisiting the Trilemma in
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Emerging Market Economies.” Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (2): 279–293.
Patterson, L. 2016. “Adjusting to the Fall in Commodity Prices: One Step at a Time.” Speech to
the Edmonton Chamber of Commerce, Edmonton, Alberta, March 30.
Poloz, S. S. 2014. “Float of the Loonie.” Speech to the Société de développement économique
de Drummondville, Drummondville, Quebec, September 16.
Powell, J. 2005. A History of the Canadian Dollar. Ottawa: Bank of Canada.
Rey,  H.  2013.  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  The  Global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary  Policy
Independence.” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium: 285–333.
Rose,  A.  K.  2014.  “Surprising  Similarities:  Recent  Monetary  Regimes  of  Small  Economies.”
Journal of International Money and Finance 49 (Part A): 5–27.
Schembri, L. L. 2016. “Stress Prevention: Central Banks and Financial Stability.” Speech at the
Joint  Workshop:  Bank  of  Canada,  International  Monetary  Fund,  Centre  for  International
Governance Innovation, and Peterson Institute for International Economics, Ottawa, 6 May.
Shambaugh, J. C. 2004. “The Effect of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 119 (1): 301–352.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Rose (2014) finds that the monetary policy frameworks consisting of an inflation target and a flexible exchange
rate have been the most stable since the global financial crisis. He also finds this combination has proven to be
a very durable framework overall because no country has yet to abandon it under duress.
The Bank of Canada has undertaken extensive work to model the Canadian dollar, including Amano and Van
Norden (1995); Issa, Lafrance and Murray (2008); and Djeutem and Dunbar (2018). All find an important role for
commodity prices in the determination of the Canadian exchange rate.
Our inflation target is flexible. While price stability is the primary goal, the path for the policy rate and the horizon
for returning inflation to target are chosen to limit undue volatility in output and employment as well as an
excessive buildup in financial vulnerabilities. For more information, see Bank of Canada (2016).
The exchange rate is, by definition, the relative price of the Canadian dollar compared with another currency,
most often the US dollar. Therefore, global forces that influence the value of the US dollar would also affect the
exchange rate.
This figure is obtained using monthly data on annual consumer price index inflation for all items. Data are from
Statistics Canada.
The joint inflation-control agreement between the Bank of Canada and the federal government commits both
parties to the inflation target and provides political legitimacy. The federal fiscal consolidation, which began in
earnest in the aftermath of the Mexican peso crisis of December 1994, when the Canadian dollar was also
severely affected, enhanced the credibility of the inflation target.
These advantages strengthen the traditional argument (Mundell 1961) for Canada being an optimal currency
area. See Carney (2013) for a broader discussion of these advantages, especially those related to the high
degree of interprovincial trade and the strength of the financial system. In practice, the optimal currency area
should  be  the  nation  state  (Laidler  1999)  because  its  citizens  should  decide  its  monetary  policy  goal  and
framework.
See Powell (2005) for further information about the circumstances leading to these changes in exchange rate
regimes in Canada. The Canadian experience had important implications not only for the International Monetary
Fund and the Bretton Woods system, but also for macroeconomic theory and policy in open economies (Bordo,
Gomes and Schembri 2010).
This argument that a flexible exchange rate is less effective in insulating the domestic economy from external
financial shocks rather than real ones makes the case for developing and consistently implementing global
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
minimum  standards  for  financial  regulation  and  supervision.  This  process  is  being  led  by  the  G20  and
coordinated by the Financial Stability Board. See Schembri (2016) for further details.
In addition, Cerutti, Claessens and Rose (2019) uncover little evidence of a global financial cycle that drives
capital flows.
Poloz  (2014)  offers  useful  supporting  evidence.  Also  see  Murray  (2000)  who  compares  terms  of  trade
movements in Canada and the United States in response to commodity price changes.
This counterfactual exercise was conducted using the Bank’s ToTEM model. See Murchison and Rennison
(2006), Dorich et al. (2013), and Bank of Canada (2017) for a description of ToTEM.
The results from this counterfactual exercise are illustrative and are likely larger than what would have been the
case if Canada had had a pegged exchange rate with the US dollar at the time of the oil price decline because
expectations about the conduct of monetary policy would have been different.
The actual monetary and exchange rate response to the oil price shock provides an example of the “divine
coincidence”  (Blanchard  and  Galí  2007).  By  attempting  to  maintain  stable  inflation,  monetary  policy  helped
stabilize output and employment.
See Patterson (2016) for more details on the adjustment of the Canadian economy to the 2014–15 oil price
shock.
This dominant currency argument applies primarily to exports because the domestic price of imports would be
affected by exchange rate movements and the volume of imports would adjust.
Devereux, Dong and Tomlin (2017) find that, by value, 88 per cent of Canadian imports were invoiced in US
dollars over the period from September 2002 to June 2008. Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon (2010) find 96 per
cent of Canada’s exports to the United States over the 1994–2005 period were priced in US dollars.
In other words, the Bank of Canada’s reaction function to various shocks was not well understood.
The delineation of roles between monetary policy and the exchange rate corresponds to the concept of policy
assignment of Mundell (1961).
See Champagne and Sekkel (2018) for more details.
In both Canada and Australia, the correlation coefficients between the exchange rate and the commodity price
index increased significantly after inflation targeting was put in place: from –0.73 to 0.84 in Canada, from 0.51 to
0.84 in Australia and from 0.35 to 0.49 in Chile. All of these correlation changes are statistically significant at the
1 per cent level. See Cui (forthcoming) for further details. Note part of the increased correlation in the Canadian
case reflects the increasing importance of oil exports over the sample. See Issa, Lafrance and Murray (2008) for
more details.
Canadian government policy now restricts such interventions to the most exceptional circumstances.
Dodge (2007) explains that maintaining a fixed exchange rate may require controls on both the financial and real
sides of the economy. Thus, a flexible exchange rate would preclude the need for such intervention.
See Dunbar and Li (forthcoming) for more details. They find that the benefits in terms of financial development
are  largest  for  early  adopters  of  inflation  targeting—for  example,  Canada, Australia  and  New  Zealand.  The
sample was of 30 countries that adopted inflation targeting between 1980 and 2016.
Canada is perhaps the best example of the outcomes predicted by Milton Friedman (1953) in his well-known
article, “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates.”
Dodge (2007) cogently argues that many countries should strive to achieve a well-functioning flexible exchange
rate because it is a key component of a market-based liberalized trade and financial order that will promote
global economic growth and prosperity.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
