Jon Nicolaisen: Will debt be reduced?
Speech by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the
Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 9 April 2019.
Accompanying slides of the speech.
Why do we have debt?
 Nearly  50  years  ago,  on  23  December  1969,  Phillips  Petroleum  informed  the  Norwegian
authorities of a major oil discovery on the Norwegian shelf. When it came time to develop the
shelf, the Norwegian government decided to invest through direct ownership, financing its direct
investment in oil activities with foreign borrowing. Between 1973 and 1979, Norway’s public debt
soared, and Norway’s current account deficit climbed to more than 10 percent of GDP.
The project was risky. Up until 1972, oil prices had hovered around USD 2 per barrel. The cost of
producing Middle Eastern oil was a fraction of this, while production costs in the North Sea were
far higher. Even so, the Norwegian authorities took a chance and started to develop the North
Sea with borrowed capital. Today, it is safe to say that this decision was a good one.
Why do we borrow? The fundamental reason is that borrowing – credit – makes it possible to
bring forward consumption and investment. Credit enabled Norway to finance its investment in
the oil sector. Credit enables consumers to buy a home early in the life cycle rather than waiting
until middle age. Credit can be used to finance education, a car and a place to live while we are
young and enables us to enjoy the benefits while earning money to pay for them. Over the past
century, a modern financial system has evolved that provides ample access to credit. A well-
developed credit market is an important part of a well-functioning economy.
There is another side of the coin: Once we have incurred a debt, it remains with us. The debt
must be repaid – with interest. We might say that while credit is an unvarnished good, debt is a
necessary evil. Paying for bread already eaten can be tough.
When we borrow money, we draw up a repayment plan with the bank. Implicit in this plan are a
number of expectations – regarding our future earnings, net worth and interest rates. If these
expectations pan out, the plan succeeds. We arrive at the desired outcome. And many times, the
future turns out even better than expected. In recent decades, house prices have risen and with
them our wealth. Income growth in Norway has been high and has benefited nearly everyone. At
the same time, interest rates have fallen to historically low levels. This has made a high debt
burden easier to bear.
In forming our expectations, we often look in the rear-view mirror. As anyone knows who has
driven a car, mirrors are important. But if you only look back in the mirror, you will land in the
ditch.  That  is  also  the  way  it  is  with  expectations.  If  we  become  overly  concerned  with  past
events, we may miss signals about what lies ahead.
So the question we must ask is: is household debt in Norway based on unrealistic expectations?
Will debt be reduced?
How did we get here? 
Debt takes various forms. An important distinction is made between public and private debt.
Norway’s public debt is low at present and its assets in the Government Pension Fund Global
(GPFG)  are  substantial.  The  return  on  the  Fund  is  a  source  of  large  annual  government
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
revenues.  This  year,  transfers  from  the  Fund  account  for  one  sixth  of  central  government
spending. On the other hand, private debt is high, both from a historical perspective and relative
to other countries.
Chart 1: Record-high private debt
This chart shows private debt in Norway relative to GDP all the way back to 1830, a period of
nearly two centuries. We see that debt has multiplied. The average debt of households is more
than twice their disposable income. This debt comprises mostly residential mortgages. For those
under age 40, average debt is well over three times their income.
How did we get here?
Over  the  past  150  years,  something  has  happened  to  the  Norwegian  national  character.  In
Ibsen’s A Doll’s House, Helmer says: “There can be no freedom or beauty about a home life that
depends on borrowing and debt.” Helmer was probably harsh, even for his time. Even then it was
fairly inconceivable for most people to finance a home purchase without taking out a substantial
mortgage. Today we have few scruples left, and we have never borrowed as much as we do
now.
The striking pattern in the chart applies to more countries than Norway. This pattern is described
in detail in the well-known book about financial crises by the American professors Reinhart and
Rogoff, This Time Is Different.  Debt levels fluctuate substantially over time, but the cycle is very
long. It may take several generations of debt accumulation before a sudden adjustment takes
place  –  usually  owing  to  some  economic  shock.  According  to  Reinhart  and  Rogoff,  crises
generally occur when most people stop expecting them – often because one factor or another
leads many to assume that economic mechanisms have changed. But they seldom have. The
adjustment comes, and usually out of the blue.
1
In Norway, such major corrections have only occurred twice over the past 120 years. The first
time was after the Wall Street crash in October 1929. The deleveraging that followed is known as
the  Great  Depression.  The  second  time  we  experienced  a  correction,  but  on  a  substantially
smaller scale, was during the banking crisis around 1990. The backdrop was the fall in the oil
price  in  1986  and  the  sharp  jump  in  interest  rates  in  Europe  following  German  reunification.
Those of us born before 1970 clearly remember the banking crisis and drop in house prices in
the early 1990s. That is a lesson that nonetheless is gradually withering away.
Chart 2 Total debt has barely budged
Global debt soared ahead of the financial crisis in 2008. In its wake, a process of private sector
deleveraging started in many countries, such as the UK and the US. At the same time, however,
government borrowing was increased to address the banking crisis and to cushion the economic
impact of private sector deleveraging. The end result now a decade later is rather disheartening.
Total debt in Europe and the US has barely budged. At the same time, in other parts of the world,
Asia in particular, debt is on the rise. Total global debt has never been higher than it is today. But
the debt has shifted between countries and sectors.
Chart 3 High private debt in Northern Europe
In Southern Europe, there have been wide swings in private sector debt over the past 20 years.
From the end of the 1990s, economic growth was strong, but mainly driven by public and private
debt-financed  consumption  and  investment.  The  financial  crisis  brought  it  down  with  a  crash.
Expectations  did  not  pan  out.  Since  then,  private  debt  in  these  countries  has  fallen  sharply.
Public debt has continued to rise.
The countries in Central Europe stand out. Debt has risen gradually, but without wide swings.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Between  these  countries  and  Scandinavia,  there  are  some  institutional  differences.  Housing
markets, welfare programmes and pension systems are organised differently. In addition, history
and culture may play an important role. Perhaps, in view of recent history, German households
are more savings-prone than others.
Elsewhere in Northern Europe, private debt, and household debt in particular, has risen sharply in
recent  decades.  Our  part  of  the  world  became  the  champions  of  globalisation.  We  had  the
winning combination: highly educated labour, open economies with access to a large European
market and, in Norway’s case, abundant natural resources.
Our  group  of  countries  is  characterised  by  solid  government  finances.  Public  debt  has  fallen
through the entire period under consideration. At the same time, the countries in Northern Europe
have amassed substantial financial assets, either in public or in private hands.
Chart 4 Substantial wealth – different composition
We often think that Norway really stands out, with its big sovereign wealth fund and substantial
external  assets.  But  along  many  dimensions  we  are  actually  fairly  similar  to  our  closest
neighbours.  Sweden,  Denmark  and  the  Netherlands  also  have  considerable  savings.  In  these
countries, however, saving takes place in private pension funds.
Throughout Northern Europe, pension savings entitle us all to a future income flow, whether this
saving takes place in a public scheme or through compulsory pension agreements. The security
this entails also enables households to bring forward a considerable portion of their consumption
by borrowing, and to do so willingly. Together with solid income growth and low interest rates,
this has fuelled a systematically faster rise in private debt levels than in income.
Households  with  faith  in  the  future  borrow  and  invest.  We  borrow  today,  because  we  are
confident that the income will come tomorrow.
How can debt be reduced?
While the financial crisis in 2008 brought debt growth to a sudden halt in some countries, debt
growth continues to outpace income growth for Norwegian households. This can hardly go on
forever.
If debt needs to be reduced, the question is how?
Sovereign  borrowers  can  levy  taxes  and  thereby  have  a  reliable  source  of  revenue.  Even  so,
being the creditor of a sovereign can be risky.
In 1918, after the Russian Revolution, the Bolsheviks repudiated all debt issued by the previous
regime.  French  investors,  among  them  many  small  savers,  held  nearly  half  of  the  Russian
national debt at the beginning of the First World War. They were among the first big losers of the
2
Russian Revolution.
In  the  inter-war  period,  these  losses  had  consequences  for  French  foreign  policy.  France
became a fierce opponent of the Soviet regime. The losses on Tsarist bonds may have also
contributed to France’s unwillingness to restructure German debt after the war. Germany’s debt
burden contributed to the hyperinflation of the 1920s and the fall of the Weimar Republic. Now, on
the evening of 9 April, 79 years after the German invasion of Norway, we can conclude that debt
m have fateful consequences.
After  Boris  Yeltsin  raised  the  Russian  flag  in  1991,  the  French  creditors  returned.  Old  bond
certificates were retrieved from drawers. A final settlement was agreed in 1996. Around 300 000
persons shared a USD 400 million payout from the Russian government – a little over USD 1 000
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
for each recipient. In the meantime, many years of high inflation had reduced the real value of the
3
original debt to a fraction.
History is replete with examples of sovereigns that have reduced the real value of their debt by
printing money to inflate it away. Debt is ordinarily a fixed nominal amount. As long as debt is in
the  country’s  own  currency,  sovereigns  can  reduce  their  real  debt  burden  by  inflating  prices.
Holders of that debt then find that its value is falling sharply in real terms, even if the nominal debt
remains in the books. Inflation may thus be a de facto tax on creditors.
Public debt becomes a bigger problem for countries with debt in a foreign currency. A classic
example  is  Argentina’s  US  dollar  debt,  which  domestic  inflation  could  not  reduce.  Greece
experienced similar problems when its nominal GDP fell following the financial crisis. Greece and
Argentina  had  to  undergo  painful  adjustments  to  be  able  to  manage  debt  that  had  become
excessive – to the detriment of their citizens.
Debt incurred by firms can effectively be restructured, at least for those that are organised as
limited  liability  companies.  In  a  bankruptcy,  the  firm’s  debts  are  settled  by  liquidating  the
company’s assets. If there are insufficient assets in the bankruptcy estate to satisfy the creditor’s
claim, the creditor must absorb the loss.
Speedy and efficient liquidation of insolvent companies is crucial for the economy’s overall ability
to restructure, innovate and grow. This is closely related to creditor protection. Creditors enjoy
high  standing  in  Norwegian  legislation.  High  creditor  protection  makes  it  relatively  easy  for
creditors to demand liquidation when the conditions are met. As long as the legal system and
administrators in bankruptcy function as intended, the creditors may realise their claims on the
estate and resources are freed up for society. It is essential that resources – labour, skills and
capital – that are tied up in an unprofitable business are freed up for new activities. This also
provides  adequate,  if  painful,  adjustment  in  a  crisis.  The  downturn  is  shortened,  and  the
economy gets back on its feet faster.
Household debt  is  harder  to  restructure.  Norwegian  households  can  settle  debt  by  liquidating
their assets, but this usually only takes place after the borrower dies.  Before that, the rule is that
debt follows you to your grave.
4
Norway  has  a  Debt Settlement  Act.  Very  few  would  voluntarily  petition  to  enter  into  a  debt
settlement arrangement. While some of the debt may be forgiven, such an arrangement involves
garnishment of wages, down to the minimum for necessities. Many of those who enter into such
an arrangement in Norway struggle with debts incurred while self-employed.
Recent years have seen a sharp rise in consumer debt. Defaulting on this sort of debt is much
more common than defaulting  on  a  residential  mortgage.  Default  does  not  mean  that  lenders
forfeit their money. If a borrower defaults on consumer debt, the creditor can have the debtor’s
wages garnished. Sale of  assets  may  be  necessary  to  avoid  a  debt  settlement  arrangement.
This gives lenders strong protection – also those handsomely compensated for the risk by the
high interest rates they charge on unsecured household loans. Creditor protection is intended to
induce  prudence  among  borrowers,  since  they  know  that  the  debt  will  have  to  be  repaid.
Paradoxically, this may make it just a little too attractive to promote this kind of credit.
Mortgage debt normally entails sound collateral for the lender. Nevertheless, in downturns when
property  prices  fall  sharply,  such  debt  may  be  difficult  to  manage.  If  many  people  try  to
deleverage  at  the  same  time  by  selling  their  homes,  prices  and  collateral  values  will  fall.  If
collateral values fall sharply, it becomes difficult to restructure debt.
What is the significance of the housing market?
Nearly 90 percent of household debt is mortgaged using property as collateral. And debt growth
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
largely tracks house prices. So despite the substantial rise in consumer debt in recent years, the
big picture continues to be dominated by mortgage debt. As we invest so heavily in housing –
primarily using borrowed money – house prices are a key determinant of our net wealth.
It is often said that people in Norway own their homes. Reality is slightly more nuanced. Twenty-
three percent of Norwegian households rent the home in which they live. However, it has long
been a cross-party objective for people to be able to own their home if they wish.
Chart 5: Strong house price inflation
As we can see from the chart, inflation-adjusted house prices have fluctuated over the past 150
years.  House  prices  reached  a  preliminary  peak  in  1899,  the  year  before  the  housing  market
crash in Kristiania (the name of Oslo at the time), falling thereafter, especially during and after the
two world wars. If you had bought a home just before the Kristiania crash, it would have taken
more than 80 years for you to recoup your investment. And after the fall in house prices at the
end of the 1980s, 12 years passed before prices returned to 1987 levels.
Following the banking crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, house prices took off and in real terms
are now more than twice as high as before the housing bubble burst at the end of the 1980s. A
home  purchase  has  been  for  many  years  an  exceptionally  good  investment.  Thanks  to  rapid
house price inflation, many of us have accumulated considerable wealth – at least on paper.
Chart 6: How much housing can an average wage buy?
In the most of the past century, Norwegians experienced a substantial rise in prosperity. Larger
and cheaper housing was a significant contributor. This meant an ordinary wage could by more
housing space, even though the real price of housing also rose sharply. But since the beginning
of the 1990s, the average house has become more expensive also relative to income. Or to put it
another way, an average wage can buy less than half as many square metres today than it could
in 1991.
Chart 7: Higher debt – lower interest burden
Since our living conditions are generally not more cramped than before, you might think that we
have to spend more of our income on financing our homes. But this is not the case. Although we
hold record-high levels of debt, our interest burden is not heavier now than it was 30 years ago.
Interest rates have fallen. Since income has risen markedly at the same time, principal payments
on large loans have also been manageable. Norwegian households have responded by taking out
increasingly larger mortgages to finance increasingly more expensive housing.
This would not have been possible without access to cheap credit. Low interest rates have made
it possible to maintain housing quality, even though house prices have crept steadily upwards.
Moreover,  lower  interest  rates,  longer  repayment  periods  and  the  introduction  of  interest-only
periods have made it possible to borrow more without squeezing liquidity. This has also enabled
prospective  homebuyers  to  submit  a  bid  higher  than  they  normally  would  have  done,  with
increasingly higher prices as a result.
Globally,  debt  is  matched  by  assets.  What  some  people  borrow,  others  save.  Some  wish  to
bring forward consumption and investment, others to save for old age. The global fall in interest
rates reflects the emergence of a considerable savings glut, especially after the countries in Asia
joined the world market in earnest after 2000.
The decline in interest rates is thus an international phenomenon, driven by falling inflation, lower
growth and increased global saving. Interest rates in Norway cannot diverge too far from global
rates. An excessively strong krone would then lead to a fall in activity and deflation.
The main task of monetary policy is to maintain the value of money by keeping inflation low and
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
stable. Inflation targeting is forward-looking and flexible so that it can contribute to high and stable
output  and  employment  and  to  counteracting  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  Monetary
policy  cannot  assume  primary  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  But  as  we  are  now  in  the
process of raising the policy rate somewhat, this could also help curb debt growth.
Will debt be reduced?
It is easy to imagine that house prices will just continue to rise – as they have done for more than
25  years.  Rising  income  and  government  wealth  have  gone  hand  in  hand  with  rising  house
prices  and  higher  household  debt.  But  Norway’s  experience  from  the  years  after  oil  was
discovered, and in particular from the years following the banking crisis at the beginning of the
1990s, cannot serve as reliable guidance for what we can expect in the future.
Thanks to the proceeds from oil activities, income and wealth in Norway have risen rapidly over
the past 25 years. This chapter of our history is unlikely to repeat itself. It will take some doing for
Norway to find a similar source of economic prosperity and growth for the next 25 years. In the
recent past, the contributions from the GPFG to government finances have also increased. Now
the GPFG is close to its peak, and the contributions from the GPFG are not likely to become
much  larger  than  they  are  today.  Even  though  Norway  will  continue  to  be  among  the  world’s
wealthy  countries,  we  will  likely  see  an  increased  resemblance  between  Norway  and  its
neighbours in future.
In 1988, the average bank lending rate was above 16 percent. Lending rates remained in double-
digits until well into the 1990s. Today, residential mortgage rates are at a record low – below 3
percent. We seem to be entering a period of slightly higher interest rates, which may increase
interest  burdens  and  curb  household  borrowing.  Regardless  of  what  happens  in  the  years  to
come, however, interest rates cannot fall as far as in the past 25 years. Those who borrow today
must consider whether they are taking on an amount of debt they can live with over time. The
rear-view mirror will be poor guidance going forward.
Experts and economists like myself have been mistaken before, but there is one thing I am quite
sure about: Nothing grows forever. Expectations shift. When borrowers discover that prospects
are  not  as  bright  as  before,  they  will  become  more  cautious.  So,  if  anything,  Norwegian
household debt will be reduced, perhaps not in absolute terms, but at least relative to income.
The higher the level of initial debt, the greater the risk to the Norwegian economy. A sudden debt
correction would then be more likely, potentially resulting in a sharp fall in GDP.
When  economic  conditions  deteriorate,  good  credit  becomes  bad  debt.  Households  will  then
deleverage and cut back on consumption, adversely affecting businesses. It will then take time
for growth to recover, as we are witnessing in many European countries that continue to struggle
following the financial crisis.
Norway  has  a  well-equipped  toolkit  for  counteracting  crises.  There  is  room  for  manoeuvre  in
monetary and fiscal policy. Norwegian authorities have also introduced a number of measures to
reduce the vulnerability of the economy to shocks, especially in the wake of the financial crisis in
2008  and  2009.  Banks  are  required  to  hold  more  equity  and  more  liquid  assets,  which
strengthens banks’ resilience. Borrowers are also regulated. The regulation on requirements for
new residential mortgage loans was first introduced in 2015. The regulation limits the level of
debt  a  household  can  take  on,  reducing  the  number  of  vulnerable  households.  Recently,
limitations on consumer credit have also been introduced. Together with room for manoeuvre in
fiscal policy and a gradual normalisation of the policy rate, we may believe that these measures
will be sufficient to avoid a new crisis.
Debt will probably be reduced, but the timing and extent are uncertain. If we are fortunate, there
will be a gradual adjustment without major shocks. But we cannot assume that this will happen. If
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
debt now still continues to rise, further measures may be necessary.
The  economy  must  also  tolerate  a  sharp  correction  if  a  shock  should  occur.  The  Norwegian
economy  is  resilient.  Businesses  have  shown  the  ability  to  restructure,  innovate  and  grow,
Norway’s  government  finances  are  sound,  the  labour  market  is  flexible  and  wage  formation
functions well. Should a crisis come our way, these are the qualities we must draw on to get
through it as painlessly as possible.
1
2
3
4
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2011): This Time Is Different, Princeton University Press.
In all, the losses may have equalled nearly 20 percent of France’s GDP at the time. By comparison, the GPFG’s
losses on equities was around 20 percent of Norway’s GDP.
Clarke, Antoine (2014): The Death of French Savings, the Russian Bonds Story 1880–1996; Oosterlinck, Kim
and John Landon-Lane (2006): “Hope springs eternal – French bondholders and the Soviet repudiation (1915–
1919)”, Review of Finance, vol. 10, issue 4, 507–535, Pavlovsky, Leo and Harold G. Moulton (1924): Russian
Debts and Russian Reconstruction, McGraw-Hill, New York.
An exception is that households are liable for joint debt held by a housing cooperative only as long as they own
shares in the cooperative.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
