  Paris Europlace International Financial Forum – Paris, 9 July 2019 
New Frontiers in Finance 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
               Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr; +33 6 88 56 54 03).
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Page 1 sur 5 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  today:  this  Paris  -  Europlace  International 
Financial Forum is more and more “the place to be”, as France and Paris are 
increasingly  stimulating  first-movers  in  Europe.  The  theme  of  this  Forum  – 
“New Frontiers in Finance” – prompts us to look towards new territories that 
we  have  to  explore  and  conquer.  Regarding  finance,  I  will  focus  on  two  of 
them: digitalisation and green finance.  But before looking at the future, let me 
stress two prerequisites for the present.  
I. Two prerequisites for the present  
 My  first  message  is  to  welcome  the  new  European  team,  nominated  in 
Brussels last week, starting with Christine Lagarde and Ursula von der Leyen. 
Once again, albeit at the last minute, albeit under the threat of a crisis, Europe 
has  proved  itself  to  be  decisive  and  innovative.  Now,  it  is  time  to  begin  the 
fundamental work on a true financial Eurosystem. Let us look beyond Brexit, 
and  beyond  the  somewhat  disappointing  debates  on  the  euro  area  budget. 
The  top  priority  on  the  European  agenda  should  be  a  Financing  Union  for 
Investment  and  Innovation,  which  will  channel  our  abundant  private  savings 
through  a  combined  Banking  Union  and  Capital  Markets  Union.  Firms  need 
this  in  order  to  raise  equity  and  find  European  venture  capital;  keeping  a 
European  capacity  in  investment  banking  is  a  strategic  imperative.  Financial 
players need this in order to conduct cross-border mergers: European banking 
consolidation is overdue, and it is indispensable, not to reduce competition – 
quite the opposite – but to reach the critical mass necessary to make digital 
investments and allow savings to circulate. And, lastly, the euro area needs it 
in order to finally have an effective economic stabilisation tool to weather the 
shocks  affecting  some  countries:  “private  risk  sharing”  is  effective  between 
states in the United States. If one doesn’t want a fiscal union – duly noted –, 
one  must  make  even  more  resolute  progress  on  the  Capital  Markets  Union. 
We  have  talked  enough  about  this,  and  it  is  now  time  to  take  concrete 
 
measures:  this  must  be  the  ambition  of  the  new  Commission.  The  ECB  will 
support it, and France will be a committed player.  
Page 2 sur 5 
My second prerequisite is the successful implementation of Basel III. It is vital 
that  we  do  not  forget  the  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis,  nor  break  the 
promise  we  made  in  2017.  But  this  transposition  must  be  fair  –  naturally 
involving  the  United  States  –  and  reasonable.  The  first  estimates  of  capital 
requirements  are  premature  and  do  not  give  the  horizon:  Basel  III  will  be 
finalised only in 2027. But our objective and our assessment are crystal clear: 
Basel III is for all French banks compatible with normal allocations of profits to 
reserves  in  the  coming  years,  after  distribution;  in  no  case  will  it  require  a 
dedicated capital increase. 
 II. Taking the digital turn with lucidity 
We obviously all need to make the digital leap. Digitalisation is shaking up the 
way we live and consume, opening up a world of possibilities for corporates 
and customers alike. Worldwide, it clearly represents both an opportunity and 
a  challenge  for  banks,  as  well  as  for  supervisors.  The  ACPR  is  working 
actively  on  these  issues.  Last  year,  it  published  a  discussion  paper  on  the 
implications  of  AI  in  the  financial  sector.  And  this  year,  we  are  working  with 
financial  industry  participants  on  the  implications  of  AI  algorithms  in  three 
topics: AML/CTF, internal models and customer protection.    
Beyond  incumbents, new players  are  now  becoming  increasingly  important. 
Fintechs  are  competing  on  niche  markets.  Yet  they  do  not  have  the  capital 
resources to disrupt incumbent banks and can even be acquired by them. On 
the contrary, Bigtechs do have the potential to fundamentally redefine financial 
intermediation:  they  have  strong  brand  recognition,  a  worldwide  customer 
base and privileged access to cutting-edge technologies. This new situation is 
a  major  challenge  for  regulators  and  supervisors.  Of  course,  financial 
regulation  should  remain  technologically  neutral:  the  basic  principle  “same 
activity, same rules” still applies. This is a good thing for the level playing field. 
Page 3 sur 5 
 
However,  beyond  traditional  financial  regulation,  international  cooperation 
should  be  developed  in  three  areas,  three  cornerstones  of  the  regulation  of 
digital  finance.  First,  cybersecurity  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  a  reliable  and 
sustainable digital future. It is a clear priority of the G7 French Presidency next 
week  in  Chantilly.  Second,  regarding  data  protection,  financial  supervisors 
and authorities in charge of privacy have to invent new ways of cooperation to 
address  data  issues  that  have  become  central  to  financial  services.  Third, 
regarding  competition  and  anti-trust  policies,  situations  where  “the  winner 
takes most” while staying outside the scope of financial regulation should be 
adequately anticipated and addressed. 
 “Stable  coin”  projects,  including  Facebook’s  Libra,  are  a  case  in  point. 
“Stable  coins”  are  quite  different  from  speculative  assets  like  Bitcoins. 
However, regulators will have to keep a very close eye at the global level, and 
believe me, we will do it. France, as Chair of the G7 this year, has created a 
dedicated task force. Our aim is to formulate a response that is common to all 
jurisdictions,  and  holistic  on  all  the  issues.  And  to  quote  only  two  of  many 
requirements:  it  is  imperative  that  the  projects  comply  with  anti-money 
laundering regulations; the anonymity of the users creates heightened risks. 
In addition, if issuers of stable coins also want to offer banking services such 
as deposits,  financial  investments  and  loans,  then they will  have  to obtain  a 
banking  license  in  all  countries  where  they  operate.  Otherwise  it  would  be 
illegal.  We  are  quite  far  from  the  creation  of  a  global  private  currency.  But 
stable coin projects reveal gaps in existing cross-border payment systems.  
Hence,  at  the  European  level,  we  should  aim  at  promoting  a  genuine 
European  strategy  for  retail  payments.  Payments  are  no  longer  a  mere 
boring  back-office  technicality.  They  are  innovative,  and  they  provide  two 
strategic assets: data, and daily customer relations. The raw truth however is 
that  the  European  payments  market  is  already  dominated  by  non-European 
stakeholders. Furthermore, the growing role of non-European digital firms – be 
they  American  or  Chinese  –  offering  payments  solutions  should  be  taken 
seriously. Despite the creativity of the European ecosystem of payments, our 
Page 4 sur 5 
 
market remains too fragmented. Against this background, I call for the creation 
of pan-European payment solutions, building on a common brand and on the 
technical  success  of  the  Target  Instant  Payment  Settlement  infrastructure 
(TIPS)  managed  by  the  Eurosystem.  We  don’t  have  much  time  left,  but 
regulators – starting with the Banque de France – and market players should 
work hand in hand to create a momentum.  
 III. Green finance, “a new frontier for the 21st Century” 
Let me now conclude with some words on green finance. As I once said, it is 
“a new frontier for the 21st Century”. Much has already been undertaken over 
the past few months.  
We  are  currently  witnessing  a  growing  awareness  from  central  banks, 
supervisors and financial institutions about climate-related risks. Clearly, green 
finance and climate risks management have gone from the “nice to have” to 
the  “must  have”,  from  emotion  to  reason.  From  the  point  of  view  of  your 
financial institutions, climate change is no longer confined to Corporate Social 
responsibility  (CSR)  policy.  Concerning  central  banks  and  supervisors,  the 
creation  of  the  Network  of  Central  Banks  and  Supervisors  for  Greening  the 
Financial System (NGFS) in Paris in December 2017 has been a decisive step 
forward.  In  18  months,  this  coalition  of  the  willing  has  increased  from  8 
founding members to over 40 members and observers from all 5 continents, 
with  the  Banque  de  France  acting  as  its  permanent  Secretariat.  This 
momentum has an important meaning: supervisors and central bankers have 
collectively  acknowledged  that  climate  change-related  risks  are  a  source  of 
long-term 
first 
comprehensive  report  issuing  four  recommendations  for  central  banks  and 
supervisors, and two additional recommendations for policy makers.  
the  NGFS  published 
In  April  2019, 
financial  risk. 
its 
Let me now say a few words on the road ahead for us. I will mention three 
priorities for the near future. First, we must rely on enhanced disclosures that 
need  to  be  built  on  sound  taxonomies.  The  taxonomy  published  by  the 
Page 5 sur 5 
 
Technical  Expert  Group  (TEG)  on  Sustainable  Finance  of  the  European 
Commission  three  weeks  ago  [on  18  June]  is  a  welcome  step.  Second,  we 
have  to  better  anticipate  long-term  climate-related  risks,  through  what  I  call 
“the video of the risks”. We must push for building a forward-looking approach 
of  the  impacts  of  climate  risks  through  the  development  of  comprehensive 
climate  stress  tests.  Third,  green  finance  should  mature  and  upgrade  its 
professional  standards.  Financing  needs  for  energy  transition  are  huge;  in 
Europe alone, it is estimated that an additional EUR 177 billion per year will be 
necessary  over  the  period  2021-2030  to  reach  the  EU’s  energy  and  climate 
objectives  for  2030.i  The  European  Green  Bond  Standard  proposed  by  the 
TEG  should  ultimately  help  to  further  develop  the  green  bond  market  and 
channel more investments towards green projects. Let me add that France has 
strengthened  its  role  as  leader  in  green  finance.  Last  week,  Paris  Financial 
Centre players have committed themselves to adopt a carbon exit strategy by 
mid-2020.  
 To  conclude,  let  me  quote  John  F.  Kennedy:  “the  New  Frontier  of  which  I 
speak  is  not  a  set  of  promises  –  it  is  a  set  of  challenges.  […]  I  believe  the 
times  demand  new  invention,  innovation,  imagination,  decision.  I  am  asking 
each  of  you  to  be  pioneers  on  that  New  Frontier.ii”  Today,  almost  60  years 
later, we face other challenges. But let us keep the same energy. Let us not 
think  that  the  battles  have  already  been  lost.  Let  us  break  limits  and  invent 
new  practices  taking  into  account  both  digitalisation  and  climate  change. 
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                            
References 
i Source: European Commission 
ii John F.  Kennedy, Democratic National Convention Nomination Acceptance Address, "The New Frontier", 
delivered 15 July 1960, Memorial Coliseum, Los Angeles 
