Michael Held: SOFR and the transition from LIBOR
Remarks  by  Mr  Michael  Held,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Legal  Group  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the SIFMA C&L Society February Luncheon, New York City, 26
February 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Thank you for that kind introduction, and for the opportunity to speak to you all today.  As always,
my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
1
York or the Federal Reserve System.
When I was thinking about what to talk about today, I recalled how everybody’s favorite question
at these kinds of events is, “What keeps you up at night?”  Of course, at the top of my own list is
whether my daughter is going to get into a good kindergarten in Brooklyn.  But not far below that
is reference rate reform.  Today I’ll keep the former to myself, and speak instead about reference
rates.
It’s  not  just  me  who’s  concerned.    The  Securities  Industry  and  Financial  Markets Association
(SIFMA) named reference rate transition from the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) to its
alternatives  as  one  of  two  leading  fixed-income  market  developments  for  2019.       And  the
Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) has repeatedly identified reference rate transition as
a  financial  stability  risk.     Today  I’d  like  to  give  you  an  update  on  the  state  of  that  transition. 
Here’s the preview: The task is immense.  But it is not insurmountable.  Much work has been
accomplished,  and  much  work  remains.    Every  firm  that  has  exposure  to  LIBOR  needs  to
prepare now for the risk—indeed, the likelihood—that LIBOR will cease in the near future.  I’m
optimistic that we can get there.  But, as Tim Geithner liked to say, hope is not a plan.
How Did We Get into This Fix?
2
3
Before discussing solutions, let’s review what we’re trying to solve.
It became apparent after the financial crisis that LIBOR was being manipulated.  Financial firms
misstated their LIBOR submissions—often in collusion with each other—to make better returns
on their swap books.  During the financial crisis, they also submitted artificially low rates to avoid
signaling  financial  weakness.    Manipulation  was  possible  because  of  the  way  LIBOR
submissions were made.  Banks were asked to estimate the rate at which they could borrow
from other banks, not rates at which they actually borrowed.  Their quotes were hypothetical—
guesses if you will—and were therefore particularly easy to compromise.
At  the  same  time,  the  way  banks  fund  themselves  has  changed.    The  unsecured  London
interbank market, which LIBOR was designed to measure, was active when LIBOR was created,
but that just isn’t how banks finance themselves any more.  The Fed estimates that on a typical
day  there  are  currently  around  six  to  seven  actual  market  transactions—totaling  about  $500
million—that  could  underpin  one-  and  three-month  U.S.  dollar  LIBOR  across  all  of  the  panel
banks.  For the six-month tenor, there are only two or three transactions per day.  At the one-year
tenor the average is one transaction per day, and on many days there are none.    That means
that the majority of panelist submissions each day are based solely on “expert judgment.” 
4
Although  actual  transactions  underlying  LIBOR  have  diminished,  its  use  as  a  benchmark  has
become ubiquitous.  The gross notional value of all financial products tied to U.S. dollar LIBOR is
5
around $200 trillion—about 10 times U.S. GDP.
  That includes $3.4 trillion of business loans,
$1.8 trillion of floating-rate notes and bonds, another $1.8 trillion of securitizations, and $1.3 trillion
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
of consumer loans held by about four million individual retail consumers, including around $1.2
trillion of residential mortgage loans.  The remaining 95% of exposures are derivative contracts,
which we learned in the financial crisis have consequences for both Wall Street and Main Street. 
So, every day, the payments on $200 trillion of exposures are calculated based on a handful of
transactions  worth  a  few  hundred  million  dollars  at  most.    That’s  like  a  very  tall,  very  broad
building built on a very narrow foundation.  Imagine an upside-down pyramid.  It’s not stable, and,
as we will discuss shortly, it’s getting more rickety by the day.  You don’t want to be standing
near it when it comes down.
There is, thankfully, a coordinated global effort to address LIBOR’s shortcomings.  That work has
focused  on  creating  more  reliable  alternatives.    The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)   and  the
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)   have  published  roadmaps  for
reform.  Their shared principle is that benchmarks should be based on observable, arms-length
transactions rather than estimates. 
6
7
To meet this expectation, an FSB steering group has coordinated working groups for each of the
major IBOR benchmarks.  The mandates of these groups are to identify alternative rates and to
begin transitioning to them. 
In 2014 the Federal Reserve convened the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) to
plan the transition away from U.S. dollar LIBOR.    The ARRC conducted two public roundtables,
published  a  written  consultation,  and  created  an  advisory  group  of  end  users  across  market
sectors.    The  ARRC’s  criteria  for  U.S.  dollar  LIBOR’s  replacement  included  methodological
quality,  accountability,  governance,  and  ease  of  implementation.    In  the  end,  the  ARRC
recommended a new rate that the New York Fed had proposed in cooperation with the Treasury
Department’s  Office  of  Financial  Research.       The  new  rate  is  called  the  Secured  Overnight
Financing Rate (SOFR). 
8
9
The  New  York  Fed  has  published  SOFR  every  day  since  early April  of  last  year.
      SOFR
measures  the  cost  of  overnight  borrowings  through  repo  transactions  collateralized  with  U.S.
Treasury securities, which is the deepest and most liquid money market in the U.S.  It is based
on  actual  transactions  and  takes  in  more  transactions  than  any  other  Treasury  repo  rate
available, recently around a trillion dollars each day.  SOFR is relevant to the cost of borrowing
for  a  wide  array  of  market  participants,  was  constructed  to  meet  the  best  practices  for
benchmarks set out by IOSCO, and is built to accommodate future market evolution.
10
I want to pause here to acknowledge that, as an overnight rate, SOFR has been the subject of
criticism for sometimes being volatile from day to day, especially near quarter- and year-end.  I
think such criticism is misplaced.  Most users of SOFR don’t use a single day’s rate to determine
their payments; they use average rates, which are not much affected by daily volatility.
Parallel  work  has  been  going  on  in  other  jurisdictions  whose  currencies  are  used  in  major
benchmarks.  Working groups for sterling, euro, Swiss franc and yen IBORs  have all endorsed
overnight rates as their preferred alternatives to those rates.
   Three of the alternative rates are
(or will be) administered directly by central banks, reflecting the recognition that crucial interest
rate  benchmarks  are  a  public  good,  and  their  integrity  and  sustainability  are  key  to  financial
stability.
11
12
I’ll note that, at the outset of these reform efforts, the idea was not to completely replace LIBOR. 
LIBOR was being reformed to address its weaknesses as far as possible in the expectation that
it could continue to be used.  Efforts to “fix” LIBOR proceeded alongside the program to identify
better  alternatives.    The  idea  was  that  if  there  were  a  more  attractive  alternative,  firms  would
gradually move away from LIBOR of their own accord, with a minimum of disruption, and that
LIBOR then would be seldom, if ever, used.  LIBOR could still be inherently unstable despite the
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
reform efforts.  Perhaps it would go away eventually, maybe dying of loneliness, or perhaps it
would  stagger  on  for  a  small  range  of  transactions—but  in  any  event  it  would  cease  to  be  a
problem.
While  this  work  was  underway,  new  regulations  brought  the  production  of  LIBOR  under  the
supervision of the UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and introduced minimum requirements
for benchmarks used in the EU.  In 2017, Andrew Bailey, the head of the FCA, spotlighted the
possibility that LIBOR itself might cease to exist altogether.
  Bailey announced that the FCA
had been exerting an increasing amount of persuasion to get panel banks to keep submitting
quotes, and had gotten their commitment to continue until the end of 2021.  But he warned that
the FCA could not ensure that LIBOR would be published at all after that.
13
Suddenly, instead of just the general threat that LIBOR could cease to be produced someday,
there was a specific expiration date on the horizon.  The challenge to the market was no longer
to gradually start writing new contracts on alternative rates like SOFR instead of LIBOR, but to
prepare for the risk that LIBOR could entirely cease to exist within a fairly short time frame.  That
was a much bigger job, because when you looked at the underlying contracts that used LIBOR,
they  didn’t  provide  very  well  for  LIBOR  simply  disappearing.    I  blame  the  lawyers,  and  our
congenital  lack  of  imagination.    Even  when  financial  contracts  deal  with  the  possibility  that  a
LIBOR quote might not be available, they seem to have been drafted assuming that the gap is
temporary, not permanent.  In a permanent cessation of LIBOR, the fallback solutions in existing
contracts become impractical or materially change the economics.  That’s a situation that invites
litigation, and in the case of LIBOR that litigation would be on a massive scale.  So while this
prospect might not be unwelcome to certain members of the litigation bar, this is not good news
for those interested in maintaining financial stability. 
For example, many contracts state that if a calculation agent cannot find a LIBOR quote for a
given day on the usual Reuters screen, it will call three large London banks and ask them what
their borrowing rate is for that day—basically try to privately replicate LIBOR.  Imagine if every
calculation agent for every transaction tried to do this every time they had to set LIBOR.  There
would  be  chaos,  especially  when  those  London  banks  had  already  decided  to  get  out  of  the
LIBOR-estimating business.  Why would they even respond?
For some types of transactions—floating-rate notes, for example—there is a further fallback: to
fix the interest rate at whatever the last LIBOR quote was.  This is not a very satisfactory solution
to either the issuers or the borrowers who thought they had an instrument that protected them
against interest rate risk.  Other transactions like syndicated loans may revert to prime rate loans
—again,  not  what  borrowers  may  want.   And,  for  derivatives,  there  simply  may  be  no  further
fallback.    You  can  imagine  the  litigation  risk  when  the  reference  rate  for  a  20-year  contract
disappears and there’s no clear path to replace it. Now imagine 190 trillion dollars’ worth of those
contracts.  This is a DEFCON 1 litigation event if I’ve ever seen one.
Where Are We Now?
Those  are  the  issues  that  the ARRC,  the  other  IBOR  working  groups,  and  central  banks  in
general have confronted over the last few years.  Let me turn now to the work at hand.
There are two urgent tasks for every market participant with LIBOR exposure.  First, if you find
yourself in a hole, stop digging.  What market participants must do right now is stop writing new
contracts on LIBOR and start using SOFR or at least another robust alternative.  And, especially
if  you  need  to  keep  using  LIBOR,  make  sure  your  new  contracts  have  strong  and  workable
fallback  language.    That  was  one  of  the  original  recommendations  the  various  official  sector
groups made as far back as 2013, but the people writing the contracts don’t seem to have been
paying attention.  As I’ll describe in a moment, very soon there will be specific fallback language
that  represents  the  consensus  best  practice  to  use  in  each  type  of  U.S.  dollar  LIBOR-linked
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial product going forward.
The second urgent task is to deal with the trillions of dollars of existing contracts that extend past
2021  and  don’t  have  effective  fallbacks.    That’s  a  more  serious  problem  for  some  types  of
instruments than others.  The large majority of business loans in existence today will mature or
be renegotiated before the end of 2021 in the ordinary course.  So the loans can be converted
entirely to SOFR loans before the clock runs out on LIBOR, or at least fallback provisions can be
added.    There’s  also  good  news  on  derivatives,  relatively  speaking.    A  large  percentage  of
derivative contracts are also shorter-term.  Over-the-counter derivatives that do extend past 2021
can be amended to incorporate new rates and fallback provisions through a protocol procedure
that the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) will put in place.  That’s still a lot
of work for everyone who has LIBOR derivatives, but it’s a relatively clear way forward.  And for
exchange-traded derivatives, the exchanges themselves can specify fallbacks through rulebook
amendments.    The  exchanges  have  indicated  they  will  adopt  the  same  basic  fallback
methodologies as ISDA.  This is all good news.
Consumer  loans  present  different  issues.    The  documentation  generally  gives  the  lender
discretion to unilaterally choose a comparable rate if LIBOR goes away.  That sounds simple. 
But,  in  practice,  the  knot  of  reputational,  operational,  and  legal  considerations  involved  in
changing  the  interest  rate  basis  on  consumer  loans  will  require  attention  and  resources  to
unravel.  And over 40% of LIBOR-based residential mortgage loans currently outstanding extend
past 2021.
One of the more difficult challenges is the one posed by floating-rate notes, securitizations, and
preferred stock whose payments are tied to LIBOR.  These securities either have no fallbacks at
all  to  handle  a  LIBOR  cessation,  or  they  effectively  become  fixed-rate  instruments.   And,  in
practice, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to add the kind of provisions that will be standard for
new issuances going forward.
A  year  after  Andrew  Bailey’s  2017  speech,  he  reiterated  that  firms  should  treat  the
14
discontinuation of LIBOR as an event that will happen and that they should be preparing for it.
  
For my part, that’s also the message I would ask you to take away today.  You can think of this
as a call to arms or as a threat or as simply a warning.  What’s important is that you act on it.  To
tackle  the  issues  a  LIBOR  cessation  presents  for  cash  products,  the  Fed  reconstituted  the
ARRC in 2018 to broaden its membership and its mandate.  “ARRC 2.0” now has dedicated
workgroups for floating-rate notes, syndicated and bilateral business loans, consumer products,
and securitizations.  Those workgroups include market participants that weren’t all members of
“ARRC 1.0” but are active in their specific sectors.  There are also working groups dealing with
legal,  regulatory,  and  accounting  issues.    Thanks  to  these  working  groups,  for  the  first  time
market  participants  and  their  lawyers  now  have  not  just  general  concerns  and  warnings,  but
specific actionable language to react to and start to use in contracts across different products. 
Again, this is good news.
The ARRC’s recommendations are voluntary, and the Federal Reserve is not mandating what
fallbacks to use.  But there’s a lot of value in a common approach.  If LIBOR ceases and different
instruments that use it fall back to different rates or at different times, basis risk will be higher and
hedging  more  difficult.    So  the  ARRC  started  its  fallback  work  by  adopting  a  set  of  guiding
principles to apply across all product types.
   Among other things, those guidelines suggested
that,  to  the  extent  practicable  and  appropriate,  market  participants  should  (1)  maintain
consistency of fallbacks across asset classes and minimize basis risk between products; (2)
use SOFR or a benchmark based on SOFR as the replacement rate; (3) minimize value transfer
over  the  life  of  the  contract  if  the  fallback  is  triggered;  and  (4)  include  specific  triggers  that
activate the fallback.  
15
Following these overall principles, the ARRC commenced consultations on specific fallbacks for
16
 4 / 8
17
BIS central bankers' speeches
18
 and securitizations.
  bilateral
four  types  of  cash  products:  floating-rate  notes,
business loans,
   In general, the consultations proposed that following a
trigger event—such as LIBOR being discontinued—the instrument would instead pay interest at
SOFR  or  a  rate  based  on  SOFR,  adjusted  so  the  new  rate  is  comparable  to  the  old  one. 
ARRC’s  consultations  recognized  that  different  solutions  may  be  necessary  or  preferable  for
different markets and products, but promoted common approaches as much as possible. 
  syndicated  business  loans,
19
16
17
The comment periods for the consultations have closed, and the ARRC is now reviewing the
feedback.  Final recommendations are expected to be published very soon.
You may have noticed that I didn’t mention an ARRC consultation on fallbacks for derivatives,
even  though  ARRC’s  original  purpose  was  to  address  benchmark  transition  in  derivative
products.  That’s because the FSB’s Official Sector Steering Group asked ISDA to do that for
derivatives on all of the IBORS.  So, alongside the ARRC consultations for cash products, ISDA
20
has  been  conducting  consultations  on  fallback  provisions  for  IBORS  in  multiple  currencies,
and has said it will be putting out a U.S. dollar LIBOR consultation in the near future.  One of the
key  questions  being  discussed  is  how  closely  aligned  the  cash  products  fallbacks  and  the
derivatives fallbacks will be.
The  ARRC  has  also  been  an  essential  vehicle  for  engaging  the  official  sector  to  address
regulatory  obstacles  to  LIBOR  transition.    For  example,  replacing  fallback  language  in  legacy,
uncleared swaps presents a host of issues under the swap margin rules.  ARRC’s regulatory
working group is actively engaged with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal
Reserve,  and  other  regulators  to  address  those.    On  the  accounting  side,  the  Financial
Accounting Standards Board has ruled that SOFR is eligible for hedge accounting treatment.
While all the consulting and coordinating and kvetching has been going on, market participants
have  gone  ahead  and  begun  the  transition  to  actually  using  SOFR.    SOFR  swaps  are  being
quoted  by  dealers  and  cleared  by  central  counterparties.    CME  Group  and  LCH  are  clearing
SOFR-linked swaps and are moving quickly to using SOFR for discounting curves and interest
on collateral. CME Group and Intercontinental Exchange have listed SOFR-linked futures. Over
$56 billion in floating-rate financing based on SOFR has been issued in all sectors of the debt
markets.
   And the Treasury Borrowing Advisory Committee has discussed the possibility of
issuing SOFR-linked floating-rate notes.
21
These are all reasons for optimism.  But I’m a realist—some would say a pessimist.  It is not yet
time to chill the champagne.  As I said at the beginning of my remarks, much work remains.
Life After LIBOR and How We Get There
Looking forward, the risks from LIBOR transition are both macro- and micro-prudential—a risk to
the system is always built up from risks to individual firms.  On the macro scale, as I mentioned
earlier,  the  FSOC  has  identified  reference  rate  transition  as  a  financial  stability  risk.    The
President of the New York Fed, John Williams, was just appointed co-chair of the FSB’s steering
group.  He succeeds Fed Chairman Jerome Powell in that role.  From the beginning, the Fed’s
mantra has been that the transition away from LIBOR has to be led by the private sector.  But the
Fed clearly has a role to play.  The New York Fed will continue to be engaged through our work
with  the ARRC,  our  coordination  with  the  other  international  transition  efforts,  and  our  role  as
administrator of our own benchmark rates.
At the micro level, sound risk management demands that every firm assess its vulnerabilities if
LIBOR  ceases  to  be  published,  and  engage  in  appropriate  planning  to  address  those  risks
across its balance sheet.  Firms must have a safe and sound process for addressing all aspects
of this transition.  They also need to select alternative rates that are robust and resilient, in line
with current best practice.  At the Fed, we’ve been thinking about this risk across all portfolios,
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
from small community banks to the largest institutions.  Our focus so far has been on outreach
and education.  We have been encouraging examiners to raise awareness with their supervised
institutions, and we’ve provided them with some tools to enage in this discussion.  We’ve also
been reviewing our own contracts that use reference rates to make sure we’re walking the talk.
Anecdotally, the largest financial firms seem to be more aware of the challenges than smaller
ones.  Last September, the UK Prudential Regulation Authority and FCA sent a “dear CEO” letter
to  the  heads  of  large  banks  and  insurance  companies  to  seek  assurance  that  their  senior
managers  and  boards  understood  the  risks  of  LIBOR  transition  and  were  taking  appropriate
action ahead of end-2021.
   As the larger firms prepare for the transition, they are beginning to
work on the operational challenges the transition will present.  You all know that those kinds of
system changes are never simple or straightforward.  The potential death of LIBOR is causing
everyone in the market a lot of grief, and everyone goes through the five stages of grief at their
own pace.  But the fact that firms are starting to grapple with implementation means that they’ve
got past denial and bargaining and settled down to acceptance.
22
Smaller firms may be lower down on the preparation curve, although presumably their total risks
are also smaller.  In December, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council presented
a  one-hour  webinar  on  LIBOR  transition  that  drew  about  1,300  participants  from  supervised
firms.  Of those who responded to a polling question during the webinar, about one-fifth said it
was the first time they were hearing about the topic.
To continue forward, several issues must be resolved.  For example, what events should trigger
the  shift  from  LIBOR  to  SOFR  or  another  alternative  rate?   A  definitive  end  to  LIBOR  is  an
obvious trigger.  But, short of that, what events should prompt the switch?  What if LIBOR was
nominally  available,  but  the  UK  FCA  used  its  supervisory  power  to  declare  that  LIBOR  is
unrepresentative of the underlying market?  Last month, an FCA official highlighted the possibility
that this is exactly how the end of LIBOR might come about, and urged market participants to
seriously  consider  this  possibility  when  crafting  their  fallback  triggers.
      In  their  various
consultations on fallback language, the ARRC has proposed that such a declaration by the FCA
would trigger the switch to an alternative rate.  A clear majority of respondents supported that
proposal.  I think every market participant should ask how the fallback triggers in their contracts
would respond. 
23
In  addition,  the  precise  mechanism  of  changing  from  LIBOR  to,  say,  SOFR  will  vary.    The
solution is not a simple substitution.  There are inherent differences between SOFR and LIBOR
that will need to be adjusted for in the transition.   For one thing, most contracts that reference
LIBOR key off of three-month or six-month LIBOR.  Mortgages often use one-year LIBOR.  But
SOFR is an overnight rate—there’s no such thing as three-month or six-month SOFR.
One  solution  to  this  difference  is  to  use  the  daily  SOFR  for  each  day  during  the  term,  either
averaged  or  compounded  each  day  until  the  end  of  the  period.    ISDA  has  indicated  that
derivatives will fall back to this kind of average, and the SOFR floating rate notes issued recently
use a similar approach.  To facilitate this method, the New York Fed is preparing to produce a
backward-looking compounded average alongside the daily SOFR. 
Some  market  participants  may  need  to  use  a  forward-looking  “term  SOFR”  created  by
constructing  a  yield  curve  off  of  trading  in  forward-looking  SOFR  derivatives,  particularly  for
legacy contracts that already reference a term LIBOR rate.  Creating a new rate like that is part
of the ARRC’s transition plan, although it’s more concept than reality at this point.  But under all
of the cash product consultations put out to date, the first preferred fallback is to that kind of term
rate, if such a rate were to be created that was up to IOSCO standards and endorsed by the
ARRC.
Another difference between SOFR and LIBOR is that SOFR is a “near risk-free rate” because
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  underlying  repo  transactions  are  secured  by  Treasuries.    LIBOR,  on  the  other  hand,  was
based on unsecured transactions and was intended to include the price of bank funding risk. 
Although most of the current uses of LIBOR have no actual need to reflect bank funding risk, that
difference does still affect the level of the index, and so will need to be adjusted for in contracts
that start out referencing LIBOR and then switch to SOFR.
There are various technical ways to adjust for both the term difference and the credit difference
between SOFR and LIBOR.  The goal is to create a value-neutral adjustment mechanism that
doesn’t create winners and losers as LIBOR contracts reset.  Ideally, the adjustments would also
be easily understood, transparent, and based on objective factors, not on discretion.  That’s a
very tall order.  This is another area where the ongoing consultations are very important.
Conclusion
Change is hard.  It’s hard to say goodbye to LIBOR when it’s been around for so long and is
embedded in so many operations and processes that have been in place for decades.  For the
last several years, change has clearly been coming to the use of LIBOR, but there was a fog of
uncertainty about what that change was going to look like, and so the reaction of many firms
seemed  to  be  to  do  nothing  except  wait  and  see  what  happens.    Now  the  time  has  come—I
would argue it came a while ago, but in any case it’s here now—the time has come for every firm
with LIBOR exposure to actively grapple with the risks that are coming your way whether you like
it or not.  The way forward for the vast majority of LIBOR-based instruments is rapidly becoming
clear.  It’s easy and tempting to justify inaction by criticizing the available solutions as imperfect
or as just too hard to do.  But inaction at this point in the LIBOR transition is short-sighted and
futile and only extends the uncertainty.  We need decisive action by everyone in the market to
avoid damage to individual firms and the financial system.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Raymond Check and Thomas Noone assisted in preparing these remarks.  Mr. Held would like to thank his
other colleagues at the Federal Reserve who provided comments and corrections.
2019 Outlook: Trends in the Capital Markets
See for example the FSOC’s Annual Reports for 2013 and 2018.
See Introductory Remarks by Federal Reserve Board of Governors Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K.
Quarles at the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable, July 19, 2018
Second Report of the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, March 2018
Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks, 22 July 2014
Principles for Financial Benchmarks Final Report, July 2013
Information  on 
www.newyorkfed.org/arrc.
the  ARRC, 
including 
its  announcements  and  publications,  can  be 
found  at
The ARRC Selects a Broad Repo Rate as its Preferred Alternative Reference Rate
Information about SOFR can be found at apps.newyorkfed.org/markets/autorates/sofr.
In addition to the London Interbank Offered Rates, the other major interbank offered rates (IBORs) are the Euro
Interbank Offered Rate (EURIBOR) and the Tokyo Interbank Offered Rate (TIBOR).
See Reforming major interest rate benchmarks, FSB Progress Report, 14 November 2018
The future of LIBOR, speech by Andrew Bailey, Chief Executive of the FCA, 27 July 2017
Interest rate benchmark reform: transition to a world without LIBOR, speech by Andrew Bailey, Chief Executive of
the FCA, 12 July 2018
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
ARRC Guiding Principles for More Robust LIBOR Fallback Contract Language in Cash Products
ARRC Consultation Regarding More Robust LIBOR Fallback Contract Language for New Issuances of LIBOR
Floating Rate Notes, September 24, 2018
ARRC  Consultation  Regarding  More  Robust  Fallback  Contract  Language  for  New  Originations  of  LIBOR
Syndicated Business Loans, September 24, 2018
ARRC Consultation Regarding More Robust LIBOR Fallback Contract Language for New Originations of LIBOR
Bilateral Business Loans, December 7, 2018
ARRC Consultation, New Issuances of LIBOR Securitizations, December 7, 2018
See ISDA LIBOR Fallbacks, presentation by ISDA at the ARRC’s July 2018 roundtable
Source: Bloomberg data services, press releases and FRBNY staff calculations
See Dear CEO LIBOR Letter
LIBOR  transition  and  contractual  fallbacks,  speech  by  Edward  Schooling  Latter,  Director  of  Markets  and
Wholesale Policy at the FCA, 28 January 2019
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
