Sabine  Lautenschläger:  Cross-border  banking  since  the  crisis  –
lessons for supervisors
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, at the 10 Years Vienna Initiative - Anniversary Conference 2019, Vienna, 27 March
2019.
 The  crisis  has  shown  that  the  banking  sector  is  deeply  interconnected  worldwide,  and  that  a
banking crisis can quickly spread from one country to another.
It also laid bare a number of weaknesses in the global regulatory framework. But after long and
tough  negotiations,  we  agreed  on  the  Basel  III  framework,  which  addresses  most  of  the
weaknesses  found  in  global  regulation.  It  will  help  make  global  financial  markets  safer  by
ensuring that global banks and banks with cross-border activities have to comply with a common
framework of minimum capital, liquidity and risk management standards.
The  crisis  clearly  showed  that  supervision  should  not  stop  at  national  borders.  And  it  also
showed  us  that  cooperation  between  home  and  host  supervisors  is  key  to  understanding  the
risks banks are exposed to when doing business across borders.
In recent years, cooperation between supervisors has increased significantly, on the back of new
global  and  European  standards  for  home/host  cooperation.  Cooperation  between  supervisors
has become natural; in fact, it has become essential. This cooperation has been institutionalised
via supervisory colleges and crisis management groups.
Standards now apply when information is exchanged between host and home supervisors, and
when  joint  fact  findings  and  assessments  are  due.  And  various  criteria  now  apply  when
supervisors from different countries have to agree on joint action regarding banks.
Of course, it is easier to cooperate in theory than in practice. And it is easier to cooperate in
normal times than in times of crisis.
The  Vienna  Initiative  was  an  important  example  of  cooperation  in  crisis  times.  And  with  the
Vienna  Initiative  2.0  in  particular,  we  have  seen  how  important  it  is  to  provide  structures  and
platforms for home/host cooperation. It is undeniable that, in times of crisis, the interests of home
and host supervisors may diverge. But without cooperation, it would be very difficult to maintain
financial stability.
Breaking this kind of prisoner’s dilemma requires trust. But trust cannot be built over a few days
of  talks  at  the  height  of  a  crisis.  Trust  requires  us  to  understand  each  other’s  priorities  and
constraints. And this takes time. In a way, this should be seen as an investment. As a supervisor,
you should invest your time in building trust with other authorities. It will pay off.
In practice, the fact that this lesson has not been fully learned, means there are still obstacles to
cross-border banking.
In Europe, we have gone one step further in ensuring that banks in the euro area are supervised
according to one approach – an essential part of the response to the crisis was to create a single
supervisor for the euro area.
The single rulebook forms the basis for this supervision. But this rulebook is not as single as
supervisors would like. There are still some important areas in urgent need of harmonisation, not
only to ensure a level playing field, but also to promote cross-border banking.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
I will mention just a few:
Fit and proper rules are not harmonised at all.
Many crisis-related supervisory competences are not harmonised.
There are still some options and national discretions open to Member States, which means
banks can be treated differently for reasons other than the underlying risks.
We see that cross-border banking has recovered elsewhere but not in Europe. European banks
still lag behind in this respect. In part, this is also due to ring fencing, which limits banks’ ability to
freely move liquidity and capital within groups in Europe.
I  understand  that  taking  the  first  step  in  eliminating  ring-fencing  is  daunting.  Host  country
supervisors  fear  being  left  to  foot  the  bill  of  costly  crises.  For  small  economies,  or  large
economies with a large number of foreign banks, this is a challenge. But it is a challenge we
need to find a common solution to. And we need to find this solution before the next crisis hits.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
