  Conference „20 Years of Stability“ 
Governor Senad Softić, Ph.D. 
Welcome speech 
Sarajevo, 22 September 2017 
 
Your excellencies, distinguished guests,  
 
I would like to welcome you to this Conference and thank you for recognizing 
the importance of our institution’s anniversary. 
Central banking in Bosnia and Herzegovina has a history much longer than 
20 years. 
However, Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a sovereign country, has established 
its first Central Bank (the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina) in 1997, 
with  a  mandate  guaranteed  by  the  Constitution  to  implement  monetary 
policy throughout the entire country under the currency board arrangement. 
The main objective of the Central Bank has been to achieve and maintain the 
stability of domestic currency, the convertible mark, the only legal tender in 
Bosnia  and  Herzegovina.  The  task  was  very  complex  because  at  that  time 
there were four currencies in use in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
The Constitution defined that the first Governing Board of the Central Bank 
would include the Governor appointed by the International Monetary Fund 
in  consultation  with  the  Presidency  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  and  three 
members nominated by the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Due to 
specific  circumstances  related  to  the  establishment  of  the  Central  Bank,  it 
was also defined that the first Governor would not be a citizen of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina or a citizen of any of the neighboring countries.  
In the years of Central Bank development that followed, we saw three phases. 
 1 of 5 
 The main functions of the Central Bank, as defined by the Central Bank Law, 
were established in the period until 2000. Since 11 August 1997, all prices 
and  all  payments  have  been  denominated  in  convertible  marks.  Since  the 
beginning  of  1999, the convertible  mark  has  been  the  only  legal  tender  in 
internal payment operations, supported by the modern payment systems in 
the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, introduced in 2000. During this 
time,  the  Central  Bank  was  growing  and  expanding  the  network  of  its 
organizational units in Sarajevo, Mostar, Banja Luka, Brčko and Pale.  
During the following ten year period, the focus was on the strengthening of 
the financial system and macroeconomic stability. Since the very beginning 
of  our  operations,  long  before  other  institutions  in  the  country,  we  have 
recognized the importance of macroeconomic statistics and invested efforts 
in  its  development.    Having  in  mind  the  significance  of  macroeconomic 
statistics  for  the  public,  and  by  implementing  constantly  the  adjustments 
with  the  international  standards,  we  have  managed  to  provide  the 
international relevance of our country.   
By  using  the  mechanism  of  banking  supervision  coordination,  we  have 
managed to consolidate the data from Entities’ Banking Agencies, reporting 
on the financial soundness indicators for the entire banking system.   
Several years later, these activities resulted in: 
  the continued monitoring of systemic risks in the Standing Committee 
for Financial Stability, chaired by the Central Bank,  
  regularly performed macroeconomic stress tests, and 
  the  signed  memoranda  on  understanding  and  cooperation  with 
regulators from the home countries of the banking groups operating in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
We have also established the Central Credit Registry which helps banks to 
manage risks, having insight into the credit histories of their clients in the 
entire country.  
 2 of 5 
 Our  cash  operations  underwent  a  serious  test in  October  2008, when,  our 
citizens, in panic, withdrew significant amount of deposits from banks in only 
several days. Thanks to the prompt response, we provided enough foreign 
currency,  mostly  euro,  confirming  in  that  way  the  full  coverage  of  the 
convertible mark.  
During  the  recent  years,  in  the  third  phase,  the  Central  Bank  has  had  an 
increasing  prominent  role  in  fulfilling  the  international  obligations  of  our 
country.  During  this  period,  we  continue  to  strengthen  our  functions  and 
resources.  
In addition to regular publications, we prepare other analytical publications, 
such  as  the  ECB  Assessment  on  Financial  Stability  for  EU  Candidate  and 
Potential Candidate Countries.  
We have representatives in many working bodies, groups and institutions at 
the  local  and  international  level,  particularly  in  the  European  integration 
field,  for  example,  with  the  aim  to  prepare  the  answers  for  the  European 
Commission questionnaire.  
Through the intense cooperation between the Central Bank and its partner 
institutions, such as the European Central Bank, we are working on: 
  the implementation of new rules and policies,  
  changing our practices and  
  training our staff in compliance with the European standards. 
This contributes to the development of the culture that will help the entire 
society to recognize the Central Bank’s independence as a public interest.  
We also highly appreciate the support of the International Monetary Fund, 
which had a key role in the establishing of the Central Bank twenty years ago. 
We  hope  that  such  support  will  continue  in  the  future,  especially  in  the 
activities  aimed  at  the  strengthening  of  the  banking  system  in  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina.  
 3 of 5 
 We  also  appreciate  the  valuable  support  which  we  received  during  this 
period from the Office of the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
and institutions such as the World Bank, USAID, GIZ and other, for significant 
projects we implemented together. 
In the future, the Central Bank will continue with its mission to: 
  harmonize with the EU standards,  
  modernize and improve its work, payment systems, cash management 
operations,  
  increase  institutional  quality  by  using  the  best  practices  and 
experiences of other, fully developed central banks.  
In the end, allow me to say that I am proud that the Central Bank is a fully 
independent, credible and transparent central bank, presenting the anchor 
of the country’s macroeconomic stability.  
For  all  these  years,  in  the  complex  reality  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  one 
thing has been certain: the value of convertible mark, expressed in euro, has 
never been questioned.  
I  also  have  to  emphasize  that  this  institution’s  successful  performance  is 
brought about by its human resources. The Bank’s highly skilled employees 
have been dedicated to developing this institution and achieving the results 
that we are proud of today. The success that we have achieved during the last 
twenty years and the contribution we have made to the society that we serve 
are largely due to the trust invested in the Central Bank.  
Therefore,  my  dear  colleagues,  representatives  of  the  government  and 
friends, representatives of the  media that have professionally reported on 
our work, thank you for the support that you have always provided to the 
Central Bank and its objectives! The Governing Board, the Management and 
the employees of the Central Bank will continue to work in the way which 
will prove worthy of your confidence.  
 4 of 5 
 Thank you once again for celebrating with us this important anniversary and 
we wish you a pleasant stay in Sarajevo and Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
  5 of 5 
