Benoît  Cœuré:  The  euro’s  global  role  in  a  changing  world  -  a
monetary policy perspective
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, 15 February 2019.
Speech including graphs can be found at the ECB's website.
 This year marks the 20th anniversary of the euro’s creation, an event which has triggered much
reflection on the single currency’s successes and challenges.
[1]
I would like to thank J. Gräb, A. Mehl and J. Yiangou for their contributions to this speech. I remain
solely responsible for all opinions contained herein.
Most of this commentary has, rightly, focused on the economic track record of the euro area.
The  main  aim  of  monetary  union  was,  after  all,  to  maximise  the  benefits  of  the  EU’s  internal
market and thereby shift Europe onto a higher growth trajectory.
[2]
See,  for  example,  Draghi,  M.  (2018),  “Europe  and  the  euro  20  years  on”,  speech  at  Laurea
Honoris Causa in Economics by University of Sant’Anna, Pisa, 15 December.
I  will  not  discuss  these  benefits  today.  Instead  I  will  merely  say  that,  since  day  one,  many
commenters,  including  here  in  the  United  States,  have  predicted  the  imminent  demise  of  the
euro. However, the truth is that, today, three out of four people in the euro area support the euro –
the broadest support since its creation.
[3]
See European Commission (2018), “Eurobarometer: Support for the euro steady at all-time high
levels”, 20 November.
One should never underestimate the resilience and strength of Europe’s monetary union project.
Today I would like to focus on a different aspect, however: the external dimension of the euro –
that is, its international role. For some Europeans, external factors have always formed part of
the case for the single currency. A currency with a global standing would not just be a symbol of
European unity on the world stage, it would also be a tool to project global influence.
Following this line of thought, it is no coincidence that the final push towards monetary union took
place against the backdrop of the confrontational foreign economic policies of the 1980s.
[4]
See  Henning,  R.  (1998),  “Systemic  Conflict  and  Regional  Monetary  Integration:  The  Case  of
Europe”, International Organization, Vol. 52, No 3, pp. 537–573.
Yet by the time the euro was launched in 1999, this protective aspect of the single currency had
rather disappeared from view. The turn of the century was the age of “the end of history”, when
conflicts between great powers were seen as a relic of the past, replaced by a widespread liberal
order. The notion that countries should view their currencies as tools of foreign economic policy
became unfashionable.
As a result, few politicians in Europe took note that, after quickly establishing itself as a global
currency, the euro gradually lost international standing from the mid-2000s onwards. You can
see this on my first slide, which shows a composite index measuring the euro’s international
role. Today, it stands at an historic low.
The euro’s international role has declined since the mid-2000s
 1 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
Index of the euro’s international role
(percentages; four-quarter moving averages)
Sources: BIS, IMF, CLS, Ilzetzki, Reinhart and Rogoff (2017) and ECB calculations.
Notes: Arithmetic  average  of  the  shares  of  the  euro  at  constant  exchange  rates  in  stocks  of
international  bonds,  cross-border  loans,  cross-border  deposits,  foreign  exchange  settlements,
global foreign exchange reserves and exchange rate regimes. Data on the share of the euro in
global trade invoicing were not available; those on foreign exchange settlements are at market
exchange rates. The latest data are for the fourth quarter of 2017.
While the euro is the second most used currency by most measures, it often lags behind the
dollar by a wide margin.
[5]
In  2008,  some  economists  expected  the  euro  to  overtake  the  US  dollar  as  an  international
reserve currency by around 2020. See, for example, Chinn, M. and Frenkel, J. (2008), “Why the
euro will rival the dollar”, International Finance, Vol. 11(1), pp. 49–73.
You can see this on Slide 2, which shows the shares of major currencies in selected measures
of international currency use.
The euro is the world’s second global currency
Snapshot of the international monetary system
(percentages)
Sources: BIS, IMF, SWIFT, Gopinath (2016) and ECB calculations.
Note: Data as at the fourth quarter of 2017 or latest available.
European  policymakers  have  woken  up  to  these  developments.  There  have  been  a  series  of
calls in recent months for the euro to assume a stronger international role.
[6]
See Juncker, J.C. (2018), “The Hour of European Sovereignty”, State of the Union Address 2018;
European  Commission  (2018),  “Towards  a  stronger  international  role  of  the  euro”,  European
Commission  contribution  to  the  European  Council  and  the  Euro  Summit,  5  December;  and
European Council (2018), “Statement of the Euro Summit”, 14 December.
The main reason that I see for these calls relates to the growing perception of a shift in global
governance,  from  leadership  built  on  trust  and  common  identities  –  what  the  ancient  Greeks
called hegemonia – to leadership based on arkhe, hard power where policies and doctrines are
imposed on others.
[7]
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2018),  “Asserting  Europe’s  leadership”,  panel  remarks  at  Les  rencontres
économiques d’Aix-en-Provence, 8 July.
In  such  an  environment,  being  the  issuer  of  a  global  reserve  currency  confers  international
monetary power, in particular the capacity to “weaponise” access to the financial and payments
systems.
[8]
See,  for  example,  Tooze, A.  and  Odendahl,  C.  (2018),  “Can  the  euro  rival  the  dollar?”,  CER
Insight, Centre for European Reform, 4 December.
As has been clear on a number of recent occasions, the prospect of being shut out of major
financial systems makes fines or economic sanctions markedly more threatening.
 2 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
This shift in global governance, in turn, has contributed to the belief that the EU may be more
exposed to the risk that the monetary power of others is not used in its best interests, or is even
used against it.
[9]
See, for example, European Commission (2018), ibid.
These risks are not new, of course. As Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa once noted, the demise of
the  gold  standard  shifted  monetary  management  away  from  international  constraints  and
towards domestic priorities. In Padoa-Schioppa’s words, this is when “monetary nationalism took
over”.
[10]
“In  the  last  century  [the]  history  [of  monetary  orders]  was  marked  by  a  fundamental  shift  in
relations  between  money  and  the  two  entities  to  which  it  had  been  anchored  from  time
immemorial:  a  commodity  (mainly  gold)  and  the  ‘sovereign’  or,  to  put  it  another  way,  intrinsic
value  and  political  power.  Over  the  decades,  the  commodity  anchor  was  relaxed  while  the
political anchor was correspondingly strengthened.” See Padoa-Schioppa, T. (2010), “The Ghost
of Bancor: The Economic Crisis and the Global Monetary Disorder”, Triffin Lecture, Louvain-la-
Neuve, 25 February.
The  novelty  of  our  situation  today  is  that  these  concerns  extend  well  beyond  advanced
economies. Other nations are now seeking to raise the international profile of their currencies.
The  renminbi,  for  example,  was  included  in  2016  in  the  International  Monetary  Fund’s  special
drawing  rights  (SDR)  basket  alongside  the  US  dollar,  euro,  yen  and  pound  sterling.  China
recently  also  launched  its  first  oil  futures  contract  denominated  in  renminbi  –  the  so-called
petroyuan – in an apparent bid to strengthen the hold of the renminbi in global energy markets.
There  are  certainly  high  barriers  to  other  currencies  displacing  the  dollar  in  the  international
financial and commodity system.
[11]
Increasing  returns  and  network  effects  are  important  determinants  of  international  currency
status  and  support  the  continued  use  of  incumbent  currencies.  Small  initial  differences
accumulate over time, resulting in the disproportionate and persistent use of one currency. Early
discussions of these effects include: Krugman, P. (1984), “The International Role of the Dollar:
Theory and Prospect,” in Bilson, J. and Marston, R. (eds.), Exchange Rate Theory and Practice,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 261–278; and Rey, H. (2001), “International Trade and
Currency Exchange,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 68, No 2, pp. 443–464. In line with
this,  it  is  conventionally  believed  that  it  took  between  30  and  70  years  for  the  US  dollar  to
dethrone  the  pound  sterling  as  the  leading  international  currency  once  the  United  States
surpassed the United Kingdom as the leading global economic powerhouse and trading nation
(see Triffin, R. (1960), Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The Future of Convertibility, New Haven: Yale
University  Press).  But  more  recent  scholarly  work  suggests  that  this  change  occurred  faster
than conventionally assumed because the increasing returns of networks may not be as strong
as commonly posited (see, for example, Chiţu, L., Eichengreen, B. and Mehl, A. (2014), “When
did  the  dollar  overtake  sterling  as  the  leading  international  currency?  Evidence  from  the  bond
markets,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 111, pp. 225–245).
Yet multi-polar currency systems existed in the not-so-distant past. Before World War One, the
pound sterling, the Deutsche Mark and the French franc all vied for global supremacy as reserve
currencies.
[12]
See Eichengreen, B., Mehl, A. and Chiţu, L. (2017), How Global Currencies Work: Past, Present
and Future, Princeton University Press.
And the interwar period was characterised by a sterling-dollar duopoly. So, if history is any guide,
a multi-polar system could well become a reality once again.
[13]
 3 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the prospects for a multi-polar monetary system, see also Bénassy-Quéré, A. and Cœuré, B.
(2010), “Le rôle international de l’euro : chronique d’une décennie”, Revue d’économie politique,
Vol. 120, pp. 355–377.
In fact – and you can see this on Slide 3 – some shifts are already taking place. Both the euro
and  the  dollar  have  lost  similar  ground  as  international  reserve  currencies  since  the  global
financial crisis.
[14]
Official  reserve  managers,  including  the  ECB,  have  diversified  a  small  part  of  their  portfolios
towards  non-traditional  currencies,  with  the  shares  of  the  Chinese  renminbi, Australian  dollar,
Canadian dollar and other non-traditional units trebling to about 7% of global foreign exchange
reserves.
It remains to be seen whether this is a short-lived development or the beginning of a larger trend.
The euro and the US dollar have lost ground as international reserve currencies
Share of the euro and the US dollar in global foreign exchange reserves
(percentages)
Sources: IMF and ECB calculations.
Notes:  Data  adjusted  for  exchange  rate  valuation  effects.  The  latest  observations  are  for  the
fourth quarter of 2017
So how are we as central bankers affected by these developments?
The ECB, of course, does not take a view on foreign policy questions. It is not for us to decide on
Europe’s role in the world, or on which countries outside Europe choose to use the euro and
which  do  not.  We  continue  to  see  the  global  role  of  the  euro  as  being  primarily  a  market-led
process.
That said, we are not indifferent to the current debate in Europe, for two major reasons.
First, we see an alignment between the policies that will strengthen the euro’s global role and the
policies that are needed to make the euro area more robust. We support efforts to improve the
design of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), and these efforts will also, indirectly, foster a
stronger international role for the euro.
Second, a stronger global role for the euro may have tangible consequences for the conduct of
monetary policy.
In my remarks this morning, I would like to explain these two points in more detail.
Policies supporting the euro’s international role
The decline of the euro’s international role is, on the face of it, puzzling. The euro area displays
two  of  the  fundamental  elements  that  economists  deem  essential  in  fostering  a  currency’s
international use.
The first element is that it is the currency of a large economy that is comparable in economic
size to that of the United States.
[15]
In  purchasing  power  parity  terms,  the  United  States  accounts  for  about  15%  of  world  GDP,
compared with 11% for the euro area. Economic size is an important determinant of international
currency use in random matching models considering currency choice as a double-coincidence-
 4 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
of-wants problem (see Matsuyama, K., Kiyotaki, N. and Matsui, A. (1993), “Toward a Theory of
International Currency,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60, No 2, pp. 283–307).
The second is that it is issued by the world’s largest trading bloc.
[16]
The United States accounts for about 11% of global trade, compared with 14% for the euro area.
These two elements featured prominently in the discussions that took place 20 years ago as to
whether the euro could match the international standing of the dollar.
[17]
See, for example, Bergsten, F. (1997), “The Dollar and the Euro,” Foreign Affairs,Vol. 76, pp. 83–
95.
Secular  factors  unrelated  to  the  euro  area  –  such  as  the  parallel  rise  of  the  renminbi  –  have
certainly played a role in stalling the euro’s progress. But what is also clear is that establishing an
international currency is not just a matter of economic size.
You can see this clearly on Slide 4. The United States accounts for a much smaller share of the
global  economy  today  than  it  did  after  World  War  II,  and  yet  the  US  dollar  is  still,  by  far,  the
leading global reserve currency, now like then.
Economic size is not the only factor determining global currency use
Importance of the US and the US dollar in the global economy
(percentages)
Sources: Maddison project, IMF WEO and Eichengreen, Mehl and Chitu (2016).
Note: Share of the US in global GDP in PPP terms. The last observation is for 2017.
This suggests that factors specific to the euro area are likely to have prevented the euro from
rising more forcefully as an international currency. I see these factors as closely related to three
broad shortcomings in the institutional design of the EU and EMU:
First – the ability to provide stability both domestically and internationally.
Second – the limited depth and liquidity of euro area financial markets.
And third – Europe not speaking with one voice on international matters, including national
security.
An international currency must be stable
Take stability first. Empirical research confirms that, next to size and openness, stability is a key
determinant  of  international  currency  use.  But  stability  means  different  things  to  international
investors, who hold the currency as a store of value, and international borrowers, who use it as a
financing vehicle.
For borrowers, broadly speaking, stability derives primarily from central banks’ monetary policy
frameworks. Research finds that the currencies that become dominant in international financing
are the ones whose central bank actively pursues an inflation stabilisation policy that protects
borrowers’ real debt burdens.
[18]
This is the essence of the international Fisher debt-deflation channel which works through the
effects  of  monetary  policy  on  the  exchange  rate  and  inflation  risk  premia  (see  Eren,  E.  and
Malamud, S. (2018), “Dominant Currency Debt”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No 13391).
 5 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
To deliver this stability, central bank independence is crucial. That aspect was highlighted in 2011
by the US Treasury Secretary, Timothy Geithner, in the context of the renminbi becoming part of
the IMF’s SDR basket.
[19]
“We believe that currencies of large economies heavily used in international trade and financial
transactions  should  become  part  of  the  SDR  basket,  and  that  to  achieve  this  objective,  the
concerned  countries  should  have  flexible  exchange  rate  systems,  independent  central  banks,
and permit the free movement of capital flows.” See Geithner, T. (2011), Statement at the High-
level Seminar on the International Monetary System, Nanjing, 31 March.
For investors, stability mainly comes from a currency’s ability to act as a safe haven in times of
global financial stress.
[20]
Certain academics have created models to show that currency depreciations make holding a
unit  unattractive  and  discourage  its  international  use  insofar  as  it  will  not  be  perceived  as  a
reliable store of value. For example, see: Devereux, M. and Shi, S. (2013), “Vehicle Currency,”
International Economic Review, Vol. 54(1), pp. 97–133.
This  is  what  some  have  coined  the  “exorbitant  duty”  of  international  currency  status,  which
offsets the “exorbitant privilege” in crisis times, since it leads to negative wealth effects for the
currency issuer.
[21]
See  Gourinchas,  P.-O.,  Govillot,  N.  and  Rey,  H.  (2011),  “Exorbitant  Privilege  and  Exorbitant
Duty”, Working Paper Series, University of California, Berkeley. See also Caballero, R., Farhi, E.
and  Gourinchas,  P.-O.  (2015),  “Global  Imbalances  and  Currency  Wars  at  the  ZLB,”  NBER
Working Paper, No 21670.
Theoretical work suggests that investors are more likely to perceive sovereign debt as safe if the
fundamentals  of  the  issuer  are  strong relative  to  other  possible  issuers,  but  not  necessarily
strong on an absolute basis.
[22]
See He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A. and Milbradt, K. (2019), “A Model of Safe Asset Determination,”
American Economic Review, forthcoming.
This  may  explain,  for  example,  why  investors  did  not  rebalance  away  from  US  Treasuries
throughout the global financial crisis, despite the stark deterioration in the United States’ fiscal
position.
For currency unions, however, absolute fundamentals arguably matter more. The reason is that,
in  the  absence  of  a  common  consolidated  balance  sheet,  sovereign  debt  exhibits  a  higher
degree of credit risk than it does in economies that can pursue their own monetary policy. Public
debt can therefore behave like private debt when risk aversion rises.
[23]
See Cœuré, B. (2016), “Sovereign debt in the euro area: too safe or too risky?”, keynote address
at Harvard University’s Minda de Gunzburg Center for European Studies, 3 November.
This fact was not unknown. The idea of the euro was always that a credible set of fiscal rules
would ensure that national sovereign debt would be safe. But the euro area debt crisis exposed
flaws in the design of our monetary union.
With the crisis, the number of AAA-rated euro area sovereigns fell from eight to three. Today,
AAA-rated euro area sovereign debt amounts to just 10% of GDP. In the United States it is more
than 70%. You can see this on Slide 5.
The supply of euro area safe assets has declined and is small relative to the US
 6 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
Outstanding amount of AAA-rated debt securities issued by euro area central governments
(EUR billions)
Sources: OECD Government Statistics and ECB staff calculations.
Notes: Outstanding amounts at market value. The blue bars in the chart report debt securities
issued that are rated AAA/Aaa both by Standard and Poor’s and Moody’s (local currency long-
term  debt  rating).  Totals  for  2007  includes  Austria,  Finland,  France,  Germany,  Ireland,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Spain. Totals for 2018 include Germany, Luxembourg and the
Netherlands.
Debt securities issued by central governments
(2018; as percent of GDP)
Sources: OECD Government Statistics, IMF WEO and ECB staff calculations.
Notes: Outstanding amounts at market value for the euro area; publicly held Treasury securities
outstanding for the US. See the preceding footnote for definitions of the rating universe.
But  Europe  has  learnt  its  lesson.  Considerable  efforts  have  been  made  in  recent  years  to
improve the euro area governance framework, and work is still ongoing. We now have a single
supervisor for large banks, a single framework for resolving failing institutions, a single fund to
finance those resolution activities and, soon, a single backstop for that fund.
We  have  also  established  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  which  provides  a  safety  net  for
sovereigns threatened with losing market access, provided that they implement sound economic
policies.
But for the euro to act as a true, effective hedge in times of stress, and therefore to attain and
maintain international status, we need to further strengthen the fiscal dimension of EMU.
Sound fiscal and structural policies are needed to provide international investors with what they
need  most:  a  large  and  elastic  supply  of  safe  assets.  The  fact  that  the  supply  of  euro-
denominated safe assets can shrink at precisely the time when demand for such assets is rising
has  not  been  lost  on  investors.  It  is  likely  a  dominant  factor  keeping  the  euro  from  having  a
stronger international role.
We know that the journey towards a true European safe asset, one that does not vanish on rainy
days, will be long and full of perils. While progressing towards this objective, we should thus also
focus  our  efforts  on  “upgrading”  the  credit  quality  of  outstanding  liabilities,  which  can  only  be
achieved  if  governments  make  public  debt  more  sustainable  by  committing  to  credible  fiscal
rules.
The need for deeper and more liquid capital markets
The second, and related, shortcoming of EMU is the segmentation of its capital markets.
Deep and liquid financial markets are fundamental to a currency’s ability to attain international
status.  They  reduce  transaction  costs,  making  the  currency  more  attractive  for  international
financing and settlement, and – as more liquid markets mitigate rollover risk – they are perceived
as safer by investors.
[24]
The dynamic interaction between debt liquidity and safety is non-trivial, however, as shown in He
et al. (2019), op. cit. If global demand for safe assets is high, large debts can enhance safety
because they offer greater liquidity and so reduce rollover risk. Conversely, if demand for safe
 7 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
assets is low, large debt may increase rollover risk.
This is not just theory. Recent research shows that capital market depth was critical in helping
the US dollar to catch up with, and then overtake, the pound sterling in the first half of the last
century.  Financial  deepening  was  by  far  the  most  important  contributor  to  the  increase  in  the
share  of  dollar-denominated  international  bonds  issued  between  1918  and  1932.  Its  impact
dwarfed that of economic size or credibility.
[25]
Chiţu, L., Eichengreen, B. and Mehl, A. (2014), op. cit.
European capital markets appeared to be becoming more integrated, and hence deeper, prior to
2008.  But  this  impression  was  based  more  on  price  convergence  than  on  real  cross-border
integration. You can see this clearly on Slide 6, which shows composite indicators of euro area
financial integration produced by the ECB. The quantity-based indicator remains at about half of
its pre-crisis peak, and at very low levels in absolute terms.
[26]
The price-based composite indicator is about 30% below.
Financial fragmentation has weighed on the euro’s global standing
Financial integration in the euro area
(indices)
Source: ECB.
Notes: The price-based composite indicator aggregates ten indicators covering the period from
the  first  quarter  of  1995  to  the  fourth  quarter  of  2017,  while  the  quantity-based  composite
indicator aggregates five indicators available from the first quarter of 1999 to the third quarter of
2017.  The  indicators  are  bounded  between  zero  (full  fragmentation)  and  one  (full  integration).
Increases in the indicators signal greater financial integration. For a detailed description of the
indicators and their input  data,  see  ECB  (2018),  Financial  integration  in  Europe,  Frankfurt  am
main. The latest data are for the third quarter of 2018.
Cyclical factors and the “doom loop” between euro area banks and sovereigns have certainly
aggravated market segmentation. But the underlying reasons for it are structural. Capital markets
in Europe are still fragmented along national lines, since various legal and institutional barriers
hinder the creation of a single pool of liquidity.
This is precisely why policymakers have now put their weight behind the capital markets union
(CMU) project. But progress remains too slow. We at the ECB see CMU as a key priority for the
next European Commission and Parliament. 
[27]
See Building a Capital Markets Union – Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission’s
GreenPaper, 21 May 2015.
The ECB has been complementing these efforts by upgrading its payment system infrastructure,
which  contributes  to  market  integration  and,  in  turn,  to  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  euro  area
securities markets. Recent initiatives include the successful launch of our securities settlement
platform TARGET2-Securities, a new platform for instant payments and the upgrade of our large-
value  transactions  TARGET  system.  In  time,  these  systems  may  offer  international  market
participants easier access to our currency.
[28]
The new platform for instant payments launched by the ECB in November 2018 might offer an
alternative  to  credit  cards  for  payments  online.  The  reform  of  the  large-value  transactions
TARGET  system  would  make  it  technically  possible  to  establish  direct  links  with  comparable
 8 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
systems worldwide. In turn, this would enable settlement of foreign exchange transactions and
offer an alternative to other systems.
International currencies carry a security premium
The third and final factor that is likely to have held back the international role of the euro relates to
the EU’s ability to speak with one voice on international affairs.
I will venture very warily into what is certainly not central bankers’ territory. But empirical evidence
supports the view that the US dollar benefits from a substantial security premium. Nations that
depend on the US security umbrella hold a disproportionate share of their foreign reserves in
dollars.
Global geopolitical outreach matters for international currency status
Predicted share of the US dollar in the foreign exchange reserves of selected countries
(percentages)
Source: Eichengreen, B., A. Mehl and L. Chiţu (2019).
Note: The figures show the predicted shares of the US dollar in the foreign reserve holdings of
five countries which depend on the US security umbrella. Predicted shares are computed under
two scenarios: (i) using estimates from a model restricted to standard economic determinants of
international  currency  choice  (shown  as  yellow  bars);  and  (ii)  using  estimates  from  a  model
expanded  to  include  the  effect  on  international  currency  choice  of  the  countries’  NATO
membership (shown as red bars). Actual US dollar shares are shown as blue bars. The actual
dollar  shares  are  based  on  publicly  available  estimates  for  the  year  1987  (Korea),  2004
(Germany), 2006 (Japan), 2007 (Saudi Arabia) and 2016 (Taiwan); see Eichengreen et al. (2019)
for further details on the sources for the data.
You can see this on Slide 7: a model restricted to economic factors – the yellow bars – under-
predicts, by a wide margin, the dollar reserves of countries dependent on the United States for
their security. A model including their NATO membership – the red bars – comes much closer to
the actual shares. By one estimate, military alliances boost the share of a currency in the partner
country’s foreign reserve holdings by about 30 percentage points.
[29]
See Eichengreen, B., Mehl, A. and Chiţu, L., “Mars or Mercury? The Geopolitics of International
Currency Choice”, Economic Policy, forthcoming.
This is not a new phenomenon. During the late 19th century, a growing share of Deutsche Marks
in  Austria-Hungary’s  reserves  went  hand  in  hand  with  the  Triple  Alliance,  i.e.  the  secret
agreement between Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy signed in 1882 and renewed periodically
until World War I. The increasing importance of French francs in Russia’s reserves in the years
after the Franco-Russian alliance of 1894 reflected similar security patterns.
[30]
Ibid.
Of  course,  this  aspect  of  a  currency’s  international  status  extends  beyond  EMU.  But  it  has  a
clear  implication  for  policymakers.  Europe  already  exerts  global  leadership  in  regulatory,
competition and trade domains.
[31]
Europe already exerts global leadership in the regulatory domain. The obligation for companies to
respect EU standards when exporting products to the Single Market, combined with the size of
this market, means that the EU tends to influence standards elsewhere – the so-called Brussels
effect. The EU is the top trading partner for no fewer than 80 countries.
 9 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
European initiatives to foster cooperation on security and defence, to speak with one voice on
international affairs, and, in short, to further assert global leadership, might also help promote the
euro’s global outreach.
The monetary policy consequences of a greater international role for the euro
Now,  one  important  aspect  that  is  often  overlooked  in  the  debate  about  strengthening  the
international role of the euro is what it would mean for the ECB’s monetary policy. This is what I
would now like to discuss.
As I see it, the monetary policy relevance of an international currency has probably increased
over time, on account of both the evolution of the international monetary system itself and the
way central banks implement monetary policy today, in particular at the zero-lower bound.
More  specifically,  I  see  three  broad  implications  for  the  conduct  and  transmission  of  our
monetary policy, all of which we would need to understand and take into account when defining
the appropriate stance for the euro area.
First is the effect on exchange rate pass-through.
This is in part mechanical: the more the domestic currency is used for trade invoicing, the less
the pass-through to import prices in the face of fluctuations in the exchange rate. This holds not
only over the short run, when prices are sticky, but also over the long run when they are adjusted
by producers.
[32]
See Gopinath, G., Itskhoki, O. and Rigobon, R. (2010), “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate
Pass-Through”, American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No 1, pp. 304–336.
The  tight  correlation  between  domestic  currency  invoicing  and  exchange  rate  pass-through  is
evident in the euro area.
[33]
For further details, see ECB (2015), “The international role of the euro”, Frankfurt am Main, July.
As you can see on the left-hand chart of Slide 8, euro area countries with a greater share of
imports invoiced in euro – those on the south-east corner of the chart – are more insulated from
fluctuations in the euro exchange rate and have lower pass-through to import prices.
International currency status lowers exchange rate pass-through
Exchange rate pass-through to import prices vs. euro invoicing across euro area countries
Source: The international role of the euro, ECB, July 2015.
Notes: Long-run exchange rate pass-through is estimated using a standard log-linear regression
model  of  the  quarterly  log  change  in  import  price  unit  values  on  the  quarterly  changes  of  the
standard broad measure of the NEER-38 of the euro, a quarterly effective measure of inflation in
production  costs  of  the  euro  area’s  major  trading  partners  and  the  quarterly  log  change  in
industrial production (excluding construction). The estimation sample spans the time period from
the first quarter of 2000 to the last quarter of 2014. The share of euro invoicing reported on the x-
axis is the average over the sample period. The black line is a fitted regression line.
Exchange rate pass-through to euro area import prices in response to a monetary policy shock
(percent)
Source: ECB calculations based on Casas et al. (2017).
 10 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
Note: The figure plots the impulse response of import prices to a negative 25 basis point cut in
the short-term interest rate leading to 1% depreciation in the exchange rate under local currency
(euro)  pricing  and  dominant  currency  (dollar)  pricing  obtained  in  a  calibrated  small  open-
economy model.
The degree of pass-through, in turn, has a strong influence on the transmission of shocks, which
has differing implications for monetary policy.
On  the  one  hand,  lower  pass-through  means  that  import  prices  are  better  shielded  from
exogenous exchange rate shocks, and monetary policy can focus more on domestic sources of
inflationary pressures.
[34]
Price increases in local currency by exporters will, of course, still be transmitted to domestic
consumer prices.
As of today, more than 90% of US imports are invoiced in US dollars. By comparison, less than
50% of extra-euro area imports are invoiced in euro. If this share were to increase to, say, 70%,
the sensitivity of import prices to exchange rate movements would decline by around one-third.
On the other hand, the effect of domestic monetary policy on import prices is more limited when
pass-through is low. You can see this on the right-hand chart, which plots simulations from a
calibrated  model  of  the  exchange  rate  pass-through.  Clearly,  increased  local  currency  pricing
would, in principle, attenuate an important lever of monetary policy.
[35]
The estimates are taken from Casas, C., Diez, F., Gopinath, G. and Gourinchas, P.-O. (2017),
“Dominant Currency Paradigm: A New Model for Small Open Economies”, IMF Working Papers,
No 17/264.
But it is also true that, in the euro area, exchange rate pass-through has already notably declined
over  the  past  two  decades,  mainly  due  to  the  declining  share  of  commodity  imports  and  the
increasing role of global value chains.
[36]
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy in standard and non-
standard times”, speech at the workshop “Monetary policy in non-standard times”, Frankfurt am
Main,  11  September.  It  is  ultimately  the  source  of  exchange  rate  movements  that  is  likely  to
determine the degree, and at times even the direction, of pass-through to consumer prices. For
the  role  of  import  shares,  see  Campa,  J.  and  Goldberg,  L.  (2005),  “Exchange  Rate  Pass-
Through into Import Prices”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87(4), pp. 679–690.
You can see this on Slide 9. Today, the pass-through to final consumer price inflation may be
less than a third of what it was at the beginning of the century.
[37]
See  European  Central  Bank  (2016),  “Exchange  rate  pass-through  into  euro  area  inflation”,
Economic Bulletin, July.
There has been a marked decline in exchange rate pass-through over time
Exchange rate pass-through to HICP inflation
(percent)
Sources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations.
Notes: The chart shows the cumulated impulse response (dark blue line) of HICP inflation to a
1%  appreciation  in  the  NEER  after  three  years  over  time  and  the  respective  95%  confidence
bands (light blue lines). The cumulated impulse response is based on the updated estimation of
 11 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
Hahn (2003) over a 20-year rolling window from the first quarter of 1980 to the first quarter of
2016. Each point on the dark blue line refers to the end point of each 20-year rolling sample, with
the first sample referring to the period from the second quarter of 1981 to the first quarter of 2000
and the last sample to the period from the second quarter of 1996 to the first quarter of 2016.
The second way in which an international currency is relevant for monetary policy is its effect on
interest rates.
In principle, international currency issuers enjoy greater monetary autonomy. Central banks in
small open economies, for example, are typically more heavily exposed to foreign spillovers in
setting interest rates than those presiding over an internationally dominant currency.
But international currencies are not isolated from foreign spillovers. Greater external demand for
euro  area  securities,  for  instance,  can  increase  the  influence  of  foreign  factors  on  domestic
monetary and financial conditions.
[38]
Concerns about foreign influences on domestic monetary policy are of course not new. As early
as  the  1970s,  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  was  expressing  misgivings  about  the  rapid
internationalisation  of  the  Deutsche  Mark,  fearing  that  it  could  lead  to  heightened  “hot  money”
flows that would, in turn, make monetary aggregates more volatile and difficult to interpret.
For  example,  in  periods  of  global  stress,  investors  rush  to  the  safety  and  liquidity  of  dollar-
denominated securities, thereby compressing term premia. These effects, however, are typically
temporary and policymakers can hence afford to look through such volatility.
[39]
And to the extent that such flight-to-safety flows affect the exchange rate, the aforementioned
reduced  pass-through  to  import  prices  that  international  currencies  imply  also  mitigate  more
direct effects on domestic prices.
Other effects may prove more durable, however. The past experience of the Federal Reserve
highlights these challenges. It is well documented that the large demand for US securities by
foreign central banks in the run-up to the financial crisis contributed to the decline in longer-term
US  interest  rates,  thereby  in  part  offsetting  the  parallel  tightening  efforts  by  the  Federal  Open
Market Committee.
[40]
See Bernanke, B. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, speech
at  the  Homer  Jones  Lecture,  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  14  April.  On  the  impact  and  transmission
channel  of  foreign  official  purchases  on  US  Treasury  yields  in  the  mid-2000s,  see  also:
Kaminska,  I.  and  Zinna,  G.  (2014),  “Official  Demand  for  U.S.  Debt;  Implications  for  U.S.  Real
Interest Rates”, IMF Working Papers, No 14/66; and Krishnamurthy, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen,
A. (2012), “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 120,
No 2, pp. 233–267.
In other words, the effects of such purchases by foreign central banks do not fundamentally differ
from those of domestic central banks which purchase assets as part of their efforts to stimulate
the economy – quantitative easing.
[41]
See,  for  instance,  Warnock,  F.  and  Warnock,  V.  (2009),  “International  capital  flows  and  U.S.
interest rates”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 28(6), pp. 903–919; and Beltran,
D., Kretchmer, M., Marquez, J. and Thomas, C. (2013), “Foreign holdings of U.S. Treasuries and
U.S. Treasury yields”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 32(C), pp. 1120–1143.
It is not that these effects are completely absent in the euro area today. As the second most
important reserve currency, demand from foreign central banks can also be expected to have
affected euro area financing conditions.
[42]
 12 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “The persistence and signalling power of central bank asset purchase
programmes”, speech at the 2018 US Monetary Policy Forum, New York City, 23 February.
But there is a difference, and it is due to a distinctive feature of the euro area which I have already
highlighted:  the  lack  of  a  single  safe  asset.  We  have  seen  foreign  demand  driving  a  wedge
between sovereign bond yields in the euro area. Specifically, foreign central banks currently hold
more  than  40%  of  their  euro  reserves  in  German  government  bonds,  well  above  Germany’s
share of total outstanding euro-denominated sovereign bonds, which is around 15%.
[43]
See IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (2018).
The implication is that efforts to improve the stability of our currency union could be expected to
lead to a more even distribution of reserve demand effects across the euro area. This, by itself,
would benefit the transmission of our monetary policy.
The final monetary policy implication of a stronger international role for the euro is that spillovers
and spillbacks through international trade and finance would probably be larger.
There are two broad channels to consider here.
The first is that the increased use of the euro as an international funding currency would amplify
the  so-called  international  risk-taking  channel  of  monetary  policy,  which  operates  through
international bank leverage.
[44]
Bruno  and  Shin  (2015)  argue  that  looser  US  monetary  policy  encourages  global  banks  to
leverage more in dollars (on the supply side) and emerging markets to borrow more in dollars (on
the  demand  side).  The  latter  reflects  the  fact  that  the  ensuing  dollar  depreciation  flatters
emerging markets’ balance sheets, hence appearing less risky. See Bruno, V. and Shin, H. S.
(2015),  “Capital  flows  and  the  risk-taking  channel  of  monetary  policy”, Journal  of  Monetary
Economics, Vol. 71(C), pp. 119–132. Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) find evidence of large
financial spillovers from the hegemon to the rest of the world. US monetary policy explains an
important  share  of  the  variance  of  returns  of  risky  assets  around  the  world.  See  Miranda-
Agrippino, S. and Rey, H. (2015), “US Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle”, NBER
Working Paper, No 21722.
As you can see on my last slide, the risk-taking channel is strong for the United States.
International currency status increases monetary policy spillovers
Strong link between US dollar movements and international dollar lending
 Sources: BIS and ECB staff calculations.
Notes:  Growth  in  US  dollar  lending  refers  to  quarterly  changes  in  cross-border  loans  and
deposits in US dollars of BIS reporting banks; NEER stands for nominal effective exchange rate
(positive changes indicate a dollar appreciation). The sample period is Q1/2002-Q3/2015 as in
Avdjiev, Koch and Shin (2017). The black line is a fitted regression line.
When  monetary  policy  eases,  the  US  dollar  depreciates,  and  international  lending  in  dollars
grows because emerging market borrowers’ balance sheets look stronger in dollar terms, which
encourages lenders to provide them with dollar-denominated credit.
Second, if the euro were used more for trade among third countries, a depreciation of the euro
would  make  all  euro-denominated  exports  cheaper,  from  euro  area  and  non-euro  area  firms
 13 / 18
[45]
BIS central bankers' speeches
alike. This would cause an increase in global trade with potentially positive spillbacks.
[45]
See Boz, E., Gopinath, G. and Plagborg-Møller, M. (2017), “Global Trade and the Dollar”, NBER
Working Paper No 23988.
And since the euro area is more open to trade than the United States, the spillbacks to it could
even be larger than those to the United States.
The flipside is that central banks in smaller economies, not least in emerging market economies,
could turn more frequently to the ECB for currency swap lines when the tide turns – i.e. if and
when monetary policy is tightened and the availability of international liquidity in euro dries up.
The ECB would then be called on to increase its activities as an international lender of last resort.
Any extension of the global network of currency swap lines would, however, have to be based on
sound  monetary  arguments.  Central  banks  are  mindful  of  global  financial  stability,  but  they
always act in full discretion and within domestic mandates.
Conclusion
It is time for me to conclude.
The decline in the euro’s international role in recent years is primarily a symptom of the initial fault
lines in Economic and Monetary Union. There is thus a close alignment between the policies that
will strengthen the euro’s global role and the policies that are needed to make the euro area more
robust.  The  ECB  continues  to  see  the  global  role  of  the  euro  as  being  primarily  a  market-led
process. Nevertheless, we support efforts to overcome the shortcomings in the design of our
monetary union, and these efforts will also, indirectly, foster a stronger international role for the
euro.
At the same time, a stronger global role for the euro may have tangible consequences for the
conduct  of  monetary  policy,  all  of  which  we  would  need  to  understand  and  take  into  account
when designing the common monetary policy for the euro area. But provided the right economic
policies are adopted, a stronger global role of the euro could help facilitate the transmission of
monetary policy across euro area financial markets and reduce perilous fragmentation.
I would like to thank J. Gräb, A. Mehl and J. Yiangou for their contributions to this speech. I
See  European  Commission  (2018),  “Eurobarometer:  Support  for  the  euro  steady  at  all-time
See, for example, Draghi, M. (2018), “Europe and the euro 20 years on”, speech at Laurea
Thank you.
[1]
remain solely responsible for all opinions contained herein.
[2]
Honoris Causa in Economics by University of Sant’Anna, Pisa, 15 December.
[3]
high levels”, 20 November.
[4]
Europe”, International Organization, Vol. 52, No 3, pp. 537–573.
[5]
In  2008,  some  economists  expected  the  euro  to  overtake  the  US  dollar  as  an  international
reserve currency by around 2020. See, for example, Chinn, M. and Frenkel, J. (2008), “Why the
euro will rival the dollar”, International Finance, Vol. 11(1), pp. 49–73.
[6]
See  Juncker,  J.C.  (2018),  “The  Hour  of  European  Sovereignty”,  State  of  the  Union Address
2018;  European  Commission  (2018),  “Towards  a  stronger  international  role  of  the  euro”,
European Commission contribution to the European Council and the Euro Summit, 5 December;
See Henning, R. (1998), “Systemic Conflict and Regional Monetary Integration: The Case of
 14 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2018),  “Asserting  Europe’s  leadership”,  panel  remarks  at  Les  rencontres
and European Council (2018), “Statement of the Euro Summit”, 14 December.
[7]
économiques d’Aix-en-Provence, 8 July.
[8]
Insight, Centre for European Reform, 4 December.
[9]
See, for example, European Commission (2018), ibid.
See, for example, Tooze, A. and Odendahl, C. (2018), “Can the euro rival the dollar?”,  CER
[10]
“In the last century [the] history [of monetary orders] was marked by a fundamental shift in
relations  between  money  and  the  two  entities  to  which  it  had  been  anchored  from  time
immemorial:  a  commodity  (mainly  gold)  and  the  ‘sovereign’  or,  to  put  it  another  way,  intrinsic
value  and  political  power.  Over  the  decades,  the  commodity  anchor  was  relaxed  while  the
political anchor was correspondingly strengthened.” See Padoa-Schioppa, T. (2010), “The Ghost
of Bancor: The Economic Crisis and the Global Monetary Disorder”, Triffin Lecture, Louvain-la-
Neuve, 25 February.
[11] 
Increasing returns and network effects are important determinants of international currency
status  and  support  the  continued  use  of  incumbent  currencies.  Small  initial  differences
accumulate over time, resulting in the disproportionate and persistent use of one currency. Early
discussions of these effects include: Krugman, P. (1984), “The International Role of the Dollar:
Theory and Prospect,” in Bilson, J. and Marston, R. (eds.), Exchange Rate Theory and Practice,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 261–278; and Rey, H. (2001), “International Trade and
Currency Exchange,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 68, No 2, pp. 443–464. In line with
this,  it  is  conventionally  believed  that  it  took  between  30  and  70  years  for  the  US  dollar  to
dethrone  the  pound  sterling  as  the  leading  international  currency  once  the  United  States
surpassed the United Kingdom as the leading global economic powerhouse and trading nation
(see Triffin, R. (1960), Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The Future of Convertibility, New Haven: Yale
University  Press).  But  more  recent  scholarly  work  suggests  that  this  change  occurred  faster
than conventionally assumed because the increasing returns of networks may not be as strong
as commonly posited (see, for example, Chiţu, L., Eichengreen, B. and Mehl, A. (2014), “When
did  the  dollar  overtake  sterling  as  the  leading  international  currency?  Evidence  from  the  bond
markets,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 111, pp. 225–245).
[12]
Present and Future, Princeton University Press.
[13]
On  the  prospects  for  a  multi-polar  monetary  system,  see  also  Bénassy-Quéré,  A.  and
Cœuré, B. (2010), “Le rôle international de l’euro : chronique d’une décennie”, Revue d’économie
politique, Vol. 120, pp. 355–377.
[14]
Official reserve managers, including the ECB, have diversified a small part of their portfolios
towards  non-traditional  currencies,  with  the  shares  of  the  Chinese  renminbi, Australian  dollar,
Canadian dollar and other non-traditional units trebling to about 7% of global foreign exchange
reserves.
[15]
In purchasing power parity terms, the United States accounts for about 15% of world GDP,
compared with 11% for the euro area. Economic size is an important determinant of international
currency use in random matching models considering currency choice as a double-coincidence-
of-wants problem (see Matsuyama, K., Kiyotaki, N. and Matsui, A. (1993), “Toward a Theory of
International Currency,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 60, No 2, pp. 283–307).
[16]
area.
[17]
See  Eichengreen,  B.,  Mehl,  A.  and  Chiţu,  L.  (2017), How  Global  Currencies  Work:  Past,
The United States accounts for about 11% of global trade, compared with 14% for the euro
 15 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
See, for example, Bergsten, F. (1997), “The Dollar and the Euro,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 76, pp.
[17]
83–95.
[18]
This is the essence of the international Fisher debt-deflation channel which works through the
effects  of  monetary  policy  on  the  exchange  rate  and  inflation  risk  premia  (see  Eren,  E.  and
Malamud, S. (2018), “Dominant Currency Debt”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No 13391).
[19]
“We  believe  that  currencies  of  large  economies  heavily  used  in  international  trade  and
financial transactions should become part of the SDR basket, and that to achieve this objective,
the concerned countries should have flexible exchange rate systems, independent central banks,
and permit the free movement of capital flows.” See Geithner, T. (2011), Statement at the High-
level Seminar on the International Monetary System, Nanjing, 31 March.
[20]
Certain academics have created models to show that currency depreciations make holding a
unit  unattractive  and  discourage  its  international  use  insofar  as  it  will  not  be  perceived  as  a
reliable store of value. For example, see: Devereux, M. and Shi, S. (2013), “Vehicle Currency,”
International Economic Review, Vol. 54(1), pp. 97–133.
[21]
See Gourinchas, P.-O., Govillot, N. and Rey, H. (2011), “Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant
Duty”, Working Paper Series, University of California, Berkeley. See also Caballero, R., Farhi, E.
and  Gourinchas,  P.-O.  (2015),  “Global  Imbalances  and  Currency  Wars  at  the  ZLB,”  NBER
Working Paper, No 21670.
[22]
American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[23]
address at Harvard University’s Minda de Gunzburg Center for European Studies, 3 November.
[24]
The dynamic interaction between debt liquidity and safety is non-trivial, however, as shown in
He et al. (2019), op. cit. If global demand for safe assets is high, large debts can enhance safety
because they offer greater liquidity and so reduce rollover risk. Conversely, if demand for safe
assets is low, large debt may increase rollover risk.
[25]
See  Cœuré,  B.  (2016),  “Sovereign  debt  in  the  euro  area:  too  safe  or  too  risky?”,  keynote
See He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A. and Milbradt, K. (2019), “A Model of Safe Asset Determination,”
Chiţu, L., Eichengreen, B. and Mehl, A. (2014), op. cit.
[26]
The price-based composite indicator is about 30% below.
See  Building  a  Capital  Markets  Union  –  Eurosystem  contribution  to  the  European
[27]
Commission’s GreenPaper, 21 May 2015.
[28]
The new platform for instant payments launched by the ECB in November 2018 might offer an
alternative  to  credit  cards  for  payments  online.  The  reform  of  the  large-value  transactions
TARGET  system  would  make  it  technically  possible  to  establish  direct  links  with  comparable
systems worldwide. In turn, this would enable settlement of foreign exchange transactions and
offer an alternative to other systems.
[29]
International Currency Choice”, Economic Policy, forthcoming.
[30]
See  Eichengreen,  B.,  Mehl,  A.  and  Chiţu,  L.,  “Mars  or  Mercury?  The  Geopolitics  of
Ibid.
[31]
Europe  already  exerts  global  leadership  in  the  regulatory  domain.  The  obligation  for
companies to respect EU standards when exporting products to the Single Market, combined
with the size of this market, means that the EU tends to influence standards elsewhere – the so-
 16 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
Price increases in local currency by exporters will, of course, still be transmitted to domestic
For further details, see ECB (2015), “The international role of the euro”, Frankfurt am Main,
See  European  Central  Bank  (2016),  “Exchange  rate  pass-through  into  euro  area  inflation”,
See Gopinath, G., Itskhoki, O. and Rigobon, R. (2010), “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate
called Brussels effect. The EU is the top trading partner for no fewer than 80 countries.
[32]
Pass-Through”, American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No 1, pp. 304–336.
[33]
July.
[34]
consumer prices.
[35]
The  estimates  are  taken  from  Casas,  C.,  Diez,  F.,  Gopinath,  G.  and  Gourinchas,  P.-O.
(2017), “Dominant Currency Paradigm: A New Model for Small Open Economies”, IMF Working
Papers, No 17/264.
[36]
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy in standard and non-
standard times”, speech at the workshop “Monetary policy in non-standard times”, Frankfurt am
Main,  11  September.  It  is  ultimately  the  source  of  exchange  rate  movements  that  is  likely  to
determine the degree, and at times even the direction, of pass-through to consumer prices. For
the  role  of  import  shares,  see  Campa,  J.  and  Goldberg,  L.  (2005),  “Exchange  Rate  Pass-
Through into Import Prices”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87(4), pp. 679–690.
[37]
Economic Bulletin, July.
[38]
Concerns about foreign influences on domestic monetary policy are of course not new. As
early  as  the  1970s,  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  was  expressing  misgivings  about  the  rapid
internationalisation  of  the  Deutsche  Mark,  fearing  that  it  could  lead  to  heightened  “hot  money”
flows that would, in turn, make monetary aggregates more volatile and difficult to interpret.
[39]
And to the extent that such flight-to-safety flows affect the exchange rate, the aforementioned
reduced  pass-through  to  import  prices  that  international  currencies  imply  also  mitigate  more
direct effects on domestic prices.
[40]
See  Bernanke,  B.  (2005),  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current Account  Deficit”,
speech  at  the  Homer  Jones  Lecture,  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  14  April.  On  the  impact  and
transmission channel of foreign official purchases on US Treasury yields in the mid-2000s, see
also: Kaminska, I. and Zinna, G. (2014), “Official Demand for U.S. Debt; Implications for U.S.
Real  Interest  Rates”, IMF  Working  Papers,  No  14/66;  and  Krishnamurthy,  A.  and  Vissing-
Jorgensen, A. (2012), “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt”,  Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 120, No 2, pp. 233–267.
[41]
See, for instance, Warnock, F. and Warnock, V. (2009), “International capital flows and U.S.
interest rates”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 28(6), pp. 903–919; and Beltran,
D., Kretchmer, M., Marquez, J. and Thomas, C. (2013), “Foreign holdings of U.S. Treasuries and
U.S. Treasury yields”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 32(C), pp. 1120–1143.
[42]
programmes”, speech at the 2018 US Monetary Policy Forum, New York City, 23 February.
[43]
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “The persistence and signalling power of central bank asset purchase
See IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (2018).
[44]
Bruno  and  Shin  (2015)  argue  that  looser  US  monetary  policy  encourages  global  banks  to
leverage more in dollars (on the supply side) and emerging markets to borrow more in dollars (on
the  demand  side).  The  latter  reflects  the  fact  that  the  ensuing  dollar  depreciation  flatters
 17 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
emerging markets’ balance sheets, hence appearing less risky. See Bruno, V. and Shin, H. S.
(2015),  “Capital  flows  and  the  risk-taking  channel  of  monetary  policy”, Journal  of  Monetary
Economics, Vol. 71(C), pp. 119–132. Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015) find evidence of large
financial spillovers from the hegemon to the rest of the world. US monetary policy explains an
important  share  of  the  variance  of  returns  of  risky  assets  around  the  world.  See  Miranda-
Agrippino, S. and Rey, H. (2015), “US Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle”, NBER
Working Paper, No 21722.
[45]
NBER Working Paper No 23988
See  Boz,  E.,  Gopinath,  G.  and  Plagborg-Møller,  M.  (2017),  “Global  Trade  and  the  Dollar”,
 18 / 18
BIS central bankers' speeches
