Timothy  Lane:  Taking  precautions  -  the  Canadian  approach  to
foreign reserves management
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Peterson Institute
for International Economics, Washington DC, 6 February 2019.
Introduction
 Foreign exchange reserves, and their use for interventions in the foreign exchange market, have
played a notable and sometimes controversial role in the world economy and financial system.
This is partly because of their sheer size—estimated at some US$11 trillion worldwide. Changes
in holdings of foreign exchange reserves, and in how they are invested, can matter—not just for
exchange rates, but potentially for a whole range of asset prices. Reserves are usually seen as
an  important  element  of  self-insurance  that  complements  the  access  to  financing  provided  to
countries by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and other multilateral organizations.
In contrast, Canada’s foreign exchange reserves stand out for their relatively modest size and
their  stability.  Our  reserves  are  about  US$85  billion,  some  5  per  cent  of  our  gross  domestic
product (GDP). This compares with the 10-year average of about 13 per cent of GDP for other
advanced economies and 20 per cent for emerging-market economies.
A  key  reason  Canada’s  international  reserves  are  nonetheless  adequate  is  our  freely  floating
exchange rate. Canada adopted a flexible exchange rate in 1950 and, except for an eight-year
stretch in the 1960s, our dollar has floated ever since. We have not intervened to stabilize the
Canadian dollar for over two decades now.
This is a period that encompassed major changes in our exchange rate. During the commodities
supercycle,  the  Canadian  dollar  rose  from  62  cents  US  in  2002  to  $1.08  in  2007.  During  the
global financial crisis, it dropped sharply to as low as 76 cents US before settling above parity for
almost five years. It depreciated by about 25 per cent again with the collapse of oil prices in 2014,
and has fluctuated around 75 cents US since then.
These  exchange  rate  movements  helped  the  economy  adjust  to  the  shocks.  Such  shifts  are
always  painful  for  some  and  beneficial  for  others.  But  the  Canadian  economy  is  diverse  and
dynamic and, over time, able to achieve a new balance of growth among regions and sectors.
In  my  talk  today,  I’m  going  to  expand  on  these  points  and  explain  why  we  stopped  using  our
reserves to stabilize our dollar. A central theme is that, because we no longer use them routinely
to  intervene  in  foreign  exchange  markets,  we  hold  reserves  mainly  as  a  precaution  against
extreme tail events. I’ll discuss what we consider to be an adequate level of reserves and how
we manage them.
Why not intervene?
Canada’s foreign exchange reserves belong to the Government of Canada, while in a number of
other countries they are an asset of the central bank. They are managed within the terms of an
established governance  framework  by  the  Department  of  Finance  and  the  Bank  of  Canada.
Together, we develop strategies and policies for the management of the reserves. The Bank, as
the government’s fiscal agent, carries out related market transactions.
Most of the time, exchange rate movements driven by the market have contributed to Canada’s
economic stability—helping our economy ride the rising and falling tides of the global economy.
As a commodity exporter, Canada has been subject to swings in world commodity prices which
affect our terms of trade. Let me make a few observations related to recent experience.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
To a certain extent, movements in the Canadian dollar reflect the comparative strengths of the
Canadian  and  US  economies—which  are  linked,  in  turn,  to  expectations  for  each  country’s
monetary policy path. We’ve seen these forces shift significantly over time.
In particular, the past year has seen an important change in the relative performance of the two
economies—despite the fact that the Canadian economy is generally in a good place. Economic
activity has been running close to potential for nearly two years and economic growth has been
solid. Unemployment rates have been at historic lows, employment creation has been strong and
inflation has been hovering around our 2 per cent target. In that context, we took steps to move
our policy interest rate upward by a cumulative 1¼ percentage points.
But uncertainty about US trade policies has been holding back Canadian business investment
below what our strong economic fundamentals would indicate. Lower oil prices in recent months
have caused a deterioration of Canada’s terms of trade, which in turn reduces domestic income
and wealth. Housing investment and consumption spending have also softened. The result has
been a temporary slowing of Canada’s economic growth. Meanwhile, the US economy has been
powering ahead with the effects of the fiscal stimulus and, in response, the Federal Reserve has
taken  several  steps  over  the  last  year  to  move  interest  rates  toward  their  neutral  level.  This
combination of factors has been putting downward pressure on the Canadian dollar. The lower
Canadian dollar, in turn, will help support the economy through this period.
It’s been almost half a century since we set a target for the exchange rate. By and large, the
exchange rate movements delivered by the market have served Canada well. Trying to hold the
dollar constant would have given us larger fluctuations in unemployment, output and inflation.
Nonetheless,  for  many  years  we  did  have  a  policy  of  routinely  using  our  foreign  reserves  to
resist, in an automatic fashion, any significant upward or downward pressure on the dollar. For
example,  between  1995  and  1998,  we  intervened  roughly  150  times.  We  weren’t  targeting  a
particular level for the exchange rate but simply smoothing its movements. This reflected a belief
at the time that markets did not function efficiently and could give rise to volatility that could be
destabilizing.
But this view gradually gave way to the weight of evidence and experience. By 1998, we had
concluded that such interventions weren’t particularly effective. We saw the futility of attempting
to  moderate  exchange  rate  movements  caused  by changes  in  the  underlying  fundamental
factors. Trying to counter them was a bit like tapping on the brakes while skidding on ice. It can
help, momentarily, but not by much.
So where does that leave us?
We  do  have  a  policy  framework  that would  allow  us  to  intervene  in  the  unlikely  event  that  it’s
needed. That could happen under two scenarios. The first would be a market breakdown with
extreme price volatility. Buyers or sellers would be increasingly unwilling to transact, indicating a
severe  lack  of  liquidity  in  the  Canadian-dollar  market.  The  second  would  be  sharp  currency
movements that seriously threaten the conditions that support sustainable, long-term economic
growth. In a market breakdown, intervention would aim to restore market functioning and would
likely be quite short-lived. In extreme currency movements, it’s understood that intervention would
be part of a broader set of policy changes to re-establish confidence in Canadian economy. This
framework is transparent—it is posted on our website.
Thus, we are ready to intervene, if necessary. But as I said, we have not seen the need to do so
at any time throughout the past two—often turbulent—decades.
There have, however, been a couple of occasions over that period when Canada participated in
concerted  intervention  along  with  other  countries.  In  2011,  Canada  joined  an  action  to  stem
excess volatility and disorderly movements in the exchange rate of the Japanese yen following
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  earthquake  and  resulting  tsunami  and  nuclear  crisis  at  the  Fukushima  nuclear  plant.  The
intervention involved selling the yen against our respective domestic currencies to send a clear
signal  that  the  goal  was  to  weaken  the  yen  and  not  to  strengthen  other  currencies.  And  in
September 2000, we joined the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  Bank  of  England  to  support  the  euro.  These  episodes  were  in
response to exceptional developments affecting other currencies of global importance, and were
not specifically aimed at influencing the Canadian dollar.
How much is enough? 
How, then, should we think about Canada’s current level of foreign exchange reserves?
Internationally, a number of factors influence reserve holdings. In some cases, such as China,
movements  in  international  reserves  are  largely  a  by-product  of  the  country’s  exchange  rate
regime and associated trade and capital flows. A number of countries, typically emerging-market
economies, may choose to hold large reserves to offset volatility in capital flows and, in some
cases, to ride out trade imbalances resulting from the fluctuations in the prices of their major
exports.  Among advanced economies, Switzerland accumulated large reserve holdings when it
set a floor for its exchange rate. In contrast, our flexible exchange rate and non-intervention policy
allow us to keep a much smaller level of reserves.
1
Given that we intervene so rarely, why do we hold any reserves? And how do we gauge whether
they are adequate for our needs?
First,  we  must  be  prepared  to  intervene  in  case  of  events  that  are  even  more  severe,  and
improbable, than those we have experienced in recent decades. We periodically examine such
extreme scenarios and estimate the scale of intervention that would be required.
A second important purpose of our foreign exchange reserves is to ensure that the Government
of  Canada  can  meet  its  payment  obligations  in  situations  where  normal  access  to  funding
markets  may  be  disrupted  or  delayed.  Reserves  help  insure  against  rollover  risks  for  public
borrowing.  While Canada has not faced any such difficulties since the Second World War, the
Government  of  Canada reassessed its own potential liquidity needs  in  the  wake  of  the  global
financial crisis. It opted for a larger buffer—and accordingly, beefed up both its demand deposits
and its foreign exchange reserves.
2
Third, Canada’s foreign exchange reserves serve to reinforce confidence in the soundness of the
Canadian financial system. They are among several factors that do so. Canadian banks manage
their  risks  prudently  and  are  well-regulated  and  supervised.  Even  during  the  financial  crisis,
banks remained in good financial health and did not have to rely on direct official support. Ten
years  later,  Canada’s  financial  institutions  have  ample  buffers  of  capital  and  liquidity  and  the
system remains resilient.
Financial institutions are expected to take responsibility for managing their own foreign currency
exposures.  They  implement  hedging  and  funding  strategies  to  that  end.  Indeed,  so  do  other
major Canadian foreign-currency borrowers, such as provincial governments.
In the unlikely event that a Canadian financial institution had exceptional needs for liquidity in US
dollars or other foreign currencies, the swap lines the Bank of Canada has established with other
G7 central banks would enable us to obtain funds in any of four other currencies. These lines
were  introduced  in  response  to  the  global  financial  crisis.  They  were  renewed  in  response  to
market stresses in Europe and later turned into standing agreements. The Bank of Canada has
never drawn on these swap lines, nor has it faced a request to provide Canadian dollars. But
these arrangements are available if needed.
Even though it is very unlikely that Canada’s foreign exchange reserves would need to be drawn
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
down for financial stability purposes, their existence provides further reassurance of the safety
and  soundness  of  the  Canadian  financial  system.  Such  confidence,  in  turn,  helps  maintain
stability in times of financial stress.
All this considered, Canada holds foreign exchange reserves as a precaution against extreme
events.  Even  though  Canada  has  had  no  history  of  such  events,  we  know  from  international
experience that they are possible.
So far, I’ve emphasized the role of Canada’s reserves in serving Canadian purposes. I should
also mention the use of our reserves in our role as a good global citizen.  Part  of  our  Official
International  Reserves—around  US$10  billion—are  held  at  the  IMF.  Canada,  like  a  number  of
other advanced economies, also makes a portion of its reserves available for IMF programs.
Taking all these potential needs into consideration, Canada’s level of liquid international reserves
is  set  at  a  minimum  of  3  per  cent  of  nominal  GDP—a  floor  which  it  generally  significantly
exceeds. This level is simple to communicate to the public, credit rating agencies and investors.
While, as I’ve noted, it is low relative to many countries, it is in line with a set of similar countries
such as the United Kingdom and Australia. Together with our Department of Finance, we review
this level periodically in light of various metrics and international comparisons—and particularly
with regard to extreme scenarios that would imply a draw on reserves. The last such review,
completed in 2016, concluded that the 3 per cent minimum remains adequate to meet Canada’s
needs, even under such extreme conditions.
How do we manage our reserves?
Given  that  the  primary  purpose  of  our  international  reserves  is  precautionary,  a  key  strategic
objective in managing them is to maintain a high standard of liquidity under all circumstances.
The preservation of capital value and optimization of returns are also essential.
To maintain liquidity, we hold reserves in assets that mature or can be sold on very short notice
with minimal market impact.   
To preserve value, we minimize the risk of loss by holding a diversified portfolio of high-quality
assets, managing liquid assets and liabilities on a matched basis. 
We  aim  to  achieve  the  highest  return  while  respecting  the  objectives  of  liquidity  and  capital
preservation.
To maintain both the liquidity and capital value of reserve assets, the term to maturity of individual
assets is limited, currently to a maximum of 10½ years. This reflects the fact that shorter-term
securities are typically more liquid, and their value less sensitive to the interest rate, than longer-
term securities by the same issuer and in the same currency.
While our liquid reserves are diversified across currencies, more than half is held in US dollars,
because of the greater liquidity of US-dollar markets and since potential foreign currency needs
are most likely to be in US dollars. The remainder is held in euros, pound sterling and Japanese
yen.  We have explored the possibility of adding other currencies but decided against doing so
because they were less liquid and there were fewer investment options.
3
Let me expand on the point about asset-liability matching. Our liquid foreign reserves are held
primarily  in  the  Exchange  Fund Account  (EFA).  These  assets  are  funded  by  Government  of
Canada  liabilities  denominated  in,  or  converted  to,  foreign  currencies.  They  largely  consist  of
foreign currency securities, which are mostly government treasury bills and bonds, and fixed-
income  securities 
issuers,  sub-sovereign  entities  and
supranational institutions. Other eligible assets include deposits with commercial banks, central
banks and the Bank for International Settlements.
issued  by  sovereign-supported 
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The assets in the EFA are matched in currency and duration to the government’s liabilities that
fund  the  liquid  securities  in  order  to  minimize its exposure to currency and interest rate risks.
These matching requirements are part of our asset-liability-matching (ALM) framework. To my
knowledge, no other central bank exclusively manages reserves in this manner.
The ALM framework, which allows us to earn a positive net return, is consistent with our floating
currency.  Indeed,  if  we  intervened  continuously,  we  would  not  be  able  to  match  assets  to
liabilities. This approach has proven to be an effective way to minimize interest rate and foreign
exchange risk to the government’s fiscal position. However, there is still residual market risk that
is derived from the credit-spread exposures inherent in the assets and liabilities—and the lack of
perfect correlation between the two. Since the EFA is predominantly funded with cross-currency
swaps, there are non-zero levels of basis risk. There is also an element of credit risk, both with
regard to the issuers of reserve assets and swap counterparties.
We  conduct  our  own  risk  assessments,  including  credit  risk,  which  we  have  significantly
enhanced in response to the Financial Stability Board’s call to reduce reliance on credit rating
agencies.
In large measure, the  difference  between  our  approach  to  reserve  management  and  those  of
other reserve managers is related to the relatively small size of our reserves, our ALM framework
and our focus on liquidity. In their pursuit of higher returns, many countries are pushed to explore
alternative asset classes, such as higher-yielding bonds and equities. Moreover, most countries
have a net asset position, which means they have outright exposure to currency movements.
This increases the need for diversification into other currencies. Because our portfolio is asset-
liability matched, volatility in currency markets is a lesser concern to us.
I  should  say  a  brief  word  here  about  gold.  Some  countries  continue  to  hold  portions  of  their
reserves  in  gold,  sometimes  for  symbolic  reasons.  Canada  doesn’t.  In  1980  the  government
implemented a policy of selling its gold at a gradual and controlled pace to enhance the return for
the EFA. Gold bullion is not considered as liquid as, for example, US Treasury securities and, to
the  extent  that  physical  delivery  may  be  involved,  could  entail  significant  costs  for  secure
transport  and  storage.  As  such,  gold  doesn’t  fit  well  within  the  asset-matching  framework.
Proceeds  from  gold  sales  were  invested  in  high-quality,  interest-bearing,  foreign-currency
assets. While these assets may not have the reassuring physical heft of a gold bar, we believe
they are better suited to the purposes for which we hold reserves. The last of the government’s
gold bullion was disposed of in 2003. The gold reserves that remained were coins, which have
also since been sold.
Our dollar as a reserve currency
One of the relatively recent developments for our dollar that we are monitoring closely is its use
as  a  foreign  reserve  currency  by  other  countries.  Following  the  global  financial  crisis,  central
banks and monetary authorities around the world began adding Canadian-dollar assets to their
reserve portfolios. Reserves in Canadian dollars now amount to around $200 billion—close to 2
per cent of the global total.
The  move  to  hold  a  portion  of  reserves  in  Canadian  dollars  is  part  of  a  broader  strategy  of
reserve  diversification.  It  is  also,  in  some  sense,  a  vote  of  confidence  in  Canada:  reserve
managers tell us they are attracted by Canada’s sound financial system and fiscal position, as
reflected in its high credit ratings.
Even though the Canadian dollar is only a small share of global reserves, the total allocations to
our  dollar  may  be  large  relative  to  the  size  of  our  market.  Combined  with  the  fact  that  some
reserve portfolios are buy-and-hold, inflows from reserve managers may have a material impact
on Canada’s financial markets, particularly the government bond markets in which these flows
are  concentrated.  Although  the  flows  tend  to  be  relatively  stable,  they  may  put  downward
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
pressure on yields, lowering the government’s funding costs. At the same time, the increasing
presence  of  these  large  buy-and-hold  investors  might  negatively  affect  the  markets’  liquidity
because of the effects on secondary market trading and the availability of collateral. We continue
to  assess  the  impact  of  such  activity  on  the  bond  market  and  its  potential  implications  for
financial stability, particularly since the government debt market and the associated market for
repurchase  agreements  are  core  funding  markets.  We  also  regularly  review  our  market
operations, recognizing the influences of various holders, and have implemented policies that aid
in  providing  or  enhancing  liquidity  via  repo,  securities  lending  and  our  own  balance  sheet
management.
Finally, the impact of our own reserves on the exchange rate is negligible because of our non-
intervention policy and asset-liability matching. However, Canadian-dollar-denominated reserves
at  foreign  central  banks  as  well  as  allocations  to  Canadian-dollar  assets  by  foreign  private
investors may cause appreciation of our dollar during times of heavy portfolio inflows.
Conclusion
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  touch  on  the  new  Canada-United  States-Mexico  Agreement
(CUSMA),  or  USMCA  as  it  is  known  here,  which  has  been  signed  but  not  yet  ratified.  In  one
chapter, the parties are enjoined from manipulating their exchange rates to gain an unfair trade
advantage.  This  is  not  a  controversial  issue  for  us.  We  have  long  relied  on  our  market-
determined flexible exchange rate to absorb external shocks and cushion the economy from their
impact. This policy has served Canada well. Without a freely floating currency, prices, wages
and  unemployment  would  fluctuate  markedly,  creating  havoc  for  people  and  businesses.  A
flexible exchange rate is essential for us to be able to pursue an independent monetary policy.
We maintain a high standard of transparency, both with regard to our framework for managing
foreign exchange reserves and the publication of relevant data. This speech is another step in
making sure that our framework is well understood.
I would like to thank Wendy Chan, Eric Chouinard, Mervin Merkowsky and Maksym Padalko for
their help in preparing this speech.
1
2
3
Some prominent international literature on reserve adequacy focuses on emerging-market economies that are
subject to sudden stops in capital flows. See, for instance, O. Jeanne and R. Rancière, “The Optimal Level of
Reserves for Emerging Market Countries: A New Formula and Some Applications,”  The Economic Journal 121,
no. 555 (2011): 905–930.
The role of international reserves in mitigating rollover risk has been an important focus of the literature. See, for
instance, J. Bianchi, J. C. Hatchondo and L. Martinez, “International Reserves and Rollover Risk,” American
Economic Review 108, no. 9 (2018): 2629–2670.
As of January 2019, the currency composition of our reserves was 67 per cent USD, 19 per cent EUR, 10 per
cent GBP and 3 per cent YEN. See Official International Reserves, Department of Finance Canada.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
