Gent Sejko: Role of the banking industry in the future development
of Albania - challenges and opportunities
Address  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  to  the  discussion  meeting  with
senior banking sector officials, Tirana, 29 May 2019.
Dear banking system executives,
Dear guests, dear colleagues,
 I have the pleasure of welcoming you to this event, which brings us together to address some
issues of particular importance to the banking sector and the Albanian economy as a whole.
Today,  we  will  be  discussing  the  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  development  of Albania’s
economy, from short, medium, and long-term perspectives. This is, in our opinion, a matter of
both private and public interest.
I am confident that the discussions around this table will yield a tangible product. Our aim is to
adopt a common development philosophy that will guide the banking industry into the future, as
well  as  to  agree  on  a  concrete  and  detailed  plan  of  measures  for  improving  the  quantity  and
quality of lending and enriching the array of financial products.
This meeting takes place only two weeks after the Third Conference of the Albanian Association
of  Banks,  which  was  dedicated  to  the  sustainable  development  of  the  banking  sector  in  the
future. At  this  Conference,  where  I  had  the  honour  and  pleasure  to  address,  I  underlined  the
valuable contribution of the banking industry to Albania’s development over the past two decades
and identified some challenges and opportunities that may lie ahead for all of us, together, in the
future. In our vision, these challenges and opportunities are related to the degree and quality of
intermediation of funds in the economy – in other words, the volume and structure of credit, and
the expansion of the range of financial products – to boost financial inclusion of the population
and innovative technological development in the economy.
The premises of this meeting remain consistent with what I said earlier.
The Albanian banking sector has developed rapidly over the past two decades. Now, this sector
administers  around  2.4  million  bank  accounts  of  individuals,  and  provides  credit  to  around
327,000 economic units, of which around 307,000 are households and around 19,000 are small
or large enterprises; the rest are other public or private entities. In macroeconomic terms, the
volume of financial savings administered by the banking sector accounts for around 70% of the
GDP, whereas the volume of credit accounts for around 35% of the GDP. Moreover, in the past
two decades, the banking sector has expanded its operational network across the territory of the
country  and  has  introduced  bank  products  and  payment  instruments  in  line  with  global
developments in this sector.
In  brief,  the  banking  industry  has  contributed  to  the  development  of  the Albanian  economy  by
encouraging savings and generating credit. It has also contributed to the development of financial
markets  and  the  expansion  of  payment  instruments,  by  offering  advice  and  expertise  to
enterprises and providing for risk diversification in the economy.
In  return  to  these  contributions,  the  banking  sector  –  now  entirely  privately  owned  –  has
constantly generated positive returns and has experienced relatively low volatility in its profitability
indicators. It has offered and continues to offer a positive business prospect for all investors that
have  a  long-term  vision  and  are  dedicated  to  accompanying  Albania  on  its  journey  toward
progress and European integration.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The banking sector has been and remains the backbone of the financial system and the most
professionally avant-garde segment of the Albanian economy. I am confident that – irrespective
of  the  trend  for  expansion  and  diversification  of  other  segments  of  the  financial  market  –  the
banking sector will continue to play a unique role in the near and distant future.
In this context, I would like to share with you the vision of the Bank of Albania on development
challenges.
1. Credit as an instrument that brings together the interests of both the economy and the
banking sector
Sustainable development of the banking sector requires increased attention to its primary role:
transforming savings into financing instruments to the economy. In practical terms, the banking
industry should ensure that the credit supply concords in terms of time and diversity to the needs
of the economy, while factoring risk in directly and responsibly.
Before I elaborate on this topic, let me emphasise two key moments.
The first moment pertains to a misunderstanding we often encounter in the public opinion, even
within the professional discourse, that is the Albanian banking sector is not lending. This is not
true. Our data show that, excluding the accounting effect of the exchange rate and the write offs,
the portfolio of bank loans has recorded 6% annual growth in the last year. Moreover, the pace of
growth has shown an improving trend, in line with the overall context of the performance of the
economy.  In  parallel,  the  expansion  of  the  bank  loan  portfolio  has  shown  a  more  balanced
composition in terms of both the currency structure and the destination of funds. I would also like
to underline that the term to maturity of the bank loans portfolio is short, which means that it is
renovated  frequently.  Thus,  regardless  of  the  pace  of  change  in  the  size  of  the  portfolio,  the
Albanian banking sector continues to lend. To illustrate my point, only in 2018, the banking sector
has  granted  new  loans  amounting  to  around  EUR  1.1  billion  (equivalent)  to  fund  business
investments, house purchase and consumption.
The second moment pertains to the responsibility and the diligence of the banking sector vis-à-
vis lending. As the administrator of public savings, responsibility and due diligence in lending are
non-negotiable  conditions.  Measures  undertaken  to  bolster  the  short  and  medium-term
development of Albania should not run against its financial stability in the long term.
Yet, in coherence with my observations above, I judge that the banking sector should pay more
attention to lending. This judgement is based on two theoretical premises and is enabled by an
important precondition.
First,  a  more  proactive  approach  to  lending  is  beneficial  for  the  sustainable  and  long-term
development  of  the  banking  industry.  Low  return  on  assets  is  one  of  the  problems  facing  the
banking sector in Albania, in the region, and beyond. Such low rates of return – which in Albania
are  induced  also  by  ample  foreign  currency  liquidity  and  will  continue  to  be  favoured  by  the
reduction  trend  of  the  public  debt  and  domestic  borrowing  by  the  Government  –  increase  the
vulnerability of the sector to shocks.  Against this backdrop, the banking sector should increase
its orientation toward lending as an instrument to enhance asset profitability and boost its long-
term stability. In the same vein, leaving potential sectors or clients outside the focus will push
them to turn to other segments of the financial market. This implies less income for the banking
sector not only in the form of less income from lending, but also in the form of less income from
other products in the package of services that banks offer to clients.
Second,  a  more  proactive  approach  to  lending  is  beneficial  for  the  sustainable  and  long-term
development of the Albanian economy. Our analyses, based on the available information and the
bank lending survey for Albania suggest a divergence in the pace of improvement in loan demand
and supply.  While this divergence does not seem to have, as of yet, a substantial impact on
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
lending, if it deepens further it will jeopardise the performance of credit and the pace of economic
growth. In this light, I would like to underline that a series of studies, both at home and abroad,
emphasise the fact that the Albanian economy would benefit from credit growth, for as long as
and  provided  that  such  growth  is  based  on  firm  structural  and  institutional  premises.  It  is  our
common duty not to let this opportunity pass.
This conclusion leads me naturally to the precondition I mentioned earlier.
The Albanian economy offers positive business prospects, coupled with a high crediting potential
and reduced credit risk. This reality dictates the need and the possibility for a bolder approach
toward crediting. I have had the opportunity to elaborate – on a continuous basis – our standpoint
on the economic development perspective. I would like, however, to bring today to your attention
again that, in cooperation with the Albanian Association of Banks and the Government of Albania,
we are implementing an ambitious plan of measures for reducing non-performing loans. From a
strategic  point  of  view,  the  objective  of  this  plan  was  not  only  to  simply  clean  banks’  balance
sheets, but also to provide for a qualitative improvement of the crediting environment in Albania.
In this context, the banking industry now has a more adequate legal and regulatory framework on
protecting  the  interests  of  the  creditor,  repossessing  collateral  and  executing  it,  and  a  more
transparent environment for assessing the risk of individual borrowers.
On this basis, the Bank of Albania deems that the banking sector, should:
Pay additional attention to crediting as a commitment that generates mutual benefits both for
it and the Albanian economy;
Empower  internal  structures  and  its  analytical  and  managerial  capacities  in  terms  of
crediting;
Ensure prioritized implementation of outstanding commitments under the plan of measures
for reducing non-performing loans; and,
Be more vocal and more transparent in identifying obstacles or deficiencies it finds in the
crediting environment, both in legal and in regulatory aspects.
These recommendations should not be addressed separately from the second challenge.
2.  Efficient  allocation  of  bank  loans  as  a  precondition  for  sustainable  and  long-term
development
Increased attention to crediting does not imply merely increased attention to the volume of credit,
but  also  additional  attention  to  its  quality.  These  two  aspects  are  complementary  and  do  not
contradict each other in the long run.
The  history  of  credit  in  transition  economies,  including  Albania,  features  some  problematic
elements which we need to avoid in the future.
First,  credit  has  been  notably  concentrated  in  non-tradable  goods  and  services,  such  as
residential buildings and services, which are oriented solely – or primarily – toward the domestic
market.  Clearly,  this  trend  reflects,  at  the  same  time,  the  lack  of  managerial  knowledge  and
capacities  in  the Albanian  economy,  and  the  banks’  behaviour  in  terms  of  crediting.  This  has
produced two negative consequences: it has failed to promote the growth of productivity and the
improvement of the long-term growth pace of the domestic economy; and, it has restrained the
diversification of the production base in the economy, limiting its resilience to various shocks.
Second, a part of the credit portfolio, not quite insignificant, has been granted to borrowers who
have  been  exposed  to  and  unhedged  against  exchange  rate  volatility.  These  borrowers  have
often  had  limited  and  deficient  knowledge  on  the  exchange  rate  risk  and  have  suffered  the
consequences.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Beyond macroeconomic aspects, the structural deficiencies of crediting are, in part, responsible
for the rapid growth of non-performing loans in the post-financial crisis period.
In this context, the Bank of Albania deems that the banking sector should:
Expand  the  range  of  credit  products,  especially  with  regard  to  funding  projects,  so  as  to
ensure  a  better  coverage  of  the  sectors  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  of  the  needs  of
borrowing households;
Increase its attention to sectors that offer a high potential for returns, given the low usage of
financial  leverage,  such  as  agriculture  and  innovative  business  start-ups  in  information
technology;
Supplement the range of financial products with derivative instruments for hedging against
the exchange rate, especially for borrowers exposed to it.
3. Enriching the array of financial products and payment instruments
In addition to its primary function, intermediation of funds, the banking sector has an essential
role  to  play  in  providing  payment  services  to  the  economy.  The  scale  and  efficiency  of
accomplishing  this  role  is  in  proportionate  correlation  to  the  scale  of  financial  inclusion  of  the
population, the overall efficiency of the economy, and – why not – the level of its formalisation.
In the framework of its role as overseer of payment systems, the Bank of Albania has undertaken
a series of measures to further improve legal and regulatory frameworks. These improvements
aim to accommodate innovative technological developments in the field of payments, enhance
effectiveness by promoting competition and ensure transparency and consumer protection.
Acknowledging  the  role  of  other  institutions,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  together  with  the  National
Payment  Systems  Committee,  have  drafted  for  the  first  time  the  National  Retail  Payments
Strategy, which identified market needs and relevant measures for intervention. The goal of the
Strategy is to improve the retail payment market by providing Albanian citizens with more choices
for their daily transactions, in an easy-to-use cost-effective way, as well as to increase financial
inclusion. The Strategy has a detailed action plan; the Bank of Albania is fully committed to its
implementation.
In this framework, I would like to emphasise a notable achievement, the finalisation of the draft
law on “Payment services”, which transposes the Revised EU Directive on Payment Services
(PSD2). The draft is currently subject to public consultations. The approval of this draft-law would
provide  the  preconditions  for  promoting  innovative  technological  solutions,  and  introduction  of
more  efficient  and  less-costly  instruments. At  the  same  time,  it  contributes  to  enhancing  the
security  of  payment  services  by  addressing  risks  related  to  the  implementation  of  innovative
technological developments in these services.
In the period ahead, we will continue to improve payment services; an important initiative in this
regard is the preparation of a draft-law “On payments account” which transposes another EU
Directive. It seeks to underpin the objectives for increasing financial inclusion of the population,
which is currently at relatively low levels.
I am confident that the expansion of financial inclusion, notwithstanding its short-term costs, will
contribute significantly to bolstering your intermediation activity in the long run.
In addition to regulatory improvements, we are engaged in a series of projects on infrastructure
improvements. Such as:
Creating  a  national  platform  for  real-time  processing  of  payments.  Such  platforms  have
proven to be very effective, as they realise a payment within seconds and may replace or
supplement areas where the activity of card payments have not been effective.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Creating a national SWITCH, which implies processing a cad payment through a domestic
platform, avoiding prolonged cycles via international card processors.
Creating a system for the settlement of euro payments domestically in order to lower the
existing very high commissions resulting from the use of correspondent banks, which are
very costly.
All these legal improvements and technological modules, which are being made available to you
should be followed by concrete actions on your side, to expand the range of instruments and
lower their costs.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 The banking sector has had and will continue to have a positive development prospect in Albania.
That does not mean, however, that there are no challenges lying ahead of us. On the contrary,
there  are  numerous,  complex  and  dynamic  ones,  often  combined  with  unpredictable
development, domestically and internationally.
It  is  our  duty,  as  actors  and  regulators  of  this  industry,  to  respond  in  a  timely  and  decisive
fashion,  to  turn  the  already  identified  challenges  into  development  opportunities,  as  well  as  to
enhance the stability and resilience of the sector against unforeseeable shocks.
As we proceed, I would like to invite you all to openly share your thoughts on these issues. I am
certain that a constructive dialogue will enable us to prepare a concrete, realistic, and – why not
– ambitious plan.
Once again, let me reiterate that the banking sector is a national treasure and a strategic sector.
This status allows it to have an important voice in the formulation of development policies, along
with an obligation to serve with utmost commitment to the economy and the society.
Thank You!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
