Yannis  Stournaras:  The  Greek  economy  10  years  after  the  crisis
and lessons for the future both for Greece and the Eurozone
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the European Court of
Auditors, Luxembourg, 28 June 2019.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It gives me great pleasure to be here today. The European Court of Auditors (ECA), representing
the  interests  of  the  European  taxpayer,  has  a  key  role  to  play.  It  is  responsible  for  checking
whether the European Union spends its money in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the EU budget and for the purposes for which this money is intended. To this end, besides its
other  activities,  the  2017  ECA  special  report  on  the  Commission’s  intervention  in  the  Greek
financial  crisis  provided  us  with  invaluable  lessons  about  the  design  of  such  support
programmes and about the remaining challenges for the Greek economy. Benefiting from the
insights  of  this  report,  I  will  present  to  you  my  own  views  on  the  state  of  play  in  the  Greek
economy  10  years  after  the  crisis  and  on  the  lessons  to  be  learned  for  Greece  and  the
Eurozone.
1. Brief overview and lessons from the Greek crisis
In Greece, the sharp deterioration in the fiscal and the macroeconomic environment in 2008 and
2009, and the subsequent downgrades of sovereign debt and rising sovereign spreads, cut off
the  Greek  sovereign  and  banks  from  international  capital  and  money  markets.  Substantial
deposit withdrawals and extremely tight liquidity conditions put strain on the banking sector. An
EU-IMF financed economic adjustment programme was initiated in 2010, aimed to correct the
imbalances.
The  crisis  has  taken  a  heavy  toll  on  output,  incomes  and  wealth.  Between  2008  and  2016,
Greece lost over one fourth of its GDP at constant prices, and the unemployment rate rose by
nearly 16 percentage points. Furthermore, GDP per capita at purchasing power parity declined to
67.4% of the EU average in 2018, down from 93.3% in 2008. Meanwhile, there was a large brain
drain and massive underinvestment, with immeasurable economic and social consequences.
The deterioration in the macroeconomic environment and the slide of the GDP growth rate into
negative  territory  raised  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  to  unsustainable  levels  despite  the  fiscal
consolidation and caused debt-servicing problems for households and businesses. As a result,
non-performing loans (NPLs) rose substantially, weakening banks’ asset quality, thus making it
difficult for banks to finance the real economy. Resolving the Greek crisis took eight years, three
economic  adjustment  programmes,  major  debt  restructuring  and  three  rounds  of  bank
recapitalisation.
Several factors can explain the length and depth of the Greek crisis:
First, the size and speed of fiscal consolidation were unprecedented. This primarily had to do
with  the  fact  that  the  initial  macroeconomic  imbalances  were  much  higher  in  Greece  than  in
other Member States under financial stress.
Second,  the  fiscal  multipliers  turned  out  to  be  higher  than  initially  anticipated,  aggravating  the
recession.  As  a  result,  the  economy  was  soon  caught  in  a  vicious  circle  of  austerity  and
recession.
Third, given the size of the initial fiscal imbalances, more emphasis was initially placed on tax
hikes rather than expenditure cuts, growth-enhancing reforms, privatisations, tackling tax evasion
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
and reorganising the public sector.
Fourth, the idiosyncratic sequencing of structural reforms led to real wages declining more than
initially planned, deepening the recession. The reform effort focused much more on the labour
market than on goods and services markets. Hence, nominal wages declined faster and more
strongly  than  prices.  Households  experienced  a  massive  drop  in  purchasing  power,  which,  in
turn, constrained personal consumption and deepened the recession.
Fifth,  the  non-performing  loans  (NPL)  problem  proved  more  difficult  to  manage  than  initially
anticipated. Mainly the result of economic contraction, it was further exacerbated by legislative
changes  such  as  the  blanket  moratorium  on  primary  residence  auctions  and  the  abuse  of
foreclosure  protection  (under  Law  3869/2010),  as  well  as  several  other  legal  and  judicial
impediments. A more dynamic response during the first years of the crisis, by implementing the
necessary  legislative  changes  much  earlier  and  introducing  a  centralised  asset  management
framework for NPLs as other Member States have done, could have reduced the problem we
face today.
Sixth,  certain  reforms  fell  behind  the  agreed  time  schedule  due  to  several  factors,  including:
insufficient  ownership  of  the  necessary  reforms;  populist  rhetoric,  rivalry  and  failure  of  the
political  parties  to  reach  an  understanding;  and  the  resistance  of  various  –  small  and  large  –
vested interests to reform.
Seventh, political economy deliberations in the euro area also played their part in delaying the
recovery of the Greek economy. The Eurogroup decision of November 2012 to grant further debt
relief was put off for several years and was implemented only in June 2018. This undermined the
growth prospects of the Greek economy and prolonged the crisis.
2. Progress since the beginning of the debt crisis
Despite the missteps, occasional backsliding and delays, significant progress has been made
since the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis in 2010. The implementation of a bold economic
adjustment programme has eliminated the root causes of the Greek crisis. It is particularly worth
noting that:
The fiscal adjustment was unprecedented, turning a primary deficit of 10.1% of GDP in 2009
into  a  primary  surplus  of  4.3%  of  GDP  in  2018  (according  to  the  enhanced  surveillance
definition). The primary surplus exceeded the programme target for the fourth year in a row.
The current account deficit has been reduced by 12 percentage points of GDP since the
beginning of the crisis.
Labour  cost  competitiveness  has  been  fully  restored,  and  price  competitiveness  has
recorded substantial gains since 2009.
A bold programme of structural reforms was implemented, covering various areas, such as
the  pension  and  healthcare  systems,  goods  and  services  markets,  the  business
environment, the tax system, the budgetary framework and public sector transparency.
The banking system has been restructured. Only four large banks control today over 95% of
the market, as more than ten other banks have been merged or liquidated. Meanwhile, the
role of the Bank of Greece was pivotal in the restructuring and recapitalisation of the banking
system, as well as in the enhancement of its corporate governance. Today, banks’ capital
adequacy ratios stand at satisfactory levels, and their loan-loss provisions are sufficient to
address potential credit risks.
Furthermore, a number of important reforms have been implemented, aiming to provide banks
with  an  array  of  tools  to  tackle  the  problem  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs),  including  a
strengthening of the supervisory framework by setting operational targets for NPL reduction, the
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
creation of a secondary NPL market and the removal of various legal, judicial and administrative
barriers to the management of NPLs.
These actions have started to bear fruit, as shown by the continued reduction of the NPL stock in
line with the targets set. Non-performing loans amounted to €80 billion at the end of March 2019,
down by €27.2 billion from their peak in March 2016. However, the NPL ratio remains high, at
45.2% in March 2019.
On  account  of  the  reforms  implemented  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis  and  the  effort  of
enterprises to make up for declining domestic demand by exporting to new markets, following the
improvement in competitiveness, openness has increased substantially, and the economy has
started to rebalance towards tradable, export-oriented sectors.
The share of total exports in GDP increased from 19.0% in 2009 to 36% in 2018. Exports of
goods  and  services,  excluding  the  shipping  sector,  have  increased  in  real  terms  by  60%
since their trough in 2009, outperforming euro area exports as a whole.
The volume of tradable goods and services in the economy increased cumulatively between
2010  and  2017  by  approximately  14%  relative  to  non-tradables  in  terms  of  gross  value
added.  The  rebalancing  of  the  economy  towards  the  internationally  tradable  sectors  was
facilitated by increases in the relative prices and net profit margins of tradable goods and
services.  It  is  worth  underlining  the  fact  that,  in  2017,  the  estimated  net  profit  margins  of
tradables were three times higher than those of non-tradables.
Thanks to the improved economic conditions and the reforms implemented, the unemployment
rate, though still high, fell to 19.2% in the first quarter of 2019, from 27.8% at the end of 2013.
3. The outlook of the Greek economy
Following the stagnation of 2015–2016, GDP growth turned positive in 2017 (1.5%) and picked-
up to 1.9% in 2018. Recent real GDP data point to continued, albeit decelerating, expansion in
the  first  quarter  of  2019  (1.3%  y-o-y).  Looking  forward,  the Bank  of  Greece  expects  that
economic activity will remain on a positive growth trajectory, growing by 1.9% in 2019 and 2.1%
in  2020.  The  catching-up  effect  from  a  long  depression  is  projected  to  counterbalance  the
negative  effect  of  the  global  slowdown.  Growth  will  be  driven  by  robust,  though  decelerating,
export  performance;  solid  private  consumption  growth,  supported  by  rising  employment  and
gradually rising compensation per employee; and increased investment spending, reflecting the
implementation  of  new  investment  projects,  thanks  to  the  gradual  improvement  in  both
confidence and financing conditions, as the acceleration in NPL reduction is expected to improve
bank lending.
The outlook is subject to downside risks, related both to the external and domestic environment.
The  global  growth  and  trade  slowdown  could  affect  export  growth  more  markedly,  while  a
disorderly Brexit is also a significant downside risk to the forecast. A possible sharp correction in
global financial markets could increase the cost and reduce the availability of funding. There are
also downside risks on the fiscal front due to ongoing court rulings on pensions cuts, which could
weigh  on  debt  sustainability. Additional  risks  for  the  budget  outcome  in  2019  arise  from  the
recently implemented (May 2019) expansionary fiscal package. However, there are also upside
risks  relating  to  a  possible  acceleration  of  NPL  reduction,  which  would  improve  financing
conditions for companies and households, as well as to an acceleration of investment.
4. The Greek economy continues to face major challenges
Despite  the  progress  made  so  far,  major  challenges  and  crisis-related  legacies  remain.  For
example, the European Commission, in its 2019 report for the European Semester, points out
that  Greece  faces  excessive  macroeconomic  imbalances.  In  particular,  the  main  challenges
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
are: 
Τhe high stock of non-performing loans (NPLs), which impairs banks’ lending capacity and
delays the recovery of investment and economic activity.
The high public debt (whose sustainability improved significantly in the medium term with the
measures adopted by the Eurogroup in June 2018) creates uncertainty about the country’s
ability to service its debt in the long term, raising the cost of borrowing both for the public and
for the private sector, and hampering growth prospects. On top of all this, maintaining large
primary surpluses over a prolonged period (e.g. 3.5% of GDP until 2022) impacts negatively
on GDP growth. The restrictive effect of large primary surpluses is even more pronounced
when  accompanied  by  very  high  taxation,  which  increases  the  informal  sector  of  the
economy, and public investment spending under-execution.
The  still  negative  current  account  balance  and  the  negative  net  international  investment
position.
The slow digital transformation of the economy. Based on the Digital Economy and Society
Index of the European Commission, Greece for the year 2019 is ranked 26th among the 28
EU countries, which implies a high risk of technological lag and digital illiteracy.
The still high unemployment rate, which generates inequalities that threaten social cohesion
and increases the risk of human capital erosion.
The projected demographic decline (due to population ageing and outward migration), which
exerts downward pressure on potential growth.
The multi-year recession has left an extremely large investment gap and risks permanently
impairing  the  productive  capacity  of  the  Greek  economy  through  a  hysteresis  effect.  In-
house  estimates  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  indicate  that  the  net  capital  stock  of  the  Greek
economy  (at  constant  2010  prices)  declined  by  €65.1  billion  in  the  period  2010–2016.  In
order  to  raise  the  net  capital  stock  over  the  next  decade  to  pre-crisis  levels,  gross  fixed
capital  formation  at  constant  prices  needs  to  increase  by  about  10%  per  year  by  2029.
Excluding residential investment, gross fixed capital formation at constant prices needs to
increase by about 5% per year by 2029.
Without ignoring the effects of relatively low domestic demand, the higher cost of capital and
funding  constraints  that  hinder  new  investment,  the  business  environment  cannot  be
considered  investment-friendly  and  discourages  investment.  This  is  due  to  the  high  tax
rates,  excessive  red  tape,  the  existence  of  barriers  and  obstacles  that  have  proven  to
hamper investment, and delays in court proceedings and rulings. In this context, it should be
noted that non-price competitiveness, so-called “structural competitiveness", is not only low
compared to the European partners, but has in fact fallen in recent years, according to the
ease of doing business index of the World Bank (October 2018), the global competitiveness
index of the World Economic Forum (October 2018) and the global competitiveness ranking
for 2019 of the IMD World Competitiveness Center.
5. The prerequisites for sustainable growth
To address the challenges facing the Greek economy, speed up the recovery and strengthen
investor confidence in Greece’s long-term economic prospects, economic policy should focus
on the following policy actions:
1st  Reducing  the  high  stock  of  NPLs  with  the  timely  implementation  of  the  systemic  solution
proposed by the Bank of Greece, as well as the solution proposed by the Ministry of Finance,
which will supplement banks’ own efforts.
2nd  Reducing  the  primary  surplus  target  from  3.5%  of  GDP  to  2.2%  until  2022  as  well  as
changing the fiscal policy mix, with an emphasis on lower tax rates and higher public investment,
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
so as to boost the growth impact of fiscal policy. With a public debt-to-GDP ratio of 180%, higher
growth (or lower interest rates) is 1.8 times more effective in reducing the debt ratio than a higher
primary surplus.
3rd Broadening the scope for public-private cooperation, in line with best international practices,
for  example  by  strengthening  public-private  partnerships  in  investment,  social  security  and
healthcare.
4th  Improving  the  effectiveness  of  public  administration  and  the  efficiency  of  state-owned
enterprises.
5th Stepping up the pace of the privatisation programme and improving the management of state
assets.
6th  Implementing  a  more  focused  policy  for attracting  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI), as
domestic  savings  are  insufficient  to  meet  the  investment  needs  of  the  Greek  economy.
Emphasis  should  be  placed  on  reducing  the  tax  burden,  improving  public  administration
efficiency  and  removing  major  disincentives,  such  as  bureaucracy,  legislative  and  regulatory
ambiguity, especially regarding land use, and the remaining capital controls.
7th Maintaining labour market flexibility and pursuing structural reforms in the goods and services
markets in order to boost competition and increase innovation and productivity growth.
8th Improving the quality and safeguarding the independence of public institutions. Independent
and well-functioning institutions enhance long-term economic growth. In this context, a speedier
delivery  of  justice,  legal  certainty  and  a  clear  and  stable  legal  framework  are  essential
conditions  for  strengthening  the  public’s  sense  of  fairness  and  justice,  for  improving  the
investment climate and for accelerating economic growth.
9th  Enhancing the so-called “knowledge triangle”, i.e. education, research and innovation, as
well as the digitalisation of the economy by adopting policies and reforms that support research,
technology  diffusion,  entrepreneurship  and  foster  closer  ties  between  businesses,  research
centres and universities. This would contribute to further increasing R&D spending and the ICT
sector’s  share  in  GDP.  However,  exploitation  of  ICT  calls  for  continuous  development  and
training in new technologies, the adoption of innovative products and the enhancement of start-up
entrepreneurship. Overall, sustained efforts are required to foster innovation and R&D spending
in order to boost Greece’s digital transformation.
6. The EMU dimension
6.1 Progress over the past 20 years
The  euro  area  was  quite  successful  during  its  first  ten  years.  Real  GDP  per  capita  grew  on
average at par with the US, there was substantial nominal and real convergence, and the ECB
was  able  to  credibly  bring  inflation  close  to  target.  During  the  first  decade  of  Economic  and
Monetary  Union  (EMU),  the  number  of  EMU  members  increased  from  the  original  11  to  15.
Moreover, the euro immediately became the second most important world currency. The euro’s
share in foreign currency reserves has remained broadly stable at 20% since its creation.
The low interest rate environment and easy access to credit slowed down structural reforms and
led to excessive public and private borrowing. The financial crisis of 2007–2009 and the euro
area sovereign debt crisis that followed, brought to the surface the flaws in the initial design of
EMU.  EMU  lacked  the  tools  to  avert  and  to  contain  the  crisis.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact
(SGP) failed to control the build-up of public debt in the pre-crisis period. There was no sufficient
monitoring and control over macroeconomic imbalances, such as the evolution of the current
account and private debt. The sovereign-bank “doom loop” amplified the financial crisis and the
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
recession.  Euro  area  crisis  management  and  resolution  tools  were  poor  or  non-existent  on
account  of  concerns  about  moral  hazard,  and  due  to  the  lack  of  the  appropriate  institutional
setting. There was no provision for risk-sharing in the initial EMU architecture. In this context, the
ECB forcefully stepped in to restore market confidence, to contain the sovereign debt crisis and
to support the euro area economy, by safeguarding price and financial stability.
The ECB’s response provided the time required for euro area governments to take the actions
necessary  to  strengthen  the  EMU.  Policy  actions  have  focused  on  addressing  institutional
weaknesses, structural fragilities and excessive risk-taking that led to the sovereign debt crisis
and the negative feedback loop between sovereigns and banks, which in turn undermined euro
area  stability.  The  key  initiatives  were  the  provision  of  intergovernmental  loans  to  Greece;  the
establishment of the EFSF, and its successor the ESM; the creation of a banking union with a
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  introduction  of
stricter rules on banking regulation and supervision; the establishment of the European Systemic
Risk Board and the development of appropriate macro-prudential tools, which allowed greater
emphasis on identifying and addressing system-wide risks; the strengthening of the SGP; the
initiation of the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure and the European Semester. As a result of
the above initiatives, all Member States that received EU-IMF assistance are back on their feet,
macroeconomic  imbalances  have  been  corrected  to  a  large  extent,  and  growth  has  been
restored. Economic expansion in the euro area as a whole continues, albeit at a slower pace,
and  EU  banks  have  become  more  resilient  to  financial  shocks  over  the  past  two  years,  as
reflected  in  the  results  of  the  recent  EU-wide  stress  tests.  Moreover,  EMU  admitted  four
additional Member States in the course of the crisis years.
Notable  progress  was  made  in  the  June  2019  Euro  Summit,  where  a  broad  agreement  was
reached  a)  on  the  budgetary  instrument  for  convergence  and  competitiveness  (BICC)  for  the
euro area (and for ERM II Member States on a voluntary basis) and b) on revising the ESM
treaty  text  to  allow  for  a  common  backstop  for  bank  resolution  and  an  instrument  of
precautionary  financial  assistance.  The  Eurogroup  will  continue  its  work  on  both  issues  as  a
matter of priority.
6.2 Remaining challenges
Despite  the  progress  achieved  so  far  and  the  good  overall  economic  situation,  the  euro  area
faces  several  challenges  ahead.  The  recovery  of  the  euro  area  from  the  financial  crisis  lags
behind  the  recovery  of  global  competitors.  This  reflects  weak  productivity  performance  and  a
lagging  behind  in  innovation  and  digital  technologies.  Moreover,  population  ageing  and  climate
change pose serious concerns about the longer-term outlook of the euro area economy.
After the crisis, we have seen a home bias in investment and a flow of euro-area excess savings
towards the rest of the world rather than within the EU (from higher to lower GDP per capita
countries). This has also led to a halt in financial integration, which weakens private risk-sharing
in the euro area. It is striking that in the euro area only 20% of shocks to GDP growth can be
smoothed via capital markets, compared with 40% in the United States.
Economic convergence in terms of real GDP per capita among the 12 old euro area countries
(EA12) has stopped since 2010. There is real divergence even if Greece is excluded. Only the
new euro area Member States have showed sustained convergence. Divergence has widened
also in terms of unemployment rates and in terms of income inequality indicators, such as the
share of population at risk of poverty or social exclusion or the ratio of total income received by
the 20% of the population with the highest income to that received by the 20% of the population
with the lowest income (S80/S20 income quintile ratio), in particular among the 12 old euro area
Member States.
Real  divergence,  the  weakening  of  social  convergence  and  the  North-South  divide  due  to  the
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
sovereign debt crisis, coupled with the effect of globalisation and the digital revolution on the low-
skilled  and  the  rise  in  migration,  have  created  social  tensions,  sparked  anti-EU  rhetoric  and
propagated mistrust towards European policies and institutions. The greatest manifestations of
these  have  been  Brexit  and  the  rise  of  populist  anti-EU  voices  and  political  parties  across
Europe.  Nevertheless,  according  to  recent  surveys,  more  than  two  thirds  of  the  euro  area
citizens have positive views about the euro, and trust in EU institutions at the EU-28 level has
improved relative to the past.
Last but not least, the financial system continuously innovates, the work of regulators comes with
a lag and shadow banks remain insufficiently monitored and under-regulated. Further challenges
arise from geopolitical risks, trade disputes or even trade wars, or cyber-risks. As central banks,
we have to be prepared for all contingencies.
6.3 Policy actions needed to deepen EMU
Central banks are expected to continue to use the asset side of their balance sheets, as well as
other tools such as forward guidance, in addition to their standard interest rate policies, as the
effective lower bound will likely continue to be a binding constraint on interest rate policy in a low
inflation,  low  interest  rate  environment.  However,  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  stabilize  the
economy in perpetuity. Fiscal policy should also be active in Member States with sufficient fiscal
and current account space. To address the remaining challenges and to be better prepared for a
future crisis, we must also take action now in order to further deepen EMU. At the moment there
is no appetite for a fully-fledged political and fiscal union. However, there are important steps that
we can take in order to enhance the functioning of EMU.
In the financial sector, it is a priority to complete the Banking Union by creating the European
Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS), and the Capital Markets Union (CMU). The completion of the
Banking  Union  will  improve  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  by  cutting  the  still  strong  bank-
sovereign  link.  More  developed  and  integrated  capital  and  banking  markets  will  improve  the
financing of the real economy by diversifying the sources of financing, and will facilitate private
risk-sharing through the capital and credit channels. Moreover, the more risk is shared through
the private channel, the less fiscal risk-sharing is needed . Ηowever, we should make sure that
the expansion of the non-bank sector does not endanger financial stability.
1
The integration and connection of European financial centres in the context of the Capital Markets
Union  becomes  even  more  important  in  view  of  Brexit.  The  emphasis  on  sustainable  finance
and,  recently,  on  the  pan-European  personal  pension  product  (PEPP),  and  possibly  the
development of occupational pensions or investment savings accounts, may be a way forward in
order  to  boost  the  demand  for  the  CMU.  However,  the  cross-border  portability  of  these
instruments  is  key  to  their  success.  Besides  harmonisation  towards  best  practices  in
securitisation,  accounting,  insolvency  law,  company  law  and  property  rights,  we  need  to  take
steps  that  address  the  debt-equity  bias,  to  improve  financial  literacy  and  revive  the  equity
investment culture.
We must take steps to enhance public sector risk-sharing in EMU by creating a centralised fiscal
stabilisation tool. The recent agreement on the new budgetary instrument is expected to enhance
the resilience and adjustment capacities of euro area economies as well as the mechanisms of
economic  governance  and  strengthen  potential  growth.  A  fully-fledged  central  fiscal  capacity
could provide effective protection against asymmetric shocks triggered by regional disturbances.
Building on the agreement for an instrument of precautionary financial assistance, the European
Stability  Mechanism  could  be  further  enhanced  and  eventually  transformed  into  a  European
Monetary  Fund  that  would  act  as  lender  of  last  resort  for  Member  States.  Besides  that,  the
issuance of a European Safe Asset could be a promising idea as it will break the sovereign-bank
nexus and strengthen the international role of the euro. A euro-denominated Safe Asset will allow
the efficient functioning of the EU financial system and the development of EU capital markets,
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
reducing financing costs for the euro area economies. Such a policy will also increase the global
relevance of European financial regulation and of the EU-based payment systems.
At the euro area level, it is essential to ensure that the economic rebalancing mechanisms (i.e.
the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure)  operate  symmetrically,  i.e.  both  for  countries  with
external deficits and for countries with external surpluses. Symmetric adjustment to imbalances
helps  real  convergence  in  a  currency  union.  Instead,  the  burden  of  correcting  external
imbalances in the aftermath of the crisis was incurred primarily by “deficit countries”, mainly via
the  income  channel  and  “internal  devaluation”.  This  asymmetry  in  external  rebalancing  has
contributed to the great divergence of GDP per capita between the North and the South after
2010. Therefore, the countries with large current account surpluses could consider taking steps
to limit their excessive surpluses. For example, by increasing clean energy public investment,
they could both increase potential growth and address climate change, and at the same time
generate positive spillover effects on previously “deficit countries”.
Both at the EU and at the Member State level, action is required in order to address weak long-
term  growth  and  the  lack  of  real  convergence.  Emphasis  should  be  placed  on  increasing
productivity  growth  by  investing  in  public  infrastructure,  innovation,  R&D  and  in  the  digital
transformation  of  our  economies.  Growth  policies  should  address  climate  change  (e.g.  by
means  of  carbon  taxes,  subsidies  to  green  innovation  and  targeting  public  procurements  at
“green” products), while at the same time ensuring social cohesion (by offsetting the impact on
low-income  households  and  the  unemployed).  Fiscal  policy  should  promote  sustainable  and
inclusive growth. However, fiscal positions should remain sound in order to ensure public debt
sustainability and to allow for fiscal stabilisation in difficult times. A sound fiscal position would
imply  that  both  automatic  stabilisers  and  discretionary  fiscal  policies  could  be  used  in  a
recession.
Climate change will increasingly gain prominence as a factor of relevance to monetary policy due
to  its  potential  to  exert  multiple  impacts  on  firms,  households,  banks  and,  eventually,  on  the
economy at large. It is therefore within the mandates of central banks and supervisors to ensure
that the financial system is resilient to such risks. At the present time, several central banks,
including the Bank of Greece and the ECB, participate in the Network for Greening the Financial
System  (NGFS),  aiming  to  enhance  the  role  of  the  financial  system  in  managing  climate  and
environmental risks, analyse the macro-financial impact of climate change and strengthen the
global response to the threat of climate change. Over the past ten years, the Bank of Greece has
been actively engaged and investing in research related to climate change.
A well-functioning EMU requires flexible markets for goods, services, labour and capital in order
to strengthen economic resilience, i.e. to reduce vulnerability to shocks, and to prevent economic
shocks from having significant and persistent effects on income and employment levels.
In  the  context  of  economic  policy  coordination  and  with  a  view  to  fostering  real  convergence,
improvements  should  be  made  in  institutional  quality  and  good  governance  across  euro  area
Member States.
National  ownership  of 
the  country-specific
recommendations are crucial for promoting economic policy coordination and for risk reduction –
for  example,  the  reduction  of  non-performing  loans  or  national  discretions  in  supervisory  and
resolution rules for banks. The latter will facilitate greater public risk-sharing.
reforms  and  credible 
implementation  of 
In  my  view,  what  we  urgently  need  today  in  the  Eurozone  is  to  promote  simultaneously  risk-
sharing  and  risk-reduction  measures.  It  is  only  in  this  way  that  we  can  transform  what  is,  in
effect, an almost non-cooperative zero-sum negotiating game into a cooperative win-win one.
References
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Bank of Greece (2019), Monetary Policy Report, July (forthcoming).
Bank 
Policy, 
www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/Inter_NomPol2018.pdf
(2018),  Monetary 
of  Greece 
Interim 
Report, 
December.
Buti,  M.,  M.  Jolles  and  M.  Salto  (2019),  “The  euro  –  a  tale  of  20  years:  The  priorities  going
forward”, VoxEU 19 February.
voxeu.org/article/euro-tale-20-years-priorities-going-forward
Codogno, L. and P. van den Noord (2019), “The rationale for a safe asset and fiscal capacity for
the Eurozone”, LSE’ Europe in Question’ Discussion Paper Series, No 144/2019 May.
Dabrowski,  M.  (2019),  The  Economic  and  Monetary  Union:  Past,  Present  and  Future,  Study
requested by the ECON Committee European Parliament.
Demertzis, M., A. Sapir and G. Wolff (2019), “Promoting sustainable and inclusive growth and
convergence  in  the  European  Union”,  Bruegel,  Contribution  to  the  Informal  Ecofin  Meeting,
Bucharest 5 April.
Eurogroup (2019), Letter by the President Centeno to President Tusk on the deepening of the
Economic and Monetary Union, Brussels, 15 June.
www.consilium.europa.eu/media/39769/eurogroup-president-letter-to-euro-summit-president.pdf
European Commission (2018), The Digital Economy and Society Index 2018, Country Report:
Greece.
ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/scoreboard/greece
European Commission (2018), “Economic Resilience in the EMU”, Quarterly Report on the Euro
Area, Institutional Paper 086, vol. 17, no 2, July.
European Commission (2018), Sustainable convergence in the euro area: A multi-dimensional
process, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Institutional Paper 072, vol.16 no 3, February.
European Commission (2019), Spring 2019 Economic Forecasts: Growth continues at a more
moderate pace, Brussels.
ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/economic-performance-and-forecasts/economic-
forecasts/spring-2019-economic-forecast-growth-continues-more-moderate-pace_en.
European  Commission  (2019),  2019  European  Semester,  Country  Report:  Greece  2019,
Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances,
Brussels.
ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/2019-european-semester-country-report-
greece_en.pdf
European Court of Auditors (2017), The Commission’s intervention in the Greek financial crisis,
Special Report No 17, Luxemburg.
publications.europa.eu/webpub/eca/special-reports/greek-crisis-17–2017/en/
de Guindos, L. (2019), “Building the EU’s Capital Markets: what remains to be done”, speech at
the  Assosiation  for  Financial  Markets  in  Europe  Conference,  Supervision  and  Integration
Opportunities  for  European  and  Banking  and  Capital  Markets,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  23  May.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2019/html/ecb.sp190523~b1245030d5.en.html
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
de  Guindos,  L.  (2019),  “Deepening  EMU  and  the  implications  for  the  international  role  of  the
euro:, speech at the joint conference of the European Commission and the European Central
Bank 
stability,  Brussels, 
16  May.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2019/html/ecb.sp190516~1c0d48c7d8.en.html
on  European 
integration 
financial 
and 
de  Guindos,  L.  (2019),  “Euro  at  20  years:  the  road  ahead”,  address  at  the  European
Parliamentary Week, 19 February.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2019/html/ecb.sp190219~6f4c9be85b.en.html
IMD World Competitiveness Center (2019), World Competitiveness Ranking 2019, Lausanne.
www.imd.org/wcc/world-competitiveness-center-rankings/countries-profiles/
Montoya,  L.A.  and  M.  Buti  (2019),  “The  euro:  From  monetary  independence  to  monetary
sovereignty”, voxeu, 1 February.
voxeu.org/article/euro-monetary-independence-monetary-sovereignty
Stournaras,  Y.  (2018),  “Investment  Opportunities  in  Greece  −Investment  opportunities  in
Greece”,  speech  at 
the  “Repositioning  Greece”  event  of  Ekali  Club,  17  December.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=556&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y. (2018), “What lies in store for the eurozone? An assessment of the Greek bailout
programmes:  Has  the  EU  become  wiser?”,  speech  at  the  Economist’s  event:  Southeast
Europe–Germany Business and Investment Summit: Reassessing Europe’s priorities, Berlin, 3
December.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=553&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  “A  Retrospective  on  Euro  Area  Monetary  Policy  during  and  after  the
Recent  Financial  Crisis”,  Speech  at  the  23rd  International  Conference  on  Macroeconomic
Analysis and International Finance, University of Crete, Department of Economics, Rethymno, 31
May.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=596&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  “Climate  Change:  Threats,  Challenges,  Solutions  for  Greece”,  keynote
address  at  the  Symposium  on  “Climate  Change:  Threats,  Challenges”,  Solutions  for  Greece,
April.
(www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=589&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b)
Stournaras, Y. (2019), “Lessons from the Greek Crisis: Past, present, future”, speech at the 87th
International 
March.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=583&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Conference, 
Economic 
Atlantic 
Athens 
28 
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  “International  economic  developments  and  prospects  of  the  Greek
economy”, speech at an event of the Federation of Industries of Northern Greece, Thessaloniki,
15 March.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/el/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Item_ID=582&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras,  Y.  (2019),  “Addressing  reversal  of  ﬁnancial  integration”,  aArticle  published  in  the
100th edition of The Bulletin (OMFIF).
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=560&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
Stournaras, Y. (2019), New Year Speech to the Bank of Greece staff, Athens, January 9.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=559&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
World  Bank  (2018),  Doing  Business  2019:  A  Year  of  Record  Reforms,  Rising  Influence,  31
October. www.worldbank.org/en/news/immersive-story/2018/10/31/doing-business-2019-a-year-
of-record-reforms-rising-influence
World Economic Forum (2018), The Global Competitiveness Report 2018.
reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-report-2018/?
doing_wp_cron=1553010986.3554461002349853515625
 1
For example, in the US 80% of the adjustment to asymmetric shocks is taken care of by private market flows,
with the remaining 20% of the adjustment coming from fiscal transfers from the federal government.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
