Mario Draghi: Sovereignty in a globalised world
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, on the award of Laurea
honoris causa in law from Università degli Studi di Bologna, Bologna, 22 February 2019.
 It is a great honour to be speaking here today at the University of Bologna.
As Europe’s oldest university, it has been at the heart of education and learning in Europe for
over 900 years. It has a long history of welcoming students from across the continent, including
Thomas Beckett and Copernicus. Erasmus studied here in 1506, and the University of Bologna
is today a leading participant in the student exchange programme that bears his name.
The Erasmus Programme is one of the many examples of the benefits of the close cooperation
within the European Union that enjoy widespread popularity. But we know that other elements of
European integration are more contested today.
At the root of this debate is the inherent tension between the clear gains of economic integration,
and  the  cooperation  that  is  necessary  to  bring  it  about,  which  can  sometimes  be  politically
difficult to achieve or explain. I would like to argue that, in many ways, this tension is illusory.
Rather than taking away countries’ sovereignty, the EU offers them a way to regain it.
This does not mean we need the EU for everything. But in the face of globalisation, the EU is
more  relevant  than  ever  today.  As  Jean  Monnet  said,  “we  need  a  Europe  for  that  which  is
essential … a Europe for what nations cannot do alone.”
Sovereignty in an interconnected world
[1]
On the whole, European citizens appear to welcome the benefits brought about by economic
integration through the EU.
 The free movement of people, goods and services – that is, the
Single Market – is routinely seen by citizens as the EU’s most positive achievement. In the euro
area,  75%  of  people  are  in  favour  of  the  euro  and  Monetary  Union,  and  71%  of  Europeans
support the EU’s common trade policy.
[2]
Yet at the same time, public attitudes towards the EU’s political structures seem to be hardening.
Average trust in the EU stands at 42%, down from 57% in 2007. This decline has taken place
against the backdrop of a general loss of faith in public institutions. Trust in national governments
and parliaments has dropped to just 35%.
This tension between economic integration and political cooperation is fuelled by a powerful belief
that there is an inherent trade-off between EU membership and the ability of countries to exercise
sovereignty. In this way of thinking, if citizens want to be able to exert more control over their
destinies, they have to loosen the EU’s political structures. But this belief is wrong.
It is wrong because it conflates independence with sovereignty.
True sovereignty is reflected not in the power of making laws – as a legal definition would have it
– but in the ability to control outcomes and respond to the fundamental needs of the people: what
John Locke defines as their “peace, safety, and public good”.
 The ability to make independent
decisions  does  not  guarantee  countries  such  control.  In  other  words,  independence  does  not
guarantee sovereignty.
[3]
Countries  that  are  completely  shut  off  from  the  global  economy,  to  take  an  extreme  but
instructive example, are independent but not sovereign in any meaningful sense – often relying
on  external  food  aid  to  feed  their  people.  Yet  being  connected  through  globalisation  also
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
increases the vulnerability of individual countries in many ways.
They  are  more  exposed  to  financial  spillovers  and  to  the  aggressive  trade  policies  of  foreign
states, while increased competition makes it harder for states to coordinate with one another to
enforce  regulations  and  set  standards  so  as  to  achieve  their  social  goals.  This  restricts  their
control over domestic economic conditions.
In this environment, countries  need  to  work  together  to  exercise  sovereignty. And  this  applies
even  more  within  the  EU.  Cooperation  within  Europe  helps  protect  states  from  external
pressures, and it helps enable their policy choices.
Working together to protect
Globalisation has profoundly changed the nature of global production and deepened the ties that
exist  between  countries.  Cross-border  holdings  of  financial  assets  are  now  around  200%  of
global GDP, compared with about 70% in 1995. Foreign trade has increased from around 43% of
global GDP in 1995 to about 70% today. And around 30% of foreign value added is now created
through global value chains.
[4]
At the global level, this process has been driven not just by policy choices, but in large part also
by  technological  progress.  Businesses  have  capitalised  on  the  advances  in  transportation,
telecoms and computing that make it easier to trade globally and fragment production.
[5]
Previous  policy  decisions  and  geographic  proximity  make  the  EU  by  far  the  most  important
trading area for European economies. The majority of world trade takes place within three main
trading  blocs  –  the  EU,  the  North American  Free  Trade Agreement  (NAFTA)  and Asia  –  and
though linkages have grown between those blocs, they remain relatively closed to one another.
The ratio of extra-regional trade to GDP in these regions is below 15%.
[6]
The EU is the most integrated of these blocs. Two-thirds of EU countries’ trade is with other
Member States, compared with about half for the NAFTA region. Around 50% of euro area cross-
border financial holdings are from other euro area countries. Practically speaking, this means
that Italy exports more to Spain than to China, and more to Austria than to Russia or Japan. In
2017, German direct investment in Italy was five times higher than that of the United States.
Europe has profited a great deal from this integration: it is estimated that the Single Market raises
GDP  in  the  EU  by  around  9%,  taking  into  account  both  the  direct  trade  and  competition
effects.
 But as countries become more interlinked, they also become more exposed to volatile
capital  flows,  unfair  competition  or  discriminatory  actions  –  and  this  necessitates  greater
protection for their citizens.
[7]
That  protection,  which  EU  countries  have  created  together,  has  allowed  them  to  garner  the
benefits of openness while limiting, to some extent, its costs. The EU’s common structures and
institutions contain spillovers, ensure a level playing field and prevent unjust behaviour – in other
words, they respond to the needs of citizens and allow countries to exercise sovereignty.
Thus  the  Council  and  the  European  Parliament  set  common  rules  for  the  whole  EU,  the
Commission ensures they are observed, and the European Court of Justice (ECJ) provides for
judicial protection if they are violated. In the euro area, European banking supervision and the
Single Resolution Mechanism help to contain the effects of financial instability.
In this interconnected environment, seeking independence from EU institutions presents complex
trade-offs. Countries either have to accept rules decided by others to ensure continued access
to the European market, which gives them less control over decisions that affect their citizens’
interests;  or  they  have  to  disentwine  themselves  from  their  most  important  trading  partners,
which gives them less control over their citizens’ welfare.
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
If trade barriers were to be reintroduced within Europe, it is estimated that GDP would be about
8% lower in Germany and 7% lower in Italy.
[8]
The case for working together to enhance sovereignty also applies to the relationship between
the EU and the rest of the world. Few European economies are sizeable enough to withstand
spillovers  from  large  economies  or  to  leverage  power  in  external  trade  negotiations.  But
cooperating at the EU level increases their potential to do so.
[9]
  second  only  to  China,  which  gives
The  EU  accounts  for  16.5%  of  global  economic  output,
European countries a large domestic market to fall back on in the event of trade disruptions. EU
trade  makes  up  15%  of  world  trade,
  compared  with  around  11%  for  the  United  States,
providing the EU with significant weight in trade negotiations. And the euro is the world’s second-
most traded international currency, which helps insulate the euro area economy from exchange
rate volatility.
[10]
Indeed, around 50% of extra-euro area imports are now invoiced in euro,
 which reduces the
pass-through of exchange-rate volatility to import prices. That in turn allows monetary policy to
focus  more  on  euro  area  economic  developments  rather  than  having  to  react  repeatedly  to
external shocks.
[12]
[11]
For  all  these  reasons,  being  outside  the  EU  might  lead  to  more  policy  independence,  but  not
necessarily to greater sovereignty. The same is true of the single currency.
Most countries would no longer benefit from local currency invoicing, which would exacerbate the
effects on inflation if they undertook large exchange rate devaluations. And they would be more
exposed to monetary policy spillovers from abroad – not least from the ECB itself – which could
constrain their domestic policy autonomy. In recent years, Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland and
central  and  eastern  European  economies  have  been  affected  by  spillovers  from  our  policy
measures.
[13]
In fact, spillovers from larger economies were one reason why the euro was created in the first
place. Under the European Monetary System that preceded the euro, most central banks had to
follow the policy of the Bundesbank. After more than a decade of disappointing, if not devastating,
experiences, it was deemed preferable to regain monetary policy sovereignty by launching the
single currency together.
Cooperation and economic policy
[14]
The second way in which globalisation constrains sovereignty is by limiting countries’ capacity to
set laws and standards that reflect their social goals.
Global trade integration tends to reduce that capacity, because as production fragments through
value  chains,  there  is  a  greater  need  for  countries  to  agree  on  common  standards.  Those
standards are mostly set not within the World Trade Organization, but by large economies with
dominant positions in the value chain. Smaller economies tend to end up as rule-takers in the
international system.
[15]
Global financial integration can likewise reduce individual countries’ power to regulate, tax and
uphold labour standards. Multinational firms can influence national regulations through the threat
of relocation, as well as arbitrage tax systems by shifting income flows and intangible assets
across jurisdictions. There can also be incentives for countries to use labour standards as a tool
of international competition – the so-called “race to the bottom”.
This makes it more difficult for countries to enforce their core values and protect their people. It
also  leads  to  corporate  tax  bases  being  eroded,  which  makes  it  harder  to  finance  welfare
[16]
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
[16]
states.
be in the range of 4% to 10% of corporate income tax revenues.
 OECD analysis, for example, estimates global revenue losses from tax avoidance to
[17]
These effects occur when countries are not large enough to exercise regulatory power against
mobile capital or cross-border firms. But it is harder for this to happen at the level of the EU,
since it represents a market that companies can ill afford to leave. Having regulatory power at the
EU  level  enables  EU  countries  to  exercise  sovereignty  in  the  areas  of  taxation,  consumer
protection and labour standards.
First, the EU gives its members the capacity to prevent multinationals from avoiding corporation
tax by exploiting loopholes or extracting subsidies.
This is a complex area, but some recent progress has been made on this front. New European
rules have entered into force this year to eliminate the most common corporate tax avoidance
practices.
 And while the ECJ recently ruled against the Commission in a tax exemption case,
it  also  recalled  that  special  tax  deals  between  multinationals  and  individual  countries  can
constitute illegal state aid, which the Commission has the right to examine.
[18]
[19]
Second, the EU offers much greater possibilities to defend consumers’ values and ensure that
they are treated fairly within the European market.
This  has  been  visible  in  the  EU’s  ability  to  enforce  its  values  concerning  privacy  through  the
 It has been visible too in EU regulations to bring down
General Data Protection Regulation.
mobile phone roaming charges for consumers within Europe,
 or to ensure that they cannot be
charged more for cross-border payments in euro within the EU than they would be for national
transactions.
[21]
[22]
[20]
The third advantage is that countries have the possibility to coordinate within the EU to defend
social protections without imposing trade restrictions.
Through  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights,  EU  law  has  reduced  the  possibility  of  unfair
competition  from  jurisdictions  with  laxer  labour  laws.  And  it  has  also  helped  raise  labour
standards within the EU. A case in point is the European Directive on Part-time Work in 1997,
which reduced certain forms of discrimination that were still in place in 10 of the then 15 EU
Member States,
 including Italy. OECD analysis finds that, over time, the introduction of equal
treatment laws was associated with an increased likelihood of people being awarded permanent
contracts.
[23]
[24]
The same protections do not exist at the global level or are much weaker in other regional trading
blocs such as NAFTA. The history of the United States itself illustrates the difficulty of aligning the
approaches of individual states to improve working conditions.
In the early 20th century, there was a growing concern in several US states about the lack of a
social  safety  net,  especially  for  the  elderly.  But  individual  states  feared  that  providing  social
security would impose, in the words of the time, “a heavy tax burden on the industries of the
state that would put them at a disadvantage in competition with neighboring states unburdened by
a pension system.”
[25]
The  lack  of  coordination  created  a  severe  underprovision  of  social  security,  which  was
exacerbated  by  the  Great  Depression.  In  1934,  half  of  the  population  over  65  were  in
poverty.
 This was only resolved through the passing of the federal Social Security Act in 1935,
which enabled states to coordinate in providing social security.
[26]
In  a  similar  way,  the  EU  provides  a  powerful  coordination  function  that  allows  countries  to
achieve goals that they could not realise alone. And the EU is able in turn to export some of its
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
standards globally.
[27]
The  EU  is  the  top  trading  partner  of  80  countries,  compared  with  just  over  20  for  the  United
 That allows the EU to insist on higher labour and product standards abroad via trade
States.
agreements,
as well as protecting local producers at home. The recent trade agreement with
Canada, for example, protects 143 European geographic indications.
[28]
The EU also has regulatory power that goes beyond trade agreements. As exporters to the EU
must  meet  its  standards,  economies  of  scale  result  in  the  application  of  those  standards  to
production in all countries. This is known as the “Brussels effect”.
 In this way, the EU de facto
sets the global rules across a wide range of areas.
[29]
All this gives EU countries another unique capacity: to ensure that globalisation is not a race to
the bottom on standards. Rather, the EU is able to pull global standards up to its own.
Institutions and rules
In an integrated regional and global economy, the case for European countries to work together
to exercise sovereignty is clear. But while many would agree on the need for cooperation, views
differ over how best to organise it.
Some would argue that looser, more transactional cooperation led by national governments is
sufficient. And  there  are  indeed  several  historical  examples  of  successful  agreements  being
forged  by  the  coming  together  of  willing  states.  Where  all  parties  benefit  equally,  loose
cooperation can be sustainable. One such example is the Bologna Process, which has helped
align  higher  education  standards  and  ensure  mutual  recognition  of  university  degrees  across
members of the Council of Europe.
[30]
But it is also clear that in cases where cooperation is more necessary, the conditions for loose
cooperation  would  not  hold.  Spillovers  between  larger  and  smaller  economies  are  typically
asymmetric. Coordination problems arise because there are incentives for countries to free-ride
or to undercut one another.
 In these instances, deeper modes of cooperation are essential to
align countries’ interests.
[31]
The  EU  has  thus  far  employed  two  methods  of  governance  to  facilitate  cooperation.  In  some
cases, we have invested common institutions with executive power – such as the Commission
for trade policy or the ECB for monetary policy. In others, executive power remains with national
governments,  with  cooperation  through  common  rules,  such  as  the  framework  for  fiscal  and
structural policies.
These  areas  of  economic  policy  were  considered  too  specific  to  the  situation  of  individual
countries to be entrusted to a common body. It was felt that the only possible form of governance
was for countries to exercise national sovereignty, thereby respecting their own specific set of
circumstances. A rules-based approach was seen to be the only solution that was consistent
with this vision. But it is worthwhile to reflect on how successful this choice has been.
For the cases where executive power has been invested with institutions, most would agree that
the  institutions  have  performed  relatively  well.  Trade  policy  has  been  effective  in  opening  up
access to new markets: the EU has in place 36 free trade agreements, compared with 20 for the
United States.
 Monetary policy has successfully fulfilled its mandate.
[32]
But for the areas that use a rules-based approach, some shortcomings have been revealed. The
fiscal rules have provided a framework for assessing fiscal policies but have at times proven
difficult to enforce and hard to explain to the public. In the area of structural policies, the Country
Specific Recommendations have had a limited impact, with less than 10% of recommendations
[33]
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
being substantially implemented each year.
[33]
The disparity between the outcomes of the two methods does not stem from any difference in
the  quality  of  European  and  national  authorities.  Instead,  it  is  a  consequence  of  the  inherent
difference between rules and institutions. There are two reasons why institutions have proven
superior.
First,  rules  are  generally  static  and  require  countries  to  adhere  to  specific actions,  whereas
institutions  are  required  to  achieve  prescribed objectives. Rules  therefore  cannot  be  updated
quickly when unforeseen circumstances arise, whereas institutions can be dynamic and employ
flexibility in their approaches. That distinction matters hugely when underlying parameters and
economic relationships change – as they often do. The distinction also matters for citizens, who
ultimately  care  most  about  the  results  of  economic  policy  rather  than  the  actions  taken  by
governments.
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  during  the  crisis  is  an  example  of  the  greater  flexibility  of  action
afforded by an institution-based approach.
The ECB was faced with a range of challenges that few could have predicted when our mandate
was  defined.  But  the  Treaty  combines  our  mandate  for  price  stability  with  discretion  over  the
tools we could use to achieve it. This allowed us to deploy a range of unconventional policy tools
to ensure that inflation remained in line with our aim. Neither operating monetary policy according
to a fixed rule nor restricting ourselves to conventional policy tools would have sufficed.
Discretion and flexibility in the use of our tools helped to strengthen our credibility. Flexibility and
credibility were, in this instance, mutually reinforcing.
By contrast, rules lose credibility if they are applied with discretion. Rules will be undermined if
countries  find  reasons  to  circumvent  them  or  rewrite  them  as  soon  as  they  bind.  But
circumstances will always arise which were not foreseen at the time the rules were written and
which call for flexibility. In the case of rules, there is an inevitable trade-off between credibility and
flexibility.
This is why there are always tensions when it comes to economic policies that follow the rules-
based  approach.  But  the  transition  to  an  institutions-based  approach  requires  trust  between
countries. And trust is based on strict compliance with the existing rules, but also on the ability of
governments  to  reach  mutually  satisfactory  compromises  when  the  circumstances  call  for
flexibility and to explain them adequately to their citizens.
That transition nevertheless remains necessary.
The  European  Commission’s  recent  initiative  on  the  international  role  of  the  euro  provides  a
further example of the need to move from the current framework of various laws and ad hoc
rules to a system based on harmonisation and institutions. Rising trade tensions and the growing
use of sanctions as an instrument of foreign policy have meant that the laws of the United States
are  increasingly  being  applied  outside  its  jurisdiction.  This  takes  the  form  of  penalties  for
societies outside the United States and the prevention of access to the US payment system and
is based on the central role played by the US financial system and the US dollar in global trade.
Several European governments believe that this situation could be mitigated by increasing the
international role of the euro. But if markets are to entertain the possibility of an enhanced role for
the euro, we need to consider what the conditions are that underpin the dollar’s dominance. The
list is long, but the fact that the dollar is an expression of an integrated capital market is certainly
one  of  those  conditions.
  For  the  EU  to  meet  that  condition  –  which,  at  this  stage  of  its
development,  is  more  achievable  than  others  –  would  require  a  complex  programme  of
legislative and institutional harmonisation, which however could be put in place in short order.
[34]
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  second  reason  why  an  institutional  approach  can  help  produce  better  outcomes  is  that
institutions and their actions can be subject to more clearly defined democratic control. Precisely
because  those  institutions  are  invested  with  a  mandate  and  defined  powers,  it  is  possible  to
make a more direct link between decisions and responsibility.
The EU already has many channels through which its citizens can exercise democratic control,
via national authorities in the EU Council and Members of the European Parliament, who hold EU
institutions accountable on behalf of the people who elected them. In fact, for the first time on
record, a majority of Europeans now feel that their voice counts in the EU.
[35]
It is to be hoped that accountability arrangements to hold EU institutions in check continue to be
strengthened, because the perception of the legitimacy of their actions depends on it. The role of
the European Parliament is vital here. Of the institutions with a democratic mandate to exercise
control, it is the only one with a European perspective.
The  European  Court  of  Justice  provides  a  second  avenue  of  democratic  control.  Its  role  in
ensuring that EU institutions are following their mandates becomes all the more important in the
absence of a European government.
Adherence to the judgments of the ECJ is a necessary condition of the rule of law. Consistency
and uniformity in the interpretation of EU law across 28 Member States are the bedrocks of EU
law as an effective and autonomous legal order.
 A  basic  function  of  the  law  is  to  stabilise
expectations by providing a reliable foundation upon which citizens and companies can organise
their  activity  and  plan  for  the  future.
  And  such  predictability  and  certainty  is  especially
important for Economic and Monetary Union today.
Conclusion
[37]
[36]
In today’s world, technological, financial and commercial interlinkages are so powerful that only
the very largest countries are able to be independent and sovereign at the same time, and even
they cannot do so entirely. For most other nation states, including the European countries, these
two characteristics do not coincide.
The  European  Union  is  the  institutional  framework  that  has  allowed  the  Member  States  to  be
sovereign in many areas. It is a shared sovereignty, which is preferable to none at  all.  It  is  a
complementary sovereignty to the one exercised by individual nation states in other areas. It is a
sovereignty that Europeans like.
The European Union has been a political success built within the international order that emerged
after the Second World War. It has been a faithful interpreter of the values of freedom, peace and
prosperity on which that order was founded.
The European Union has been an economic success because it has provided an environment in
which the energies of its citizens have created widespread and lasting prosperity founded on the
Single Market and protected by the single currency. The last decade has dramatically highlighted
the shortcomings of national policies and the need for cooperation to evolve both within the EU
and beyond.
A  long  global  economic  crisis,  unprecedented  migration  flows  and  inequality  exacerbated  by
large concentrations of wealth resulting from technological progress have given rise to rifts in a
political and economic order that was thought to be set.
Change is necessary, but there are different ways of bringing it about. One prospect is that age-
old  ideas  that  have  shaped  most  of  our  history  are  revived,  such  that  the  prosperity  of  some
cannot be achieved without the poverty of others; international and supranational organisations
lose their relevance as places for negotiating and finding compromise solutions; the affirmation of
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
the self, of the identity, becomes the first requirement of every policy. In such a world, freedom
and peace become accessories which can be dispensed with as needed.
But  if  we  want  these  values  to  remain  essential,  fundamental,  the  path  is  a  different  one:
adjusting  existing  institutions  to  change.  This  process  of  adjustment  has  so  far  encountered
resistance because the inevitable national political difficulties always seemed to be above such
need. This reluctance has resulted in uncertainty about the capacity of institutions to respond to
events and has strengthened the voice of those who want to pull down these institutions.
There  should  be  no  doubt:  this  adjustment  will  have  to  be  as  deep  as  the  phenomena  that
revealed the fragility of the existing order, and as vast as the dimensions of a geopolitical order
that is changing in a way that is not favourable for Europe.
The European Union wanted to create a sovereign where there was not one. It is not surprising
that in a world where every point of contact between the great powers is increasingly a point of
friction,  the  external  challenges  to  the  existence  of  the  European  Union  become  increasingly
threatening. There is only one answer: recovering the unity of vision and action that alone can
hold together such different countries.
This is not only a hope, but an aspiration based on political and economic advantage. But there
are also internal challenges that have to be faced, which are no less important for the future of
the European Union. We need to respond to the perception that it lacks equity, between countries
and social classes. We need first to listen, and then to act and explain.
So, unity and equity are needed, above all, as a guide for policymaking in Europe.
I would like to recall in closing the words of Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI in a famous speech held
38 years ago:
“To be sober and to do what is possible, and not to claim with a burning heart the impossible has
always been difficult; the voice of reason is never as loud as an irrational cry… But the truth is
that political morals consist precisely in resisting the seductions of magniloquent words… It is
not  moral  the  moralism  of  adventure…  It  is  not  the  absence  of  all  compromise,  but  the
compromise itself that is the true moral of political activity”.
Footnotes
[1]
l’Europe, August.
[2]
Eurobarometer  90  –  Autumn  2018,  Directorate-General 
Commission, Brussels.
[3]
Reflection paper by Monnet, J. (1965), Les Portes, Archives de la Fondation Jean Monnet pour
the  European  Union”,  Standard
for  Communication,  European
John Locke, An Essay concerning the true original, extent and end of civil Government, 1690.
European  Commission 
“Public  opinion 
(2018), 
[38]
in 
[4]
UNCTAD (2018), World Investment Report 2018: Investment and New Industrial Policies.
[5]
There is some debate as to whether technology will evolve in the future in ways that make
global value chains less important. Technologies such as 3D printing or robotics could allow the
local production of many more goods. Some scholars find that technological change has so far
only mildly slowed offshoring, while others see a more significant reversal ahead. See Koen De
Backer,  K.,  Menon,  C.  Desnoyers-James,  I.  and  Moussiegt,  L.  (2016),  “Reshoring:  Myth  or
Reality?”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers,  No  27,  OECD  Publishing;
and  Baldwin,  R.  (2016), The  Great  Convergence:  Information  Technology  and  the  New
Globalization, Harvard University Press.
[6]
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
[6]
OECD (2018), OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2018, Issue 1, Chapter 2.
[7]
in  ‘t  Veld,  J.  (2019),  “Quantifying  the  Economic  Effects  of  the  Single  Market  in  a  Structural
Macromodel”, European Economy Discussion Paper, No 094, European Commission, February.
[8]
This  scenario  assumes  a  counterfactual  in  which  trade  reverts  to  WTO-rules,  and  applies
Most  Favoured  Nation  (MFN)  rates  as  tariffs  on  goods.  For  non-tariff  barriers,  it  relies  on
estimates calculated for trade between the EU and the US. See in ‘t Veld, J. (2019), op. cit.
[9]
As measured by PPP-adjusted GDP.
[10]
Excluding intra-EU trade.
[11]
For further details, see ECB (2015), The international role of the euro, Frankfurt am Main, July.
See Gopinath, G., Itskhoki, O. and Rigobon, R. (2010), “Currency Choice and Exchange Rate
[12]
Pass-Through”, American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No 1, pp. 304–336.
[13]
See  Falagiarda,  M.,  McQuade,  P.  and  Tirpák,  M.  (2015),  “Spillovers  from  the  ECB’s
nonstandard  monetary  policies  on  non-euro  area  EU  countries:  evidence  from  an  event-study
analysis”, ECB  Working  Paper  Series,  No  1869;  Potjagailo,  G.  (2017),  “Spillover  effects  from
Euro  area  monetary  policy  across  Europe:  A  factor-augmented  VAR  approach”,  Journal  of
International  Money  and  Finance,  72(April):127–147;  Bäurle,  G.,  Gubler,  M.  and  Känzig,  D.
(2017),  “International  inflation  spillovers  –  the  role  of  different  shocks”, Swiss  National  Bank
Working Papers, No 7/2017.
[14]
See Draghi, M. (2018), “Europe and the euro 20 years on”, speech by Mario Draghi, President
of  the  ECB,  at  Laurea  Honoris  Causa  in  Economics  by  University  of  Sant’Anna,  Pisa,  15
December 2018.
[15]
See Blind, K., Mangelsdorf, A., Niebel, C. and Ramel, F. (2018), “Standards in the global value
chains of the European Single Market”, Review of International Political Economy, 25:1, 28–48.;
Nadvi,  K.  (2008),  “Global  standards,  global  governance  and  the  organization  of  global  value
chains,” Journal of Economic Geography, 8(3): 323–343.
[16]
Public Economics, Vol. 92(5-6), pp. 1210–1235.
[17]
See Devereux, M. et al. (2008), “Do countries compete over corporate tax rates?”, Journal of
OECD (2018), OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2018 Issue 1, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Joined  Cases  T-131/16, Belgium  v  Commission  and  T-264/16, Magnetrol  International  v
See European Commission, “New EU rules to eliminate the main loopholes used in corporate
[18]
tax avoidance come into force on 1 January”, press release, Brussels, 30 December 2018.
[19]
Commission, judgment of the Court of 14 February 2019.
[20]
REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of
27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data
and  on  the  free  movement  of  such  data,  and  repealing  Directive  95/46/EC  (General  Data
Protection Regulation).
[21]
COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING REGULATION (EU) 2016/2286 of 15 December 2016 laying
down detailed rules on the application of fair use policy and on the methodology for assessing the
sustainability of the abolition of retail roaming surcharges and on the application to be submitted
by a roaming provider for the purposes of that assessment.
[22]
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Spain, Sweden and the United
[22]
DIRECTIVE (EU) 2015/2366 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of
25  November  2015  on  payment  services  in  the  internal  market,  amending  Directives
2002/65/EC,  2009/110/EC  and  2013/36/EU  and  Regulation  (EU)  No  1093/2010,  and  repealing
Directive 2007/64/EC,
[23]
Kingdom.
[24]
4.3., OECD Employment Outlook: Moving Beyond the Jobs Crisis.
[25]
1910.
[26]
Bulletin, 70(3).
[27]
DeWitt, L. (2010), “The development of social security in the United States”, Social Security
Report of the Massachusetts Commission on Old Age Pensions, Annuities, and Insurance,
OECD (2010), “Have equal-treatment laws improved job quality for part-time workers?”, Box
ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/eu-position-in-world-trade/
[28]
For  example,  to  participate  in  the  EU’s  Generalised  Scheme  of  Preferences,  developing
countries have to put into practice key UN human rights and International Labour Organization
conventions.
[29]
Bradford, A (2012), “The Brussels effect”, Northwestern University Law Review, 102(1).
See ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/countries-and-regions/negotiations-and-agreements/#_in-place
[30]
See European Commission/EACEA/Eurydice (2018), The European Higher Education Area in
2018:  Bologna  Process  Implementation  Report,  Luxembourg:  Publications  Office  of  the
European Union.
[31]
For a discussion of these phenomena in the US context, see Inman, R. and Rubinfeld, D.
(1997), “Rethinking Federalism”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 11, Number 4, Fall
1997.
[32]
andustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements
[33]
the 2018 European Semester”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB.
[34]
For an in-depth discussion of the policies that are needed to increase the international role of
the euro see Cœuré, B. (2019), “The euro’s global role in a changing world: a monetary policy
perspective”, speech at the Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, 15 February.
[35]
Capella-Ramos, J. (2018), “Country-specific recommendations for economic policies under
European Commission (2018), op. cit.
[36]
Case  6/64, Costa v E.N.E.L., judgment of the Court of 15 July 1964, p. 594; Case 314/85,
Foto-Frost v Hauptzollamt Lübeck-Ost, judgment of the Court of 22 October 1987, paragraphs
15–16.
[37]
Habermas, J. (2008 repr.), Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory
of Law and Democracy,  translated  by  William  Rehg,  MIT  Press,  p.  144  et  seq.;  Luhmann,  N.
(1993), Das Recht der Gesellschaft, Suhrkamp, pp. 150–3.
[38]
Sermon at St. Winfried Church, Bonn, 26th November 1981.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
