Christopher Kent: Opening panel remarks - FX Week Australia
Opening panel remarks by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the
Reserve Bank of Australia, at the FX Week Australia, Sydney, 27 March 2019.
 Thanks to FX Week for the invitation to discuss the FX Global Code.
When the FX Global Code was launched in 2017, the aim was that it would promote a robust,
fair, liquid and transparent wholesale market. To do that, the Code sets out principles of good
practice.
As  awareness  of  the  Code  builds  and  more  market  participants  commit  to  adhering  to  its
principles,  standards  will  no  doubt  improve  across  the  market.  The  Code  has  already  gained
significant traction in the marketplace.
A  recent  survey  of  market  participants  by  the  Global  Foreign  Exchange  Committee  (GFXC)
confirmed that awareness of the Code within the industry was now very high. Almost all of those
surveyed  had  read  part  or  all  of  the  Code.  Furthermore,  the  vast  majority  of  respondents
indicated  that  they  expected  or  required  their  counterparties  to  adhere  to  the  Code.  Globally,
there are now more than 800 firms that have signed Statements of Commitment to the Code and
lodged them on public registers.
So what do we need to do from here? Globally, it is clear that the sell-side have embraced the
Code. What appears to be missing is comparable take-up from the buy side. This is as apparent
in Australia as it is in other jurisdictions. To some extent, this could be just a lag as buy-side
participants  take  longer  to  complete  the  process  of  reviewing  the  Code  and  aligning  their
practices to it. Encouragingly,  the  GFXC’s  survey  showed  that  while  current  take-up  from  the
buy-side was low, many of the buy-side respondents indicated that they did intend to adhere and
some of those had already begun the process.
More  broadly,  though,  the  GFXC  is  conscious  that  greater  take-up  from  the  buy-side  will  be
needed and the GFXC is actively looking at ways to achieve that end.
For those in the audience from the buy-side the question I would put to you is: can you justify to
your stakeholders — whether they are your investors (if you are a fund manager) or shareholders
(if you are a business) — why you have not adopted a set of principles which represent industry
best practice when you are managing their money?
The widespread adoption of the Code will benefit everyone involved in the FX industry, regardless
of where you sit in the market.
It  is  worth  noting  the  Code  is  principles-based  rather  than  rules-based.  This  is  to  encourage
market  participants  to  think  about  their  practices  and  how  their  activities  comply  with  the
principles, rather than working narrowly to a set of rules. The Code’s application is also designed
to be proportional to the FX business that a participant is involved in. Clearly, there are some
principles that aren’t directly relevant to the buy-side. Most obvious are those principles that deal
with handling client orders or client mark ups.
Ultimately,  the  Code’s  principles  are  there  to  give  market  participants  confidence  in  how  the
market is operating. There are numerous ways the Code can promote confidence. It can help to
improve price competition as liquidity providers’ pricing practices become more transparent to
clients. Market participants can also be more confident that good practices around information
handling will result in a more level playing field for all.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
So I encourage those of you who have yet to familiarise yourselves with the Code to do so. And
then consider adopting it. It is a useful tool in many ways, not just to enhance your own practices
but, for those on the buy side to gauge what you should expect from your brokers in terms of
their execution, the type of market colour they provide and their market practices more generally.
Finally, I should mention the work of the Australian Foreign Exchange Committee (AFXC). This
committee  contributes  to  maintaining  the  Code  and  promoting  it  within  the  local  market.  Our
membership  comprises  a  diverse  range  of  market  participants,  including  those  from  both  the
sell-side  and  buy-side,  and  also  those  that  provide  infrastructure  to  the  market,  such  as  the
platforms. So if you are interested to know more about the Code, you could contact any one of
the members and ask about their own experiences with the Code.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
