An address by Lesetja Kganyago,  
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
At the launch of the SA25 commemorative circulation and 
 collectable coins 
 Constitution Hill, Johannesburg 
5 June 2019 
 
Honourable  Ministers,  Justices  of  the  Constitutional  Court  esteemed 
guests, fellow South Africans.  
 
It is both a pleasure and a privilege to be here at Constitution Hill on this 
very special day.  
 
It is indeed an honour for me to be addressing you from the Constitutional 
Court,  a  deeply  symbolic  and  significant  place  in  our  constitutional 
democracy. The Constitution, which this Court zealously guards, has been 
a  moral  compass  guiding  all  of  us  on  this  journey  we  embarked  on 
25 years  ago.  It  is  only  fitting  that  we  are  gathered  here  today  to 
commemorate our robust and youthful democracy.  
 
I am reminded of a quote by former President Thabo Mbeki at the opening 
of the Court, who then said: “The Court represents the conversion of the 
negative, hateful energy of colonialism, subjugation and oppression into a 
positive, hopeful energy for the present and the future; a celebration of the 
creative potential of our people that has given us an architectural jewel.”  
 
Page 1 of 4 
I  should  say  that,  if  time  permits,  please  do  take  a  walk  around 
Constitution Hill. It serves not only as a sobering reminder of a dark past, 
but  also  as  an  awe-inducing  monument  of  the  great  things  that  can 
happen if people come together.  
 
The Constitution has an important place in the work of the South African 
Reserve Bank (SARB). One of the principles on which the Constitution is 
based  says:  “The  independence  and  impartiality  of  a  Public  Service 
Commission, a Reserve Bank, an Auditor-General and a Public Protector 
shall be provided for and safeguarded by the Constitution in the interests 
of the maintenance of effective public finance and administration and a 
high  standard  of  professional  ethics  in  the  public  service.”  The 
Constitution also outlines the primary mandate of the SARB: protecting 
the  value  of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable 
growth.  
 
It is tradition for the SARB to issue commemorative circulation coins to 
mark  both  key  moments  in  our  history  as  well  as  the  individuals  who 
helped  to  shape  it.  This  past  year,  as  the  SARB  leadership  was 
considering the most significant way to mark 25 years of democracy, we 
were  left  with  only  one  answer:  the  Constitution.  The  enhancement  in 
basic human rights – the rights to housing, health care, basic services 
such  as  water  and  electricity,  the  rights  of  workers,  the  rights  of  civil 
organisations,  the  accountability  of  the  executive  to  Parliament,  the 
transformation  of  public  finance  management,  the  independence  and 
competence of the judiciary, the independence and mandate of the SARB 
– all come from the Constitution.  
 
Page 2 of 4 
This is a happy occasion for the SARB as it marks the culmination of a 
project  that  started  last  year  with  the  South  African  Mint,  in  which  we 
capture some of the essential elements of our Constitution in coins.  
 
We honour the vision of the architects of our Constitution with the new 
SA25 commemorative circulation and collectable coins that the SARB is 
launching here today. The team at the South African Mint tapped into the 
perspectives of young South Africans and the creativity of various artists 
for the themes and designs of the SA25 ‘Celebrating South Africa’ coins. 
It is, in fact, the first time in the history of the SARB and the South African 
Mint that South Africans were consulted to this extent in developing coin 
themes and designs.  
 
I  am  told  that,  during  the  engagement  with  young  South  Africans,  ‘our 
constitutional  rights’  came  up  several  times,  which  made  this  the 
overarching  theme  that  we  decided  to  depict  on  the  coins.  These 
perspectives were brought to life by some of the country’s most talented 
young  artists  who  not  only  poured  passion  into  the  project  but  also 
captured the essence of the theme.  
One of the main functions of the SARB is to ensure there is a sufficient 
supply of high-quality banknotes and coins. This is the one function of the 
SARB that puts it in the pockets and wallets of all South Africans. It is only 
fitting that the money we use reflects the identity of our country. 
 
It  is  also  the  responsibility  of  the  SARB  to  ensure  the  integrity  of  the 
banknotes and coins in circulation. We have to ensure that banknotes and 
coins remain a secure method of payment, a unit of account, and a store 
of wealth. Let me repeat: a banknote is but a piece of paper, and a coin is 
but a piece of metal. Both derive their worth from the trust that the citizens 
Page 3 of 4 
of a country have in the country’s currency. The confidence that South 
Africans  have  in  their  banknotes  and  coins  is  based  on  trust  that  the 
banknotes and coins are authentic, and trust in the institution that issues 
them.  
 
Working on this project, and in fulfilling our constitutional mandate, we at 
the  SARB  and  all  our  subsidiaries  continue  to  be  inspired  by  the 
Constitution and strive to ensure that we continue to function in the public 
interest.  
 
To conclude, I would like to thank my colleagues at the South African Mint 
for  their  expertise  and  their  ability  to  rally  all  South  Africans,  which  is 
evident on the SA25 range. I would also like to express my gratitude to 
the young South Africans who contributed ideas; I am humbled by their 
understanding of the Bill of Rights. It reflects on both the circulation coins 
and the collectable coins, which I am sure will be highly appealing both to 
the general public and to coin collectors.  
 
The SARB takes great pride in the issuing of such commemorative coins. 
It is an important element of our public service role, and a unique way to 
pay tribute to individuals and events of national importance.  
 
I am delighted to officially present these coins to you.  
 
I now hand you over to the Programme Director. 
 
Thank you. 
Page 4 of 4 
