Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Optimism, commitment and reform
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines),  delivered  by  Ms  Chuchi  G  Fonacier,  Officer-in-Charge,  at  the Annual
Reception for the Banking Community, Manila, 25 January 2019.
 The Annual Reception for the banking and financial community celebrates our close partnership
over the years.  It is our family affair. 
Rising from 2018’s Challenges
2018 began with guarded optimism nurtured early by a global economic upswing and expansion. 
There was higher investment and stronger private consumption in emerging market economies. 
By October 2018, however, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) shifted from using phrases like
“Brighter Prospects” and “Optimistic Markets” to highlighting “Challenges to Steady Growth.” 
The IMF cited escalating trade tensions between the United States and China, elevated policy
uncertainty, dampened business and financial market sentiments, financial market volatility, and
a slowing down of investment and trade. 
Global  developments  caused  portfolio  adjustments,  sharp  exchange  rate  movements,  and
reductions in capital inflows to emerging markets.
Domestically, we had a bout with rising inflation on account of supply-side pressures alongside
firm demand conditions and implementation of important fiscal reforms.
Average inflation quickly rose above the government target in 2018.  In response, the BSP raised
its policy rate decisively four times by a cumulative 175 basis points beginning in May 2018 to
rein  in  inflation  expectations  and  prevent  sustained  supply-side  price  pressures  from  driving
further second-round effects.
Our  exchange  rate  had  episodes  of  sharp  depreciation  and  our  balance  of  payment  deficit
widened  due  to  the  economy’s  import  requirements  while  exports  suffered  from  external
headwinds.
Nevertheless we argued this to be consistent with our strong macroeconomic fundamentals.  It
is  an  indicator  of  a  growing  economy,  reflective  of  dollar  debt  repayments,  prepayments,  and
outward investments in the normal course of business.   
The volatility in the foreign exchange market led to a reduction in our gross international reserves
(GIR) as the BSP intervened to smoothen the foreign exchange market.  Despite the reduction,
the end-December 2018 GIR level of US$ 79.2 billion is more than adequate and continues to
serve as an ample external liquidity buffer.  It is equivalent to 7.0 months’ worth of imports of
goods and payments of services and primary income. 
To timely ease demand pressures in the foreign exchange spot market, and to provide a hedging
facility  for  those  with  foreign  currency-denominated  borrowings,  the  BSP  reactivated  the
Currency Rate Risk Protection Program or CRPP in September 2018. 
Yes, indeed we had some challenges.  But I believe we rose decisively to meet all of them.
The  Philippine  economy  maintains  its  record  of  uninterrupted  GDP  growth  for  80  consecutive
quarters.  This covers an impressive span of 20 years!
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We continue to be one of the fastest growing economies in the region!
The  resiliency  of  our  economy  can  be  attributed  to  more  than  two  decades  of  sound  and
strategic reforms.  These reforms have created buffers for the nation to withstand shocks and
benefit from a more flexible policy space.
The consistently sound and stable condition of the Philippine banking system – a product not only
of prudent regulation and risk-based supervision, but of earnest cooperation from the sector itself
– is a key anchor of our growing economy.
Assets of the Philippine banking system continued to expand to P16.4 trillion by end-November
2018, attributed mainly to deposit growth. Most of these deposits were deployed to lending for
productive activities.  Loan quality remains satisfactory as banks continue to adhere to sound
credit underwriting standards.  Meanwhile, capitalization continues to build up, with capital ratios
remaining well above national and international thresholds.
Overall, amidst the challenges of 2018, the Philippine economy has remained strong and robust. 
It continues to live-out its growth narrative.  Congratulations everyone.
But we shouldn’t also overlook the fact that 2018 was also an exceptional year in pursuit of bold
financial sector reforms.  We introduced several refinements in the Interest Rate Corridor (IRC)
system which provided BSP with greater operational flexibility.  With the resulting firm anchoring
of market rates to the IRC, we were able to reduce reserve requirements ratio (RRR) by a total of
200 basis points as operational adjustments.  This keeps us on track of the medium-term goal of
a phased and gradual approach in reducing RRR to single-digit level. 
We  also  continued  to  liberalize  foreign  exchange  rules  and  pursued  improvements  in  the
governance framework of the FX trading market.  We likewise implemented measures to further
develop the domestic capital market.  These include enhancement of rules to facilitate bank bond
issuance,  paving  the  way  for  more  private  bond  issuances.    The  BSP  also  issued  enhanced
guidelines  on  marking-to-market  of  financial  instruments  in  response  to  the  adoption  of  a
valuation  methodology  for  peso-denominated  government  securities.    This  forms  part  of  the
domestic  bond  market  development  roadmap  that  aims  to  promote  price  transparency  by
providing basis for the establishment of reliable and market-based benchmarks.
Key  legislative  measures  were  also  passed  which  support  our  digitalization  and  financial
inclusion  efforts.    The  Philippine  ID  System Act  establishes  a  biometrics-based,  foundational,
national identification system that will provide every Filipino and foreign resident with a trusted
and verifiable digital identity.  The enactment of the National Payments System Act is vital to the
country’s payment systems development agenda.
High Hopes for 2019
As we enter 2019, we do so with excitement – initiatives we launched in the last year, and since
the beginning of my Governorship in July 2017, shall continue with vigor.
Our latest forecasts indicate that inflation will return to the 2-4 percent target this year and in
2020. 
Nonetheless,  we  approach  the  year  with  utmost  vigilance  and  prudence…  mindful  of  the
unfolding global economic landscape.  There are still significant lingering concerns and imminent
risks particularly on the external front. But we cannot allow these headwinds from deflecting us
from our deep financial reform agenda.
Another challenge is to adapt to the rapid expansion and reach of technological innovation and
deployment  of  digital  financial  solutions.  These  developments  need  to  meet  the  highest
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
standards of transparency, product suitability, security, and confidentiality to ultimately serve the
public.
Lastly, there is the challenge of keeping an eye out for signs of excessive credit and leverage in
the financial system.
While we continue to see the Philippine banking system as currently being in a position of relative
strength...  nevertheless, we need to push for necessary financial sector reforms to propel us
towards a more sound, stable and inclusive financial system.
Commitment Reaffirmed
Now, let me suggest to you what you may expect from the BSP in terms of policy direction in the
months ahead.
First, as we pursue our primary mandate of price stability, we shall continue to carefully examine
and be guided by the data and our forecast models in shaping the policy responses so that these
are timely and appropriate.  Even as we continue to see abating pressures on prices, the BSP
will remain vigilant and ready to employ monetary responses to keep prices stable and rein in
inflation expectations.
We shall carry on with further refinements of the Interest Rate Corridor (IRC) system to align the
conduct of BSP’s monetary operations with international central banking practices, encourage
active and dynamic liquidity management by banks, and afford the BSP with more operational
flexibility.  Consultations on the proposed IRC refinements shall continue.
We now see scope for further reduction on the RRR as we see inflation returning firmly to within
target and with inflation expectations stabilizing. 
Second,  we  stay  committed  to  the  micro  and  macroprudential  measures  we  implemented  to
ensure financial stability.  Recently, the Monetary Board approved the adoption of the counter-
cyclical capital buffer (CCyB)  on  universal  and  commercial  banks,  as  well  as  their  subsidiary
banks and quasi-banks to prevent excessive credit growth.
This  policy  expands  our  toolkit  for  systemic  risk  management.    It  is  specifically  designed  to
provide a steadying hand to counter the common occurrence of boom-and-bust periods within
the financial cycle. Banks are to set aside additional capital as reserves during good times to
prepare us for bad times.
We  are  also  pursuing  enhancements  on  operational  risk  management  standards.  Two  key
reforms in this area include issuance of standards on model risk management and reputational
risk management.  We will also be issuing guidelines on risk-based approach to pricing to help
ensure  that  exposures  of  banks/financial  institutions  to  risks  associated  with  lending/financing
activities are adequately compensated.
Third, the BSP recognizes the fundamental need to create a secure, reliable and efficient digital
financial  ecosystem  where  all  these  innovations  can  come  together  to  achieve  the  greatest
synergy.
As such, after the operationalization of PESONet and InstaPay, the BSP is now exploring further
enhancements  to  the  large  value  payment  system.    We  do  this  even  as  the  private  sector
contemplates other automated clearing houses (ACHs) for other useful retail payment schemes.
Current efforts also include development of an inter-operable national quick response (QR) code
standard to accelerate the digitalization of merchants to close the loop on the digital payment
system. 
In relation to this, we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, thank you in the Banking and the Non-
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Bank  Financial  Community  for  going  beyond  just  complying  with  financial  regulations.    You
proactively  responded  to  emerging  developments  and  challenges  such  as  our  transition  from
being  a  cash-heavy  to  a  cash-lite  economy  with  the  implementation  of  the  National  Retail
Payment System (NRPS)!  Salamat sa inyo.
Fourth, we remain on course in promoting financial deepening, with measures to further develop
the  domestic  capital  and  foreign  exchange  (FX)  markets.    We  will  continue  streamlining
documentary requirements for FX trade and non-trade transactions.  The BSP will likewise issue
a circular on FX market governance framework, formalizing policies that promote fair, liquid, and
transparent FX market.
And  we  shall  continue  to  pursue  meaningful  initiatives  and  partnerships  to  advance  financial
education and inclusion, and consumer protection.   No one is dropping the ball.  The BSP is
here with you for the long haul.
Concluding Remarks
As you can see, there is much work to be done. So much work.
After decades of hard work, we are now at a point when we are set to update the BSP Charter to
keep up with the rapid global challenges.  We collectively thank the administration of President
Rodrigo Roa Duterte for taking us to the finish line right in time for the celebration of 70 years of
Central Banking in the Philippines.  This is truly an institutional milestone.
Thank you and Mabuhay tayong lahat!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
