Luis de Guindos: Key vulnerabilities for euro area financial stability
Remarks by Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the meeting of
the Financial Stability Contact Group, Frankfurt am Main, 2 October 2019.
 Let  me  start  by  thanking  you  all  for  participating  in  this  meeting  of  the  Financial  Stability
Contact Group. These meetings are a key feature of the ECB’s market intelligence gathering
activities.
The financial stability environment has certainly remained challenging since this group last
met in March. The global economic outlook has worsened since then, and political and policy
uncertainty has increased in a number of areas.
Taking this into account, we continue to see four key vulnerabilities for euro area financial
stability: (i) first, a risk of mispricing of some financial assets; (ii) second, high public and
private  sector  indebtedness  in  several  countries;  (iii)  third,  in  view  of  banks’  subdued
profitability outlook, we see a risk of hampered bank intermediation capacity; and (iv) fourth,
vulnerabilities stemming from increased risk taking in the non-bank financial sector. We see
the likelihood of these vulnerabilities unravelling in a disorderly manner over the next 18–24
months as remaining largely unchanged. This is because the now widely expected “lower-
for-longer” interest rate environment mitigates many of the possible triggers for corrections
over the short to medium term.
Let me expand a little on these vulnerabilities:
Repeated downward revisions to the economic outlook and accommodative monetary policy
actions  on  both  sides  of  the Atlantic  have  put  downward  pressure  on  global  bond  yields
across  the  whole  maturity  spectrum.  For  the  first  time  in  history,  large  parts  of  the  yield
curve for many euro area sovereign bonds, in particular those issued by governments with
high credit ratings, have entered negative territory.
It is often said that low or negative interest rates inflate asset prices as investors search for
yield  and  take  on  more  credit  and  duration  risk.  Equity  and  corporate  bond  prices,  for
instance, have appreciated across the globe over the past decade as yields have followed a
path of long-term decline. Abrupt corrections, especially in equity markets and markets for
lower-rated  bonds  remain  a  risk,  particularly  in  the  face  of  high  economic  and  political
uncertainty.
Low  funding  costs  can  encourage  firms  to  increase  their  leverage,  which  might  intensify
vulnerabilities  in  the  event  of  an  economic  downturn.  This  risk  has  increased  as  the
economic outlook has worsened and the share of triple-B ratings has grown.
Concerning  the  second  vulnerability,  in  several  countries  debt  in  the  public  and/or  non-
financial  private  sectors  is  lingering  at  levels  that  are  high  by  historical  and  international
standards. This leaves public and private finances exposed to the risk of a sudden change in
market sentiment or deteriorating macroeconomic conditions.
Third,  parts  of  the  banking  sector  continue  to  exhibit  weak  performance.  Banks  have
improved their capital positions and profitability since the euro area crisis, and the stock of
non-performing loans continues to decline at a moderate pace. But further improvements
are needed in parts of the banking sector if banks are to achieve sustainable rates of return.
In  particular,  overcapacity  and  cost  inefficiencies  weigh  on  many  banks’  long-term
profitability prospects. The better performance of some banks within the euro area, and in
jurisdictions facing similar economic and financial conditions, illustrates the importance of
addressing structural issues.
The  current  interest  rate  environment  has  various  implications  for  the  resilience  of  the
banking sector. Banks have benefited, and will continue to benefit, from the lower credit risk
for borrowers, and from the higher asset valuations associated with lower interest rates and
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
better macroeconomic outcomes. This has helped support bank profitability across the euro
area since the deposit facility rate turned negative in 2014. However, the negative interest
rate policy also entails costs for banks, and these could increase the longer negative rates
are in place, the lower policy rates are set and the larger the amount of excess liquidity held
by banks.
These vulnerabilities could crystallize if economic growth is much weaker than expected, or
if weak growth persists for longer than expected. We thus welcome the measures taken by
the  banking  sector  in  recent  years  to  improve  resilience,  and  support  efforts  to  further
strengthen resilience while conditions are benign.
There  are  also  vulnerabilities  in  the  non-bank  financial  sector,  which  has  significantly
expanded its role in financing the real economy in the euro area. Total assets held by non-
banks have almost doubled over the last ten years, growing from €23 trillion in 2008 to €42
trillion in 2018, while the size of the banking sector stagnated over this period. Non-banks
currently account for around 55% of the euro area financial sector. While a larger non-bank
financial sector has the benefit of helping to diversify the funding sources available to the real
economy, it may also entail rising risk taking in the current market environment.
We are closely monitoring two developments in this context: first, non-bank financing activity
is  growing,  in  particular  in  higher  credit  risk  corporate  financing,  where  indebtedness  is
already higher. Second, as institutional investors are searching for yield, they may amplify
the cyclical underpricing of risk, potentially also taking on more leverage and liquidity risk.
In the euro area investment fund sector, we have observed increasing liquidity risk for some
time. This reflects a falling share of holdings of liquid government bonds and a fall in cash
holdings  across  the  sector.  We  have  recently  witnessed  cases  in  which  funds  holding
considerable amounts of illiquid assets (Woodford, H2O and GAM – all UCITS funds) faced
severe  difficulties  in  dealing  with  large-scale  outflows.  These  cases  had  no  systemic
repercussions – partly because the outflow triggers were idiosyncratic and partly because
the market environment was benign.
In a more broad-based market downturn, though, we would be concerned that a repricing of
financial  assets  could  trigger  sudden  and  large  redemptions  from  these  funds,  possibly
resulting in forced asset sales, which could amplify stress in less liquid markets. This would
have wider implications in the form of impaired market liquidity and possible spillovers to the
real economy.
While leverage in the euro area fund sector is low on average, there are also pockets of high
leverage among some types of alternative funds, and these need to be monitored closely.
Even if leverage of UCITS funds is not excessive, it can still add to the procyclical selling of
assets if a fund tries to keep its leverage constant during periods of stress.
I  hope  that  gives  you  a  good  perspective  on  our  current  assessment  of  financial  stability
risks. I look forward to hearing your own views on these and other vulnerabilities for the euro
area financial system.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
