Mr Talwar considers emerging trends in supervision in India
Speech by Mr S P Talwar, a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the meeting of
SAARC Supervisors in Pune (India) on 27-30/1/99.
At the outset, on behalf of the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and Government of India, I
extend a hearty welcome to all the Central Bankers of the SAARC Region on their visit to India
and particularly to the Reserve Bank’s College of Agricultural Banking. I also feel honoured for
the  privilege  bestowed  on  me  to  inaugurate  the  Meeting  of  the  Bank  Supervisors  to  discuss
’Emerging Trends in Supervision’ today.
It is in fitness of things that the Meeting is being held in this city, which is known as the ’City of
learning’  in  and  around  which  great  Indian  philosophers  and  educationalists  held  sway  for
centuries. The scenic surroundings of the College of Agricultural Banking and salubrious climate
of  Pune,  I  am  sure,  will  provide  the  necessary  ambience  for  sharing  the  inherent  supervisory
skills and learning about each other’s country experiences.
The theme of discussions of such inter central bank meets used to centre around core economic
or monetary policy issues. However, in the context of the South East Asian financial crisis and
its  contagion  effect  on  the  financial  system  of  some  of  the  even  well  established  global
economies, regulation and supervision of financial vehicles has emerged as the foremost topic of
concerns  in  any  international  conference.  Central  banks  around  the  world  have  also  started
working  towards  strengthening  prudential  norms  and  enforcing  transparency  in  financial
reporting by financial institutions to avert any future international financial crisis.
The regulatory and supervisory frameworks  for  banks  and  other  institutions  in  India  have  also
undergone significant changes, keeping pace with the reforms introduced in the financial sector.
The details of these changes will be presented in greater detail by my colleagues from the RBI in
the  coming  sessions.  I  would  like  to  highlight  some  of  the  more  important  ones  to  serve  as  a
backdrop for the fruitful discussions that are slated to follow this inaugural session.
Prudential Norms
The  focus  of  the  statutory  regulation  of  commercial  banks  in  India  until  the  early  1990s  was
mainly  on  licensing,  administration  of  minimum  capital  requirements,  pricing  of  services
including administration of interest rates on deposits as well as credit, reserves and liquid asset
requirements. In these circumstances, the supervision had to focus essentially on solvency issues.
After the evolution of the BIS prudential norms in 1988, the RBI took a series of measures to
realign its supervisory and regulatory standards almost on a par with international best practices.
At the same time, it also took care to keep in view the socio-economic conditions of the country,
the business practices, payment systems prevalent in the country and the predominantly agrarian
nature of the economy, and ensured that the prudential norms were applied over the period and
across different segments of the financial sector in a phased manner. The Indian banking system
is at present subjected to the following prudential norms:
Exposure Norms
• Exposure to a single borrower should not exceed 25% of the bank’s capital funds (i.e. paid up
capital and free reserves).
BIS Review   13/1999
– 2 –
• Group exposure should not exceed 50% of the capital funds of the bank. An additional 10%
is allowed in respect of exposure to infrastructure projects (power, telecom, roads & ports).
Connected Lending
• Section  20  of  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  prohibits  loans  to  directors  or  to  any  firm  or
company in which directors hold an interest.
• The banks should maintain an arms-length relationship in respect of own subsidiaries or joint
ventures; all loans to such companies have to be made at commercial rates and are subject to
limits which apply to similar companies.
• There is an aggregate ceiling fixed for loans related to owned funds of the subsidiary.
Capital Adequacy Norms
• Under  the  risk-weighted  asset  approach  for  the  purpose  of  capital  adequacy  standards,  the
minimum  CRAR  has  been  prescribed  at  8%  and  will  be  further  raised,  to  9%  (which  is
already applicable to banks permitted to trade in gold), with effect from 31 March 2000.
Income Recognition Norms
• Under the Income Recognition Norms, income from non-performing assets cannot be taken
as part of the profits of banks unless the income has been realised.
Asset Classification Standards
• The definition of ’past due’ for a period of any two quarters in a financial year in respect of
interest or instalment of principal under a credit facility has been adopted as part of the Asset
Classification Norms to identify NPAs.
• Based  on  the  status  of  an  asset  as  an  NPA,  it  is  required  to  be  classified  as  standard,
substandard, doubtful and loss assets and appropriate provisions made.
• Banks  are  required  to  make  a  general  provision  of  10%  of  the  total  outstanding  under
substandard assets.
• A  doubtful  asset  has  been  defined  as  one  which  has  remained  as  an  NPA  for  a  period
exceeding 2 years and provisions are required at 100% of the  unsecured  portion  and  20  to
50% in respect of the secured portion over a period of 3 years. The period for reckoning an
NPA as doubtful will be further shortened, to 18 months, by 31 March 2001.
• Banks are required to write off the entire loss assets or make 100% provision therefor.
• Banks are required to create provisions on government guaranteed NPAs from 1 April 2000.
• A general provision of 0.25% on standard assets has to be made for the year ending 31 March
2000.
BIS Review   13/1999
– 3 –
Marking Investments to Market
• Banks  are  required  to  bifurcate  their  investments  in  approved  securities  (govt.  or  govt.
guaranteed  securities  and  bonds)  into  "permanent"  and  "current"  investments.  The  ratio  of
permanent investment to total investment has been reduced from a high of 70% in 1992-93 to
30% in 1998-99 and the intention to mark 100% of bank’s investments to market (as current
investments)  over  the  next  3  years  has  already  been  announced.  While  appreciation  in  the
value of securities is ignored, depreciation has to be fully provided for.
The  aforesaid  prudential  standards  compare  favourably  with  some  of  the  international  best
practices already in vogue in developed economies.
New Supervisory Initiatives
The entire supervisory mechanism has been realigned since 1994 under the directions of a newly
constituted Board for Financial Supervision (BFS), which functions under the aegis of the RBI,
to suit the demanding needs of a strong and stable financial system. The supervisory jurisdiction
of the BFS now extends to the entire financial system barring the capital market institutions and
the insurance sector.
The periodical on-site inspections, and also the targeted appraisals by the Reserve Bank, are now
supplemented  by  off-site  surveillance  which  particularly  focuses  on  the  risk  profile  of  the
supervised institution. A process of rating of banks on the basis of CAMELS in respect of Indian
banks  and  CACS  (Capital,  Asset  Quality,  Compliance  and  Systems  &  Control)  in  respect  of
foreign banks has been put in place from this year.
The  Off-site  Monitoring  and  Surveillance  System  (OSMOS)  was  introduced  in  1995  as  an
additional tool for supervision of commercial banks to supplement the on-site examinations. The
system  consists  of  12  returns  (called  DSB  returns)  focussing  on  supervisory  concerns  such  as
capital adequacy, asset quality, large credits and concentrations, connected lending, earnings and
risk  exposures  (viz.  currency,  liquidity  and  interest  rate  risks).  As  part  of  the  first  tranche,  7
returns have so far been operationalised and the second tranche of returns on risk management
aspects and consolidated supervision is expected to be introduced by next year.
The supervisory intervention by the RBI is normally triggered by the deterioration in the level of
capital  adequacy,  NPAs,  credit  concentration,  lower  earnings,  and  larger  incidence  of  frauds
which reflect the quality of control.
Internal Control Systems
Like  the  central  banks  in  developed  supervisory  regimes,  the  RBI  also  has  started  placing  an
increasing reliance on professional accountants in the assessment of internal control systems of
the  banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions.  Over  the  period,  the  responsibilities  of  auditors
have  been  delineated  not  only  to  make  the  audit  more  detailed  but  also  to  make  them
accountable. The methodology and processes used to generate available data as certified by the
audit profession would improve the reliability of financial statements as regards their conformity
with national accounting and disclosure standards.
Another area of crucial importance is the strengthening of internal control systems in banks. The
Reserve Bank has, over the years, emphasised the need for having an effective internal control
system in  banks.  Banks  have  also  been  advised  to  introduce  the  system  of  concurrent  audit  in
BIS Review   13/1999
– 4 –
major  and  specialized  branches.  As  a  result,  all  commercial  banks  have  introduced  concurrent
audit since 1993 by using external auditors as a major resource. The banks are now required to
set up audit committees to follow up on the reports of the statutory auditors and inspection by the
RBI. Similarly, immediate action is warranted on reconciliation of inter branch accounts which,
if left unreconciled, are fraught with grave risks. Substantial progress has been made by banks in
reconciliation of the outstanding entries, and the BFS reviews progress in this area at quarterly
intervals.
Operational Strength of the Indian Banking System
It is now commonly acknowledged that the Indian banking sector has, as a result of the ongoing
reforms, emerged strong and resilient. The public sector banks which suffered losses of Rs.3,293
crore  in  1992-93  and  Rs.4,349  crore  in  1993-94,  i.e.  in  the  initial  years  of  introduction  of
prudential norms, have ended the year 1997-98 with a net profit of Rs.5027 crore. Net NPAs of
public sector banks formed 8.2% of the net advances and 3.3% of the total assets as at the end of
March 1998.
Evolution of the Risk Management System
Financial institutions carry a wide range of risks, including credit, interest rate, foreign exchange,
liquidity,  operational  and  reputational  risks.  These  risks  are  highly  interdependent  and  events
(whether expected or unanticipated) that affect one area of risk can have ramifications on other
risk  categories.  In  the  context  of  deregulation  of  interest  rates  in  India,  market  risk  has  now
emerged  as  an  area  requiring  immediate  attention  on  the  asset  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  In
recognition  of  this,  the  RBI  has  issued  to  the  banks  draft  guidelines  (with  the  final  guidelines
becoming operational from 1 April 1999) for a broad framework for asset-liability management,
taking into account the variance in the business profile of banks in the public sector and private
sector as well as the data/information base available to banks in India.
Transparency and Disclosure Standards
Another area where the RBI has moved ahead is to  impart  greater  transparency  to  the  balance
sheets of banks. This was a logical step after the adoption of prudential norms, with the banks in
India coming under greater international scrutiny. During the last couple of years, the range and
extent of disclosures has been gradually increasing so as to provide a clearer picture to informed
readers of balance sheets. The banks are now required to disclose the break-up of the provisions
made  towards  NPAs,  depreciation  of  investments  and  other  purposes  besides,  the  capital
adequacy ratio and the level of net non-performing assets.
With  effect  from  1997-98,  banks  are  required  to  disclose  accounting  ratios  relating  to  income
heads  like  operating  profit,  return  on  assets,  business  per  employee  and  profit  per  employee.
From the year ending 31 March 2000, the following information, among others, should also be
disclosed by the banks operating in India in the published accounts:
• Maturity pattern of loans and advances, investment securities, deposits & borrowings,
• Foreign currency assets and liabilities,
• Movements in NPAs & provisions,
• Lending to sensitive sectors as defined by the RBI from time to time.
BIS Review   13/1999
– 5 –
The primary objective of any supervisory regime has to be prudential, viz., to protect the safety
and  soundness  of  domestic  banking  systems.  Its  application  can  at  the  same  time  provide  an
incentive for other countries to improve the quality of their prudential supervision. If banks want
to  operate  in  other  markets  where  these  core  principles  are  strictly  applied,  they  will  have  to
convince the authorities in the host countries that the quality of supervision in their home country
is adequate. This can create powerful new incentives for improvements in supervision. Recently,
I had the privilege of associating myself  with  the  Willard  Group  of  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements (BIS) constituted by G 10 countries to look into these aspects. The Group has come
out  with  recommendations  which  call  for  close  coordination  amongst  central  banks  and
governments  of  the  world,  as  well  as  the  international  financial  institutions  like  the  IMF  and
World Bank, in promoting stability, accountability and transparency in the financial systems.
Adoption of Core Principles and Uniform Accounting Standards
The Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (1997) evolved by the Basle Committee
on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  have  been  accepted  for  adoption  by  the  RBI.  The  Core
Principles seek to promote and enhance the standards of supervision. Incidentally, I may add that
the  International  Accounting  Standards  Committee  (IASC)  is  also  working  closely  with  the
BCBS  on  reducing  differences  in  supervisory  approaches  to  loan  valuation  and  credit  loss
provisioning.  In  many  areas  of  banking  supervision  and  securities  regulation,  international
consensus  has  been  reached  and  principles  or  standards  have  been  established.  In  other  areas
there  still  is  a  need  to  define  best  practices  and  develop  standards.  The  lack  of  international
consensus on sound practices for loan valuation, loan-loss provisioning and credit risk disclosure
seriously impairs the ability of market analysts as well as regulators to understand and assess the
risk inherent in a financial institution’s activities.
Supervision of Non Bank Financial Institutions
I would like to specifically mention the far-reaching supervisory initiatives on the part of the RBI
which  has  now  brought  all  Indian  development  finance  institutions  and  non  banking  financial
companies under an intensive supervisory framework through both on-site inspection and off-site
monitoring procedures.
Development Finance Institutions
The RBI set up an exclusive Supervisory Division in August 1990 for monitoring the operations
of  select  all  Indian  development  financial  institutions  (FIs).  Currently,  12  such  FIs  are  being
monitored.  Of  them,  the  term  lending  and  refinance  institutions,  viz.  Industrial  Development
Bank of India (IDBI), Industrial Credit & Investment Corporation of India Ltd. (ICICI), Industrial
Finance Corporation of India Ltd. (IFCI), Industrial Investment Bank of India Ltd. (IIBI), EXIM
Bank,  Tourism  Finance  Corporation  of  India  Ltd.  (TFCI),  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and
Rural  Development  (NABARD),  National  Housing  Bank  (NHB)  and  Small  Industries
Development  Bank  of  India  (SIDBI)  are  also  subject  to  the  on-site  supervision  process  of  the
RBI.
Prudential  norms  relating  to  income  recognition,  asset  classification,  provisioning  and  capital
adequacy have also been prescribed, for IDBI, ICICI, IIBI and EXIM Bank in March 1994 and
for SIDBI , NABARD and NHB in March 1996.
BIS Review   13/1999
Supervision of NBFCs
– 6 –
The RBI has been regulating the NBFCs, which numbered around 40000 companies, for over 3
decades since 1963. The regulatory role up to 1997 was confined to deposit acceptance activities
of NBFCs and did not cover the asset quality and liquidity mismatch aspects.
In  the  context  of  the  increasing  functional  diversity  and  expanding  intermediation  role  of  this
sector, the RBI, through enabling legislation to its regulatory powers, has taken a series of steps
for compulsory registration and liquidation of recalcitrant and defaulting companies in repayment
of public deposits. An entry norm of minimum net owned funds of Rs.25 lakhs was prescribed
for the purpose of registration.
A registration process to cover as many as 7689 companies was initiated in July 1997 and was
completed by December 1998. Simultaneously, prudential guidelines have been put in place to
govern the various aspects of their functioning besides bringing them under more intensive on-
site  supervision  based  on  the  CAMELS  pattern.  More  detailed  presentation  on  some  of  the
innovative  supervisory  practices  and  extensive  use  of  technology  for  data  compilation  and
analysis is slated to follow during the last session of this Meeting.
Millennium (Year 2000) Issues
I would like draw your attention to one of the current IT related issues, viz. the Y2K problem,
which is pursued by the RBI more as a business continuity risk than a technology problem. The
initiation of supervisory measures by the RBI is in synchronisation with the standards set by the
BIS.  The  RBI  has  an  enlarged  role  of  monitoring  and  enforcing  compliance  by  the  entire
financial  sector  and  co-ordinates  its  efforts  with  the  National  Level  Task  Force  set  up  by  the
Prime Minister of India.
Major  policy  initiatives  taken  in  this  regard  focus  on  promoting  increased  awareness,
establishing  targets  and  benchmarks  for  industry,  industry-wide  status  assessment  and
maintaining  pro-active  supervisory  pressures.  The  RBI  issued  circulars  in  September  1997  to
commercial  banks  explaining  the  Y2K  problems  and  possible  solutions.  Targetted  on-site
appraisals have been commissioned by the RBI to verify the compliance efforts  on  the  part  of
banks.
A target date of 31 December 1998 was fixed for ensuring Y2K compliance and banks may be
subject to penal measures in case of persisting non-compliance beyond March 1999. Institutions
have  also  been  advised  to  put  in  place  appropriate  contingency  plans  to  take  care  of  possible
system  failures.  A  high-powered  Working  Group  in  the  RBI,  under  the  chairmanship  of  the
Deputy  Governor  and  with  representatives  drawn  also  from  the  banking  industry,  reviews  the
progress made in compliance at regular intervals.
As you would have observed from the foregoing, the Indian supervisory system has already made
much  headway  in  realigning  itself  to  the  emerging  needs,  particularly  addressing  the  risks
inherent in the liberalisation and globalisation of the Indian economy after the advent of financial
sector  reforms.  The  prudential  norms  adopted  by  Indian  banks  in  the  area  of  marking  the
investments  to  market  conform  to  the  international  standards.  The  disclosure  norms  already
prescribed  for  Indian  banks  as  part  of  accounting  standards  do  conform  to  the  global  best
practices  besides  ensuring  transparency  in  published  accounts.  The  only  area  where  the  BIS
standards are yet to be implemented in full are those relating to asset classification, particularly
in respect of re-defining NPAs as those past due for a quarter (instead of 2 quarters as at present)
BIS Review   13/1999
– 7 –
and the reduction in the period for classifying such accounts as doubtful from 24 months to 12
months.  We  are  however  making  earnest  efforts  in  this  direction  to  make  our  banking  system
more transparent and vibrant.
The banking system had acquired,  at  the  time  of  introduction  of  prudential  norms  for  the  first
time in 1992-93, a large quantum of non-performing credit which can be termed as legacy NPAs.
It is worth mentioning that the incremental NPAs in subsequent years have been at much lower
levels. The level of NPAs in the Indian banking sector is being commented upon as an alarming
one by various international and domestic analysts/groups. At the same time, these agencies have
rather chosen to ignore the high level of NPAs which have totally eroded the banking systems in
the  East  Asian  countries,  with  many  banking  institutions  folding  up  as  a  consequence.  In  this
background,  it  has  to  be  mentioned  that  the  NPAs  of  the  Indian  banking  system  have  already
been  provided  for  more  than  50  per  cent,  which  is  often  ignored  by  the  international  agencies
when evaluating the NPA status of the Indian system. Further, Indian banks secure their loans to
a  very  large  extent  by  collateral.  The  banks  in  India  do  not  normally  prefer  to  write  off  loans
covered  by  collateral  during  the  pendency  of  cases  in  law  courts.  Looking  into  the  delays  in
realisation of collateral, it is of paramount need to focus our attention on expediting legal reforms
recommended by the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Narasimham Committee II). The
banks  also  have  to  activate  the  procedures  of  compromise  settlements  and  their  recovery
machinery towards faster recovery.
Another factor which contributed to the build-up of NPAs in the past was the lack of focussed
attention on the end use of funds by the borrowers. The borrowers in many instances went for
projects and purposes other than those included or prioritised in the original schemes sanctioned
by the banks. To avoid such a situation, the banks have already started paying a lot of attention to
the  end  use  of  credit.  The  RBI  expects  the  banks  to  set  up  an  efficient  and  appropriate  loan
review mechanism for this purpose.
As  you  would  have  observed  from  the  foregoing,  we  have  covered  a  lot  of  ground  in
strengthening our prudential regulation and supervision system for the financial system over the
last  few  years.  I  can  proudly  claim  that  the  efforts  of  the  central  bank  in  this  direction  have
helped  in  sustaining  the  health  of  the  Indian  banking  system,  enabling  it  to  withstand  the
contagion effect of the East Asian syndrome.
There is a lot of pressure to reduce the asset classification norm to one quarter in respect of past
due loans and a lot of discussions have taken place in this regard at various international fora.
However, we have taken a view that the international practices should not be merely mimicked
but should be carefully evaluated and applied to a country’s specific situation, keeping in view
the support systems. In countries like India and even in some well developed countries, the trade
and commerce cycle combined with payment and settlement systems extends beyond a quarter.
Unless the underlying commercial and payment systems move towards faster settlement of trade
transactions, we do not see any immediate compulsion to shift to a norm for asset classification
of one quarter in respect of past dues.
I  should  stress  at  this  point  that  it  is  easy  to  introduce  stricter  norms  but  it  requires  lot  of
discipline to resist leeways sought by banks at the implementation stage. We are not in favour of
such leniencies. We strongly believe that once the norms are laid by the central bank, they should
be  complied  with  in  letter  and  spirit  by  the  constituent  institutions.  Though  it  has  taken  some
time  for  us  to  introduce  the  prudential  norms,  I  am  sure  that  the  banks  in  India  follow  these
norms as a gospel.
BIS Review   13/1999
– 8 –
I would like to conclude with a request to the participating financial supervisors to focus their
deliberations  and  try  to  arrive  at  possible  ways  of  addressing  emerging  areas  of  supervisory
concern  which  are  not  just  regional  but  universal,  owing  to  the  interdependency  of  financial
systems across the globe. I shall particularly like the supervisors’ discussions to centre around the
assessment  of  supervised  institutions’  capabilities  in  the  management  of  NPAs,  installing
appropriate  business  and  operational  risk  management  systems,  enhancing  transparency  in
disclosure  standards  and  earnestness  in  the  introduction  of  an  effective  internal  control
mechanism.
I would like to record  my  appreciation  for  the  excellent  arrangements  made  by  the  College  of
Agricultural Banking and untiring efforts on the part of its Principal, Mr S K Newlay, and his
colleagues in hosting the Meeting. I am sure that no efforts will be spared by the team in looking
after the comforts of the visiting dignitaries from other central banks during their stay.
 BIS Review   13/1999
