Mr Noyer’s overview on the relationship between politics and central banks
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the  relationship
between politics and central banks to the Estonian Central Bank at Tallinn, Estonia on 3 May 1999.
Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen:
It is a pleasure to be here today. First of all, I should like to congratulate the Estonian central bank on
its 80th birthday. This also suggests that I should be modest, speaking as a representative of a central
bank which is not even one year old. I am particularly delighted to be addressing the topic of politics
and central banks, since this is one of the basic issues in central banking. I should like to explain to
you why I  think  independence  from  day-to-day  politics  is  crucial  for  a  successful  central  bank  and
how this has been achieved in the case of the European Central Bank (ECB). However, independence
should not mean isolation. A more open and transparent central bank is more effective. Moreover, in a
democratic  society  accountability  for  policies  is  the  logical  complement  to  independence.  In  this
context, I shall address the issue of how we pursue our aim to be as open, transparent and responsible
as  possible.  I  shall  conclude  with  a  brief  discussion  of  the  relationship  between  the  monetary  and
fiscal authorities.
Independence as a cornerstone of central banking
Recently there has been a world-wide tendency to grant independence to central banks. This tendency
is  evidenced  by  both  practical  experience  and  academic  research.  By  shielding  monetary  policy
decisions  from  political  interference,  lower  inflation  can  be  maintained  without  having  to  give  up
economic growth. Indeed, in that sense, creating an independent  central  bank  appears  to  be  a  good
thing all round. The reason for this is that monetary policy-making under the influence of politicians
tends  to  focus  too  much  on  short-term  considerations.  This  can  easily  lead  to  temporary,  non-
sustainable accelerations in economic activity, at the expense of lasting increases in inflation and also
ultimately a curbing of economic output and increases in unemployment. Politicians all over the world
have come to realise this and have decided to remove the temptation to pursue short-term gains - like
Ulysses, who asked to be roped to the mast in order to resist the temptation of the sirens’ song - and to
make their central bank independent. It should be underlined that granting this independence is, as it
should be, a political decision. An independent central bank needs a clear legal mandate.
The ECB is one of the most, if not the most, independent central bank in the world. Its independence
and  that  of  the  participating  national  central  banks  is  firmly  enshrined  in  the  so-called  Maastricht
Treaty, the Treaty on European Union. This Treaty was concluded by the governments of all the EU
Member States and ratified by all their national parliaments. In some cases referenda were held. The
17 members of the main decision-making body, the Governing Council of the ECB, are not allowed to
take or seek instructions from anybody, politicians included. Politicians are not allowed to give such
instructions. Members of the Governing Council have a term of office of at least five years. The ECB
is financially independent and has a clear mandate, laid down in the Maastricht Treaty. Its primary
objective is to maintain price stability and, without prejudice to this objective, it should support the
general  economic  policies  in  the  Community,  with  objectives  such  as  economic  growth  and  high
employment.
Independence  from  politics  should  not  and  does  not  mean  isolation  from  politics.  I  have  already
mentioned  that  granting  the  ECB  independence  was  a  political  decision.  More  generally,  the
introduction  of  the  euro  and  the  establishment  of  the  ECB  constitute  a  new,  important  step  in  the
process of European integration which has now been under way for more than half a century. This
process is based on the political view that an integrated Europe is in the interest of stability, security
1
BIS Review  49/1999
and  prosperity.  The  European  integration  process  is  primarily  a  political  process  with,  of  course,
important economic aspects and benefits.
It should also be underlined that the appointment of the members of the Executive Board of the ECB,
as you may have noticed last year, is a political decision, to be taken at the highest political level, i.e.
by  the  heads  of  state  or  government.  I  should  add  immediately  that  the  Treaty  stipulates  that  the
persons to be appointed should be experts in financial matters. There are also some rules of the game
which the politicians must follow in making these appointments.
It is equally important to avoid isolation in the daily conduct of monetary policy. That brings me to
the issues of accountability and transparency.
Transparency and accountability
Accountability for policies is the logical complement to independence in a democratic society. The
Maastricht Treaty includes a number of provisions in this respect. First, there is the mandate to pursue
price  stability.  This  provides  a  qualitative  measure  against  which  the  ECB’s  performance  can  be
measured. We have decided to enhance this by providing a quantitative definition of price stability. In
addition to that, we have formulated a quantitative reference value for money growth. One of the aims
of publishing our monetary policy strategy is to make our policy decisions transparent. Second, the
ECB  has  to  publish  an  annual  report  in  which,  inter  alia,  the  monetary  policy  of  the  previous  and
current  year  are  discussed.  The  President  of  the  ECB  presents  the  ECB’s  Annual  Report  to  the
European Council meeting in the composition of the Ministers of Finance and Economy (the ECOFIN
Council) and to the European Parliament, which may hold a general debate on the basis of the Report.
The  President  and  other  members  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board  may  be  heard  by  the  competent
committees  of  the  European  parliament.  The  President  has  agreed  to  appear  before  the  European
Parliament at least four times a year. Third, the ECB has to report on its activities at least quarterly. It
has been decided to go beyond this requirement and to publish a monthly bulletin. It is my view that
the main way to achieve accountability is through being transparent and open. In passing, I note that
transparency  also  enhances  the  effectiveness  of  the  central  bank.  A  central  bank  that  is  better
understood is also more successful. Apart from the activities I have already mentioned, transparency
is  achieved  in  several  ways.  Every  month,  immediately  after  the  first  of  the  fortnightly  Governing
Council  meetings,  the  President  and  I  give  a  press  conference.  The  conference  starts  with  a
comprehensive introductory statement by the President, in which he explains the decisions taken by
the  Governing  Council  and  the  underlying  analysis  and  arguments.  This  introductory  statement  is
published immediately on the ECB’s Internet Web site (www.ecb.int). This is followed by a question
and  answer  session  attended  by  several  hundred  journalists.  The  questions  and  answers  are  also
published on the  Internet  shortly  afterwards.  All  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  frequently
make public speeches, give interviews and contribute to journals and books. Thousands of people visit
the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  each  year  and,  for  our  part,  we  and  our  staff  attend  many
conferences and other public events.
The  ECB  has  been  criticised,  sometimes  heavily,  for  a  lack  of  transparency  and  for  being
unaccountable. I could not disagree more, as you might expect from listening to me. One of the most
important criticisms is that we do not publish the minutes of the meetings of the Governing Council. I
would maintain, however, that the introductory statements at the press conferences are similar to what
other  central  banks  call  minutes,  with  the  difference  that  we  publish  these  statements  almost
immediately and other central banks only publish their minutes after a delay of at least a few weeks.
In addition, our Monthly Bulletin contains an explanation of recent policy decisions and an extensive
account  of  the  economic  developments  underlying  them.  What  we  do  not  do  is  publish  individual
arguments and voting records, for several good reasons. The ECB conducts a single monetary policy
for  11  countries  and  the  governors  of  the  national  central  banks  do  not  represent  their  individual
countries  on  the  Governing  Council,  but  are  obliged  to  base  their  arguments  on  euro  area-wide
considerations. To publish voting records and arguments put forward by individuals would be to risk
BIS Review   49/1999
2
undermining  their  independence  by  exposing  them  to  national  pressure.  I  do  not  believe  that
maximum  transparency  is  the  same  as  maximum  information.  It  would,  for  example,  be  rather
confusing  and  not  at  all  transparent  to  publish  a  full  transcript  of  the  meetings.  This  would  also
diminish  the  frankness  and  quality  of  the  exchange  of  views  which  takes  place.  I  should  like  to
emphasise that our concept of accountability is a collective one. We are accountable for the decisions
taken by the ECB’s Governing Council as a body. Therefore, our external communication focuses on
these  decisions  and  the  underlying  reasons  for  them,  including  arguments  for  and  against.  We  are
convinced that accountability is better served by a clear understanding of the decisions which we take
than by a public debate on who are the hawks and who are the doves.
The relationship between the monetary and budgetary authorities
Independence should not rule out communication with politicians. On the contrary, it is important for
the central bank to have a regular exchange of information and views with the budgetary authorities.
According to the Maastricht Treaty the President of the ECB is invited to meetings of the ECOFIN
Council  whenever  there  are  issues  on  the  agenda  relevant  to  the  tasks  of  the  central  bank.  The
president of the ECOFIN Council and a member of the European Commission have the right to attend
meetings of the Governing Council of the ECB. The President of the ECOFIN Council even has the
right to submit motions for deliberation. However, neither has the right to vote.
Apart from these formal channels, there  are  also  informal  ways  of  communicating.  One  of  these  is
through  the  so-called  Euro-11,  an  informal  meeting  of  the  ministers  of  finance  of  the  11  Member
States which have introduced the euro. The President and I are invited to these meetings and attend
whenever there is anything on the agenda which is relevant to our tasks and mandate.
Thus, one side of the coin is a regular exchange of information and views. The other side of the coin
is  that  in  any  such  exchange  of  information  and  views  the  independence  and  mandate  of  the  ECB
should be respected. This means, for instance, that the ECB is not prepared to enter into an ex ante co-
ordination of monetary and budgetary policies. We cannot promise ex ante that interest rates will be
reduced if budgetary authorities promise to reduce fiscal deficits. The main problem is not even that
promises  and  outcomes  may  differ,  which  unfortunately  they  sometimes  do.  The  basic  obstacle  to
such ex ante co-ordination is that the objective of monetary policy is to maintain price stability and
that in setting interest rates to achieve that objective the stance of fiscal policy is only one of the many
factors that have to be taken into account. The central bank can never make any ex ante commitment
itself in relation to an announced fiscal policy. It can never react mechanistically to a given budgetary
policy. Therefore, the so-called policy mix should be the result of the ECB’s monetary policy aimed
at maintaining price stability and fiscal policies in compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. In
the context of this Pact, EU governments have agreed to reduce their government budget deficits to
close to balance or even to create surpluses in the medium term.
Should ministers refrain from speaking about monetary policy in public? My own preferred answer to
this question, whatever it might be, is largely irrelevant. Ministers have always tended and will always
tend to have views on interest rates and, on occasion, to make their views public. I shall not criticise
them  for  doing  so.  I  shall  only  note  that  I  am  not  aware  of  any  minister  ever  having  asked  for  an
increase in interest rates; the request is always for a change in the other direction. I might add that,
whereas it is quite usual for ministers sometimes to voice their views on monetary policy, it is more
important that the central bank focuses fully on carrying out its mandate of maintaining price stability.
This is what the ECB has done, and you may be sure that it will continue to do so.
3
BIS Review   49/1999
