Mr Remsperger evaluates the role of monetary policy in a macro policy mix
A  paper  presented  by  Prof  Hermann  Remsperger,  member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the 27th Economics Conference of the Austrian National Bank in Vienna, Austria, on
11 June 1999.
Broadly  defined  topics  have  both  advantages  and  drawbacks.  On  the  one  hand,  they  mean  that  the
speaker has greater room for manoeuvre. On the other hand, he is then spoilt for choice between the
different aspects of his topic. In order to minimise the complexity of my topic, I should like to focus
on the policy mix in the euro area. In addition, the main thrust of my remarks is to be directed towards
discussion of the role of monetary policy.
In the euro area, monetary policy is centralised, but the other fields of economic policy are not. They
remain national responsibilities. Hence the topic “The policy mix in European monetary union” has
two fundamental dimensions. In the first dimension, attention is focused on one policy area in each of
the  EMU  member  states.  In  the  second  dimension,  attention  is  concentrated  on  the  mutual
relationships  of  the  individual  policy  areas,  i.e.  on  the  “assignment  of  responsibilities”.  The  two
dimensions  are  frequently  combined  under  the  heading  of  “coordination”.  Then,  however,  a
distinction  should  be  drawn  between  coordination  across  countries  for  any  given  policy  area  and
coordination across policies.
I have no wish to bore you with a flood of definitions. Even so, I think it makes sense to distinguish
between explicit and implicit coordination.1 Any form of commitment to undertake joint decisions by
separate actors should be called explicit coordination. If this coordination moves in the direction of a
single  policy  decided  by  a  single  institution,  coordination  becomes  relatively  strong.  But  there  are
also less ambitious forms of explicit coordination. One form of coordination consists in the setting of
joint rules by which the decision-making bodies have to abide. A rather looser form of coordination
occurs when the decision-makers exchange information in a kind of dialogue. Such a dialogue can,
after all, also result in “coordinated” decisions.
“Implicit coordination” relates to the assignment of the individual policy areas. If the objectives and
instruments are each clearly assigned to the individual policy areas, the overall outcome of the policy
mix is implicitly coordinated as well.
My  proposition  is  that,  under  the  terms  of  the  Treaty  of  Maastricht,  the  policy  mix  in  European
monetary union amounts  at  bottom  to  the  model  of  implicit  coordination,  and  thus  to  a  division  of
labour in the field of economic policy. This gives rise to a number of questions of principle. I should
like  to  address  two  of  them  in  more  detail  today,  namely,  first:  is  such  implicit  coordination,  and
especially  the  monetary  policy  assignment,  justified?  And  second,  does  implicit  coordination  at
European level necessitate a cross-border coordination of fiscal and wage policy?
The role of monetary policy
Let me begin with the assignment for monetary policy. The Treaty of Maastricht sets a clear objective
for the European System of Central Banks (ESCB): “the primary objective of the ESCB shall be to
maintain price stability” (Article 105.1). As part of its “stability-oriented monetary policy strategy”,
the Eurosystem has defined price stability as a “rise in the Harmonised Consumer Price Index (HCPI)
of less than 2%”. In this context “price stability must be maintained over the medium term”.2 At the
same time, the Maastricht Treaty provides that monetary policy “shall support the general economic
policies in the Community” as far as is possible “without prejudice to the objective of price stability”.
                                                     
1         See Artis and Winkler (1998).
2
 Europäische Zentralbank (1999, p. 51).
1
BIS Review   70/1999
Alongside the specification of the objective of price stability, the formulation and announcement of
the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem constitute a further key element of
implicit coordination. In strategic terms, though not in tactical terms, monetary policy is calculable.
The other economic policy makers know that the ECB’s policy is geared to two pillars: in the first
place, to the reference value for the money supply and, secondly, to the broadly based assessment of
the  prospects  for  future  price  developments.  The  second  pillar  takes  due  account  not  only  of  the
money  stock  but  also  of  other  indicators.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  euro
exchange rate is one of the indicators for the inflation outlook of the ECB.
The  inclusion  of  the  strategic  response  function  of  the  central  bank  may  contribute  to  a  stance  of
fiscal  and  wage  policy  that  is  consistent  with  stability.  Implicit  coordination  is  bolstered  by  an
intensive  exchange  of  information  between  the  ECB,  the  European  Council  and  the  European
Commission  (Article 109b  of  the  Treaty).3  Moreover,  the  ECB  is  required  to  draw  up  an  Annual
Report every year and to present and explain it to different European bodies. In addition,  there  are
numerous other channels through which information can be disseminated by the Eurosystem, not least
the press conferences held by the ECB President. Altogether, the exchange of information not only
ensures that the actors in other economic policy areas can assess monetary policy more effectively,
but the Eurosystem likewise obtains information on planned activities in other policy areas.
The assignment for European monetary policy has repeatedly been criticised in the past. However, the
critics  have  not  all  adopted  the  same  position.  Whereas  some  critics  have  objected  that  European
monetary  policy  is  acting  too  much  in  the  tradition  of  the  allegedly  overly  stability-oriented
Bundesbank,  others  have  deplored  a  supposedly  too  pronounced  orientation  towards  short-term
business activity. Only a short time after the launch of monetary union, there was talk of a “paradigm
change” compared with the earlier Bundesbank policies.
I  would  like  to  address  the  critics  calling  for  a  stronger  orientation  of  monetary  policy  towards
business activity. Three lines of argument are discernible here:
A first group of advocates of a monetary policy geared to business activity regards  the  risks  to  the
prevailing  price  stability  as  being  negligible.  That  group  would  now  like  to  make  monetary  policy
responsible for fostering growth and employment as well.
A second group of critics is arguing on the basis of economic shocks. Monetary policy should respond
to demand shocks. They believe that the objective of price stability should be met by the central bank
only in the medium or long term.4 The currently discernible weakness of economic activity in the euro
area serves the advocates of this approach as evidence of the existence of such a demand shock. In
their view, it makes an expansionary monetary policy response imperative.
A third group, finally, prefers quite a different assignment for monetary policy. While price stability
should be reached primarily by means of a productivity-oriented wage policy, monetary policy should
actively  encourage  growth  and  employment.  Hence  this  approach  reflects  the  strongest  form  of
orientation towards economic activity.5 Unlike the first two approaches mentioned, it postulates not so
much a temporary as a permanent responsibility of monetary policy for business-cycle policy.
                                                     
3 
Article 105.4 of the Maastricht Treaty explicitly provides for a right of the ECB to be consulted on all acts
within its field of competence.
By stressing the long-term orientation of  the  objective,  Fischer  (1996,  pp.  28  and  29),  for  instance,  sees
scope  for  pursuing  a  short-term,  anticyclical  monetary  policy:  “Long-run  price  stability  should  be  the
primary goal of the central bank ...” And “... emphasising the long-run ... allows ... a little leeway for short-
term  countercyclical  policy.”  Bofinger  (1999,  p. 7 ff.)  likewise  emphasises  the  active  role  of  monetary
policy in the event of demand shocks.
The  approach  is  based  mainly  on  work  by  Flassbeck  (see,  for  instance,  Flassbeck  (1998,  p. 278  ff.);
Flassbeck et al. (1992, p. 222 ff.); and Flassbeck and Spiecker (1998, p. 52 ff.)).
4 
5 
BIS Review   70/1999
2
To  evaluate  these  alternative  assignments  for  monetary  policy,  one  might  initially  try  to  devise  a
welfare-theory approach. The best assignment would distinguish itself by maximising social welfare.
However, since such an abstract concept cannot help very much in the practical debate, one might ask,
instead, to what extent monetary policy makers are  actually  able  to  perform  the  role  to  which  they
have been assigned. At the same time, it is essential for monetary policy makers to have an incentive
for playing their role as envisaged (the criterion of incentive compatibility). Thus, it is a question both
of the “ability” and of the “volition” of those responsible for monetary policy decisions.
The decision-makers are being confronted in European monetary policy with two problem complexes.
Besides  the  problems  which  beset  monetary  policy  quite  generally,  there  are,  in  addition,  some
problems which are due specifically to European monetary union. The  advent  of  a  completely  new
monetary  regime  necessarily  increases  insecurity.  Furthermore,  the  monetary  policy  makers  are
obliged to operate in a monetary area which is very far from homogeneous.
I am convinced that it would overburden monetary policy if responsibility for business-cycle policy
and employment policy were assigned to it as well. It is, for instance, to be doubted whether monetary
policy is able lastingly to raise employment. Not only monetarists refer in this context to the “natural
rate of unemployment”,  i.e.  the  unemployment  rate  that  reflects  the  structural  characteristics  of  the
goods  and  labour  markets.6  In  the  long  run,  unemployment  tends  towards  that  rate.  It  cannot  be
reduced durably by “flashes in the pan” kindled by monetary policy. Besides, there would then be a
risk of accelerating inflation rates.
It  is  of  course  difficult  to  quantify  the  “natural  rate  of  unemployment”.  But  there  is  a  general
consensus that a large part of the unemployment currently prevailing in Europe is structural in origin.7
Overall,  the  scope  for  monetary  policy  to  exercise  an  impact  on  unemployment  is  therefore  very
limited.  To  reduce  unemployment,  primarily  structural  policy  decisions  by  the  individual  member
states of the monetary union are needed. They will have to ensure, not least, that their labour markets
become more flexible.
Another  argument  against  active  business-cycle  management  by  monetary  policy  is  the  long  and
variable  time-lags  involved.  They  prevent  any  fine-tuning  of  real  business  activity  by  means  of
monetary  policy.  On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  does  have  appropriate  instruments  for
influencing  price  movements  over  the  medium  or  long  term.  One  of  the  few  facts  which  are
uncontested among economists is the perception that inflation is a monetary phenomenon.
Monetary policy affects prices by no means only through the money stock and aggregate demand but
also  via  the  expectations  of  economic  agents.  A  major  advantage  of  a  monetary  policy  credibly
committed to the objective of price stability, over an active monetary policy, is that the central bank
can  take  advantage  of  that  transmission  channel  relatively  easily.  If  monetary  policy  embodies  the
stability objective credibly, it simultaneously fosters wage settlements that are in line with stability. In
this way, it creates a good basis for its own success.
In my view, it would be a grave error if the central bank were to be made responsible for employment
policy  as  part  of  a  schematic  two-tier  approach:  first  the  attainment  of  price  stability,  then  an
orientation towards employment. For one thing, that disregards the economic management problems
deriving from the time-lags involved in monetary policy. For another, it would stand seriously in the
way of the accumulation of a reputation by the central bank.
                                                     
6 
7 
See Friedman (1968, p. 8).
See  e.g.  OECD  (1998,  p. 172  ff.)  or  IMF  (1997,  p. 39  ff.).  For  Germany,  see  e.g.  Sachverständigenrat
(Council  of  Economic  Experts)  (1998,  para. 422  ff.)  and  Dohse  et  al.  (1998,  p. 109 ff.).  Regarding  the
Phillips curve trade-off, Weber (1994, p. 91 ff.) comes to the conclusion for the G-7 countries (other than
Italy) that they all exhibit long-term vertical Phillips curves.
3
BIS Review   70/1999
Thus,  a  large  part  of  the  recent  theoretical  debate  on  the  problem  of  the  time  inconsistency  of
monetary policy is based on the initial hypothesis that the central bank should pursue a (particularly
ambitious) output or employment objective in addition to the goal of price stability. Without such an
orientation towards two objectives, the credibility problem is less serious. It must therefore be in the
best  interests  of  a  stability-oriented  central  bank  not  to  have  excessive  demands  made  on  it.  The
orientation  towards  the  objective  of  price  stability  meets  with  widespread  approval,  particularly
among  representatives  of  central  banks.  Price  stability  does  a  great  deal  to  help  monetary  policy
makers to gain a high reputation.8 An economic policy strategy that disregards this incentive pattern
and, instead, commits monetary policy to rapidly effective employment successes is likely to give rise
to substantial problems. In order to ensure that short-termism does not spread to monetary policy, the
Treaty of Maastricht provides for the independence of the European Central Bank and of all national
central banks. This crucial institutional regulation ensures a continuous monetary policy, geared to the
objective of price stability.9
Yet  the  commitment  to  price  stability  and  the  independence  of  the  European  Central  Bank  do  not
imply  that  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  is  wholly  irrelevant  to  business  activity.  A  medium-
term-oriented monetary policy, such as has been pursued by the Bundesbank in the past, and has been
incorporated, in the form of a reference value for monetary growth, in the “two-pillar strategy” of the
Eurosystem, is also apt to smooth out economic activity. As part of a monetary strategy designed to
achieve continuity, interest rate movements “breathe” in line with business activity; in a sense, they
thus act as a “built-in stabiliser”.
Central bankers may feel gratified about an increase in employment, especially if it is the fruit of a
consistent  stabilisation  policy.  In  the  process,  however,  they  must  not  forget  the  limits  set  to  the
potential impact of monetary policy. This is why Mervyn King, alluding to a phrase coined by Alan
Blinder, has written that central bankers “need soft hearts and hard heads”.10
Now that I have drawn attention to the general problems associated with economic management by
means of monetary policy, I should like to address the specific difficulties posed by the environment
of monetary union.11 In particular, those uncertainties are to be considered which are connected with
the  transition  to  Stage  Three  of  monetary  union.  The  change  of  regime  may  engender  severe
alterations in the behaviour of economic agents in the participating states. That applies not only to the
financial sector, in which monetary union has its most immediate impact, but also to the other sectors
of the economy.
It  is  to  be  expected  that  competition  will  intensify  on  the  goods  and  factor  markets  upon  the
disappearance  of  the  currency  barriers  in  the  euro  area.  Consumers  and  investors  may  well  behave
differently. For instance, foreign trade between the participating states might increase. Or goods are
bought which have cheapened owing to the stronger competition. Overall, it can be assumed that the
patterns  familiar  from  the  past  will  change.  A  monetary  policy  that,  in  an  aggressively  active
economic  management,  relied  on  the  old  patterns  might  well  enhance,  rather  than  mitigate,  the
cyclical fluctuations.
                                                     
8 
Fischer (1996, p. 23 ff.) draws attention to opinion polls according to which the citizens of most European
countries,  at  least  in  the  early  mid-nineties,  still  felt  inflation  to  be  a  major  problem.  Correspondingly,
fighting inflation contributes to the accumulation of a reputation.
It  is  in  this  sense  that  Alesina  and  Gatti  (1995,  p.  198 ff.)  understand  the  justification  of  central  bank
independence. In their view, it is only such independence that can effectively prevent monetary policy from
being the cause of politically induced business cycles.
9 
10  King (1999, p. 93).
11
On the difficulties at the start of Stage Three, see e.g. Europäische Zentralbank (1999, p. 49 f.).
BIS Review   70/1999
4
The uncertainty surrounding the effects of the single European monetary policy on the real economy
will  actually  be  increased  by  possible  differences  in  member  states’  national  transmission
mechanisms. It cannot, however, be said with sufficient certainty how significant these differences are
for  practical  monetary  policy.  Although  the  divergent  financing  patterns,  wage-bargaining  systems
and labour and goods-market regulations in the member states provide grounds for supposing that a
single  central  bank  rate  will  have  differing  effects,12  on  closer  inspection  it  transpires  that  the
direction and scale of the deviations between the individual countries depend, among other things, on
the concrete method of empirical analysis used.13
Moreover, it cannot be conclusively inferred from the differences that they are statistically significant.
If  the  criterion  of  statistical  significance  is  taken  into  account,  the  differences  ascertained  may  be
modified.14 The extent to which the existing differences will diminish in the near future is likewise
disputed. On the one hand, a higher degree of specialisation and diversification is expected in the euro
area on account of the ongoing economic integration. That would tend to result in more fanning-out of
the structures. On the other hand, a greater convergence of economic structures is expected owing to
the  single  monetary  policy  and  the  increased  harmonisation  of  the  other  economic  policies.15
Altogether,  however,  the  uncertainties  surrounding  both  the  national  effects  of  the  Eurosystem’s
monetary policy measures and the persistence of such differences stand in the way of an aggressively
active monetary policy, especially one oriented towards the short term.
However, it is now being claimed that not only the monetary policy of the Bundesbank but also the
policy of the European Central Bank could be explained more effectively by the “Taylor rule” than by
any medium-term-oriented monetary strategy. I do not share that view. The monetary policy strategy
of the Eurosystem is based just as little on the Taylor interest rate as was the former strategy of the
Bundesbank.
                                                     
12
13 
14 
Regarding  this  supposition,  see  e.g.  Hughes  Hallett  et  al.  (1999,  p. 6 f.).  The  historical  differences  in
financing patterns are described, for instance, by Borio (1995, p. 77). For example, in Germany, France and
the Netherlands in 1993 over 80% of the credit was extended at medium to long term. In Italy, by contrast,
51% of the credit was extended at short term.
In  the  literature,  differences  in  national  transmission  mechanisms  are  analysed  as  part  of  major
macroeconomic  models  (especially  those  of  central  banks),  structural  VAR  models  and  small
macroeconomic models that can be reduced to a central estimating equation. Regarding the macroeconomic
models of the various central banks, see e.g. BIS (1995). Hughes Hallett et al. (1999) and Hughes Hallett
and Piscitelli (1999) use, as an alternative, specific multi-country models. Structural VAR models are used
by Gerlach and Smets (1995), Ramaswamy and Sloek (1997), Ehrmann (1998) and Holstein (1999). Simple
“single-equation systems” are used by Dornbusch et al. (1998), Brookes and Massone (1998) and Britton
and Whitley (1997). For a survey of the literature, see Kieler and Saarenheimo (1998) or Baumgartner and
Url (1999).
This is the conclusion reached by Kieler and Saarenheimo (1998, p. 23 ff.) for Germany, France and the
UK. The International Monetary Fund (1997, p. 55 f.) arrives at the following assessment: “The evidence
indicates  that  there  have  been  differences  in  the  response  of  activity  to  monetary  policy  across  the  EU
countries, but they are not so significant as to suggest that substantial problems would arise in the operation
of a common monetary policy.”
15  While  Hughes  Hallett  et  al.  (1999,  p. 6 ff.)  postulate  strongly  diverging  structures  on  the  basis  of  the
theorem  of  “comparative  advantages”,  Frankel  and  Rose  (1998,  p. 1009 ff.)  advocate  the  opposite  view.
And  that  seems  understandable,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  differences  in  financing  patterns.  For
instance,  in  the  course  of  the  decline  in  inflation  in  Italy,  the  above-mentioned  51%  share  of  short-term
credit has probably decreased in the past few years. As the single monetary policy also applies to Italy, an
even  greater  harmonisation  of  financing  patterns  is  to  be  expected  in  the  future.  In  proportion  as  the
pressure  in  monetary  union  to  effect  consistent  structural  reforms  in  the  member  states  increases,  wage
bargaining and market flexibilities may also converge as additional causes of the differing transmission of
monetary policy stimuli.
5
BIS Review   70/1999
The  Taylor  rule  makes  the  short-term  interest  rate  dependent  on  current  inflationary  and  cyclical
developments.  Orientation  to  the  Taylor  interest  rate  would  have  implied  greater  interest  rate
movements than the Bundesbank actually allowed on the basis of its concept.
Only in the longer term are the behaviour of the day-to-day money market rate and the behaviour of
the Taylor interest rate quite similar. At first glance, this largely parallel movement appears to be very
surprising since the output gap did not play an explicit role in Bundesbank policy. It is less surprising,
however,  if  the  similarities  between  the  Taylor  rule  and  monetary  targeting  are  taken  into
consideration.  The  potential-oriented  monetary  targeting  policy,  too,  has  an  automatic  anticyclical
component. Furthermore, monetary targeting likewise reacts to deviations of the inflation rate from
“normative inflation”.
In the Eurosystem, consideration is given to the fact that the monetary policy environment cannot be
characterised  solely  by  current  price  movements  and  the  output  gap.  Instead,  the  broadly  defined
money supply, as well as a number of other monetary, financial and real economic indicators, contain
information on the future trend in inflation. Ignoring these would not be appropriate for a central bank
oriented towards the objective of price stability.
Hitherto, I have tried to make clear that the concentration of monetary policy in the monetary union
on the objective of price stability is appropriate. That objective is to be attained by a central decision-
making  body,  the  ECB  Governing  Council.  No  problem  of  coordinating  independent  national
monetary policies arises in the European monetary union.
Instead of a close interlocking of various policy areas, the Maastricht Treaty envisages an unequivocal
goal for monetary policy, in the shape of price stability. In the sense of “implicit coordination” in the
policy mix it is likewise desirable to assign clear fields of responsibility to fiscal and wage policy as
well.  The  main  tasks  of  fiscal  policy  lie  primarily  in  the  provision  of  services  which  cannot  be
supplied  at  all,  or  adequately,  via  the  market,  and  in  the  adjustment  of  the  income  distribution
resulting from the market process.16 Correspondingly, the key responsibility for employment should
be  assigned  to  wage  policy.  This  (neo-classical)  assignment  is  consistent  with  the  practical
possibilities of the various policy areas at the national and European level, and also takes due account
of  the  incentive  patterns  of  decision-makers.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the
Treaty of Maastricht envisages the cross-border coordination of economic policy. The Treaty states
that the member states are to regard their economic policies as a matter of common concern.17 But the
single European monetary policy remains unaffected by this coordination precept.
The  object  of  such  economic  policy  coordination  is  the  monitoring  of  economic  developments  and
economic  policies  in  the  member  states.  That  includes,  besides  the  surveillance  of  budget  policies,
especially the observation of structural policy measures in the goods, services and labour markets, of
cost and price movements, and the promotion of tax reforms.
If one enquires rather more carefully into the relationship between the single monetary policy and the
other  policy  areas  in  European  monetary  union,  it  must  be  said,  to  begin  with,  that  politicians  are
prohibited from  issuing  instructions  to  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks.  Similarly,  the  ECB
and  national  central  banks  are  prohibited  from  requesting  instructions  from  politicians.  Thus,
according to the Maastricht Treaty “coordination from above” is not permissible in the Eurosystem.
See Sachverständigenrat (Council of Economic Experts) (1974, para. 397).
                                                     
16 
17  Article 102a of the Maastricht Treaty provides for the gearing of the economic policies of member states to
the objectives of the Community, as defined in Article 2 of the Treaty. In the text of the Amsterdam Treaty,
these  are  “a  harmonious,  balanced  and  sustained  development  of  economic  activities,  a  high  level  of
employment and of social protection, the equality of men and women, sustained, non-inflationary growth, a
high degree of competitiveness and of convergence of economic performance, the raising of the standard of
living and quality of life, and economic and social cohesion and solidarity among member states.”
BIS Review   70/1999
6
Since  the  Eurosystem  is  responsible  for  ensuring  price  stability,  that  responsibility  must  not  be
jeopardised by any coordination, no matter of what kind.
Against this background, I should now like to address the second question of principle which I raised
at the beginning of this paper: does implicit coordination between monetary, fiscal and wage policy at
European level necessitate cross-border coordination in fiscal and wage policy?
The role of fiscal policy
In the recent debate, the necessity for the greater convergence of fiscal policy within the euro area has
usually been justified by reference to business-cycle policy. In this context it is argued that the greater
likelihood of spill-over effects in the event of purely national stabilisation policies makes convergence
essential.18 The single internal market and the single currency facilitate imports and exports, so that
domestically  oriented  stimuli  on  the  part  of  individual  member  states  spill  over  to  their  respective
neighbours.
However,  if  the  focus  of  fiscal  policy  action  is  held  to  be  less  in  the  stabilisation  function,  but
primarily in the allocative and distributional function, stabilisation-policy spill-over effects carry less
weight as arguments in favour of coordination. In line with the principle of subsidiarity, which argues
in favour of the decentralised provision of the vast bulk of public spending, the balance then swings
against marked coordination (and centralisation) in the field of fiscal policy.
Even so, in the sphere of fiscal policy there is one perfect example of cross-border coordination by
means  of  joint  rules.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  defines  a  code  of  good  practices  for  national
budget  policies.  In  this  connection,  attention  should  be  drawn  not  only  to  the  fiscally  relevant
variables of a maximum debt level of 60% of GDP and a deficit limit of 3% of GDP, which became
known as the “Maastricht criteria”, but also to the “obligation” to reach a budget position which is
almost in balance or even in surplus in the medium term. Meeting this target will enable all member
states to cope with normal cyclical fluctuations and to keep the public sector deficit at or below the
level of the reference value of 3%.
Although the Stability and Growth Pact can be substantiated by reference to the spill-over effects of
national fiscal policies, when the Stability and Growth Pact was drawn up the primary intention was
not to concentrate forces in order to perform a joint stabilisation task. The aim was, rather, to protect
both the single monetary policy and the fiscal policies of member states of the European Union from
the unsound budgetary policies of particular member states. As it could not be taken for granted that
the  financial  markets,  as  the  sole  disciplining  factor,  would  ensure  fiscal  stability,  the  countries
concerned agreed on a minimum standard of fiscal discipline, in the form of the Stability and Growth
Pact.19  To  that  end,  the  member  states  must  present  medium-term  “stability  or  convergence
programmes” once a year. If it transpires after a few months that such a programme is based more on
hopes than on realistic assumptions, it comes as no surprise if the markets respond with  jitters  and
disappointment.
The role of wage policy
The starting point of my observations on the role of wage policy in the policy mix of the European
monetary  union  is  once  again  the  model  of  implicit  coordination.  According  to  that  model,  wage
                                                     
18 
19 
For  this  view,  see  e.g.  Flassbeck  (1998a,  p. 557),  who  demands  an  institutionally  based  coordination  of
fiscal policies.
Further arguments in favour of the Stability and Growth Pact are spelled out by Eichengreen and Wyplosz
(1998, p. 71 ff.). Among other things, they regard the Stability and Growth Pact as the first step towards an
(in  their  eyes  desirable)  ex  ante  mutual  coordination  of  national  fiscal  policies  and  of  fiscal  policy  with
monetary policy (p. 77 f.).
7
BIS Review   70/1999
policy is assigned to the objective of employment. The key question is whether such assignment calls
for cross-border coordination of wage policy.
Concern  about  a  pan-European  wage-cutting  race  is  one  argument  used  in  favour  of  a  close
interlinking of national wage policies. What is feared in this case is that the level of wages will be
used as a factor to create jobs in the domestic market to the detriment of other member states, in the
style of “beggar thy neighbour” policies. The upshot of such a “disastrous wage-cutting race” could
only be a general process of deflation.20 To prevent such a development, the parties to pay settlements
should be committed to wage rises that are oriented towards the growth of productivity.21 Wage policy
would  then  be  coordinated  by  means  of  a  “joint  rule”,  i.e.  by  orientation  towards  the  growth  of
productivity.
However, some weighty objections can be raised against these ideas. For instance, orientation towards
productivity  growth  as  a  guideline  for  wage  policy  appears  to  me  to  make  little  sense  at  times  of
heavy unemployment. In the first place, it is reasonable to expect that, with the relative cheapening of
the production factor labour, substitution processes in favour of higher employment are  triggered.22
Secondly, in the event of heavy unemployment it is essential for wage rises to lag behind the growth
of productivity, if only because the statistically recorded average productivity of labour may increase
as a result of a reduction in the labour input.
The notion of a distribution of given jobs among all EMU countries – such as ultimately underlies the
argument  of  wage-cutting  competition  –  disregards  the  supply-side  potential  improvements  in
momentum on the labour and goods market. EMU-wide wage restraint aimed at making more output
profitable on the cost side need not  by  any  means  be  a  zero-sum  game  in  which  one  country  loses
precisely the number of jobs that another gains.23
Some  authors  believe  that  centralised,  corporatist  wage-bargaining  systems  are  likely  to  exert
favourable employment effects. Such hopes are based largely on the assumption that, in the context of
centralised wage negotiations, the parties to wage settlements will take due account of the effects of
wage rises on prices and employment, which, it is thought, is not true in the case of industry-specific
wage negotiations, on account of a free-rider attitude in stabilisation and employment policy.24
But  the  institutional  regulations  affecting  the  labour  market  –  and  thus  the  structure  of  the  wage-
bargaining systems as well – differ considerably between the individual EMU member states. Unlike
small, comparatively homogeneous Austria or the Netherlands, which are often cited as examples of a
successful  corporatist  approach,  the  euro  area  is  a  large  economic  zone  of  pronounced  structural
diversity. In addition, it is likely to be particularly difficult to implement a common European policy
in those countries in which the responsibility for wage bargaining is highly decentralised, e.g. located
at enterprise level. In macroeconomic terms, however, that is not a drawback.
                                                     
20 
21 
See Horn et al. (1997, p. 99 ff.) or Horn and Zwiener (1998, p. 551 ff.).
See  Horn  and  Zwiener  (1998,  p. 554).  For  concrete  nominal  wage  settlements,  the  following  formula
should be used: “nominal wage rise = productivity growth + target inflation rate of the Eurosystem.” That
would  not  only  prevent  the  “disastrous  wage-cutting  race”  but  also  protect  the  monetary  policy  of  the
Eurosystem from inflationary pressures due to  wage  policy.  That  would  create  employment-policy  scope
for monetary policy.
22  At  all  events,  this  seems  to  be  the  case  for  Germany  (see  e.g.  Lapp  and  Lehment  (1997,  p. 67 ff.)  or
Rottmann and Ruschinski (1998, p. 10). The fact that wage restraint in Germany was unable to fulfil all the
employment-policy expectations pinned on it may owe something to very vigorous job-shedding on account
of the unavoidable consolidation of the public sector budgets, the adjustment of the economic structure in
the new Länder and the tailing-off of the construction boom.
In the simulation account of Horn and Zwiener (1998, p. 555 ff.), coordinated cuts in nominal wages in all
EMU countries exert distinctly favourable employment and growth effects.
See in particular Calmfors and Driffill (1988).
23 
24 
BIS Review   70/1999
8
In my opinion, the road to more employment leads less via centralised wage negotiations at European
level  than  via  structural  changes  on  the  labour  markets.  Programmes  of  wide-ranging  structural
reforms  have  been  elaborated  by  the  OECD,  among  others.25  What  has  been  lacking  so  far  is  the
political will to implement such reforms. Hence the main significance of the European employment
pact lies in enhancing the will to implement reforms and to initiate structural changes.
Another  factor  mitigating  against  coordination  in  wage  policy  is  that,  owing  to  monetary  union,
monetary policy can definitively no longer function as a national “shock absorber”. Moreover, in most
member states fiscal policy can likewise perform this function only to a very limited extent at present.
Since the budget deficits and/or debt levels in most member states are still pretty high, the relevant
provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact curb fiscal policy’s scope. That is another reason why a
distinctly higher degree of flexibility on the labour markets is needed. Otherwise, adverse economic
shocks will be reflected directly in higher unemployment figures.
Notwithstanding  the  calls  for  greater  coordination,  in  actual  fact  competition  between  the  regions
should be used as a coordination mechanism. Issing has formulated this finding as follows: “Precisely
because monetary policy can no longer respond to national conditions the exact opposite of greater
centralisation  and  harmonisation  may  be  required  in  other  areas.  Talk  of  uniform  European  wage-
setting or of an ambitious social union is going in the wrong direction; different productivity and real
economic conditions across the euro area must be taken into account more than ever.”26
Concluding remarks
The single European monetary policy is currently being accompanied both by a fiscal policy which
has largely remained a national responsibility and by a wage policy which is coordinated, at most, at
national level. In my view, however, this policy mix should not be deplored, as there is anyway little
to  be  said  for  more  far-reaching  coordination  across  policies  at  European  level.  Any  coordination
extending beyond implicit coordination would pose two problems:
First, there would be a danger of economic policy engendering destabilisation, rather than economic
stability,  owing  to  a  one-sided  orientation  towards  a  policy  of  short-term  stabilisation  of  business
activity. What I have said about monetary policy showed how difficult a short-term-oriented policy is
in  the  presence  of  long  and  variable  time-lags.  This  problem  would  certainly  not  be  mitigated  by
going further than the implicit coordination of the various policy areas.
Second, ex ante coordination across policies would also involve the risk of responsibilities becoming
blurred and incentive patterns destroyed. Any attempt to orient all policy areas towards all objectives
may well lead to a situation in which ultimately no area seriously tries to reach even one objective. A
strategy of “relying on someone else” may perhaps promise an easier life, and a policy of “drawing
attention  to  the  failure  of  someone  else”  longer  political  survival,  but  without  an  unequivocal
objective, there can ultimately be no clear accountability. This moral hazard problem may not only
result in a threat to price stability, but also be counterproductive in terms of employment policy.
The reservations about explicit ex ante coordination in European economic policy do not imply that
that  policy  should  entirely  forgo  any  form  of  coordination.  Elements  of  implicit  coordination  and
macroeconomic dialogue are already evident at European level.
For instance, a certain coordination of the single monetary policy with national fiscal policies occurs
under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Compliance  with  the  fiscal  standards  laid  down  in  that  Pact
relieves the Eurosystem of political pressure to facilitate the financing of massive budget deficits by
means of durably low interest rates. In that way, the Stability and Growth Pact helps to ensure that the
                                                     
25 
26 
See e.g. the job studies of the OECD.
Issing (1999, p. 10).
9
BIS Review   70/1999
Eurosystem can always exhibit the “staying power” in its stabilisation policy efforts that is required
for successful monetary policy.
It is the mandate of monetary policy to maintain price stability in the euro area. This clearly defined
objective takes due account of the opportunities presented by, and limits set to, monetary policy. In
terms of reputation, this is at the same time in line with the incentives afforded  to  central  bankers.
Finally, the clear assignment of functions facilitates accountability.
Fiscal policy should, first and foremost, perform its allocation and distribution function; wage policy
should be assigned the primary employment-policy responsibility. Instead of the vague assignment of
functions and the blurring of areas of responsibility associated with explicit or ex ante coordination,
this clear-cut separation of responsibilities promises effective implicit coordination.
If one wonders, in conclusion, whether there is no room left at all in this approach for the stabilisation
of demand, I should like to draw attention, first, to the automatic stabilisation effected by a monetary
policy geared to the medium term. Moreover, it is in the best interests of monetary policy if the public
budgets, too, exert smoothing effects on business activity. That, however, will not really be possible
again until the structural budget deficits have been reduced. Provided fiscal accounts are balanced in
normal times, the full endogenous reaction of national  fiscal  structures  to  downturns  should  not  be
hampered by the Stability and Growth Pact, even during severe recessions. By contrast, starting from
deficits  of  around  2%  of  GDP  –  about  the  euro  area’s  1998  average  –  would  imply  either
systematically stifling the operation of automatic stabilisers in the event of recessions, or moving into
excessive  deficits  with  a  high  probability.  At  all  events,  growing  structural  deficits  do  not  help  to
smooth the movement of incomes across the various phases of a business cycle.
In  recent  decades,  fiscal  structures  have  become  encrusted.  They  must  now  be  broken  open  again.
There is a need for speed. The adjustment of the deficits is an indispensable element in such structural
reforms,  which  should  tackle  the  expenditure  side  of  public  budgets.  Delays  or  dilutions  are
unacceptable. They will be penalised by the markets. After all, it should not be forgotten that the ratio
of public spending to the gross domestic product in the euro area is still over 51%!
Bibliography
Alesina, A and R Gatti (1995), Independent Central Banks: Low Inflation at No Costs, in: American
Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 2 (Papers and Proceedings), 196–200.
Artis,  M  and  B  Winkler  (1998),  The  Stability  Pact:  Safeguarding  the  Credibility  of  the  European
Central Bank, National Institute Economic Review.
Baumgartner,  J  and  T  Url  (1999),  Gemeinsame  Geldpolitik  –  unterschiedliche  Auswirkungen?  In:
Monatsberichte des Österreichischen Instituts für Wirtschaftsforschung, 72. Jg., Heft 1, 75–88.
BIS (1995), Financial Structure and the Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism, Basel, CB. 394.
Bofinger,  P  (1999),  The  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy  by  the  European  Central  Bank  According  to
Article 105 of the Treaty Versus the Real Economy, Briefing Paper for the Monetary Subcommittee
of the European Parliament.
Borio,  C  (1995),  The  Structure  of  Credit  to  the  Non-government  Sector  and  the  Transmission
Mechanism of Monetary Policy: A Cross-country Comparison, in: Bank for International Settlements
(eds.), Financial Structure and the  Monetary  Policy  Transmission  Mechanism,  Basel,  CB.  394,  59–
105.
BIS Review   70/1999
10
Britton,  E  and  J  Whitley  (1997),  Comparing  the  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism  in  France,
Germany and the United Kingdom: Some Issues and Results, in: Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,
May 1997, 152–162.
Brookes,  M  and  F  Massone  (1998),  The  Economics  of  Interest  Rate  Convergence  in  Euroland,
Goldman/Sachs Report.
Calmfors,  L  and  J  Driffill  (1988),  Centralisation  of  Wage  Bargaining  and  Macroeconomic
Performance, in: Economic Policy, 13–61.
Dohse,  D,  C  Krieger-Boden  and  R  Soltwedel  (1998),  Die  EWU  –  Beschäftigungsmotor  oder
Beschäftigungsrisiko?, in: Zeitschrift für Wirtschaftspolitik, 47. Jahrgang, 109–120.
Dornbusch, R, C Favero and F Giavazzi (1998), The Immediate Challenges For the European Central
Bank,  in:  Begg,  D,  J  von  Hagen,  C  Wyplosz  and  K  Zimmermann  (eds.),  EMU:  Prospects  and
Challenges for the Euro, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Ehrmann,  M  (1998),  Will  EMU  Generate  Asymmetry?  Comparing  Monetary  Policy  Transmission
Across  European  Countries,  paper  presented  at  the  Banca  d’Italia/IGIER  conference  “Monetary
Policy of the ESCB: Strategic and Implementation Issues”, 6–7 July 1998 in Milan.
Eichengreen, B and C Wyplosz (1998), The Stability Pact: more than a minor nuisance?, in: Begg, D,
J von Hagen, C Wyplosz and K Zimmermann (eds.), EMU: Prospects and Challenges for the Euro,
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Europäische  Zentralbank  (1999),  Die  stabilitätsorientierte  geldpolitische  Strategie  des  Eurosystems,
in: Monatsbericht der Europäischen Zentralbank, January 1999, 43–56.
Fischer, S (1996), Why Are Central Banks  Pursuing  Long-run  Price  Stability?,  in:  Federal  Reserve
Bank of Kansas City (eds.), Achieving Price Stability.
Flassbeck, H (1998), Geldpolitik und Beschäftigung, in: Galler, H P and G Wagner (eds.), Empirische
Forschung  und  wirtschaftspolitische  Beratung,  Festschrift  für  Hans-Jürgen  Krupp  zum  65.
Geburtstag, Frankfurt am Main: Campus, 275–289.
Flassbeck, H (1998a), Europa braucht institutionell verankerte Abstimmung der Finanzpolitiken, in:
Die Sparkasse, 115. Jg., Heft 12, 556–557.
Flassbeck,  H,  G  Horn  and  R  Zwiener  (1992),  Rigide  Preise,  flexible  Mengen  –  Ansätze  zu  einer
dynamischen  Analyse  von  Angebots-  und  Nachfrageschocks,  Deutsches 
für
Wirtschaftsforschung, Sonderheft 149, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot.
Institut 
Flassbeck, H and F Spiecker (1998), Löhne und Arbeitslosigkeit, Berlin, August 1998.
Frankel,  J  and  A K  Rose  (1998),  The  Endogenity  of  the  Optimum  Currency  Area  Criteria,  in:  The
Economic Journal, Vol. 108, July 1998, 1009–1025.
Friedman, M (1968), The Role of Monetary Policy, in: American Economic Review, Vol. 58. No. 1,
1–17.
Gerlach,  S  and  F  Smets  (1995),  The  Monetary  Transmission  Mechanism:  Evidence  from  the  G-7
Countries, in: Bank for International Settlements (eds.), Financial Structure and the Monetary Policy
Transmission Mechanism, Basel, CB. 394, 188–224.
11
BIS Review   70/1999
Holstein,  M  (1999),  Zur  Rolle  der  Geldpolitik 
Nationalökonomie und Statistik, Band 218, Heft 3+4, 346–360.
im  Konjunkturzyklus, 
in:  Zeitschrift  für
Horn,  G,  W  Scheremet  and  R  Zwiener  (1997),  Rahmenbedingungen  für  den  Arbeitsmarkt  in  einer
erfolgreichen  Wirtschafts-  und  Währungsunion  der  EU-Mitgliedstaaten,  Gutachten  im  Auftrag  des
Bundesministers für Wirtschaft.
Horn,  G  and  R  Zwiener  (1998),  Lohnpolitik 
Simulationsstudie, in: DIW Wochenbericht, Nr. 31–32/98, 551–561.
in  der  Europäischen  Währungsunion,  Eine
Hughes  Hallett,  A J  and  L  Piscitelli  (1999),  EMU  in  Reality:  The  Effect  of  a  Common  Monetary
Policy on Economies with Different Transmission Mechanisms, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2068.
Hughes  Hallett,  A J,  L  Piscitelli  and  T  Warmedinger  (1999),  On  the  Asymmetric  Impacts  of  a
Common  Monetary  Policy  in  Europe,  forthcoming  in:  von  Hagen,  J  and  C  Waller  (eds.),  Common
Money, Uncommon Regions, Amsterdam.
International Monetary Fund (1997), World Economic Outlook, October 1997.
Issing, O (1999), The Euro – Four Weeks after the Start, speech delivered to the European-Atlantic
Group, House of Commons, London, 28 January 1999.
Kieler,  M  and  T  Saarenheimo  (1998),  Differences  in  Monetary  Policy  Transmission?  A  Case  not
Closed,  paper  presented  at  the  Banca  d’Italia/IGIER  conference  “Monetary  Policy  of  the  ESCB:
Strategic and Implementation Issues”, 6–7 July 1998 in Milan.
King,  M  (1999),  Monetary  Policy  and  the  Labour  Market,  in:  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin,
Vol. 39, No. 1, 90–97.
Lapp,  S  and  H  Lehment  (1997),  Lohnzurückhaltung  und  Beschäftigung  in  Deutschland  und  in  den
Vereinigten Staaten, in: Die Weltwirtschaft, Heft 1, 67–83.
OECD (1998), Economic Outlook, No. 63, June 1998.
Ramaswamy,  R  and  T  Sloek  (1997),  The  Real  Effects  of  Monetary  Policy  in  the  European  Union:
What Are the Differences, IMF WP/97/160.
Rottmann, H and M Ruschinski (1997), The Labour Demand and the Innovation Behaviour of Firms,
ifo discussion papers, May 1997.
Sachverständigenrat (1974), Jahresgutachten 1974/1975, Vollbeschäftigung für Morgen, Stuttgart und
Mainz: Verlag W. Kohlhammer.
Sachverständigenrat  (1998),  Jahresgutachten  1998/1999,  Vor  weitreichenden  Entscheidungen,
Stuttgart: Metzler-Poeschel.
Weber, A A (1994), Testing Long-run Neutrality: Empirical Evidence for G7-Countries With Special
Emphasis on Germany, in: Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, No. 41, 67–117.
BIS Review   70/1999
12
