Mr Brash comments on the economic reforms
of the last 15 years in New Zealand
Comments on accepting the NZIER/Qantas Economics Award by Dr Donald T Brash, Governor of the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, held in Auckland on 18 August 1999.
 Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen,
I  was  greatly  flattered  to  be  nominated  for  this  NZIER/Qantas  economics  award,  and  feel  deeply
honoured to have been selected to receive it. I regard the earlier recipients of the award as among the
giants of the economics profession, and I have been privileged to work with all of them in one way or
another.  I  am  also  very  much  aware  that,  while  my  name  is  on  the  award,  I  owe  that  fact  in  large
measure  to the  efforts of  a  great  many  other people, including  my  colleagues  on  the  Monetary  and
Economic  Council,  on  the  Committee  of  Inquiry  into  Inflation  Accounting,  on  the  New  Zealand
Planning  Council,  on  the  Economic  Monitoring  Group,  and  on  the  various  taxation  advisory
committees I was privileged to chair in the eighties; to the efforts of my colleagues and staff in the
Reserve Bank; and of course to my teachers and family over a great many years. Thank you.
I  was  told  I  might  speak  briefly  on  accepting  the  award.  What  to  talk  about?  It  hardly  seems  the
appropriate  moment  to  speak  about  the  Official  Cash  Rate,  so  I  thought  I  might  be  allowed  a  little
licence  to  add  my  contribution  to  the  debate  currently  raging  on  all  sides  about  the  success  or
otherwise of the economic reforms of the last 15 years.
But  before  I  do  that  I  want  to  say  that  I  sometimes  wonder  whether  we  New  Zealanders  are  not
congenitally prone to wild swings in mood: we are either riding high in self esteem, confident that we
can  take  on  the  world  and  win,  as  we  were  in  the  mid-eighties  and  mid-nineties,  or  we  are  utterly
gloomy, convinced that a cyclical downturn in net immigration represents the end of civilisation as we
know it, with our only hope being to plead with Australia to take us on as a distant Tasmania. As Doug
Myers mentioned in a speech a week ago, “we have developed a cottage industry of pessimism”.1
I do not propose  to  assess  why  we  have  this  tendency  to  wild  swings in  mood,  nor  even to  offer  a
comprehensive  assessment  of  the  economic  reforms  of  the  last  15  years.  That  can  not  be  done  in
15 minutes. But let me make just a few observations.
First,  I  believe that  there are  several  aspects  of those  reforms  where  the  results  are  measurable  and
clearly  positive.  For  example,  I  believe  we  can  now  safely  conclude  that  the  monetary  policy
framework put in place as part of that overall reform process has been hugely successful. And I say
that as someone  who  had only  a  small involvement  in the  original  design  of that framework.  Am  I
saying  that  the  framework  guarantees  against  mistakes  in  the  formulation  and  implementation  of
monetary policy? Of course not. No framework can do that. We have made mistakes in the past and,
since  we  do  not  have  (or  claim  to  have)  perfect  foresight,  we  will  certainly  make  mistakes  in  the
future. But the monetary policy framework conceived when Roger Douglas was Minister of Finance
as a way of depoliticising the operation of monetary policy, brought to Parliament by David Caygill,
passed into law without a single dissentient vote, and now supported  by  most  political  parties  is  an
outstandingly good one, and has already been emulated by a number of other countries. It has helped
us  to  reduce  inflation  from  well  above  the  levels  in  other  developed  countries  to  a  level  closely
consistent with those in Australia, the United States, and Europe. It has helped us to reduce long-term
interest rates from 1000 basis points above US long-term interest rates in the mid-eighties to less than
100  basis  points  above  US  long-term  rates  in  the  recent  past.  That  improvement  in  inflation
1
“Wake up New Zealand”, speech to the Tauranga Chamber of Commerce, 11 August 1999.
1
BIS Review 89/1999
performance has been of benefit to the New Zealand economy and of benefit to New Zealand society
more generally.
Second,  I  believe  that  there  are  several  aspects  of  the  reforms  where  the  results  are  not  so  easily
measurable, at least in terms of conventional macroeconomic statistics, but where the results are again
unambiguously  positive.  With  banks  now  falling  over  themselves  to  lend  money,  who  wants  to  go
back  to  having  to  get  down  on  bended  knee  to  get  a  home  mortgage  loan?  With  new  phone
connections now available in most parts of the country within days of making a request and the cost of
domestic toll calls down some 80 per cent in real terms in the last decade, who wants to go back to
waiting 12 to 18 months for a residential phone connection? And who wants to go back to the old level
of in-flight service on domestic airlines? Or to five-day-per-week shopping? Or to paying 60 cents for
mailing a surface letter (the cost in 1986 in 1999 dollars), instead of today’s 40 cents? None of these
benefits  show  up  very  clearly  in  GDP statistics,  but  all  of  them  have  made  a  big,  and  a  beneficial,
impact on our lives. Few of us would want to lose them.
But what about economic growth? Surely growth in GDP has been disappointingly slow since 1984,
and this proves beyond reasonable doubt that the reforms have failed? Certainly, taking the whole 15
year  period  growth  has  been  disappointing.  I  am  not  at  all  sure,  however,  that  it  is  legitimate  to
conclude that therefore the reforms have made no difference to our potential growth rate. In the first
several  years  of  the  period,  the  New  Zealand  economy  was  going  through  huge  changes  made
inevitable by the decision to abolish quantitative import controls, to reduce tariffs, to abolish export
subsidies, to  corporatise  and then  privatise  many  state-owned  enterprises,  to deregulate  the  banking
sector,  and  to  reduce  inflation  from  levels  well  above  the  developed  country  average.  A  lot  of  the
capital built up in the period before 1984 was destroyed when the subsidies and protection on which
that capital was totally dependent were eliminated. While there is some debate about the speed with
which subsidies were eliminated, there is little or no debate that abolishing those subsidies was in the
interests of the long-term health of the New Zealand economy. But inevitably the short-term result of
these moves was to leave the overall level of GDP looking pretty flat. It was, on a small scale, similar
to the kind of trauma which the former Soviet bloc countries have gone through in recent years, with
whole  industries  wiped  out  and,  in  their  case,  overall  GDP  shrinking  substantially.  New  Zealand’s
GDP did not shrink to any significant extent, but for six or seven years it barely grew at all.  From the
early nineties, however, the picture is much more encouraging. In the six years from 1992 to 1997,
growth in GDP averaged 3 per cent per annum – not the 4 or 5 per cent per annum which we achieved
when  we  were  first  emerging  from  the  recession  but  better  over  those  six  years  than  the  growth  in
Japan,  in  continental  Europe,  and  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  almost  identical  to  the  growth  in
Australia, on average over those six years. We would of course like to be growing faster, and unless
we do we will not regain any of the ground lost relative to Australia during the sixties, seventies and
eighties, when we were growing quite a bit more slowly than Australia and other developed countries.
But we still did very much better in the six years to 1997 than we did in the previous three decades.
But what about 1998? I suspect the fact that Australia grew at more than 4 per cent in 1998 while we
grew not at all in that year is at the root of a lot of our current gloom. How could we bomb out so
badly,  when  both  countries  had  a  very  similar  exposure  to  the  Asian  crisis?  This  isn’t  the  place  to
provide  a  comprehensive  answer  to  this  question,  and  indeed  I  don’t  think  anybody  yet  has  a
comprehensive answer to this question. Some blame poor monetary policy decisions by the Reserve
Bank for the difference. I don’t share that view and see the impact of New Zealand’s severe drought as
being a much more relevant factor, but then I am clearly not an objective observer. But even if, for the
sake  of  the  argument,  monetary  policy  caused  all  of  the  difference  between  Australian  growth  and
New  Zealand  growth  in  1998,  that  was  at  most  a  temporary  impact,  and  monetary  policy  in  New
Zealand was eased very substantially over the course of 1997 and 1998. Official forecasts suggest that
growth in New Zealand over the next two years will be closely similar to that in Australia, as it was
for the six years prior to 1998. So it is hard to see strong grounds for pessimism there.
But what about productivity? Now we are getting to the heart of the matter, and there has been some
pessimism,  even  among  professional  economists,  that  New  Zealand’s  productivity  performance  has
not  improved  discernibly  as  a  result  of  15  years  of  reform.  To  shed  some  light  on  this  issue,  the
Reserve Bank, the Treasury, and the Department of Labour commissioned some work on productivity
BIS Review 89/1999
2
by Denis Lawrence, director of the Tasman Asia Pacific economic consultancy, and Erwin Diewert,
professor of economics at the University of British Columbia, and their conclusion, as summarised by
them in the New Zealand Herald exactly one week ago, was that “to the extent we can make like-with-
like  comparisons  between  New  Zealand  and  Australia  (another  country  that  has  had  a  sizeable  but
more gradual reform programme over a similar period) New Zealand’s performance (in multi-factor
productivity)  appears  to  be  at  least  comparable”.22    Indeed,  they  suggested  that  if  sectors  where
productivity is very hard to measure (such as banking and community services) are excluded from the
numbers on both sides of the Tasman, New Zealand productivity seems to have been as good as, or
even a little higher than, in Australia in recent years.
So we have plenty of reasons for being optimistic. We have more natural resources per capita than a
great many other countries, but not so many that we are tempted into ignoring the real source of our
future  prosperity,  which  is  the  skills  and  education  of  our  people.  We  have  a  framework  for  both
monetary and fiscal policy which is the envy of a great many other countries, and that framework has
already delivered us consistently low inflation for nearly a decade and a huge reduction in net public
sector debt. Despite important differences of opinion on a whole range of issues, we have a substantial
measure of consensus about some of the really important policy questions. Remarkably for a country
which, until the mid-eighties, had a long history of controls on almost everything, we have a public
service which is almost totally free of corruption. Similarly, we have a judiciary which has never been
suspected of corruption. New technologies which were not even dreamt of when Britain entered the
European  Union  substantially  reduce  the  tyranny  of  distance  by  reducing  the  cost  of  finding  and
servicing  distant  markets.  New  technologies  create  new  business  opportunities  by  making  us  less
dependent on  the  economies  of  large  scale  production,  thereby  reducing  the  relevance  of  our  small
local market.
The  Reserve  Bank  estimates  that  our  sustainable  rate  of  growth  is  currently  around  3  per  cent  per
annum. I am convinced that, with the right policies and the right attitudes, we can do even better.
Where  do  professional  economists  fit  into  all  this?  Having  devoted  the  first  half  of  my  speech  to
arguing  that  the  current  mood  of  pessimism  about  the  fruits  of  the  last  15  years  of  reform  is
considerably  overdone,  I  want  to  use  the  second  half  of  my  address  to  talk  about  where  I  think
professional economists have let the side down. I am not talking about all of my colleagues of course.
Some  have  done  a  superb  job  of  explaining  how  the  world  works.  But  too  often  you,  I,  we  have
remained silent in the face of very considerable public and political confusion and uncertainty.
Take, for example, the rather limited public comprehension of what has been happening to the New
Zealand economy over the last 30 or 40 years. It seems, to me at least, that for several decades prior to
the  early  seventies  New  Zealand  enjoyed  a  standard  of  living  which  was  high  by  international
standards  because  we  had  unfettered  access  to  the  British  market  for  everything  which  our  very
efficient farming sector  could  produce. We taxed  our farming  sector by  providing  protection  to  our
inefficient  manufacturing  sector,  and  used  the  revenue  to  build  a  generous  system  of  state-funded
health, education, and welfare. This may not have been sustainable indefinitely in any event, because
the real price of our commodity exports was steadily declining (although improving productivity in the
farming sector was doing a pretty good job of offsetting this decline in price). But the viability of the
whole  approach  was  jeopardised  when  Britain  entered  what  was  then  referred  to  as  the  Common
Market in the early seventies. All of a sudden, our farming sector was under severe pressure. For more
than a decade, we tried to pretend we could box on regardless. We made no serious attempt to help the
farming sector by reducing the protection given to inefficient sectors. We made no serious attempt to
tailor  our  social  welfare  system  to  the  cloth  available.  Indeed,  in  1975  we  introduced  a  Domestic
Purposes  Benefit  which  would,  over  20  years,  grow  to  involve  a  fiscal  cost  almost  as  big  as  the
Unemployment  Benefit.  In  the  same  year,  we  killed  off  an  embryonic  contributory  superannuation
scheme and replaced it with a very generous taxpayer-funded scheme.
2 New Zealand Herald, 11 August 1999.
3
BIS Review 89/1999
What successive Governments have been grappling with over the last 15 years is finding ways to make
more of the economy internationally competitive, to take up some of the load which the farming sector
can no longer carry, while trying to explain to a sceptical public why the erstwhile generosity of the
state may not be able to continue. Alas, they have got precious little help from professional economists
in explaining this story to the public, and in some respects we economists have actually encouraged
the public’s reluctance to change.
Or take another example. Tariffs. To the best of my recollection, I have only ever met two economists
in my life who believed that tariff protection was a desirable long-term feature of economic policy (a
few more have accepted the infant industry argument in favour of temporary protection). Economists
are probably more united against tariffs and import controls than they are on any other single issue.
And  yet  we  allow  to  go  unchallenged  statement after statement,  on  talk-back  radio  and in  the  print
media, suggesting that New Zealand has been daft to reduce its tariffs ahead of our trading partners,
and that the only reason we are doing so is because politicians,  or Treasury  officials,  are  driven  by
some  mad  theory.  Or  perhaps  just  by  a  desire  to  look  holier-than-thou  in  international  trade
negotiations.  The  idea  that  we  should  reduce  tariffs  in  New  Zealand  no  matter  how  stupid  other
countries are about raising theirs is incomprehensible to most of the public, and yet is an idea which
would be accepted by almost all economists. Of course we would be better off if other countries did
not raise tariffs against our lamb, or our kiwifruit, or our butter, or our cheese, or our beef, or our fish.
But  even  when  they  do  raise  such  tariffs,  it  is  not  in  our  own  interests  to  reciprocate  in  kind.
Economists know that, but have not done a terribly good job of helping the public to understand that.
Or  take  a  third  example.  Health  care.  I  am  certainly  not  going  to  step  into  the  political  maelstrom
which  is  the  health  care  debate,  at  least  in  part  because  I  simply  do  not  know  what  to  suggest  or
recommend. But every economist knows from the days of Economics 101 that if you offer to supply
something for free, the demand for it will be enormous, and that if you don’t use price to limit that
demand, you will soon be unable to meet the demand – whether you devote 6 per cent, 8 per cent, or
10 per cent of GDP to health care – and will be faced with long queues. In recent years, and contrary, I
suspect,  to  public  perception,  government  spending  on  health  care  has  risen  somewhat  faster  than
GDP.  (In  the  year  to  March  1984,  government  spending  on  health  care  took  5.6  per  cent  of  GDP,
while in the June 1999 year government spending on health care is estimated to have absorbed 6.4 per
cent of GDP.) I  simply  do  not  know  what  proportion  of  GDP  New  Zealand should  be spending  on
health care. But I do know that, no matter how much is spent on health, there will always be queues
unless price or some arbitrary political decision is part of the rationing process. Of course queues may
be an optimal way of dealing with the situation. As I said, I don’t want to enter the substance of this
debate. All I am saying is that economists would do a service to rational discussion of health care if
they made the nature of the issues clear.
At the end of the day, what I am seeking from my professional colleagues is a greater commitment to
assist in the formulation of economically sound policy. At the moment, politicians of all of the major
political parties are hugely constrained by the fact that, while more economically literate than people
in many other countries, the general public do not have a good understanding of some of these crucial
issues.  How,  for  example,  do  political  leaders  grapple  with  the  gradually  growing  fiscal  cost  of
National Superannuation, or encourage rational public discussion of the issue, when  a  news  item  in
one of our largest daily newspapers could say, about the present Government’s decision to maintain
the real value of National Superannuation by indexing it to the CPI rather than to wages, “up to half
the superannuitants in New Zealand could be pushed below the poverty line when their pensions are
reduced tomorrow”.33 I suspect it is true that the great majority of superannuitants today believe that
their  National  Superannuation  payments  have  been  reduced  or  are  about  to  be  reduced,  and  yet  of
course  economists  know  that  that  is  not  true,  either  in  nominal  terms  or  in  real  terms.  It  is  true  in
relative terms of course, but a reduction in relative terms is assuredly not what most people think of
3 
“Elderly pushed into poverty”, The Dominion, 31 March 1999.
BIS Review 89/1999
4
when they talk about a reduction in a benefit. To the best of my knowledge, no economist challenged
that newspaper claim, or similar statements made on the electronic media.
Let me make it clear that I am not, here, arguing for any particular “solution” to the growing fiscal cost
of National Superannuation. There are obviously a range of possible solutions, including an increase in
income tax. All I am saying, and saying as strongly as I know how, is that we will not improve our
economic  performance,  nor  get  the  sound  policy  decisions  on  which  that  improved  economic
performance depends, without  a  better public understanding  of  the  nature  of  the  issues.  Economists
can not of course achieve that on their own. It requires leadership from political leaders, from business
organisations,  and  from  community  leaders  also.  But  as  those  with  a  professional  understanding  of
tariffs, budgets, monetary policy, taxes, and all the rest, economists surely have a major responsibility
to help in building public understanding of the choices and the dilemmas.
As an aside, the Reserve Bank decided to sponsor the production of a textbook on economic policy for
the Journalists Training Organisation a year or so back. This textbook will be launched next week. It
does not attempt to promote a single view of economic policy, and contains chapters written by a wide
range  of  New  Zealand  economists  and  financial  journalists.  It  is  the  Bank’s  attempt  to  ensure  that
journalists, at least, have access to information on some of these important issues.
Perhaps  it  is  appropriate  to  end  with  a  quotation  from  a  speech  given  just  last  week  by  Mr  Kerry
McDonald, managing director of Comalco New Zealand and of course for a number of years Director
of the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research. In that speech4 he observed:
“It  seems  that  there  simply  isn’t  a  decisive  constituency  in  New  Zealand  for  increased  growth  and
living standards. No one is demonstrating for it, and few are fussed by the lack of it. Many want the
fruits; they want the cargo to arrive, but not the hard effort of creating the economic wealth in the first
place.”
As a fifth generation New Zealander, I badly want Kerry McDonald to be wrong. I suspect he wants to
be wrong himself. I know that, when I threw my hat into the political arena in 1980, what motivated
me was a fear that, unless we could arrest our relative economic decline, my kids would leave New
Zealand as soon as they were old enough to choose, and the country which I love would gradually sink
into the sand.
I think that we have as a country made some real progress in recent years at arresting that decline. The
last  15  years  have  certainly  not  been  in  vain.  But  in  part  because  of  the  failure  of  the  economics
profession, the public seem to imagine that half a century of relative decline can be arrested by just a
few years of reform. It can’t be. There is still much to be done. Economists can assist sensible public
discussion of the issues, and if we fail to do that, we may yet, like the good people of Hamlyn, see our
children disappearing over the horizon.4
4 
“Is  a  high  performance  business  environment  possible  in  New  Zealand?”,  speech  to  the  NZ  Institute  of  Management,
Canterbury Division, 9 August 1999.
5
BIS Review 89/1999
