Bank of Japan’s April report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 13 April 1999.
The Bank’s View2
Japan’s economy, at present, appears to have stopped deteriorating.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  declining,  and  recovery  in
private consumption continues to be weak on the whole. Net exports (exports minus imports) are
leveling off. Housing investment has started recovering, and public works orders are increasing
considerably.
Reflecting  such  development  of  final  demand  and  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,  industrial
production has stopped decreasing. The deterioration in corporate and consumer sentiment seems
to have ceased, due to this economic situation as well as the subsidence of the public’s anxiety
about  the  stability  of  Japan’s  financial  system.  However,  corporate  profits  remain  weak,  and
employment  and  household  income  conditions  continue  to  deteriorate.  In  corporate  finance,
firms’  concern  about  the  availability  of  funds  in  the  future  is  gradually  abating,  but  has  not
completely disappeared.
As  for  the  outlook,  with  the  progress  in  inventory  adjustment  gradually  paving  the  way  for  a
recovery  in  production,  the  government’s  economic  measures  and  the  monetary  easing  by  the
Bank  will  underpin  the  economy.  In  addition,  the  anxiety  about  the  stability  of  the  financial
system  is  easing  against  the  background  of  the  injection  of  public  funds  into  banks,  and  stock
prices are recovering. These improvements in the financial environment are also expected to exert
positive  effects  on  the  economy  gradually.  With  respect  to  corporate  activities,  however,  firms
have  started  taking  steps  toward  full-scale  restructuring,  facing  the  continued  decline  in  profits
and strongly becoming aware of a need to improve their balance sheet. Although such corporate
restructuring is expected to improve productivity, it may, in the short run, reduce fixed investment
and  discourage  household  expenditure  through  the  resulting  deterioration  in  employment  and
income  conditions.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  still  difficult  to  expect  an  immediate,  self-
sustained recovery in private demand. Overall economic developments require careful monitoring
in consideration of the above points. It is also important to prepare an environment for a smooth
structural reform that assures the economy’s sustained growth in the medium term.
With  regard  to  prices,  reflecting  the  large  output  gap,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  on  a
downtrend,  and  corporate  service  prices  are  weakening.  Consumer  prices  also  remain  weak.  In
relation to price developments in the future, distinct narrowing in the output gap is unlikely for
the time being even though the economy appears to have stopped deteriorating. Furthermore, the
decline in wages  is  likely  to  continue  exerting  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Hence,  prices  are
expected to remain on a downtrend.
In  the  financial  markets,  the  overnight  call  rate  has  stayed  at  nearly  zero,  and  financial
institutions’ anxiety about the availability of liquidity has rapidly subsided. With the injection of
public funds, the Japan premium has almost disappeared, and interest rates on term instruments
have been at a low level.
                                                     
1  This  report  was  written  based  on  data  and  information  available  when  the  Bank  of  Japan  Monetary  Policy
Meeting was held on April 9, 1999.
2  The  Bank’s  view  on  recent  economic  and  financial  developments,  determined  by  the  Policy  Board  at  the
Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 9, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review  42/1999
The amount outstanding of funds in the call money market, after showing a recovery toward the
previous fiscal-year end, has been decreasing again since the beginning of the new fiscal year, as
institutional investors shifted part of their funds to highly-liquid deposits of banks. Although the
shrinkage of the market has not led to any difficulty in funds settlement, close attention should be
paid to the market development.
Long-term interest rates are declining gradually reflecting sluggish credit demand in the private
sector. Stock prices have been firm against the background of the market’s appreciation of moves
toward corporate restructuring and the rise in U.S. stock prices.
With regard to corporate finance, credit demand for economic activities such as fixed investment
remains  weak.  Firms’  moves  to  increase  their  on-hand  liquidity  in  the  face  of  difficult  fund-
raising conditions are settling down.
Private  banks  have  basically  retained  their  cautious  lending  stance,  facing  the  worsening
performance of borrower companies. However, severity in their fund-raising conditions has been
alleviated,  and  their  insufficient  capital  base  has  been  increased.  Under  these  circumstances,  it
seems that  banks  have  started  to  extend  loans  more  actively  than  before  especially  for  projects
involving relatively small credit risks.
As a result, credit conditions, which tightened previously, are now easing somewhat. It should be
noted,  however,  that  firms  with  relatively  low  credit  ratings  remain  under  severe  financing
conditions. The situation continues to warrant careful monitoring on the extent to which private
banks will ease their lending stance, and how the change will affect firms’ propensity to invest.
BIS Review  42/1999
2
