Mr  King  looks  at  interest  rates  and  the  new  Monetary  Policy  Committee  in  the  United
Kingdom
Lecture  delivered  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mervyn  King,  at  Queen’s
University in Belfast on 17 May 1999.
Present at the creation
Two years ago, when it announced that the Bank of England would be granted independence, the
n(N)ew  Labour  Government  surprised  everyone,  not  least  the  Bank  of  England.  Since  then,
decisions  on  interest  rates  have  been  taken  not  by  the  Chancellor  but  by  the  Monetary  Policy
Committee. Much has followed from that single bold decision to take interest rates out of day-to-
day  politics.  The  transfer  of  the  operational  responsibility  for  setting  interest  rates  to  a  new
Monetary  Policy  Committee  was  a  major  policy,  indeed  constitutional,  innovation.  The
excitement  of  being  involved  in  the  construction  of  a  new  monetary  institution  for  the  United
Kingdom has both motivated and rewarded the extraordinary efforts of the Bank staff who made
the new process work, and I want publicly to thank them for that. In the words of Dean Acheson,
to be “present at the creation” is an experience which few involved in policy are ever privileged
to share.
Inevitably there have been changes to the Bank. It has had to redirect its resources to focus  on
achieving  and  maintaining  monetary  stability  in  this  country.  Responsibility  for  banking
supervision has been transferred from the Bank to the new Financial Services Authority. The job
of managing public sector debt has passed to a new Debt Management Office. And the Treasury,
relieved of its responsibility for setting interest rates, can now focus on fiscal policy and measures
to  raise  the  long-run  growth  rate  of  the  UK  economy,  as  well  as  ensure  that  the  fruits  of  that
growth are distributed fairly. Each body now has clearer responsibilities.
Of course, not all of our present monetary framework dates from 1997. It was following our exit
from the ERM in September 1992 that monetary policy was first directed to achieving an explicit
inflation  target,  initially  a  range  of  1–4%  and,  subsequently  2½%  or  less.  With  a  floating
exchange rate, any anchor for the price level had to be based on a domestic nominal target. The
move from secrecy to transparency in the conduct of policy also dates back to 1992 when the then
Chancellor asked the Bank to produce a regular independent Inflation Report in order “to make
the formation of policy more transparent and our decisions more accountable”. The first Inflation
Report  appeared  in  February  1993.  Those  changes  led  to  a  significant  improvement  in  our
macroeconomic performance.
But many, especially elsewhere in Europe, doubted the UK’s commitment to monetary stability in
the absence of a willingness to remove operational decisions on interest rates from the political
arena. Long-term interest rates contained a risk premium to reflect the possibility that the timing
and magnitude of interest rate changes might reflect political considerations. The “Ken and Eddie
show” was probably nearing the end of its run. And both principals needed their own show.
So  when  Gordon  Brown  announced  radical  changes  to  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  monetary
policy framework two years ago they were widely welcomed because they offered the basis for a
durable commitment to price stability.
What, then, is the substance of the main reforms announced in May 1997? First, there is a clear
and  unambiguous  objective  for  monetary  policy  –  an  inflation  target  of  2½%,  set  by  the
Government,  with  inflation  defined  as  the  increase  in  retail  prices,  excluding  mortgage  interest
1
BIS Review   63/1999
payments, over the previous twelve months – RPIX inflation. Second, decisions on interest rates
are taken by a Monetary Policy Committee, or MPC, comprised of nine individuals with expertise
in monetary policy – five executive members of the Bank and four non-executives – who operate
on  the  basis  of  one  person  one  vote.  Third,  the  process  is  characterised  by  a  high  degree  of
transparency  and  accountability,  both  to  provide  the  public  with  explanations  of  the  MPC’s
actions and to hold members of the MPC individually accountable for their decisions. Have these
reforms  made  a  difference  to  the  UK  economy?  My  aim  this  evening  is  to  pose  and  begin  to
answer three questions about the MPC two years on.
(1)  What is the track record of the MPC after two years?
(2)  What has the MPC learnt during that period?
(3)  What are the challenges for the next two years?
What is the MPC’s track record?
Because  of  the  infamous  “long  and  variable”  lags  between  changes  in  interest  rates  and  their
impact  on  inflation,  the  MPC  does  not  yet  have  much  of  a  track  record  in  terms  of  inflation
outturns. But since the target given to the MPC is for inflation, let me start there. Between June
1997 and March 1999 (the latest month for which inflation has been published) RPIX inflation
averaged 2.7%. During that period, inflation ranged from a low of 2.4% to a high of 3.2%. Over
the  past  nine  months  it  has  remained  within  0.2  percentage  points  of  the  target,  a  remarkable
degree of stability.
It  is  most  unlikely  that  inflation  can  remain,  month-by-month,  as  close  to  the  target  as  that.
Unexpected movements in the exchange rate, oil or other commodity prices, indirect tax rates or a
multitude of other influences could all lead to divergences of inflation from target. Because of the
lags I mentioned earlier, it would take the MPC some time to bring inflation back to the target
level. What matters, however, is not relatively small month-to-month movements in the inflation
rate, but the expectation that inflation will average 22% over a number of years.
As part of the arrangements for accountability, the Governor, on behalf of the MPC, is required to
write  an  open  letter  to  the  Chancellor  whenever  inflation  deviates  by  more  than  a  percentage
point from the target. At the outset, the fan charts published in the Inflation Report showed that
the odds on writing such a letter during the following two years were 3 to 1 on. In the event, no
letter was required. Although the probability of writing such a letter has diminished, it remains
high. The latest Inflation Report published last Wednesday implies that the odds on our having to
write a letter over the next two years are 2 to 1 against, or one in three.
Thirty years  ago  the  UK  embarked  on  an  inflationary  journey,  and  what  a  roller  coaster  ride  it
turned out to be. During the 1970s inflation averaged no less than 13% a year, with a peak of over
27%  in  August  1975.  During  the  1980s  inflation  averaged  7%  a  year,  and  it  has  fallen  to  4%
during the 1990s. That period also contained two of  the  deepest  recessions  experienced  by  any
major industrial country in the post-war period. Since the inflation target was adopted in October
1992 inflation has averaged 2.8%. The  improvement  in  inflation  performance  during  the  1990s
can  be  seen  in  Chart  1.1  Inflation  has  been  remarkably  stable  during  the  six  years  since  an
inflation target was introduced. Indeed, it has been more stable than in any period since monthly
RPI figures were first collected in 1947.
                                                     
1 Charts not included in this Review.
BIS Review   63/1999
2
Moreover,  the  adoption  of  a  monetary  regime  which  produced  low  and  stable  inflation  has  not
damaged  growth  in  output  and  employment.  Since  the  end  of  1992  output  has  grown  at  an
average  annual  rate  of  2.8%,  well  above  the  post-war  average.  More  significantly,  growth  was
more stable, with a standard deviation less than one-half that of output growth in earlier post-war
decades. And unemployment, as measured by the Labour Force Survey, has fallen from 10.7% at
its peak in 1993 to a current level of 6.3%.
So since the inflation target was adopted inflation has been lower, and growth as high, as in any
post-war  decade,  and  both  have  been  more  stable.  And  total  output  in  the  economy  has  now
increased  for  27  consecutive  quarters,  the  longest  period  of  uninterrupted  growth  since  the
Second World War.
Part of the credit for this improvement in UK macroeconomic performance belongs to the policy
framework  (both  pre-  and  post-MPC),  and  part  was  the  result  of  favourable  economic
circumstances. From 1992 to 1996, the ability to grow at above trend rates without an increase in
inflationary pressure was made possible by using up the margin of spare capacity created by the
deep  recession  of  the  early  1990s.  After  1996,  inflationary  pressures  were  contained  by  lower
commodity  and  other  world  prices,  and  the  impact  of  a  sharp  appreciation  of  sterling.  These
developments have had a significant impact on inflation. And they were largely unpredicted. So,
although  monetary  policy  has  faced  some  difficult  choices  over  the  past  two  years,  it  has
benefited  from  an  unexpected  downward  movement  in  imported  inflation.  These  external
influences  have  offset  a  much  higher  level  of  domestically  generated  inflation.  Despite  that,
inflation has been above the target more often than it has been below – in fact, it has been below
the  target  in  only  one  month  so  far  since  the  MPC  was  set  up.  As  the  benign  effects  of  those
temporary external influences on inflation start to wear off, the challenges facing the MPC will
become, if anything, even greater than those in its first two years.
If the time lags in the monetary transmission process mean that it is too early to judge the MPC
on  its  inflation  track  record,  then  what  other  criteria  for  assessing  its  performance  might  be
relevant?  One  measure  would  be  expectations  of  future  inflation.  Following  Gordon  Brown’s
announcement of Bank independence on 6 May 1997, inflation expectations in financial markets
fell sharply. Chart 2 shows the expected inflation rate at different horizons implied by yields on
conventional  and  index-linked  government  bonds.  These  expectations  fell  by  about  0.5
percentage points on the day of the announcement. Since then inflation expectations have fallen
further. Chart 3 shows the way in which two particular measures of inflation expectations have
evolved  since  May  1997.  The  first  of  these  measures  is  the  expectation  of  inflation  ten  years
ahead  implied  by  bond  market  yields.  The  second  is  a  Consensus  Economics  average  of  the
expectations  of  inflation  five  years  ahead  held  by  economic  forecasters.  Since  1997,  inflation
expectations  on  both  measures  have  steadily  fallen  towards  the  target,  and  the  economic
forecasters’ expectation has now become firmly anchored on the target. The bond market measure
has risen somewhat in recent months, although this reflects unusually low real yields on index-
linked  debt  following  the  introduction  of  the  minimum  funding  requirement  for  UK  pension
funds.
Does this fall in inflation expectations matter? The simple answer is yes. If the MPC can anchor
inflation expectations on the target, then unexpected movements in inflation will not immediately
lead wage bargainers or price-setters to change their view of where inflation is headed and hence
will help make less likely the inflationary spirals of the past. Both inflation and output should be
less volatile as a result.
3
BIS Review   63/1999
But there is also another, albeit one-off, benefit from the new-found credibility of policy and the
subsequent reduction in inflation expectations. Over the past two years, inflation has been close to
2.5%. If inflation expectations had not themselves converged on the target, then inflation would
have been lower than expected. Why does this matter? Suppose wage bargains are struck on the
assumption that inflation will be 3 per cent, but prices in fact rise by 2.5 per cent. Real wages will
be higher than either employers and employees expect, and employment – the demand for labour
– will fall. An unexpected fall in inflation lowers both output and employment. So by bringing
inflation  expectations  down  towards  actual  inflation,  the  new  monetary  policy  framework  has
probably led to higher output and lower unemployment than might otherwise have occurred. We
might  call  these  benefits  a  “credibility  windfall”.  It  is  extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
know how large that windfall might have been. But even a windfall of 0.1 percentage points of
GDP is a  sizeable  amount.  Of  course,  somebody  might  very  well  point  out  that  we  could  have
reaped  this  same  “windfall”  by  allowing  inflation  to  rise  to  match  the  higher  inflation
expectations. But that would be inconsistent with aiming to hit the inflation target, and might well
have led to a further ratcheting-up of inflation expectations. It would have lost us all the benefits
that low and stable inflation brings.
What has the MPC learnt in the past two years?
The first two years of the MPC have been a learning process for all concerned, both the members
of  the  MPC  and  those  outside  who  observe  and  comment  on  its  actions.  We  have  learnt  from
experience and made changes where necessary. For example, the minutes of MPC meetings are
now  published  after  two  rather  than  six  weeks.  The  additional  delay  created  unnecessary
speculation  about  the  issues  on  the  minds  of  MPC  members,  and  made  it  difficult  for  us  to
explain our actions – for example, to the Treasury Select Committee – when our decisions had
moved  on  from  those  described  in  the  most  recent  minutes.  So  we  decided  to  accelerate
publication.
I  would  like  to  focus  on  two  main  lessons  from  the  first  two  years.  The  first  is  the  crucial
importance  of  a  symmetric  inflation  target.  The  second  concerns  how  to  manage  a  process  in
which the group has a common objective but in  which  individual  members  are  held  personally
accountable for their decisions.
Symmetry of the target
The inflation target which the Chancellor has given to the MPC is a simple point target for RPIX
inflation of 22%. Prior to May 1997, the inflation target was 22% or less. The meaning of those
words “or less” was never entirely clear. Rarely  in  the  history  of  economic  policy  have  so  few
words  caused  so  much  confusion  to  so  many  economic  commentators.  Moving  to  a  symmetric
point  target  has  removed  any  ambiguity  as  to  the  objectives  of  the  MPC.  That  is  important
because the rationale for handing operational responsibility for setting interest rates to the MPC is
that  it  is  better  qualified  to  make  those  decisions  than  elected  politicians,  whereas  elected
politicians have the democratic legitimacy to choose the target.
A symmetric inflation target should also make it easier for people to understand how the MPC is
likely to react to the different types of shock that may hit the economy from time to time. In more
technical  language,  the  MPC’s  policy  reaction  function  should  be  predictable.  When  an
unexpected shock moves inflation away from the target, it may not always be sensible, or indeed
feasible,  for  the  MPC  to  return  inflation  to  the  target  level  immediately.  Shocks  stay  in  the
twelve-month increase of the RPIX index for at least  twelve  months.  To  offset  the  impact  of  a
shock on RPIX inflation in less than a year or so might imply undesirable volatility in output.
BIS Review   63/1999
4
Hence  the  MPC  has  been  given  “constrained  discretion”  concerning  the  horizon  over  which  it
tries to bring inflation back to the target level. The appropriate horizon depends, in general, on the
type and persistence of the shock. There is no simple rule to determine the appropriate horizon. It
depends on the nature of the shocks. That is why the MPC spends so much time trying to unravel
recent  economic  history.  On  average,  since  shocks  may  take  several  months  to  have  their  full
effect, a horizon of about two years is a reasonable one over which to bring inflation back to its
target. But if shocks are sufficiently large – in either direction – then it may be sensible to aim to
bring inflation back to the target level over a somewhat different horizon. In such circumstances,
the MPC would make that clear both in the minutes of its meetings and in the Inflation Report,
and, if required, in an open letter to the Chancellor.
Common objectives versus individual accountability
During its first two years, the MPC has had to develop a modus vivendi to manage the potential
tension  between  operating  as  a  team  with  a  common  objective,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
requirement for individual accountability of its members, on the other. The Committee as a whole
needs  to  explain  its  view  of  where  the  economy  is  heading.  The  Inflation  Report  has  been  the
main vehicle for expressing the collective view of the Committee. Together with the minutes of
the monthly meetings, it provides an  explanation  of  past  actions  which  should  enable  others  to
understand how we are likely to behave in the future.
At the same time, the voting records of individual members of the MPC are in the public domain.
That  disclosure  improves  the  quality  of  decisions,  as  well  as  the  accountability  of  Committee
members, because there is no better incentive to cast one’s vote for the policy most likely to hit
the inflation target than the prospect of having to defend that voting record in public. Of course,
all  members  of  the  MPC  are  well  aware  that  there  is  no  certainty  about  the  precise  level  of
interest rates which is desirable in any given month. That is why we discuss with each other at
great length the appropriate course of action before each member makes up his or her own mind.
For such a system to work it is crucial that MPC members give their best judgment and do not try
to reach an artificial consensus. How, then, should we balance the need to give a clear view about
how 
individual
accountability?
the  Committee  sees  economic  developments  and 
the  requirement  of 
There have been two main criticisms of the MPC in this respect. First, that the MPC has been too
open about differences within it. Second, that the Committee has been not open enough. Let me
start  with  the  first  criticism.  From  its  first  meeting  in  June  1997  to  the  end  of  that  year,  the
Committee was unanimous on all six occasions. Output appeared to be above  trend,  the  labour
market was continuing to tighten, and there was a need to slow the growth of domestic demand in
order to reduce pressure on supply capacity. Interest rates were raised at each meeting between
June and August, and again in November. At that point the Committee was accused of acting like
a “politburo”. But in January 1998 the first disagreement occurred. The Committee voted by five
votes to three (the ninth member, John Vickers, did not join the MPC until June of last year) to
hold interest rates constant. In February and March the Committee was evenly divided, and the
Governor used his casting vote in favour of an unchanged level of interest rates. Disagreements
continued and in June the Committee voted 8 to 1 to raise interest rates for, as it turned out, the
last  time  in  that  interest  rate  cycle.  By  now,  many  commentators  were  disillusioned  with  the
evidence  of  disagreements  within  the  Committee.  If  I  single  out  Philip  Stephens  from  the
Financial Times it is only because his description, written in July 1998, of unhappiness with the
Committee was more vivid and articulate than most. He wrote:
5
BIS Review   63/1999
“The Committee has thus far lacked both leadership and predictability. … On the evidence of the
previous six months, the MPC  bears  a  closer  resemblance  to  a  post-graduate  seminar  than  to  a
forum for strategic decision-making. …To put [several] economists in the same room is to invite
what one commentator has called paralysis by analysis. As a result the Committee’s conclusions
are entirely unpredictable.”
Since  the  beginning  of  1998,  the  Committee  has  been  unanimous  at  only  one  out  of  sixteen
meetings. That was in July of last year when the Committee voted to hold interest rates constant
at 7.5%. Disagreements have become the norm, and are much less remarked upon by the press
than they were before. Moreover, disagreement is now more widely accepted as natural. It would
be  strange  if  the  uncertainties  facing  the  Committee  were  not  reflected  in  small  differences  of
opinion.  And  views  of  the  appropriate  level  of  rates  have  never  differed  by  more  than  0.5
percentage points. Nor have these technical disagreements led to “paralysis by analysis”. Indeed,
the Committee has  reduced  interest  rates  by  23  percentage  points  since  October  of  last  year.  It
was precisely the analysis that led to the action.
The  willingness  of  the  MPC  to  change  interest  rates  either  up  or  down  in  order  to  meet  the
symmetric inflation target has altered commentator’s perceptions of the Committee itself. Early in
its  history,  commentators  were  unable  to  resist  labelling  members  of  the  Committee  as  either
“hawks” or “doves”. I argued then that it made no sense to use these descriptions because each
member of the Committee had the same objective. Members of the MPC cannot entertain closet
views about their desired inflation rate because they will be held personally accountable for their
judgments  about  the  level  of  interest  rates  necessary  to  meet  the  inflation  target.  No  matter.  A
good argument will never beat a good headline. Hawks and doves it was, though there were also
references to ostriches, foxes and hedgehogs, and headless chickens. No doubt there were even
less flattering comparisons made in private. Still, unlike England football managers, we have not
–  yet  –  been  compared  with  root  vegetables.  And  we  have  made  progress.  As  Chart  4  shows,
press references to “hawks and doves” reached a peak in mid-1998 and have declined markedly
since. As I predicted in a speech in May last year, “as circumstances change, it is easy to imagine
that the ‘hawks’ shall be ‘doves’ and the ‘doves’ shall be ‘hawks’”.
But  we  were  also  criticised  for  not  being  open  enough  about  differences  of  view.  The  early
minutes  were  thought  to  be  too  bland  and  to  conceal  expressions  of  individual  points  of  view.
Much of that criticism was indeed fair. And we have tried to respond by making the minutes a
more accurate expression of the range of points of view that are expressed at the meeting. But I
should stress that the discussion of the MPC focuses on the relative merits of different possible
explanations of what is happening in the economy, in a spirit of mutual enquiry, rather than an
exchange of fixed and conflicting views. A second criticism, made by the IMF team during the
recent Article IV consultation, was that, whereas the minutes explained in some detail differences
of view among Committee members, the Inflation Report contained only a single projection for
the inflation outlook. Again, there was some justice in this criticism, and we have responded to it.
In fact, for three out of the past four  Inflation Reports, there have  been  explicit  descriptions  of
differences of view among Committee members about prospects for inflation.
What are the challenges for the next two years?
If monetary stability is to be a permanent feature of British economic life, the MPC will have to
overcome  several  challenges  in  the  years  ahead.  Two  of  these  I  would  like  to  discuss  briefly.
First,  how  will  the  Committee  deal  with  expectations  that  have  been  raised  by  the  remarkable
BIS Review   63/1999
6
stability of inflation during its first two years? Second, how can the MPC build a constituency for
low inflation?
Despite the openness and transparency of the new monetary framework, the British, indeed the
world,  economy  often  moves  in  mysterious  ways.  Monetary  policy  is  decision-making  under
uncertainty. That is why MPC projections are published as fan charts, not as point estimates. The
lags between a change in interest rates and its effects on output, demand and, ultimately, inflation
mean that rough weather and occasional storms in the world economy are likely to blow us off
course, at least for a time. A true test of the MPC is not whether it hits the target when the sea is
calm, but how it reacts to the storms, or economic shocks, that will inevitably arise.
The most immediate challenge for the MPC is that, although inflation may fall below the target
over the next year, before long the inflation prospect further ahead will depend more on domestic
inflationary  pressures  than  it  has  over  the  past  year  or  so,  when  external  factors  made  a  major
contribution in holding down retail price inflation. Lags mean that the MPC needs to look ahead.
The test of the MPC will be how it responds to the inflation prospect.
Even  in  the  absence  of  unexpected  shocks  there  are  major  uncertainties.  Trying  to  understand
changes in the way the economy behaves is a crucial part of the MPC’s work. In recent years we
have seen a combination of lower inflation, lower earnings growth and faster output growth than
previous relationships would have led us to expect. The reasons for this benign combination of
growth with low inflation are not easy to diagnose. Some have talked about a new era or a “new
paradigm”,  in  which  productivity  growth  has  permanently  risen.  We  should  be  cautious  about
those who speak of new paradigms. Paradigm is a word too often used by those who would like to
have a new idea but cannot think of one.
Optimism about growth rates has been greatest in the  United  States,  which  is  hardly  surprising
given  the  recent  performance  of  the  US  economy.  But  wiser  heads  counsel  caution.  Alan
Greenspan  has  argued  that,  although  there  is  evidence  of  a  structural  shift  in  the  level  of
productivity,  the  laws  of  supply  and  demand  have  not  been  repealed.  Eventually  the  old
relationships will return.
If  the  UK  economy  moves  in  mysterious  ways,  it  does  not  always  perform  wonders.  A
comparison between the  US  and  UK  is  instructive.  In  both  countries  earnings  growth  has  been
lower,  given  the  level  of  unemployment,  than  would  have  been  predicted  on  the  basis  of  past
relationships. Inflation has not picked up despite a tight labour market. In the US one explanation
for this benign outcome is that costs have been held down by an increase in productivity growth.
Over the past three years labour productivity (output per person hour) in the US has grown at an
average  annual  rate  of  around  22%,  well  above  the  average  rate  of  1–12%  over  the  past  thirty
years; and over the past year productivity growth rose to an annualised rate of 3% or more. Over
the same three years productivity growth in the UK has been 12% a year, well below the thirty-
year  average  of  2–22%  a  year.  In  the  US  the  application  of  new  technology,  especially
information  technology,  is  often  held  responsible  for  this  improved  performance.  Such
explanations should, in principle, apply to most industrialised countries, at least to some degree.
But,  whatever  similarities  there  are  in  the  recent  economic  performance  of  the  US  and  UK,
productivity  growth  is  not  one  of  them.  Indeed,  since  1990,  UK  productivity  growth  has  been
exactly in line with the thirty-year average. So it would be premature at this stage to suppose that
there has been a permanent shift in productivity behaviour in the UK, although further study of
the  recent  differences  in  productivity  growth  across  countries  and  how  they  might  relate  to
differences in the way information technology has affected working practices is important.
7
BIS Review   63/1999
If  not  productivity,  what  other  changes  might  help  to  explain  the  recent  benign  behaviour  of
inflation? A more plausible explanation for the lower-than-expected growth rates of earnings, and
hence prices, is, in my view, a fall in inflation expectations. If that is the case, then part of the
improved  performance  of  the  last  two  or  three  years  can  be  attributed  to  a  combination  of  the
“credibility windfall” resulting from the new monetary policy framework and the benign impact
on inflation of the higher exchange rate and lower commodity and import prices.
In  order  to  assess  whether  economic  relationships  have  changed,  it  is  vital  that  the  MPC  have
access  to  timely  and  accurate  information.  Official  statistics  comprise  the  bulk  of  information
available  to  the  MPC.  Following  the  recent  review  of  data  on  average  earnings,  it  has  been
decided to put the relationship between the Bank and the Office for National Statistics on a more
formal basis with a Service Level Agreement between the two organisations. Good progress has
been made on drafting that Agreement. But the MPC cannot live by official statistics alone, nor
even on a diet of business and household surveys. In addition, the Bank has a network of twelve
Regional Agents. Their main task is to ask local  people  how  they  view  the  current  state  of  the
economy. Each year the Bank’s Agents make, in total, around 7,000  visits  to  business  contacts
across  the  country.  The  attraction  of  this  information  is  that  it  is  timely  and  focussed  on  the
Committee’s  needs.  Other  data  are  often  published  with  a  considerable  lag.  And  there  are
frequently gaps and puzzles in those data which the Agents can help to resolve. Each month the
MPC decides on a “question of the month” which the Agents then put to their contacts. Recent
questions have covered trends in employment, the behaviour of earnings, the reaction of exports
to the rise in sterling, and the likely effects of the Millennium on investment expenditure. Within
a couple of weeks, the responses from a sample of about 150 companies are available to the MPC.
More  generally,  the  views  of  businesses  around  the  country  about  the  state  of  trade  are  passed
directly to the MPC through the intermediary of the Regional Agents who attend the monthly pre-
MPC  briefing  meetings.  This  may  not  be  quite  “One  2  One”  but  it  is  a  rapid  and  direct
communication.
The Bank of England has never had an Agency office in Northern Ireland. It is time to put that
right. I am very pleased, therefore, to announce that in January next year the Bank of England will
open an Agency in Belfast. It will increase our contacts with, and knowledge of, the economy and
people  of  Northern  Ireland.  Nigel  Falls,  one  of  our  most  experienced  Agents,  will  be  the  first
Agent  for  Northern  Ireland.  He  is  here  tonight,  and  you  will  be  seeing  a  great  deal  of  him  in
future.
The second challenge for the future is to build a constituency for low inflation. There is I believe,
a good deal of support in this country for monetary stability. Those who experienced the high and
unpredictable rates of inflation of the 1970s and 1980s – the “inflation generation” – have ensured
that all major political parties are now committed to stability. But there have been times in the
past when low and stable inflation was abandoned by those who succumbed to the temptations of
monetary laxity. Some of you here tonight are, I hope, taking a break from revision for your final
examinations. Thirty years ago this month I was in your position. As part of my revision, I studied
the inflation rates since the Second World War for several different measures of inflation. They
were all at or very close to 3% a year. No-one in Cambridge at that time – and certainly not the
students that were to become part of the inflation generation  –  heeded  the  late  Richard  Kahn’s
warning that creeping inflation was about to accelerate. The rest, as they say, is monetary history.
I would like those of you revising for your final exams this month to be able to look back in thirty
years time and recall that the year in which you graduated was when we finally laid to rest the
idea that the UK was an inflation-prone economy. Inflation was the norm for most of my adult
life. It should not be in yours.
BIS Review   63/1999
8
Why  then,  you  may  ask,  do  we  need  to  build  a  constituency  for  low  inflation?  There  are  two
reasons. First, it is important that support for low inflation not wane as the experience of high and
unstable  inflation  of  the  past  recedes.  It  would  be  a  counsel  of  despair  to  believe  that  the
inflationary excesses of the recent past would have to be repeated in order to retain support for
low  inflation.  Yet,  in  a  recent  survey  of  households  in  Germany,  Robert  Shiller2  found  that
support for stability was much higher among those who had experienced hyperinflation. Of those
born before 1940 as many as 90% agreed with the statement that “the control of inflation is one of
the most important missions of German economic policy”, whereas only 51% of those born after
1950  agreed  with  the  statement.  Those  who  value  health  most  are  often  those  who  have
experienced sickness. There is a lesson here. The past decade has been good for central banks and
central bankers. But that success should not blind us to the realisation that if public acceptance of
price stability is  based  on  no  more  than  recent  experience  of  the  opposite,  then  the  democratic
legitimacy of central banks requires a more solid foundation.
So how can we build the constituency for low inflation? Openness and transparency of the MPC,
and explanations of our actions, are an essential part of our task. But we can do more. Over the
past  few  months  I  have  been  chairing  a  working  party  in  the  Bank  designed  to  answer  the
question of how we can build the constituency for low inflation. We have been exploring possible
educational initiatives to increase public understanding of the benefits of monetary stability. And
we  have  also  been  considering  the  way  in  which  public  opinion  polls  might  be  used  to  tell  us
about the degree of public understanding of the inflation target, the role of the MPC in achieving
it, and, more generally, about the inflation process itself. I hope we shall be able to announce the
results  of  those  deliberations  before  long.  The  aim  is  to  ensure  that  the  inflation  generation  is
replaced by a new generation, a generation for whom economic success will depend more on their
own efforts than on the accidental consequences of high and unstable inflation for the distribution
of wealth – whether in housing, pensions or financial savings.
Conclusions
So what should we make of the Monetary Policy Committee after two years? As all parents know,
second birthdays are often the prelude to a difficult period: the “terrible twos”. But I am confident
that,  whatever  difficulties  lie  ahead,  the  Chancellor  will  be  able  to  take  some  pride  in  his
offspring.  Philip  Ziegler  has  described  the  British  constitution  as  an  accumulation  of  “instantly
invented precedents”. Indeed, there is a tradition in the UK of making radical reforms in such a
way that it is impossible, after a few years, to imagine that things were done any other way. That I
predict will be true of the MPC.
The  whole  monetary  policy  process  is  today  systematic  and  professional  in  a  way  that  was
unimaginable less than ten years  ago.  Then,  meetings  between  the  Chancellor  and  Governor  to
discuss interest rates were often called at only a few hours notice. Now, analysis, meetings of the
MPC and the publication of both the decision and the reasons for it proceed on a pre-announced
timetable.  The  change  has  significantly  reduced  the  uncertainty  facing  financial  markets  and
enhanced the quality of the decisions themselves. It is a massive improvement, and one which has
earned  the  UK  a  good  deal  of  respect  on  the  international  stage,  as  judged  by  the  Article  IV
reports from the IMF and the convergence reports of the European Union.
Shortly  after  Robert  Rubin  announced  last  week  his  impending  departure  as  US  Treasury
Secretary, he gave the Commencement Address at New York University. In it he stated the four
principles for decision-making that had guided him during his career. They encapsulate exactly
                                                     
2 Shiller, R, “Why do people dislike inflation?” NBER Working Paper No.5539, April 1996
9
BIS Review   63/1999
the philosophy of the MPC. First, the only certainty is that  there  is  no  certainty.  Second,  every
decision is a matter of weighing probabilities, or the balance of risks, as we say. Third, despite
uncertainty we have to decide and act. Fourth, decisions should be judged not only on the results
but also on how they were made. The first three principles guide every meeting of the MPC. And
the fourth is one I commend to all those who wish to make their own judgment about the MPC
two years on.
Institutions matter. The Bank of England is an old institution. But its success has been based on
its  willingness  to  change  and  adapt.  In  its  300-year  history,  probably  no  change  has  been  as
significant as operational independence and the creation of the Monetary Policy Committee. The
Bank aims to be at the forefront of the theory and practice of monetary policy. But we cannot rest
on our laurels. There is still much to learn and to change. Economic theory moves forward and
economic behaviour is never constant. The practice of monetary policy must keep up. But what
we  will  not  change  is  our  commitment  to  monetary  stability  and  to  the  achievement  of  the
Government’s inflation target. It is that commitment which can deliver economic stability to this
country.
BIS Review   63/1999
10
