Mr Duisenberg focuses on the possible future impact of
the unique monetary unification in the European Union and shares
some observations on the challenges facing the ECB and the EU
Speech given by Mr Willem Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the Villa d’Este
Workshop in Cernobbio on 4 September 1999.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
A great number of you are clearly familiar with the political and economic developments which led to
the introduction  of  our  new  currency,  the  euro.  I  should  therefore  like  to  look  ahead  and  focus  my
remarks on the possible future impact of this unique monetary unification and share with you some
observations on the challenges facing the European Central Bank and the European Union as a whole.
Since  1  January  1999,  the  euro  has  been  the  common  currency  for  eleven  Member  States  of  the
European Union. This was rightly described as a historic event, since the completion of Economic and
Monetary Union indeed marks an unprecedented degree of economic and political integration among
the European  countries  participating  in  this  endeavour.  I  am  sure  that the introduction  of  the  single
currency will help to further realise the efficiency and welfare gains of the Single Market, although
this will probably be a gradual process, and will become apparent only over time. However, with the
establishment of Economic and Monetary Union, the integration process has certainly gained a new
quality. The significance of the complete and voluntary transfer of a core competency of the modern
state,  namely  monetary  policy,  from  the  Member  States  to  a  truly  European  and  independent
institution  such  as  the  European  Central  Bank,  can  hardly  be  overestimated.  While  the  years  of
technical preparation certainly required great efforts on the part of all involved, it is the longer-term
impact of EMU which holds the prospect of the most momentous change.
The  first  few  months  of  the  existence  of  the  euro  have  set  the  scene  for  a  positive  outlook.  Even
though  external  developments such as  the  depreciation  of  the  euro  against  the  dollar  have  attracted
rather pessimistic headlines, there are, in fact, several reasons for some satisfaction. The changeover to
the  single  currency  ran  smoothly,  largely  thanks  to  the  diligent  preparation  of  all  involved.  The
European Central Bank and the Eurosystem have assumed their new responsibilities, and the monetary
policy instruments and decision-making procedures are functioning well. A unified euro area financial
market  is  developing  as  operators  re-orient  their  activities  beyond  the  borders  of  their  previous
domestic markets.
However, it is altogether natural that not all facets of the complex EMU project are as yet complete.
Setting up the technical and operational framework for EMU – even if it is proving to function to full
satisfaction  –  is  not  sufficient.  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  cannot  simply  be  reduced  to  the
mechanics of a functioning single monetary policy – however important this may be. EMU also has
implications for policy fields beyond those explicitly related to the management of the single currency.
The  interdependencies  generated  and  reinforced  by  the  introduction  of  the  euro  entail  a  shared
responsibility  for  the  common  currency  on  the  part  of  all  euro  area  Member  States.  Inappropriate
policy choices in one country can have an immediate impact on the common currency, for example,
via the exchange rate.
For the euro to be a lasting success – and to win the support of all citizens – national policymakers,
businesses and trade unions will have to adapt to the conditions of a single currency. Even though this
will  be  a  gradual  process,  facing  up  to  the  challenges  of  the  single  currency  will  demand  a  steep
learning curve for all involved.
Allow me to elaborate: the European Central Bank as the single monetary authority within the euro
area  will  have  to  build  up  and  maintain  a  “stability  culture”  among  the  politicians  and  peoples  of
Europe. This is no easy task, despite all our efforts to explain monetary policy decisions to the public.
1
BIS Review 93/1999
Most  importantly,  the  ECB  must  communicate  the  fundamental  nature  of,  and  justification  for,  its
Treaty  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability,  not  least  since  certain  misperceptions  of  the  goals  and
effects of monetary policy continue to exist.
It will only be possible to fully gain the crucial support of the public for the new and so far untested
currency if the ECB manages to retain its value over time. It is my firm belief that fulfilling its primary
objective  to  maintain  price  stability  is  not  only  the  best  service  which  the  ECB  can  deliver  to  the
citizens  of  Europe,  but  also  the  most  appropriate  way  of  fostering  the  legitimacy  of  our  new
institution. In the first few months of the euro’s existence we have indeed provided an internally stable
currency, although the public perception of this accomplishment has often been confused by too much
attention on developments relating to the euro’s external value. In this context, allow me to reiterate
that the ECB’s monetary policy objective is the internal value of the euro and that in the longer term
the euro’s internal strength will also be reflected in its external value.
Our task of maintaining price stability will certainly be made easier as the ECB acquires a track record
and further builds up its credibility with the markets inside and outside the euro area. In my view, this
process will be greatly facilitated by a monetary policy strategy oriented towards guaranteeing price
stability in the medium term, rather than responding to short-term considerations. I should emphasise
that  it  is  the  ECB’s  independent  status  which  will  continue  to  allow  it  to  stand  above  day-to-day
pressures, to pursue a stability-oriented policy to the benefit of all citizens without the interference of
short-term political objectives and to ignore short-term market developments if they are deemed to be
excessive.
The  ECB  is  a  novel  and  unique  institution  and  in  the  performance  of  its  tasks  it  is  still  navigating
uncharted waters. Take, for example, the differing impact of monetary policy on economic activity in
the  different  euro  area  Member  States,  which  demands  a  well-balanced  and  comprehensive
consideration of the precise timing and magnitude of interest rate decisions. The ECB must formulate
a  single  monetary  policy  for  an  economic  area  made  up  of  11  distinct  national  economic  policy
jurisdictions. Our monetary policy decisions must thus always be oriented towards the conditions of
this currency zone as a whole, since monetary policy by its nature is one and indivisible. Precisely this
is our Treaty mandate. The ECB must develop into a truly European institution and  we  are  making
good progress in that direction.
However,  developing  a  wider  perception  of  the  euro  area  as  an  entity  appears  more  complicated.
Certainly, there are some areas where awareness of a single “euro area economy” is well developed.
The financial market operators, for instance, appear to have adapted very quickly to the reality of the
euro. The extensive recourse to the more favourable financing opportunities in the now more unified
financial  market  or  the  ongoing  consolidation  in  the  banking  sector  bear  witness  to  this  shift  of
perception  from  the  national  to  the  European  level.  In  this  context,  allow  me  to  add  the  following
observation.  The  development  of  a  highly  integrated  euro  area  financial  market  and  the  ultimate
establishment of a pan-European banking industry will raise the issue of the optimal organisation of
supervision  of  the  European  financial  sector.  Today  supervision  is  organised  on  a  national  level;
financial  markets  are  not  yet  fully  integrated  and  we  do  not  as  yet  have  a  genuinely  pan-European
banking industry. However, the situation is clearly dynamic.
While it remains to be seen how quickly the situation will change, this example highlights the fact that
the euro area is not yet an entity itself and not yet perceived as such in some respects. Looking back on
the first few months of the existence of the euro, we have witnessed that singular and isolated news
and data releases from individual economies within the euro area have sometimes inappropriately been
interpreted  as  indicators  for  the  entire  currency  zone.  Such  inadequate  analysis  can  produce  real
difficulties, especially when the markets magnify and exaggerate the effects of these misconceptions.
This  phenomenon  may  possibly  be  explained  by  insufficient  information  about  the  new  European
framework.  However,  another  reason  might  lie  in  the  conduct  and  presentation  of  Member  States’
economic policies. It appears that Member States are still learning to communicate adequately that, in
economic terms, they also consider themselves constituent parts of a larger entity and thus also regard
their  domestic  economic  policy  decisions  “as  a  matter  of  common  concern”.  It  is,  however,
encouraging to see that these deficiencies are being addressed and that efforts are being made to render
BIS Review 93/1999
2
the impact of economic decision-making on the euro area as a whole visible and transparent for the
markets  and  the  public  at  large.  Moreover,  the  recognition  that  Europe’s  performance  depends  to  a
large  extent  on  its  ability  to  take  on  the  task  of  implementing  real  structural  reforms  appears  to  be
gaining ground.
There is no alternative to orienting the conduct and the presentation of economic policies to the new
framework  of  EMU  in  order  to  explore  its  full  potential.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  these
adjustments  will  have  institutional  implications,  either  motivated  by  functional  necessity  or  in
response to the demands from our partners and interlocutors.
I should add that institutional changes will in any case be on the agenda of the EU in the coming years,
not least in order to endow Europe with a capacity for decisive external action. This is a consequence
not only of the momentous changes in the wider Europe, but also the projected expansion of the EU.
The  European  Union  has  launched  an  enlargement  process  of  unprecedented  dimensions,  with  12
countries  from  central,  eastern  and  southern  Europe  currently  involved  in,  or  preparing,  entry
negotiations. The prospect of EU membership and the eventual participation in EMU has galvanised
these countries into pursuing economic reforms, re-orienting their trade and embarking on a difficult
and sometimes painful process of disinflation.
In  this  context,  there  should  be  no  denying  that  the  European  Union  too  will  have  to  reform  its
institutions and decision-making structures in order to cope with a larger number of Member States.
By agreeing to convene an Intergovernmental Conference next year, the Member States have taken the
first steps in this direction.
So far the progress of negotiations is encouraging, and the applicant countries should be applauded for
their  great  efforts  towards  meeting  the  economic  and  political  entry  criteria  set  by  the  Copenhagen
European Council in 1993. Beyond that, it appears that the very prospect of eventual participation in
EMU has also helped to establish clear policy orientations. Naturally, the ECB takes a keen interest in
developments in the future Member States and has established the relevant contacts.
I should like to conclude that the ECB is well aware of the challenges ahead, and that we are still far
from  “business  as  usual”  –  despite  the  smooth  and  successful  launch  of  the  euro.  With  the
establishment  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  the  EU  has  recorded  an  outstanding  historical
achievement, but the task of making EMU a success will be an ongoing one, and perhaps even more
momentous challenges in the wider Europe are awaiting our response.
Thank you very much.
3
BIS Review 93/1999
