Mr Erçel talks about the Turkish banking system
Speech by the Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, Mr Gazi Erçel, on the
occasion of the American Turkish Council meeting in Ankara on 18 March 1999.
First, I would like to thank the ATC arranging this gathering in Ankara. I am very pleased to
be here today, and I would like to talk about the Turkish banking system.
Let me begin by recalling that banks are important and serious institutions. They depend on
trust.  They  borrow  money  from  the  public  and  use  it.  They  also  perform  the  function  of
intermediation  of  funds.  For  many  centuries  they  have  been  institutions  that  contributed  to
economic development.
There  are  a  number  of  generally  accepted,  long-standing  principles  that  apply  to  these
institutions. The most important are:
-  Providing effective supervision over these institutions.
-  Maintaining an environment in which they can function efficiently.
-  Making risk-taking measures adaptable and applicable.
-  Helping to improve the culture of credit.
Most of these responsibilities are assigned to public authorities, although some of them are
the responsibility of the banks.
During the last two decades, however, financial developments taking place all over the world
have  brought  many  changes  in  the  practice  of  banking.  Innovations  in  information
technology, the liberalization process of financial markets and a rapid increase in the sheer
number  of  financial  transactions  have  also  affected  banking.  Competition  in  banking  and
other  sectors  has  increased.  The  number  of  kinds  of  risk  has  grown,  and  the  varieties  of
non-financial institutions have multiplied.
All these changes together call for a sounder banking system. They remind us of the fact that
sound banking is a continuous process. The importance of risk management in various kinds
of situations is well understood. In today’s environment, our understanding that a sound and
efficiently functioning banking system is a fundamental necessity is once again reinforced.
So what have we in Turkey done to meet these exigencies? The Turkish banking system is
not a recently established one. Turkey has a deep-rooted banking tradition that goes back to
the  19th  century.  During  the  last  two  or  three  decades,  the  banking  sector  has  played  a
prominent role in the Turkish financial system, and has made considerable progress, aided to
some  extent  by  structural  changes,  towards  making  the  Turkish  economy  more  financially
liberalized.  In  response  to  the  restructuring  of  the  Turkish  economy  and  to  the  need  to
integrate Turkey into the modern world of finance, Turkish banks have made major changes
both in their institutional structures and in the quality of services and products they offer. As
a  result  of  the  greater  freedom  that  comes  with  market-oriented  policies  and  a  liberalized
financial environment, many entrepreneurs, foreign as well as domestic, have been attracted
by the potentially profitable Turkish banking system.
1
BIS Review   31/1999
During the last two decades, the number of banks active in the banking sector has grown from
43 to 74. During the same period, the number of foreign banks with subsidiaries or branches
in  Turkey  increased  from  four  to  20.  As  of  November  1998,  60  banks  out  of  74  are
universally commercial banks and the remaining 14 are development and investment banks.
Thirty-six of these banks are commercial banks whose majority shares are privately owned;
20  are  foreign  banks  established  in  Turkey  or  having  branch  offices  in  Turkey;  and  14,  as
noted above, are development and investment banks. As of November 1998, Turkish banks
now operate though their 7,062 local branches. More than 165,000 persons are employed in
the banking sector. In addition, the Turkish banking system is aggressively modern, adopting
every banking innovation rapidly.
in  parallel  with 
Turkish  banks,  operating 
internationalization  and
globalization,  have  gone  one  step  further  by  starting  to  invest  in  foreign  financial
establishments as well. Turkish banks are now able to form joint ventures with foreign banks
to open financial subsidiaries and branches abroad. As of November 1998, Turkish banks had
63 financial subsidiaries in 19 different countries, and 26 branches in 10 different countries.
the  process  of 
As of November 1998, the size of the consolidated balance sheet of the banking sector was
$114  billion.  According  to  our  peer  group  classification  by  ownership,  public  and  private
banks  both  have  significant  shares  in  the  sector.  As  of  November  1998,  state-owned
commercial banks account for 35 percent of the banks in the consolidated balance sheet of
the sector, worth $40 billion, and private banks account for 54 percent of the balance sheet,
totalling  $62  billion.  Meanwhile,  the  share  of  foreign  banks,  with  assets  of  $7  billion,  has
held steady at around 6 percent.
Despite the recent privatization of two state-owned commercial banks, this class of banks has
retained its prominent role in the banking sector. But the influence of Turkey’s state-owned
banks  in  the  banking  sector  is  less  significant  compared  with  the  influence  of  state-owned
banks in some EU and OECD countries.
As of November 1998, five major banks, including two of the four state-owned commercial
banks,  held  44  percent  of  the  total  assets  of  the  banking  sector.  These  five  banks  held  51
percent of total deposits and accounted for 42 percent of total credit extended in the sector.
Total equities of these five banks comprised 48 percent of the total equity of the sector. If we
say that these banks also own almost half of the total branch network of the sector, we could
understand this concentration. However, the total share of the five major banks representing
the  concentration  in  the  Turkish  banking  system  is  smaller  than  the  share  representing  the
concentration  in  most  OECD  countries.  Again  according  to  1995  figures,  concentration  in
Sweden’s  banking  system  is  86  percent,  in  Holland  81  percent,  in  Finland  74  percent,  in
Belgium 59 percent, in England 57 percent and in Spain 49 percent. In Turkey the figure is 52
percent, and is slowly but steadily declining.
If we look at the concentration issue from another standpoint, using the data for November
1998 and taking into account the total assets of the sector, 65 percent of the Turkish banking
system belongs to the top 10 major banks. If we include the 20 foreign banks and branches
having a share of 6 percent, and the 14 development and investment banks having a share of 5
percent, it can be seen that 76 percent of the banking system is consistent with 10 big banks,
foreign and investment banks. The remaining 24 percent of the sector belongs to 30 banks.
Among these banks, there are banks that are leaders in the sector, functioning properly and
effectively.  However,  a  limited  number  of  banks  have  practical  problems  which  are  well
BIS Review   31/1999
2
known to us. We know all their problems. We monitor them. The existing banking laws and
other elements of the legal framework do not give us full authority to address them actively
and efficiently. The problem of the state owned banks is occasioned by the state budget, and
its solution involves different issues.
Now let me talk about risk management in the Turkish banking sector. From the standpoint
of  risk  management,  we  do  have  well-developed  methods  of  risk  management  and  for
supervising the risks that we undertake.
As I pointed out in my brief remarks on the financial standing of the banking sector, Turkish
banks  have  reached  a  level  of  financial  and  institutional  development  that  should  not  be
underestimated.  But  despite  all  the  aforementioned  positive  aspects,  there  are  also  various
threats to the wellbeing of the Turkish banking sector which I believe are worth mentioning.
Turkish banks, like all the other banks in the world, are exposed to credit risk, liquidity risk,
interest  rate  risk  and  foreign  exchange  risk.  This  is  true  even  in  the  absence  of  an
environment of global crisis and macroeconomic risks stemming from political uncertainties.
These are other issues that merit separate consideration.
I will turn now to financial risks. The most important of these is credit risk,  which Turkish
banks pay the most attention to managing. The Turkish banking sector has become used to
accepting  and  managing  credit  risk  over  the  years.  A  credit  culture  has  been  developed  in
which firms, sectors, regions and individuals participate. Increased competition in the sector
clearly  has  implications  for  the  risk-taking  process,  which  requires  that  the  banks  restudy
their credit strategy.
An overall examination of credit risk showed that the banking sector has been able to manage
its credit risks by keeping the level of non-performing loans low in spite of an environment
of shrinking international financing.
As to liquidity risk, the fact that depositors prefer shorter terms, while investors, driven by
expectations of high inflation and uncertainty, prefer longer terms, has caused a mismatching
of the maturity structures of the assets and liabilities of the banking sector.
As  a  result,  banks  become  more  vulnerable  to  liquidity  risk.  Financial  distress  and  global
financial  crisis  were  the  main  ingredients  of  the  conjuncture  of  1998.  Following  scattered
failures in the emerging financial environment, almost all emerging economies began to be
treated  as  risky,  due  to  growing  uncertainty  about  the  near-term  outlook  for  the  financial
markets. In this situation, international investors became more cautious about investing in the
emerging markets and became reluctant to provide them with credit. Turkish banks slowed
their  disbursements  of  credit,  preferring  to  be  liquid  in  the  marketplace.  We  also  checked
using different ratios for the liquidity in the system.
Interest rate risk is another important form of systemic risk. Since the maturity structure of
interest-sensitive liabilities in the Turkish banking system tends to favor the relatively shorter
maturity segments, external funds are repriced at shorter intervals than assets. This mismatch
in the pricing structure at various periods increases the sensitivity of assets and liabilities to
changes  in  interest  rates.  Banks  manage  the  degree  of  interest  rate  risk  to  which  they  are
exposed  during  times  of  rising  interest  rates  by  converting  their  low  interest  bearing
securities into high interest bearing securities by means of  repurchase  transactions.  Interest
rate swaps and some other derivative instruments are also used to hedge interest rate risk.
3
BIS Review   31/1999
As  to  foreign  exchange  risk,  the  difference  between  the  Turkish  lira  interest  rate  and  the
nominal  depreciation  of  the  Turkish  lira  is  the  major  reason  why  the  banks  place  foreign
currency  funds  in  Turkish  lira  funds  or  other  alternative  investment  opportunities.  In
Turkey’s  case,  the  practice  of  taking  short  positions  for  foreign  exchange  started  in  1985.
After facing several difficulties and losses, the Turkish banking system has become very well
informed  about  foreign  exchange  risk.  Furthermore,  we,  the  Turkish  authorities,  have
reduced the risk by means of a number of regulations.
I  can  say  that  all  these  kinds  of  risk  have  been  thoroughly  monitored  by  the  supervisory
authorities,  and  preventive  measures  have  been  put  in  place  before  the  effects  of  any
problems could damage financial stability. All banks operating in Turkey are subject to the
Banking  Law,  and  to  Decrees  and  Communiqués  concerning  the  law.  This  Law  authorizes
the  Treasury  and  Central  Bank  to  supervise  and  regulate  banks.  Under  this  regulatory
framework, banks must submit yearly, quarterly and even daily compilations of financial data
to the Central Bank and the Treasury. In addition to frequent financial evaluations of banks
by  off-site  examiners,  on-site  examinations  are  carried  out  to  confirm  the  reliability  and
accuracy  of  the  reported  data,  and  clarify  any  special  issues  arising  during  off-site
examinations.  The  increased  volume  of  foreign  exchange  transactions,  the  process  of
internationalization and market-determined prices have all increased the market risk that the
banks  are  exposed  to,  and  this,  in  turn,  has  increased  the  need  to  introduce  risk  measures
aimed at protecting banks’ capital. For this purpose, regulatory studies are jointly conducted
by the Central Bank and the Treasury, and commonly accepted risk measures, such as limits
on net open foreign exchange positions, and capital adequacy ratios, have been introduced in
addition to credit limits and other measures consistent with EU standards. Another practice
followed  to  make  supervision  more  effective  and  obtain  better  evaluations  of  banks’  real
financial standing is consolidated supervision.
Authorized independent bank auditors play an important role in the bank supervision process.
Each bank in the sector must obtain an independent audit report every year. These reports are
prepared  by  authorized  independent  auditing  firms  operating  in  accordance  with  the
commonly accepted international accounting and auditing principles.
Another important feature of the Turkish banking system, and not a new one, is its deposit
insurance  scheme.  It  was  first  introduced  in  1933  and  redesigned  in  1983  with  the
establishment of the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund. This Fund’s main source of income is
a premium paid by banks, equal to a certain percentage of their savings deposits. In 1994 a
new Decree came into effect and all banks’ deposits, whether denominated in Turkish lira or
foreign currencies, were fully insured by  the  Fund.  This  step  was  necessary  at  this  time  to
stop the turmoil in Turkey’s financial markets and calm depositors’ nerves.
Now, as we all know, the 100 percent coverage may subject both bankers and depositors to
moral hazard in the form of willingness to take greater risks to earn higher returns. Depositors
may encounter moral hazard when they ignore greater risks associated with their choice of a
depository institution which offers them higher rates for their deposits. But even though all
the drawbacks of the present system of deposit protection are well known, current conditions
in  the  world  financial  environment  and  their  effects  on  the  Turkish  financial  system  have
prevented  us  from  making  the  necessary  changes  in  the  existing  deposit  insurance  scheme
just now. Once we manage to stabilise the macroeconomic environment, we will be able to
reduce the 100 percent coverage to internationally acceptable levels.
BIS Review   31/1999
4
How  a  powerful  and  effective  supervision  could  be  implemented  for  the  Turkish  banking
system was foreseen many years ago. The system in effect during the 1930s had revealed its
inadequacies, but the first step was not taken until 1959 with the establishment of the Board
of  Sworn  Bank  Auditors.  The  system  was  first  applied  to  the  Turkish  economy  under  the
direction of the Ministry of Finance. The Board recruited many valuable employees, trained
them, and gained the power to supervise the system.
But as I mentioned earlier in connection with the need for additional principles to preserve
the soundness of the system, the rapid changes of recent years, their consequences and events
occurring  in  the  international  environment  have  underlined  the  importance  of  effective
supervision.
In 1997, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) enumerated the 25 Core Principles to
be used for banking supervision. The need for such principals was well understood after the
financial crises in Asia and Russia.
I may say that, during these events, which have been going on for several years, the majority
of  the  Turkish  banking  system  has  gained  great  advantages  from  adopting  these  changes.
These  banks  have  succeeded  in  keeping  pace  with  the  era,  especially  with  respect  to
technological innovations, strategies for risk-taking and management techniques.
Besides these advances, there were some factors that damaged the system. These are:
1) High inflation.
2) High public sector borrowing requirement.
3) The lack of an efficient legal framework.
In  addition,  the  style  of  banks’  operations  and  strategies  are  somewhat  different  in  a  high
inflation, as opposed to a normal, environment. On the one hand, banks try to sidestep the
harmful  effects  of  inflation.  On  the  other  hand,  they  revise  their  methods  of  overcoming
uncertainty  and  taking  risks.  And  more  important,  as  the  public  persists  in  continuing  to
borrow,  which  leads  eventually  to  crowding-out,  the  banks  turn  to  the  public  sector  as  a
simple  method  of  investment.  This  causes  them  to  turn  away  from  their  basic  function  of
intermediation, so essential for the efficient allocation of resources. A system that finances
the  public  sector  loses  its  power.  On  the  other  hand,  in  an  environment  like  that  just
described and an economy where capital movements have been liberalized, the soundness of
banks is especially important.
How, then, can banking system soundness be attained? There are four means to this end:
1)  A more efficient and independent supervision system.
2)
3)
4)
Embracing internationally accepted auditing principles.
Improving methods for reducing the financial risks taken by the banks.
The  most  important  is  reducing  the  internal  and  external  imbalances  and  preserving
market stability by creating a sound macroeconomic environment.
5
BIS Review   31/1999
Thus, the most important task for the system belongs to the public. The public authorities
have  an  obligation  to  prepare  the  necessary  legal  regulations  immediately  and  pass  them
through Parliament. Regulations that are inadequate or not updated only cause problems to
accumulate.
For these reasons the new banking law has been prepared and submitted to Parliament. The
aims of the Draft Law are basically to strengthen supervision and make it more efficient, and
to  make  sure  supervision  standards  remain  in  line  with  international  standards.  The  Draft
Law was prepared on the basis of the laws and regulations of the European Union and other
accepted  international  practices,  and  the  “25  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking
Supervision”  promulgated  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements.  I  hope  that  after  the
forthcoming election, the new government will be able to pass this law through Parliament.
Now  I  must  state  clearly  that  I  do  not  believe  there  are  serious  problems  in  the  Turkish
banking system. There are not many that interfere with the system. We, the public authorities,
evaluate the real financial standing of banks. We know the reality well. If we find a problem
in the system, we can take the necessary actions within the framework of the law. We have
the necessary tools to do this.
The Turkish banking sector has existed for 130 years and knows how to manage risks. It has
credibility in the international arena. It is sounder than many of the world’s national banking
sectors. It is dynamic. Its human resources are well trained. Supervision and auditing requires
several years of experience. A correct judgment of the system cannot be obtained by focusing
on a couple of difficulties in isolation. These facts should not be overlooked.
BIS Review   31/1999
6
