Mr  Trichet  gives  an  address  on  the  risks  and  challenges  of  the  international  financial
scene
Text  of  the  Third  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  Distinguished  Lecture  delivered  by
Mr Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  the  central  bank  of  France,  in
Hong Kong on 8 July 1999.
It is a great pleasure to be here in Hong Kong and I am greatly honoured to have been invited
to deliver the Third Hong Kong Monetary Authority Distinguished Lecture. So I would like to
thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  express  my  views  on  the  challenges  and
opportunities of the international financial scene.
The  international  financial  scene  has  been  faced  with  two  major  changes  over  the  last
quarters:
í 
í 
the  recurrence  of  financial  crises,  originating  generally  in  emerging  or  transition
economies,  which  has  emphasised  the  need  to  reform  the  architecture  of  the
international financial system;
the introduction of a new currency, the euro, which should contribute to a balanced
international monetary system.
FINANCIAL  CRISES  AND  THE  REFORM  OF  THE  ARCHITECTURE  OF  THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Two major explanations of the recent financial crises have been put forward:
í 
í 
one  which  can  be  called  the  “fundamentalist”  view  argues  that  Asia’s  healthy
macroeconomic indicators – low inflation, fiscal balance, low government debt, high
rates of savings and investment – offered a misleading picture. This view points out
that  many  Asian  governments  provided  implicit  guarantees  to  the  banking  sector,
which  often  engaged  in  borrowing  abroad  and  in  reckless  lending  to  unqualified
borrowers.  This,  in  conjunction  with  poor  corporate  governance  ended  up  in  large
stocks  of  non-performing  loans  which,  together  with  governments’  implicit
guarantees, created a sizeable “contingent fiscal liability”;
the  other  main  explanation  views  the  self-fulfilling  pessimism  of  international
lenders as the root cause of the crisis. This analysis puts emphasis on panic and on
herd  behaviour  of  foreign  investors  and  lenders.  The  crisis  is  the  result  of
shortcomings  in  the  international  capital  markets  and  their  vulnerability  to  sudden
changes  in  market  sentiment.  According  to  this  view,  the  macroeconomic  and
microeconomic  imbalances  were  not  severe  enough  to  warrant  a  financial  crisis  of
the magnitude that took place in 1997 and 1998.
I do not consider these two explanations as competing or conflicting but see them rather as
complementary. In short, the first approach focuses on what is wrong in crisis countries, the
second  on  what  is  wrong  in  international  financial  markets  and  international  financial
institutions that “govern” global finance.
1
BIS Review   81/1999
The  severity  of  the  Asian’s  financial  crisis,  the  speed  with  which  it  spread  and  the
shortcomings of the international response have contributed to a wide-ranging debate on the
basic rules and institutions that govern global finance.
Recent efforts to improve the global financial architecture began at the Halifax Summit of the
G7 leaders in 1995. The meeting of the G7 finance ministers and central bank governors (held
in London, 21 February 1998) called for a “profound and broad-ranging debate on the lessons
of events in Asia and their implications for strengthening the international monetary system,
building  on  the  reforms  initiated  at  Halifax”.  The  G7  identified  five  main  areas  where
progress had to be made.
This is not the place to take stock of the proposals that have been put forward. Let me just air
a few remarks on certain measures, which I consider as particularly important. I would like to
discuss the proposals addressing imbalances and structural distortions in the crisis countries
before considering those concerning the international financial markets and institutions issues.
Efforts to strengthen emerging countries financial systems making them more resilient
to external shocks
The  main  effort  contributing  to  the  strengthening  of  emerging  market  economies’  banking
systems is the adoption of the set of Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision which
have been widely endorsed by emerging countries authorities. The IMF in coordination with
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  is  designing  indicators  to  assess  progress  in
implementation  by  emerging  countries.  The  adoption  of  the  implementation  of  the  Core
Principles as a criterion giving access to the newly created Contingent Credit Line is a strong
incentive for members to adopt them effectively.
The design of Deposit Insurance Schemes is another important measure contributing to reduce
or eliminate implicit government guarantees limiting moral hazard on the lenders as well as
on the borrowers side.
Foreign direct investment in the banking and the financial sector should also be encouraged as
it allows the transfer of technology and management skills. But it should be clear that such an
opening  up  of  the  capital  account  should,  in  times  of  financial  stress,  not  lead  to  fire-sale
prices.
Measures aiming at protecting the financial system liquidity from the adverse consequences of
sudden changes in market sentiment (the so-called “liquidity-at-risk policy”) should be given
further consideration. The Argentine authorities have adopted such a policy by introducing a
liquidity requirement on banks’ short-term liabilities (foreign as well as domestic liabilities).
This  system  has  been  supplemented  by  a  Contingent  Liquidity  Facility  with  a  number  of
international banks.
More generally, policies designed to discourage excessive short-term foreign borrowing and
based.  on  market  mechanisms  should  be  supported.  For  instance,  unremunerated  reserve
requirements  on  short-term  foreign  liabilities  are  an  incentive  to  lengthen  debt  maturity;
domestic savings should be more systematically mobilised through a development of domestic
financial  markets  (promotion  of  larger  and  deeper  financial  markets).  In  particular,  making
short-term  foreign  liabilities  more  costly  would  also  promote  borrowing  in  local  currency,
making the financial system less vulnerable to external shocks.
BIS Review   81/1999
2
International financial markets and international governance issues
As to the promotion of efficient functioning of global markets, I would like to insist on three
points:
í 
í 
í 
Firstly the specific dangers associated with the “herd instinct” of market participants.
This  behaviour  has  been  observed  in  the  recent  financial  turmoil  both  as  regards
investors’ attitude vis-à-vis emerging economies and certainly also vis-à-vis markets
in  industrialised  countries  themselves.  One  of  the  most  effective  recipes  for
countering  this  behaviour  is  full  transparency  of  each  particular  entity,  of  each
particular country, of each particular borrower, of each particular signature. Full and
reliable transparency for all, both public and private sector entities, is needed to allow
a  proper  judgement  of  the  merits  of  each  case.  In  particular,  more  transparency
between market players is necessary for proper risk management. In a recent report
by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  recommendations  are  made  to
strengthen prudent management of banks’ exposures to highly leveraged institutions
(HLIs).  Just  like  any  other  financial  institution,  HLIs  should  comply  with  minimal
transparency, disclosure and regulation requirements anti overall leverages should be
monitored to avoid risks of systemic crisis or disruptions in the international markets;
Secondly the decision to introduce a new capital adequacy framework to replace the
1988  Accord  is  an  important  step  towards  a  more  comprehensive  approach  to
addressing risks and should, in particular, focus on internationally active banks. The
new framework should significantly improve the way regulatory capital requirements
reflect underlying risks;
Thirdly  the  design  and  implementation  of  internationally  agreed  standards  is  of
utmost importance for ensuring effective transparency at the international level. For
instance, there is evidence that in some cases discretionary accounting practices are
instrumental in enabling banks to comply with international capital regulation. Such
practices may be misleading in judging the compliance with regulation.
However  these  efforts  may  reduce  risks  but  could  be  insufficient  to  avoid  financial  crises.
Therefore,  ways  should  be  designed  to  involve  more  effectively  the  private  sector  in  crisis
resolution (the “burden-sharing” issue).
In  the  wake  of  the  Mexican  crisis,  the  G10  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors
endorsed the recommendation of the Group of Ten Report on “The Resolution of Sovereign
Liquidity Crises” to introduce in sovereign bond contracts collective action clauses. The G7
endorsed  this  recommendation.  Efforts  undertaken  recently  by  the  G10  Deputies  to  design
concrete steps to implement this proposal should also be supported.
Another way to promote private sector implication is the voluntary roll-over or restructuring
of  short-term  debt  coming  to  maturity.  The  Korean  experience  has  been  replicated,  yet  in
different conditions, with success in the case of Brazil. Such a solution worked well after the
Brazilian authorities committed firmly to, and implemented, fiscal adjustment.
The  use  of  financial  innovative  techniques  should  also  be  considered:  for  instance,  the
introduction of roll-over options in debt contract (Buiter proposal) or put options associated
with significant debt reduction.
3
BIS Review   81/1999
As to the role of the international community:
The IMF has a central role to play in macroeconomic surveillance which is its main mission.
The conditionality associated with financial assistance is essential to give economic agents a
clear  assessment  of  the  efforts  made  by  Members  committed  to  implement  adjustment
programmes.
Furthermore,  the  IMF  can  improve  its  action  as  regards  prevention.  Improvements  in  the
SDDS and more transparency regarding Article IV reports, letters of Intent and policy papers
will  certainly  improve  risk  assessment.  This  could  help  prevent  economic  problems  from
turning  into  crises  and  to  prevent  contagion  to  other  countries.  Progress  has  to  be  made  as
regards incentives for sound management. The creation of the CCL is a step in this direction.
Designing  appropriate  incentives  is  the  more  effective  way  to  make  Members  adopt  more
prudent debt management, effective banking supervision…
Given  the  large  number  of  institutions  and  fora  involved  in  the  efforts  aiming  at  a  better
global  financial  architecture,  the  creation  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  reflects  an
important effort to coordinate work in progress and identify issues not yet addressed.
THE  EUROPEAN  MONETARY  UNION  WILL  YIELD  A  SUBSTANTIAL
CONTRIBUTION TO BETTER ECONOMIC AND MONETARY EQUILIBRIUM IN
THE WORLD
The introduction of the euro six months ago is the other major event I would like to deal with
now. The irreversible nature of this change has convinced an increasing number of political
and economic actors that the success of the euro is a necessity for Europe. It is a keystone of
the single market.
It is clear that, now and for the future, we have to face a number of challenges to make this
success sustainable. I would like to draw your attention to the following issues:
í 
í 
first, the euro area will have to face up a number of challenges to confirm its initial
success;
second,  the  success  of  the  euro  will  make  a  contribution  towards  encouraging  a
balanced international monetary situation.
I believe that in the current overall economic situation, the success of the euro will help not
only Europe but also the rest of the world which will benefit from European prosperity and
growth as  part  of  a  healthy  world  economy.  This  would  help  facilitate  the  current  accounts
adjustments of the countries affected by the crisis.
The success of the euro will be complete if a number of challenges are taken up
A few years ago, it was necessary to convince a great deal of sceptic people that the euro was
a  viable  project.  Many  of  them  pointed  to  its  presumed  contradictions  and  its  alleged
inconsistencies: for example, the impossibility of achieving an efficient policy mix without a
political  federation;  the  impossibility  of  avoiding  some  “asymmetric  shocks”;  the  lack  of
sufficient  flexibility  of  the  economy  and  real  mobility  of  the  labour  force  in  the  European
countries, etc. The result was that the euro would never exist!
BIS Review   81/1999
4
These criticisms proved wrong as to the introduction of the euro. But they are useful to help
answer  the  question  of  what  are  the  conditions  for  ensuring  that  the  euro  is  a  complete
success.
Four conditions can be identified:
í 
í 
The  first  condition  is  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  guaranteed  by  the
independence  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  is  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht
Treaty and rooted in the independence of each national central bank. The euro is a
currency which is designed to be a good store of value, having the legacy of the best
European currencies. It must and will carefully keep and consolidate the confidence
of the 290 million Europeans in the euro area and the confidence of non-Europeans
with whom we do business. Satisfying this first condition will be facilitated by the
harmonious  functioning  of  the  European  monetary  team  which  is  composed  of  the
ECB and the eleven national central banks of the euro area.
The  second  condition  is  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Treaty  and  the
Guidelines laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact with regard to fiscal policy.
Close  coordination  of  fiscal  policies  and  vigilant  peer  surveillance  within  the
informal  council  of  the  eleven  participating  member  states  –  the  so-called  “Euro
Eleven” – and by the ministers of finance of the 15 member States convened in the
Ecofin  Council  is  essential  in  ensuring  a  balanced  policy  mix  throughout  the  euro
zone. Adherence to the medium-term objective of bringing national budgets close to
balance or in surplus is a condition for the Union as a whole to weather periods of
economic  difficulty  and  for  individual  countries  to  withstand  possible  economic
downturns which affect only their own economy.
We have to understand that monetary policy  alone  cannot  ensure  price  stability  without  the
appropriate fiscal discipline at the overall level of the Economic and Monetary Union.
For my part, I would give three economic justifications for the Treaty provisions that gave rise
to the Stability and Growth Pact.
Firstly, by coordinating the fiscal policies of the Member States of the Monetary Union, the
Pact  ensures  a  good  policy  mix  within  the  euro  area.  This  is  essential  for  monetary  policy.
Since  Europe  does  not  have  a  significant  federal  budget,  just  as  Europe  has  no  federal
government, the sum of the national budgets must serve as an overall budget for the area as a
whole. This calls for close mutual surveillance and coordination of fiscal policies within the
euro  area.  That  is  the  reason  why  sanctions,  including  fines,  can  be  decided  against  bad
behaviours. Europe has not practised benign neglect as regards fiscal policy: it has given the
Council, which is the political body at the centre of Europe much more influence and power
on the fiscal policy of Member States that in any existing federation or confederation.
Secondly,  the  Pact  helps  prevent  well-run  economics  from  having  to  bear  unjustified  risk
premia by setting up a system of penalties for excessive deficits.
Thirdly,  the  Stability  Pact  allows  us  to  disprove  the  assertion  that  the  euro  area  has  no
automatic  stabilisers  in  the  event  of  asymmetric  shocks  to  a  member  economy.  Indeed,  by
urging governments to aim for a fiscal position close to balance or in surplus in the medium
term, the Pact enables them to let fiscal deficits increase during recessions without exceeding
5
BIS Review   81/1999
the  3%  reference  value.  In  short,  it  allows  them  to  create  a  fiscal  buffer  during  normal
economic periods that can be drawn on, if an asymmetric shock occurs.
í 
The third condition is that all European countries must undertake structural reforms.
Continental  Europe  is  experiencing  high  levels  of  unemployment,  despite  the  fact
that the jobless rate has been declining slightly in most of its economics. According
to the IMF, around 80% of this unemployment is structural, that is, generated by our
burdensome  rules  and  regulations.  The  Monetary  Policy  Council  of  the  Banque  de
France agrees with this analysis.
Just  recently,  some  external  observers  were  still  blaming  Europe  for  its  focus  on  the  euro,
instead of what they considered the more urgent task, namely the implementation of structural
reforms necessary for more dynamic job creation.
These critics were wrong regarding the untimeliness of the euro, but their assessment of the
problems  of  the  European  economy  is  obviously  correct.  The  euro  will  be  a  stimulus  to
structural reforms. Most importantly, the single currency is decisively contributing to achieve
the single market in the three markets of goods, services and capital within the euro zone. And
the  euro  will  also  encourage  “cross  fertilisation”  of  best  practices  through  stronger  co
ordination of member states policies in areas such as labour markets, education and training,
job creation incentives, effective welfare safety nets, etc. In this sense, the euro – which is in
itself a major structural reform- must, and will certainly, bring about other structural reforms.
í 
The  fourth  condition  is  that  all  economic  leaders  in  Europe  must  be  clearsighted
with regard to the crucial matter of competitiveness. Pre-euro economic policy meant
in  particular  monitoring  trade  balances,  the  balance  of  payments  and  the  foreign
exchange and interest rate markets. Economic leaders thus received constant and to a
large  extent  real  time  feedback  on  key  indicators  affecting  national  economic
performance and could react accordingly.
These indicators remain on the euro-wide level: this is why the mutual surveillance of fiscal
and economic policies provided for by the Treaty is so important. But they have disappeared
at  the  national  level  with  the  advent  of  the  euro,  whilst  the.  rules  of  a  market  economy
continue  to  apply  to  each  economy  participating  in  the  euro  zone.  Jobs  are  created  by
consumers when they choose the goods and services they feel are the best value for money.
Businessmen allocate these jobs to different possible locations in different countries according
to  the  relative  competitive  advantages  of  these  locations.  Therefore  the  leaders  of  each
national  economy  must  monitor  competitiveness  through  indicators  such  as  unit  production
costs, tax and regulatory frameworks and so forth. This is even more important than before.
The EMU will reinforce monetary and financial stability
The international role of the euro
With  regard  to  the  international  role  of  the  euro,  let  me  say  that  the  Eurosystem  does  not
regard  it  as  part  of  a  zero  sum  game  in  an  atmosphere  of  confrontation.  On  the  contrary,  I
view it as a positive sum game, based upon close international cooperation and certainly not
on confrontation. The international role of a currency is a complex matter. A currency can be
used by different groups of economic agents for different purposes, as an anchor and reserve
currency on the official side, as an invoicing and payment currency for international trade, as
well as a currency of denomination for financial assets, on the private side.
BIS Review   81/1999
6
My  understanding  of  the  process  towards  internationalisation  of  the  euro  is  based  on  the
following observations:
í 
í 
í 
firstly the euro , as I said before, has the full legacy of the most credible currencies in
Europe, taking into account the fact that the European monetary convergence process
has been based upon a benchmarking principle. The euro is not starting from scratch
but from the solid soil of currencies having proved their solidity over time like the
franc, the DM, the guilder, and so forth;
secondly, the policy which is pursued by the European Central Bank is a policy of
stability, credibility, low inflation so that the euro will be an excellent store of value.
This  is  called  upon  us  by  the  Treaty.  It  is  clearly  the  will  of  the  European  people.
Only to give you an example of the support of the public opinion for a reliable euro:
according to a French poll, 95% of the population was in favour of a euro at least as
solid, reliable and strong as our previous “franc fort” national currency;
thirdly, the process of economic and financial globalisation, the trend of increase in
international trade calls in the long run for increased demand worldwide for official
reserves  and  for  highly  reliable  monetary  and  financial  instruments.  This  explains
why  the  progressive  internationalisation  of  the  euro  will,  in  my  eyes,  be  totally
non-confrontational but cooperative.
The exchange rate relationships of the euro area vis-à-vis key global currencies
As regards the exchange rate relationship vis-à-vis major currencies, I think the best for me
would  be  to  reiterate  the  position  of  the  Eurosystem  which  has  been  expressed  by  Wim
Duisenberg in the name of the full body of the Council of Governors of the Eurosystem:
“In  the  view  of  the  Governing  Council  the  major  economic  factor  behind  the  short-term
developments observed in the exchange markets is constituted by cyclical differences between
the euro area and the United States, which are expected to diminish over the course of this
year  and  thereafter.  The  euro  is  a  currency  firmly  based  on  internal  price  stability  and
therefore has a clear potential for a stronger external value.”
To sum up we have two main messages to global investors and savers: firstly, we pursue a
policy which is designed towards price stability and currency solidity in a steady medium and
long-term perspective; secondly, the euro has a significant potential for appreciation.
In conclusion, let me stress the following:
The international cooperation under the aegis, in particular, of the G7, has been very fruitful
regarding key issues dealing with the strengthening of the international financial architecture.
There  is  sometimes  too  much  emphasis  being  put,  in  my  view,  on  the  different  feelings  or
positions  that  appear  here  and  there.  What  I  think  more  important  is  the  fact  that  the
international community fully agrees on many key issues which are extensively mentioned in
the  Communiqué  of  G7  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors,  20 February  1999.
Other  fora  have  significantly  contributed  to  the  very  useful  exchange  of  views  on  ways  to
reform the international financial system. The Financial Stability Forum  is  making  progress
on  important  issues:  Highly  Leveraged  Institutions,  short-term  capital  flows  and  offshore
centres. Following the statement at the Summit of the Heads of Government of the G7, the
Forum  will  be  broadened.  I  am  very  happy  that  Hong  Kong  is  invited  to  participate  in  the
Forum’s next meeting.
7
BIS Review   81/1999
