Bank of Japan’s August report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 17 August 1999.
 The Bank’s view2
Japan’s  economy,  at  present,  has  stopped  deteriorating,  and  corporate  sentiment  has  seen  a  slight
improvement recently. However, clear signs of a self-sustained recovery in private demand have not
been observed yet.
With regard to final demand, business fixed investment has been on a downward trend. Recovery in
private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  on  the  whole.  Net  exports  (exports  minus  imports)  are
sluggish  at  present  due  to  an  increase  in  imports.  Meanwhile,  housing  investment  has  continued  to
recover, and public works have been rising.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  continued  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,
industrial production has stopped decreasing. In addition, corporate and consumer sentiment has seen
an improvement due to the effects of measures taken to restore the stability of Japan’s financial system
and the continued monetary easing by the Bank. The improvement in corporate sentiment, however,
has  not  necessarily  stimulated  business  activities,  because  firms  strongly  feel  that  they  have  excess
capacity  and  employees  and  their  profits  remain  weak.  Meanwhile,  the  improvement  in  consumer
sentiment is underpinning household expenditure even under the worsening employment and income
conditions, but is not strong enough to push up overall private consumption.
As for the outlook, with the progress in inventory adjustment gradually paving the way for a recovery
in production, improvements in the overall financial environment partly due to the monetary easing by
the Bank, along with a series of economic measures taken by the government, are expected to continue
underpinning  the  economy.  Moreover,  the  recovery  of  overseas  economies,  especially  of  Asian
economies, is likely to have a positive impact on domestic production. Nevertheless, under cautious
sales plans, firms are implementing further restructuring to improve their profitability. Although such
corporate restructuring is expected to improve productivity, it is likely, in the short run, to reduce fixed
investment and discourage household expenditure through the resulting deterioration in employment
and  income  conditions.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  still  difficult  to  expect  an  immediate  self-
sustained recovery in private demand. Overall economic developments require careful monitoring in
consideration of the above points. It is also important to promote structural reform in order to assure
the economy’s sustained growth in the medium term.
With regard to prices, import prices continue to rise due to the increase  in  international commodity
prices  such  as  crude  oil  prices.  Domestic  wholesale  prices  are  leveling  off  due  to  the  progress  in
inventory adjustment as well as an increase in prices of some products closely related to international
commodities, such as those of petroleum products. Consumer prices are also leveling out. On the other
hand, corporate service prices continue to decline. For a while, movements of overall prices are likely
to be flat, as import prices are rising and the decline in domestic commodity prices has come to a halt
reflecting  the  progress  in  inventory  adjustment.  However,  distinct  narrowing  in  the  output  gap  is
1  This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on August 13, 1999.
2  The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on August 13 as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 89/1999
unlikely for the time being even though the economy has stopped deteriorating, and wages continue to
decline. Thus, downward pressure on prices is expected to remain.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has stayed at nearly zero, and financial institutions have
been  confident  about  the  availability  of  overnight  funds.  Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  slightly
increased from the middle of June but then fell back, and have recently been steady. However, those
on  instruments  maturing  beyond  the  year-end  are  relatively  high  partly  due  to  market  participants’
concern over the Year 2000 problem.
The Japan premium has continued to be nearly zero.
Yields on long-term government bonds fell to the level of 1.6 percent in the middle of July, but have
slightly increased to 1.8-1.9 percent. The yield spread between government bonds and private bonds,
especially corporate bonds with relatively low credit ratings, has narrowed further.
Stock prices fell in late July against the background of the appreciation of the yen and the recent weak
tone in U.S. stock prices. The current level is around 17,000-17,500 yen.
The  amount  outstanding  of  funds in  the  call  money  market  has  remained  generally  stable  since  the
middle  of  June.  To  date,  this  has  not  led  to  any  difficulty  in  funds  settlement,  but  close  attention
should be paid to future market developments.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending attitude.
However,  constraint  that had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and  insufficient  capital
base  has  eased  considerably.  Under  these  circumstances,  major  banks  have  gradually  become  more
active than before in extending loans, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
However, credit demand for economic activities such as business fixed investment remains weak. In
addition,  firms’  moves  to  increase  their  on-hand  liquidity  have  settled  down.  As  a  result,  credit
demand in the private sector has continued to be weak, and thus private banks’ lending has remained
sluggish. Furthermore, the pace of issuance of corporate bonds and CP has generally been slowing.
Money stock (M2+CDs) has recently shown a year-to-year increase of over 4 percent partly due to an
increase in fiscal expenditure.
In this financial environment, credit conditions have eased somewhat.
The following continue to warrant careful monitoring: how actively investors will take risks; how far
private banks will ease their lending stance; and how these changes will affect economic activities.
BIS Review 89/1999
2
