Mr Stark discusses the role and prospects of the euro in an international context
Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Dr.  Jürgen  Stark,  to  the
European Institute in Washington on 26 April 1999.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I
More than three months have passed since the introduction of the euro. The transition from
the multiplicity of national monetary policies to the single monetary policy of the Eurosystem
was very successful on the whole. The fact that the transition passed off so smoothly was the
result  of  a  long  and  well-prepared  process -  entailing  a  great  deal  of  effort - and  of  the
excellent technical preparations made by the European institutions - in particular the ECB and
the national central banks involved.
Undoubtedly, the start of monetary union constitutes a historic step in the process of European
integration. But it will also have far-reaching external implications. It will constitute a major
change in the international financial system.
II
In order to be able to join EMU, most EU member states had to make profound monetary and
economic policy adjustments. Only those which met the four well-known convergence criteria
of the Maastricht Treaty were allowed to become a “euro country”.
As regards “nominal” convergence - that is the trends in inflation rates, (nominal) exchange
rates  and  long-term  interest  rates  -  considerable  progress  was  made  in  some  EU  countries.
Also,  measures  to  consolidate  public  households  were  introduced,  which  resulted  in  most
countries deficits being pushed below 3 % of GDP. Debt quotas were mainly lowered, even
though this process began only in the second half of the nineties and some countries started
from very high levels. Overall, 11 of the countries examined met the criteria for entry.
Although  improvements  were  also  made  with  regard  to  “real”  convergence,  marked
discrepancies and shortfalls still exist in some countries. For example, growth rates in the euro
area varied between 1 ½ % and 12 % last year. The lowest unemployment rate was just under
3 %, while the highest was almost 19 %.1
Efforts  must  therefore  be  stepped  up,  particularly  in  the  fields  of  fiscal,  economic  and
structural  policy,  in  order  to  create  an  economic  environment  in  which  the  considerable
growth potential of the euro area can be exploited. The aim must be to establish a sustainable
basis for a stable euro and, ultimately, for a successful monetary union.
It  is  the  stability  of  the  euro  and  the  success  of  EMU  which  will  ultimately  determine  the
international role of the new currency.
Ensuring  the  stability  of  the  euro  is,  of  course,  first  the  responsibility  of  monetary  policy,
which has been assigned to the Eurosystem since January 1. Incidentally, monetary policy is
                                                     
1 European Commission, Economic Forecasts Spring 1999.
1
BIS Review   44/1999
also  making  the  most  valuable  contribution  to  growth  and  employment  by  ensuring  price
stability.
To enable the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) to fulfil its task, its independence
was enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty (Article 107). Neither the ECB, nor a national central
bank, nor any member  of  their  decision-making  bodies  is  allowed  to  take  instructions  from
any government. Similarly, the governments of the member states shall not seek to exert any
influence  on  monetary  policy.  In  the  last  months,  this  second  part  of  the  article  of
independence was neglected by some parties.
The signatories of the Maastricht Treaty have, however, and rightly so, acknowledged that a
“depoliticised”  money  can  only  be  brought  about,  if  all  policy  areas  duly  respect  the
independence of the Central Bank.
At the beginning of this month, the Governing Council of the ECB - fully independently and
with total responsibility for price stability - lowered the interest rate for the main refinancing
operations from 3.0 % to 2.5 %. This decision was in line with the two pillars of its strategy
and  was  taken  with  a  view  to  the  future.  It  was  generally  welcomed.  However,  the  ECB
Governing Council made it clear that those responsible for other policy areas are now even
more obliged to take the necessary steps.
III
The international role that the euro will play in the future will be determined particularly by
the policies pursued in the euro countries. It will hinge crucially on the euro’s stability and the
success of EMU and on the markets’ confidence in the new currency.
I  should  like  to  stress  at  this  juncture  that  it  was  never  intended  to  establish  the  euro  as  a
“counterweight” to the dollar - although some commentators saw it like that.
The  relationship  of  the  European  currencies  to  the  US dollar  had  previously  depended,  in
particular, on the size and openness of the respective economic area, the breadth and depth of
the financial market, and the preferences of international investors. In the case of the D-Mark
it was certainly the profound confidence of market participants in the stability of the German
currency  that  established  is  as  the  second  most  important  reserve  and  investment  currency
after the US dollar.
As  far  as  the  size  and  openness  of  the  economic  area  and  the  growing  integration  of  the
financial  market  alone  is  concerned,  the  euro  no  doubt  has  the  potential  to  become  more
important  than  all  of  the  single  currencies  of  the  euro  area  put  together.  Expectations  were
therefore very high among politicians, and also among a number of academics, even before
the start of monetary union. Those expectations have presumably even been reinforced by the
advance confidence  the  euro  had  been  given  on  the  basis  of  the  solid  and  stability-oriented
institutional framework for monetary policy. It was assumed that
BIS Review   44/1999
2
•  there would be significant portfolio shifts in the euro area,
•  that  international  investors  would  quickly  add  euro-denominated  securities  to  their
portfolios, and
•  that  central  banks  all  over  the  world  would  diversify  their  foreign  reserves  to  a  greater
extent in favour of the euro.
Instead, a certain disillusionment has emerged since the beginning of this year. However, very
little time has elapsed since the introduction of the euro. Experience shows that the structure
of international financial markets changes only very slowly. It is certainly too early to make a
final assessment. We shall have to wait and see how things develop.
At present, the dollar is strong, while the euro has tended to decline in value since the start of
monetary union. However, I do not see any reason to dramatise this. For example, the current
exchange  rate  of  the  D-Mark  against  the  US dollar  is  almost  identical  with  its  rate  in  the
spring of last year.
When  reasons  for  the  weakening  of  the  euro  are  sought,  particularly  three  factors  are
mentioned:
Firstly,  the  so  far  robust  state  of  economic  activity  in  the  United  States,  and  secondly -  in
contrast to this - the slowdown of economic growth in continental Europe.
The  resultant  trends  in  interest  rates  have  not  failed  to  have  an  impact  on  the  relationship
between the euro and the dollar.
Thirdly,  the  euro  has  recently  weakened  further  due  to  the  situation  in  Kosovo,  while  the
dollar established itself even more as a safe-haven.
There is yet another hypothesis about the recent performance of the euro:
Many investors are currently avoiding the euro area, because it obviously seems less attractive
to them. Some analysts argue that this has something to do with the uncertainties about fiscal,
economic and structural policy strategies particularly in the larger economies of the euro area.
Their main question therefore is: does the euro lack political confidence?
IV
It is certainly not easy to establish a new currency in the current international environment. In
this  context,  I  would  like  to  give  particular  emphasis  to  the  fact  that  the  European  Central
Bank  is  a  new  institution.  In  my  opinion,  this  makes  it  all  the  more  important  to  boost
confidence in the euro and the Eurosystem. A stable euro and confidence in its stability are in
Europe’s proper interest.
What - apart from ESCB-independence - is required to guarantee a stable European currency
and the lasting success of EMU?
The  euro  countries  must  not  be  content  with  the  success  hitherto  achieved  in  terms  of
convergence. Monetary stability and the promotion of growth and employment must be seen
as a lasting challenge. Greater efforts are required, in particular, in order to
3
BIS Review   44/1999
•  overcome certain signs of flagging in budgetary consolidation,
•  and push ahead with the urgently needed structural reforms including the establishment of a
tax framework that is conducive to growth.
Only if all the member states pursue stability-oriented and consistent financial, economic and
structural policies will the euro be able to produce its positive effects on Europe’s economies.
Incidentally,  sound  public  finances  and  more  flexible  structures  in  the  European  economies
are required not just because of the euro. They are also necessary in order to
•  reduce  government  activities  -  which  in  some  areas  are  exaggerated  -  and  foster  private
initiative,
•  prevent future generations from being burdened excessively
•  and increase the impact of growth on lowering unemployment.
A few figures may illustrate this. On average, in the euro countries last year,
•  the government spending ratio was almost 49 % of GDP,
•  the debt level reached just over 73 % of GDP
•  and the taxes and social security ratio came to almost 44 % of GDP.2
Only a successful monetary union and a stable euro will benefit our international partners, too.
Europe’s responsibility is not only limited to its own house, but relates to the global economy
and the international financial system as well.
V
I am sure that in the medium term European monetary union will influence the international
financial  markets  significantly.  Monetary  union  has  already  created  one  of  the  three  largest
financial  markets  in  the  world  and  it  will  create  a  liquid  financial  market  offering  a
considerably broader range of investment and financing instruments than is currently available
in Europe’s still fragmented financial market place.
The introduction of the euro will result in
•  a fundamental change in European money, bond and equity markets
•  higher transparency of financial markets
•  intensified competition among financial institutions operating in Europe
•  further promotion of technological changes and deregulation.
                                                     
2 European Commission, Economic Forecasts Spring 1999.
BIS Review   44/1999
4
Instead of saying that the euro will compete with the US dollar it is – in my view – likely that
the euro will, as the outcome of competition, increasingly complement the dollar as a reserve
currency.
The euro will be used more extensively and the markets for financial assets denominated in
euro  will  be  greater  in  depth  and  breadth  than  compared  with  the  multiple  European
currencies. This will provide incentives for countries to diversify their reserve holdings to be
more in line with the currency composition of their trade and financial transactions.
VI
Finally, I would like to deal briefly with the question whether the euro might serve as a model
for other regions. Two aspects seem important to me in this respect:
Firstly,  the  establishment  of  the  euro  reflects  over  40  years  of  progress  in  strengthening
economic, monetary and political ties in Europe. This process - which began as early as 1957
when the Treaty of Rome was signed - was difficult and not free from setbacks. I think that
the high degree of convergence which had been reached in the euro countries before the single
currency  was  introduced  was  important  and  necessary.  But  in  the  end  each  country  has  to
decide for itself what the “best way” is. The decision to adopt a single currency is inevitably a
political one.
Secondly, anyone considering any form of currency pegging and, even more, a monetary union
must,  above  all,  be  fully  aware  of  the  consequences.  Monetary  union  means  relinquishing
national sovereignty over internal and external monetary policy. Interest rate differentials and
currency fluctuations, usually devices for readjusting economic competitiveness in the event
of asymmetric shocks, have to be replaced by more market flexibility. Only with the needed
structural flexibility may the potential fruit of a common and stable currency be reaped.
It is to be hoped for Europe’s sake that the euro will become a catalyst for structural reforms. I
am sure that, if this is the case, the euro will find its proper place in the international monetary
system.
5
BIS Review   44/1999
