Mr Greenspan testifies on the state of the US economy
Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,
Mr Alan  Greenspan,  before  the  Committee  on  Ways  and  Means  of  the  US  House  of
Representatives on 20/1/99.
The  American  economy  through  year-end  continued  to  perform  in  an  outstanding  manner.
Economic growth remained solid, and financial markets, after freezing up temporarily following
the Russian default, are again channeling an ample flow of capital to businesses and households.
Labor  markets  have  remained  quite  tight,  but,  to  date,  this  has  failed  to  ignite  the  inflationary
pressures that many had feared.
To  be  sure,  there  is  decided  softness  in  a  number  of  manufacturing  industries  as  weakness  in
many foreign economies has reduced demand for US exports and intensified competition from
imports. Moreover, underutilized production capacity and pressure on domestic profit margins,
especially among manufacturers, are likely to rein in the rapid growth of new capital investment.
With corporations already relying increasingly on borrowing to finance capital investment, any
evidence  of  a  marked  slowing  in  corporate  cash  flow  is  likely  to  induce  a  relatively  prompt
review of capital budgets.
The  situation  in  Brazil  and  its  potential  for  spilling  over  to  reduce  demand  in  other  emerging
market economies also constitute a possible source of downside risk for demand in the United
States.  So  far,  markets  seem  to  have  reacted  reasonably  well  to  the  decisions  by  the  Brazilian
authorities to float their currency and redouble efforts at fiscal discipline. But follow through in
reducing budget imbalances and in containing the effects on inflation of the drop in value of the
currency  will  be  needed  to  bolster  confidence  and  to  limit  the  potential  for  contagion  to  the
financial  markets  and  economies  of  Brazil’s  important  trading  partners,  including  the  United
States.
While there are risks going forward, to date domestic demand, and hence employment and output
in the United States, certainly has remained vigorous. Though the pace of economic expansion is
widely expected to moderate as 1999 unfolds, signs of an appreciable slowdown as yet remain
scant.
But to assess the economic outlook properly, we need to reach beyond the mere description of
America’s sparkling economic performance of eight years of record peacetime expansion to seek
a deeper understanding of the forces that have produced it. I want to take a few moments this
morning to discuss one key element behind our current prosperity: the rise in the value markets
place on the capital assets of US businesses.  Lower  inflation,  greater  competitiveness,  and  the
flexibility and adaptability of our businesses have enabled them to take advantage of a rapid pace
of technological change to make our capital stock more productive and profitable. I will argue
that the process of recognizing  this  greater  value  has  produced  capital  gains  in  equity  markets
that have lowered the cost of investment in new plant and equipment and spurred consumption.
But, while asset values are very important to the economy and so must be carefully monitored
and assessed by the Federal Reserve,  they  are  not  themselves  a  target  of  monetary  policy.  We
need  to  react  to  changes  in  financial  markets,  as  we  did  this  fall,  but  our  objective  is  the
maximum sustainable growth of the US economy, not particular levels of asset prices.
As I have testified before the Congress many times, I believe, at root, the remarkable generation
of capital gains of recent years has resulted from the dramatic fall in inflation expectations and
BIS Review   7/1999
– 2 –
associated risk premiums, and broad advances  in  a  wide  variety  of  technologies  that  produced
critical synergies in the 1990s.
Capital investment, especially in high-tech equipment, has accelerated dramatically since 1993,
presumably  reflecting  a  perception  on  the  part  of  businesses  that  the  application  of  these
emerging technological synergies would engender a significant increase in rates of return on new
investment.
Indeed, some calculations support that perception. They suggest that the rate of return on capital
facilities put in place during recent years has, in fact, moved up markedly. In part this may result
from improved capital productivity – that is, the efficiency of the capital stock. In addition, we
may  be  witnessing  some  payoffs  from  improved  organizational  and  managerial  efficiencies  of
US businesses and from the greater education – in school and on the job – that US workers have
acquired  to  keep  pace  with  the  new  technology.  All  these  factors  have  been  reflected  in  an
acceleration of labor productivity growth.
Parenthetically, improved productivity probably explains why the American economy has done
so well despite our oft-cited subnormal national saving rate. The profitability of investment here
has attracted saving from abroad, an attraction that has enabled us to finance a current account
deficit  while  maintaining  a  strong  dollar.  Clearly,  we  use  both  domestic  saving  and  imported
financial capital in a highly efficient manner, apparently more efficiently than many, if not most,
other major industrial countries.
While discussions of consumer spending often continue to emphasize current income from labor
and  capital  as  the  prime  sources  of  funds,  during  the  1990s,  capital  gains,  which  reflect  the
valuation  of  expected  future  incomes,  have  taken  on  a  more  prominent  role  in  driving  our
economy.
The steep uptrend in asset values of recent years has had important effects on virtually all areas
of  our  economy,  but  perhaps  most  significantly  on  household  behavior.  It  can  be  seen  most
clearly  in  the  measured  personal  saving  rate,  which  has  declined  from  almost  6%  in  1992  to
effectively zero today.
Arguably, the average household does not perceive that its saving has fallen off since 1992. In
fact, the net worth of the average household has increased by nearly 50% since the end of 1992,
well  in  excess  of  the  gains  of  the  previous  six  years.  Households  have  been  accumulating
resources for retirement or for a rainy day, despite very low measured saving rates.
The  resolution  of  this  seeming  dilemma  illustrates  the  growing  role  of  rising  asset  values  in
supporting personal consumption expenditures in recent years. It also illustrates the importance
when interpreting our official statistics of taking account of how they deal with changes in asset
values.
With regard first to the statistical issues, capital gains themselves are not counted as income, but
some  transactions  resulting  from  capital  gains  reduce  disposable  household  income  as  we
measure it, while having no effect on consumption. As a consequence, as capital gains and these
associated  transactions  mount,  published  saving  rates  are  decreased.  For  example,  reported
personal income is reduced when corporations cut back  payments  into  defined-benefit  pension
plans  owing  to  higher  equity  prices;  however,  such  reductions  do  not  diminish  anticipated
retirement income and thus should not lower consumption. And reported disposable income is
decreased when households pay taxes on capital gains realizations that would not have been so
BIS Review   7/1999
– 3 –
large in less ebullient markets. However, capital gains tax payments also are highly unlikely to be
associated with lower spending because the cash realized from the sale of the asset exceeds the
tax,  and  in  most  cases  the  typical  household  presumably  does  not  perceive  this  transaction  as
reducing available income or financial resources. Together these two effects probably account for
an appreciable portion of the reduction in the reported saving rate.
But  beyond  these  statistical  issues,  there  is  little  doubt  that  capital  gains  have  increased
consumption relative to income from current production over recent years. Economists have long
recognized  a  “wealth  effect”  –  a  tendency  for  consumption  to  rise  by  a  fraction  of  the  capital
gains  on  existing  assets  owned  by  households  –  though  the  magnitude  of  this  effect  remains
difficult to estimate accurately. We have some evidence from recent years that all or most of the
decline in the saving rate is accounted for by the upper income quintile where the capital gains
have  disproportionately  accrued,  which  suggests  that  the  wealth  effect  has  been  real  and
significant.  Thus,  all  else  equal,  a  flattening  of  stock  prices  would  likely  slow  the  growth  of
spending, and a decline  in  equity  values,  especially  a  severe  one,  could  lead  to  a  considerable
weakening of consumer demand.
Some  moderation  in  economic  growth,  however,  might  be  required  to  sustain  the  expansion.
Through  the  end  of  1998,  the  economy  continued  to  grow  more  rapidly  than  can  be  currently
accommodated  on  an  ongoing  basis,  even  with  higher,  technology-driven  productivity  growth.
Growth  has  continued  to  shrink  the  pool  of  workers  willing  to  work  but  without  jobs.  While
higher productivity has helped to keep labor cost increases in check, it cannot be expected to do
so indefinitely in ever tighter labor markets.
Despite  brisk  demand  and  improved  productivity  growth,  corporate  profits  have  sagged  over
recent quarters. This is attributable in part to some acceleration in labor compensation, but other
factors  have  also  been  pressing,  especially  intensified  competition  and  lower  prices  facing  our
exporters and those industries competing with imports. In these circumstances, businesses will
feel under considerable pressure to preserve profit margins should labor costs accelerate further,
or should the falling prices of commodity inputs, like oil, turn around. But, to date, businesses’
evident  pricing  power  has  been  scant.  Either  that  would  change  and  inflation  could  begin  to
mount or, if costs could not be recouped, capital outlays might well be cut back.
The recent behavior of profits also underlines the unusual nature of the rebound in equity prices
and the possibility that the recent performance of the equity markets will have difficulty in being
sustained.  The  level  of  equity  prices  would  appear  to  envision  substantially  greater  growth  of
profits than has been experienced of late.
Moreover, the impressive capital gains of recent years would seem also to rest on a perception of
relatively low risk in corporate ownership. Risk aversion and uncertainty rose sharply over the
late  summer  and  fall  of  1998  following  the  Russian  default  in  mid-August,  as  evidenced  by
widening  spreads  among  yields  on  debt  of  differing  credit  qualities  and  liquidity.  The  rise  in
uncertainty increased the discounting of claims on future incomes, and that reduced stock market
prices even as the long-term earnings growth expectations of security analysts continued to rise.
As risk aversion subsided after mid-October, stock prices returned to record levels.
Markets have doubtless stabilized significantly after the turbulence of last fall but they remain
fragile,  as  the  repercussions  of  the  recent  Brazilian  devaluation  attest.  Moreover,  our  chronic
current  account  deficit  has  widened  significantly,  in  part  reflecting  the  strength  of  domestic
demand that has accompanied the further accumulation of capital gains. The continued increase
in our net external debt and its growing servicing costs clearly are not sustainable indefinitely.
BIS Review   7/1999
– 4 –
In  light  of  the  importance  of  financial  markets  in  the  economy,  and  of  the  volatility  and
vulnerability  in  financial  asset  prices  more  generally,  policymakers  must  continue  to  pay
particular  attention  to  these  markets.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  easing  last  fall  responded  to  an
abrupt stringency in financial markets and the effects that the consequent increased risk aversion
was likely to have  on  economic  activity  going  forward.  We  were  particularly  concerned  about
higher  costs  and  disrupted  financing  in  debt  markets,  where  much  of  consumption  and
investment  is  funded.  We  were  not  attempting  to  prop  up  equity  prices,  nor  did  we  plan  to
continue to ease rates until equity prices recovered, as some have erroneously inferred.
This has not been, and is not now, our policy or intent. As I have discussed earlier, movements in
equity prices can play an important role in the economy, which the central bank must take into
account. And we may question from time to time whether asset prices may not embody a more
optimistic outlook than seems reasonable, or what the consequences might be of a further rise in
those prices followed by a steep decline. But many other forces also drive our economy, and it is
the performance of the entire economy that forms our objectives and shapes our actions.
Nonetheless,  in  the  current  state  of  financial  markets,  policymakers  are  going  to  have  to  be
particularly  wary  of  actions  that  unnecessarily  sow  uncertainties,  undermine  confidence,  and
interfere  with  the  efficient  allocation  of  capital  on  which  our  economic  prosperity  and  asset
values rest. It is important not to undermine the highly sensitive ongoing process of reallocation
of capital from less to more productive uses. For productivity and standards of living to grow,
not only must capital raised in markets be allocated efficiently, but internal cash flow, including
the depreciation charges from the existing capital stock, must be continuously directed to their
most profitable uses. It is this continuous churning, this so-called creative destruction, that has
become so essential to the effective deployment of advanced technologies by this country over
recent  decades.  In  this  regard,  drift  toward  protectionist  trade  policies,  which  are  always  so
difficult to reverse, is a much greater threat than is generally understood.
It  is  well  known  that  erecting  barriers  to  the  free  flow  of  goods  and  services  across  national
borders undermines the division of labor and standards of living by impeding the adjustment of
the  capital  stock  to  its  most  productive  uses.  Not  so  well  understood,  in  my  judgment,  is  the
impact that fear of growing protectionism would have on profit expectations, and hence on the
current values of  capital  assets.  Protectionism  was  a  threat  to  standards  of  living  when  capital
asset values were low relative to income. It becomes particularly pernicious in an environment,
such as today’s, when that is no longer the case.
In sum, it has been the ability of our flexible and innovative businesses and workforce that has
enabled  the  United  States  to  take  full  advantage  of  emerging  technologies  to  produce  greater
growth and higher asset values. Policy has facilitated this process by containing inflation and by
promoting  competitiveness  through  deregulation  and  an  open  global  trading  system.  Our  task
going  forward  –  at  the  Federal  Reserve  as  well  as  in  the  Congress  and  Administration  –  is  to
sustain  and  strengthen  these  policies,  which  in  turn  have  sustained  and  strengthened  our  now
record peacetime economic expansion.
 BIS Review   7/1999
