Mr Trichet presents the Annual Report of the Bank of France
Address by Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Bank of France before the President of the French
Republic, Senate and National Assembly on the occasion of the presentation of the Annual Report, in
Paris on 21/5/99.
I am honoured to present you with the report on the operations of the Banque de France, monetary
policy  and  the  prospects  for  it,  as  required  by  law.  As  is  the  custom,  I  also  submit  herewith  the
Monetary Policy Council’s comments on the events of the past year, which was marked by the choice
of  the  European  Union  Member  States  authorized  to  participate  in  Monetary  Union  and  by  the
creation on 1 June 1998 of the European System of Central Banks.
The upturn in growth that started in 1997 accelerated in 1998. Annual average GDP growth stood at
3.2%, after 2.3% in 1997 and 1.6% in 1996. In 1998, the expansion was fuelled by vigorous domestic
demand, particularly household consumption. Furthermore, total investment, which had stagnated in
1997, posted a dynamic increase in 1998. By contrast, foreign trade made a negative contribution to
GDP  growth  owing  to  the  deterioration  in  the  international  environment.  Although  France  was
comparatively  less  severely  hit  by  the  spread  of  the  emerging  country  crisis,  the  economy  was
affected by weaker demand from our main European trading partners.
Thanks to faster growth, the French economy created 300,000 jobs in the non-farm market sector in
1998, compared with 196,000 in 1997. The unemployment rate fell from 12.2% to 11.5% from the
end of one year to the next.
Against the backdrop of quickening growth, inflation was brought further under control. The year-on-
year rise in consumer prices stood at 0.3% in December 1998, after 1.1% in 1997, and thus met the
objective of less than 2% set by the Monetary Policy Council. This was the lowest rate of inflation
recorded since 1954. One of the main factors in the slowdown in price rises was the fall in the price of
oil  and  other  commodities.  “Underlying”  inflation,  which  reflects  the  fundamental  trends  in  the
economy, showed a slightly more sustained progression than the consumer price index. According to
France’s National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies, INSEE, it posted a year-on-year rise of
1.1% in December 1998, the same as in December 1997.
According to the harmonized index of consumer prices (HICP), which is the measure of inflation in
the  euro  area,  France  is  one  of  the  three  best-performing  countries  in  terms  of  inflation:  French
inflation stood at 0.7% as an annual average in 1998, compared with 1.1% for the euro area.
In the course of 1998, the franc remained constantly above its central rates vis-à-vis the other most
credible currencies of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism. The goal of a stable external value
for the franc—which was the external intermediate objective of French monetary policy over the last
five years—was thus achieved.
This  went  hand  in  hand  with  the  maintenance  of  the  competitiveness  of  the  French  economy.  The
current account surplus totalled FRF 236 billion in 1998, or 2.8% of GDP, comparable to the level
recorded in 1997.
With  regard  to  monetary  and  financial  developments,  and  particularly  growth  in  monetary
aggregates—which  constitutes  the  internal  intermediate  objective  of  French  monetary  policy—,  the
means of payment covered by M1 posted a year-on-year rise of 3.1% in December 1998, after 6.5% in
December 1997. Sight deposits paying regulated rates of interest included in M2 –M1 showed a year-
on-year increase of 5.7% in December  1998,  sharply  down  on  the  9.2%  recorded  at  the  end  of  the
previous  year.  Similarly,  M2  progressed  by  4.3%,  less  than  the  7.8%  rise  recorded  in  1997.  The
aggregate M3–M2, which covers liquid investments paying market rates of interest, stabilized in 1998
1
BIS Review   62/1999
with a 0.6% decline after the 8.2% drop recorded in 1997. This was mainly due to growth in money
market  UCITS,  which  rose  by  4.1%  after  declining  by  11.3%  the  previous  year.  The  year-on-year
increase  in  M3  was  2.7%,  compared  with  2.0%  in  December  1997.  Growth  in  investment  in
contractual savings products recorded in the P1 investment aggregate maintained a sustained pace in
1998, and in all M3+P1 showed a year-on-year progression of 4.0%, against 5.1% in December 1997.
Total  domestic  debt  posted  a  year-on-year  rise  of  3.4%  at  the  end  of  December.  It  had  shown  an
increase of 3.7% in December 1997. Financing raised on the domestic markets progressed vigorously,
with the year-on-year advance standing at 9.2% in December 1998, after 6.6% a year earlier.
Against  a  background  marked  by  uncertainty  surrounding  the  international  environment  and  by
prospects  of  a  euro  area-wide  slowdown  in  activity,  on  3  December  1998  the  Monetary  Policy
Council of the Banque de France, in close dialogue with the other members of the European System
of Central Banks (ESCB), decided to cut its main key rate, which had been set at 3.30% since October
1997, to 3.0%.
This decision was inspired by three considerations:
  the need to ensure the cohesion of the euro area in the best possible conditions;
the need to organize the convergence of short-term rates towards the lowest rates in the area, i.e.
in particular French rates;
the need to choose the level of key rates that was most appropriate at the time of entry into the
euro.
This decision  constituted  a  further  stage  in  the  process  leading  to  the  transfer  of  responsibility  for
monetary  policy  to  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  as  of  1  January  1999.  In  fact,  the  rate
applying to the first main refinancing operations of the ESCB was set at 3% on 22 December 1998 by
the Governing Council of the ECB.
After five years of independent conduct of monetary policy, the Banque de France has earned a high
degree of confidence, as witnessed by the solidity of the franc and the relative level of French long-
term interest rates. The Bank is proud to have been able to transmit this confidence to the euro, along
with other central banks forming the core of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Nineteen ninety eight was a successful year for European integration: the remarkable convergence of
European  economies  enabled  the  historic  decision  by  heads  of  state  and  government  to  commit
eleven countries to the road to the euro. The date of 4 January 1999 marked a first technical success
in the changeover from national currencies to the euro. The major challenge now facing the euro area
as a whole is to permanently guarantee good economic and financial performances. It is no longer a
question of victoriously overcoming an obstacle, but of efficiently managing the monetary, fiscal and
structural  areas  over  the  long  term.  This  is  naturally  indispensable  in  order  to  ensure  cohesion,
stability, prosperity and consequently a reduction in unemployment in the euro area, i.e. in an area
with 291 million inhabitants. And this is also a contribution necessary for the stability and prosperity
of the world economy, within which Europe will play a central role, like the United States.
Monetary policy
The  euro  should  be  at  least  as  solid  and  stable  as  the  best  currencies  of  the  European  Union  and
therefore at least as solid and stable as the French franc in the past. This is what inspires the policy of
the European System of Central Banks, the European Central Bank and its Governing Council. This
is what is required by the Treaty and also by our fellow citizens, who want a new currency that is at
least as solid as the French franc. And it is indispensable in order to preserve the competitiveness of
the European economy, ensure low medium- and long-term  market  interest  rates  on  a  lasting  basis
and therefore favour growth, job creation and the fight against unemployment.
BIS Review   62/1999
2
The stability-oriented monetary policy of the European Central Bank and of the European System of
Central Banks is guaranteed by their independence, which is enshrined in the Treaty. It is buttressed
by the support of European public opinion which, like French public opinion, is deeply attached to
the stability of the currency. In the final analysis, an independent institution is always accountable to
the public.
In a world monetary and financial system characterized by totally free capital flows, confidence is the
most  precious  asset:  the  confidence  that  we  inspire  in  economic  agents  and  French,  European  and
international investors; and the confidence with which we are credited  today,  tomorrow  and  in  the
future. The independent Banque de France has over the last six years shown great determination in
helping to ensure that the euro inherited as much confidence as possible at its birth. This legacy of
confidence is in good hands.
Fiscal policy
In the field of European fiscal policy, the Monetary Policy Council draws attention to the following
three points.
–  First, it remains essential that the mutual surveillance by euro area governments of national fiscal
policies, within the framework of strict compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact, function
smoothly. The European Union does not have a significant federal budget for economic policy—
the European budget only represents 1.27% of Union GDP. Therefore, all the national budgets of
the Member States combined function as the Union’ s budget. The preservation of confidence in
the  euro,  and  consequently  the  prosperity,  growth  and  creation  of  jobs  in  the  euro  area,  will
depend on the quality of fiscal surveillance throughout the area.
–  Second,  by  adopting  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  each  individual  European  country,  and  not
just the European Union, set itself the medium-term objective of achieving public finances “close
to balance or in surplus”. The Monetary Policy Council emphasizes this point, which is essential
for  the  stability  of  the  single  currency  and  is  necessary  to  favour  growth,  job  creation  and  the
fight against unemployment. One of the difficulties encountered by Europe, as by France, is that
public opinion is not yet entirely convinced. However, four simple arguments form the basis of
this  recommendation:  preserve,  thanks  to  the  confidence  of  investors,  low  medium-  and  long-
term  market  interest  rates,  generate  the  financial  resources  necessary  for  productive  sector
investment,  strengthen  the  confidence  of  the  personal  sector  and  bolster  that  of  the  corporate
sector. It should be added that all Monetary Union member countries have to have budgets that
are  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus,  precisely  in  order  to  allow  public  finances  to  act,  where
necessary,  as  “automatic  stabilizers”  when  economic  conditions  deteriorate.  This  point  is
essential,  most  particularly  in  the  event  of  “asymmetric  shocks”,  i.e.  particular  economic
difficulties affecting one member country, but not the others.
–  Last, as it has done constantly in recent years, the Monetary Policy Council calls attention to the
need  to  gradually  reduce  the  ratio  of  public  expenditure  to  GDP.  According  to  OECD
methodology,  in  France  public  spending  amounts  to  54.2%  of  GDP,  well  above  the  euro-area
average  of  48.7%  and  the  Group  of  Seven  leading  industrialized  countries  average  of  38.1%.
Bringing this ratio back below 50% is a primary objective, even though it is timid in comparison
with the performances of France’s partners. This greater rectitude in the management of public
finances is a vital condition of competitiveness, growth and the development of employment in
France.  In  this  respect,  one  may  note  that  the  policy  mix  in  the  United  States  is  based  on  the
conviction that the resolute policy of public deficit reduction has been one of the main engines of
the vigorous growth enjoyed by the US for many years.
Structural reform
3
BIS Review   62/1999
The effectiveness of economic policies is not simply the result of the right mix of fiscal and monetary
policy. Structural policies themselves have a major part to play. This is  particularly  true  in  France
and throughout the euro area, where around three quarters of unemployment is structural.
As with the level of public expenditure, European public opinion is again not sufficiently convinced
that mass unemployment is very largely the unfortunate result of structural defects. When the public
is convinced, it is likely that the problem will be easier to resolve since European leaders will then
more readily find the support essential for the successful completion of reforms that as a rule are hard
to implement.
The enhanced coordination between economic policies, decided at the end of 1997 by the European
Council meeting in Luxembourg, relates in particular to  “the  surveillance  of  the  structural  policies
implemented  by  the  Member  States”.  This  coordination  should  make  it  possible  to  identify  and
promote  the  best  measures  in  the  fields  of  education  and  training,  the  labour  market,  welfare
protection, etc.
The Monetary Policy Council readily suggests implementing three principles of action for structural
reform  in  the  euro  area.  These  would  lead  all  euro-area  countries  to  introduce  at  home  reforms
experimented in another economy of the area that meet the following three criteria: first, they are the
subject  of  a  multipartisan  consensus;  second,  they  have  been  implemented  on  the  basis  of  an
agreement between the social partners; third, they have actually helped create jobs. The Council does
not doubt the fact that France, like all the economies of the euro area, could benefit greatly from the
extension of such consensual and effective reforms.
The competitiveness of the economy
Last,  as  it  has  done  in  each  of  the  previous  years,  the  Monetary  Policy  Council  emphasizes  the
importance of cost containment in the economy and the need to provide an environment that favours
the  competitiveness  of  businesses.  In  Europe,  before  the  single  currency,  any  poorly  conducted
national economic policy was swiftly and severely punished by depreciation of the currency on the
foreign exchange markets and rises in market interest rates. With the creation of the single currency,
these indicators have disappeared along with the swiftly applied sanctions associated with them. In
the  new  euro  area,  any  economic  policy  errors  leading  to  lost  competitiveness  would  result,  more
slowly and insidiously, in weaker growth and job creation. For this reason, even more so than in the
past,  unit  production  costs  and  more  generally  the  quality  of  the  competitive  environment  of
businesses need to be very closely monitored.
The reason why we emphasize the importance of competitiveness indicators is therefore not only that
cost containment is a necessary condition for low inflation. It also, and primarily, lies in the fact that
in the European economy of today, which is governed by complete freedom of choice for consumers
and complete freedom for businesses to choose where to invest, jobs will be created preferentially in
economies that manage to contain their unit production costs and offer an environment that is as
favourable as possible to business competitiveness.
BIS Review   62/1999
4
