Mr Schieber looks at the significance of the euro for Germany and the Bundesbank
Speech by Mr Helmut Schieber, a Member of the Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the
Euro-Forum hosted by the Club de Banqueros, Mexico, on 10 March 1999.
- I -
The  entry  of  eleven  countries  into  Stage  Three  of  European  monetary  union  on  January  1,
1999 has introduced a new era of monetary policy in Europe. Germany is one of the initial
participants  and  has,  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  subordinated  itself  –  abdicating  a
sovereign right in the process – to the single monetary policy of a supranational central bank.
In the following, I will look at the opportunities as well as the problems and risks of monetary
union  from  the  German  point  of  view,  and  especially  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
Bundesbank.
- II -
The decision to participate in European monetary union was especially difficult for Germany.
On the one hand, the European unification process has had Germany’s broad political support
since the end of World War II. The integration successes achieved in Europe since the 1950s
were mainly in the economic sector. From the development of the European Coal and Steel
Community in 1951 to the founding of the European Economic Community and the creation
of the single market to the establishment of the European Monetary System and the signing of
the Maastricht Treaty, Germany has always been a motor of European union.
On  the  other  hand,  Germany  found  it  very  difficult  to  part  with  the  Deutsche  Mark.  The
Deutsche Mark was a symbol of the “economic miracle” of the post-war era and of Germany’s
self-image as a nation. Germany’s increasing importance in Europe and the world is reflected
in particular by the ascent of the Deutsche Mark to the second most important international
reserve, transaction and investment currency after the US dollar. This explains the particularly
critical dialogue among politicians, in public as well as in business and finance in Germany,
concerning the path to EMU laid down by the EC Treaty. The debate centred around concerns
that  monetary  stability  would  be  jeopardised.  Stability  ranks  extremely  high  in  Germany’s
order  of  priorities,  with  hyperinflation  having  wiped  out  the  currency  twice  this  century,
followed by currency reforms and their horrible political, social and economic consequences.
Against  this  background,  the  debate  on  economic  and  fiscal  convergence  and  the  group  of
participating countries was especially heated in Germany.
- III -
Now,  a  good  two  months  after  the  changeover  to  the  euro,  initial  experience  with  the  new
currency  in  the  international  financial  markets  can  be  evaluated.  The  changeover  to  Stage
Three  of  EMU,  which  posed  an  extraordinary  technical  and  operational  challenge  to  all
financial  market  participants,  was  an  unqualified  success.  Despite  the  technically  complex
task at hand, there were no serious malfunctions. Much to the relief of the financial market
participants, the convergence of interest and exchange rates took place even before the euro
was launched. The speculative attacks against the euro which many people were afraid would
1
BIS Review   29/1999
happen did not come to pass. The money market rates converged towards the low level of the
core  countries,  which  was  set  by  means  of  the  coordinated  interest  rate  reduction  by  the
central banks of the Eurosystem in December 1998. All in all, the smooth transition from the
national currencies to the euro can be regarded as a sign of the high quality of the preparations
made  by  the  central  banks  and  the  private  financial  market  participants  –  and  as  public
recognition of the hitherto successful convergence process of the partner countries.
- IV -
Confidence in the role and the work of the ECB is rising within the German population. The
decision  to  locate  the  European  Central  Bank  in  Frankfurt  and  the  composition  of  the
Governing  Council  with  Wim  Duisenberg  as  President  stand  for  a  tradition  of  stability-
oriented monetary policy. After all, the institutional regulatory system of the Eurosystem was
modelled on that of the Bundesbank. The establishment of an independent European System
of  Central  Banks  unmistakably  dedicated  to  the  goal  of  price  stability  was  of  the  utmost
importance  for  German  residents  and  politicians.  Like  the  Bundesbank  Act,  the  Maastricht
Treaty only envisages supporting the general economic policy of member states provided this
does not prejudice the objective of price stability.
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  thoroughly  discussed  its  monetary  policy  approach
and  subsequently  presented  and  explained  the  results  in  detail  to  the  public.  The  ECB  has
made it plain that – in line with its mandate – it shall pursue neither an exchange-rate-oriented
monetary policy nor an anticyclical monetary policy. Exchange rates and the  business  cycle
will  certainly  be  carefully  observed,  analysed  and  taken  into  consideration  in  the  decision-
making  process,  but  they  do  not  determine  the  general  orientation  of  the  ECB’s  monetary
policy.  Rather,  monetary  stability  as  the  primary  goal  of  the  ECB  shall  be  ensured  by
regulating the growth of the money stock, with the aid of interest rate policy, in a way that, on
the one hand, enables the full exploitation of the available scope for growth and, on the other,
prevents inflationary developments.
Here,  it  becomes  evident  that  as  far  as  the  intention  of  the  ECB  is  concerned,  the  strategy
chosen is similar to that of the Bundesbank. In the light of the uncertainty prevailing in the
new currency area, at least at the beginning, however, the Governing Council of the ECB has
not set an explicit monetary target, but rather confined itself to determining and releasing a
somewhat  less  binding  reference  value.  Anyway,  and  as  a  reassurance  to  the  politicians
worried about the business cycle, this type of monetary policy has an automatic and clearly
anticyclical component.
Looking  at  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  instruments  and  procedures,  there  are  also
strong parallels to the instruments of the Bundesbank.
All  in  all,  it  is  apparent  that  both  the  institutional  and  organisational  structure  of  the
Eurosystem and the choice of the monetary policy strategy and instruments have contributed
to achieving continuity in monetary policy. The stock of confidence gained by the ECB has
helped to limit the prevailing fears and doubts concerning EMU, especially in Germany,  so
that  today  more  and  more  residents  are  regarding  the  European  Central  Bank  as  a  worthy
successor to the Bundesbank.
BIS Review   29/1999
- V -
2
What,  then,  are  Germany’s  expectations  of  the  transition  to  a  single  currency  in  Europe?
Much  has  been  written  and  debated  about  the  opportunities  and  risks  of  this  step:  the
introduction of the euro is certainly more than simply exchanging one medium of payment for
another. The euro will no doubt also have real economic consequences, and  it  constitutes  a
new element in the international monetary system.
European monetary union eliminates exchange rate fluctuations among the currencies of the
participating  countries,  thus  doing  away  with  a  substantial  element  of  volatility  and
uncertainty. Costly hedging operations against exchange rate fluctuations and high exchange
costs  have  become  obsolete;  cross-border  trade  can  expand  without  being  held  back  by
currency market uncertainties, therefore stimulating the real economy. Large enterprises and
financial  institutions,  in  particular,  are  hoping  that  the  elimination  of  foreign  exchange  rate
risks  and  the  direct  price  comparison  of  input  and  output  factors  will  present  new  market
opportunities.  This  home  base  free  of  monetary  uncertainties  presents  great  advantages,
especially for the German economy, because more than half of all German exports go to our
European neighbours.
It is therefore somewhat difficult to understand why a new debate has erupted just now in the
euro  area  on  the  fixing  of  foreign  exchange  rates  between  the  large  currency  blocs.  Stable
exchange rates are the result of a stability-oriented monetary and fiscal policy and cannot be
achieved  by  interventions.  If  the  central  banks  were  assigned  an  exchange  rate  target  in
addition  to  the  objective  of  price  stability,  considerable  conflicts  could  arise  between  these
two objectives, a point that has been proved especially by events in Asia and Latin America
over the past few years.
Of  course,  this  does  not  imply  that  exchange  rate  developments  must  not  be  carefully
monitored  and  taken  into  consideration  while  shaping  monetary  policy.  The  exchange  rates
are an important element of inflation forecasting because they help determine the climate of
stability  through  the  import  prices,  and  the  state  of  business  activity  through  foreign  trade.
Therefore  exchange  rates  must  be  taken  into  account  when  considering  monetary  policy
(alongside the dominant role of monetary growth), yet must not serve as an end unto itself.
- VI -
Whether the introduction of the euro will, over the medium term, result in a rearrangement of
the international currency interrelations depends considerably on whether the euro will be able
to achieve a stronger position in the international monetary system than the sum of the eleven
member currencies. From the present perspective, it is not possible to give a definite answer to
this  question.  In  terms  of  population,  economic  performance,  and  their  respective  share  of
world  trade,  the  euro  area  and  the  US  are  very  similar.  Only  the  use  of  the  euro  as  a
transaction,  investment  and  reserve  currency  will  indicate  future  developments.  This  area
presents a large scope for growth for the euro because the previous European currencies were
relatively underrepresented, in comparison to the US dollar, in all of the above uses.
The creation of a common European financial market, in particular, promises a huge potential
for  the  euro’s  growth.  Broader  and  deeper  market  structures,  high  levels  of  liquidity  and
transparency  and  expected  increases  in  efficiency  are  attracting  international  investors  and
issuers. To be sure, the rupturing of monetary segmentations will not automatically create a
fully harmonised capital market in Europe. There will continue to be differences regarding the
3
BIS Review   29/1999
established  structures.  However,  the  innovation  process  begun  in  the  past  few  years  at
financial  institutions  and  in  the  financial  markets  shows  that  all  parties  concerned  have
recognised the challenge and are rising to it.
- VII -
The introduction of the euro alone is no guarantee, however, of the positive developments I
have described. Rather, this raises the question  of  what  problems  and  risks  monetary  union
harbours,  seen  from  the  German  perspective.  Extraordinary  developments  in  economic
activity or structural circumstances such as different cost trends for wages, taxes  and  social
security  contributions,  different  manufacturing  structures,  diverging  trends  in  corporate
financing and differences in the national transmission channels of monetary policy can alter
the  effect  of  monetary  policy  measures  on  the  real  economy.  In  future,  under  a  common
exchange  rate  and  monetary  policy  with  identical  official  interest  rates  and  an  identical
liquidity supply, these differences among the participating countries can only be countered by
means of flexible national fiscal, structural and wage policy measures.
It is, of course, tempting for the politicians and social partners, caught up in their many daily
conflicts  and  confrontations,  to  call  for  a  more  expansionary  monetary  policy,  as  this  will
seemingly enable an easier solution of conflicts. Yet monetary stability is – especially from
the  German  perspective  –  precisely  the  purpose  and  worth  of  an  independent  central  bank
insulated from the multitude of political conflicts, as has been so convincingly laid down in
the Maastricht Treaty. Solving problems at the expense of monetary stability is invariably an
exercise in self-deception, with many counterproductive results. Inflationary monetary policy
exacerbates  growth  and  employment  problems  instead  of  solving  them,  at  least  over  the
medium term.
The unbearably high unemployment rate in large parts of Europe presents the key economic
policy  problem  from  the  German  perspective,  too.  A  full  employment  equilibrium  in  the
participating  countries  is  characterised  by  varying  national  labour  costs  corresponding  to
national  labour  productivity.  Thus,  a  rapid  equalisation  of  the  nominal  wages  in  the
participating countries is not realistic, as the unemployment rate threatens to continue rising in
countries  which  raise  the  wage  level  above  the  level  of  labour  productivity.  Increases  in
negotiated  wages  and  settlements  should  therefore  conform  to  the  national  employment
situation  and  the  growth  rate  of  labour  productivity.  These  considerations  lead  to  the
conclusion that it does not make sense to harmonise the pay-rate policies within Europe. This
would complicate the necessary variation of wages in the euro area and impair the necessary
flexibility of wage structures.
Thus, for the euro to be a success, it is imperative that these inevitable consequences of the
single  currency  be  understood  and  accepted  by  all  participating  countries  and  that  the
necessary  measures  be  carried  out.  A  single  European  monetary  policy  which  cannot  make
exceptions  for  special  national  developments  and  interests  must  be  accepted  and  taken  into
consideration in the shaping of national economic and fiscal policy. The implementation of a
supranational European monetary policy will be all the easier the more the independence of
the European Central Bank is respected by the European bodies and especially by the residents
of the euro area. To a very large extent, the basic conditions for a stability-oriented monetary
policy and an independent central bank in Europe have been fulfilled. It is now up to those
taking  action  to  determine  how  this  framework  is  filled  out  and  implemented.  There  is
BIS Review   29/1999
4
certainly  cause  for  optimism.  The  governors  of  the  participating  central  banks  and  the
Members  of  the  Board  are  in  accord  that  they  must,  from  the  beginning,  operate  as
representatives of the euro area and its single currency and not as advocates of their nations.
- VIII -
All  in  all,  the  euro  has  had  a  relatively  smooth  and  promising  start.  Despite  a  trend  to
weakening  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  –  due  mainly  to  an  increase  in  the  spread  of
interest  rates  between  Europe  and  the  US  –  it  has  increasingly  gained  acceptance  on  the
financial markets, but also among the residents.
However,  the  range  of  questions  and  risks  presented  above  shows  that  European  monetary
union, which does not go hand in hand with an adequate political  union,  is  an  unparalleled
experiment. For it to succeed, it will require a high degree of political discipline on the part of
all participants. Only the future can show whether giving up the Deutsche Mark for the euro
was, in the long run, the right decision.
5
BIS Review   29/1999
