Mr Reddy discusses monetary policy in India
Speech  by  Y.V.  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Fourth  Securities
Industry Summit, in Mumbai, India on 26 May 1999.
Chairman and friends,
I thank the organisers for inviting me to deliver the inaugural address at the Fourth Annual Securities
Industry Summit. Although the discussions in this Summit will specifically veer around the securities
market, monetary policy strongly influences the working of the financial markets. As a central banker,
I will, therefore, speak on monetary policy making, which I trust will provide some perspectives to the
deliberations at the Summit.
Objectives
In India, monetary policy has always emphasised the objectives of price stability and growth. What
this,  in  effect,  has  meant  in  practical  policy  setting  is,  formulating  a  balance  between  the  two
objectives depending on the evolving situation but within the broad context of keeping the inflation
rate within a reasonable bound.
Apart from these two important goals, there has been a conscious attempt on the part of the Reserve
Bank  in  recent  years  to  maintain  orderly  conditions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  and  to  curb
destabilising and self-fulfilling speculative activities. This has assumed strategic importance for the
sustainability  of  the  external  sector  in  the  face  of  growing  cross  border  capital  flows  into  the
economy. With the increasing order of domestic and international financial integration, exchange rate
expectations  do  impact  on  the  domestic  stance  of  monetary  policy  and  hence  the  significance  of
inflation. In the transitional phase, however, given the exchange market imperfections, the exchange
rate  objective  may  occasionally  predominate  due  to  emphasis  on  avoidance  of  undue  volatility.  In
fact,  sometimes,  as  was  the  case  recently,  it  could  be  the  most  dominant  reason  for  short-term
monetary policy adjustments.
In a broader framework, the objectives of monetary policy in India continue to be price stability and
growth. These are pursued inter alia through ensuring credit availability, with stability in the external
value of the rupee as well as overall financial stability, all being reflective of pursuit of the overall
objectives. The relative emphasis among the objectives is governed by the prevailing circumstances.
Targets
The conduct of monetary policy in India has traditionally proceeded with the help of an intermediate
target, which the central bank could influence directly and which bears a reasonably close relationship
with  the  ultimate  objectives.  The  particular  mode  of  central  bank  intervention  is  the  operating
instrument.  Macro-economic  variables,  which  post  useful  information  about  the  objectives  of
monetary  policy,  although  they  may  not  in  themselves  be  amenable  to  central  bank  targeting,  are
‘indicators’ or ‘information’ variables.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) sets indicative broad money (M3) expansion targets in line with the
expected rate of growth of GDP and a tolerable level of inflation. Consistent with the targeted level of
broad  money  expansion,  is  a  desired  level  of  reserve  money  expansion.  The  order  of  the  reserve
money expansion, however, has to be consistent with the likely fiscal and external payments position,
since the main sources of reserve money expansion are net RBI credit to government and net foreign
exchange assets. The targeted M3 expansion is publicly announced through the Governor’s statement
on  monetary  and  credit  policy.  The  broad  money  target  is  also  supported  by  a  number  of  other
1
BIS Review   62/1999
indicators such as movement in interest rates, exchange rate and availability of credit to productive
sectors of the economy.
Monetary target is premised on a stable demand function for money. In the Indian context, a number
of  earlier  studies  on  the  demand  for  money  have  demonstrated  that  it  is  stable.  Dr.Rangarajan
demonstrated  that  money  demand  equations  provide  reasonable  predictions  of  average  changes  in
prices  over  a  medium-term  horizon  of  4-5  years,  though  not  necessarily  on  a  year-to-year  basis.  In
essence,  the  concern  was  with  the  long-run  stability  of  the  money  demand  function  in  terms  of  its
most proximate determinant, i.e. real GDP, rather than its short-term behaviour. Most recent studies in
RBI examined the stability of the money demand equation using a number of alternative procedures.
While these tests showed parameter shifts, they did not point to parameter instability. In the 1990s,
the monetary targets were set either as point targets or in a narrow range implying scope for missing
point targets, but it has to be recognised that a wider range would question the credibility, diluting the
very objective of targeting.
The  pressures  on  monetary  expansion  in  the  earlier  part  of  targeting  exercise  emanated  from
monetisation of fiscal deficit and later on from capital inflows. During the period 1985-92, net RBI
credit to Central Government accounted for over 96 per cent of the monetary base, which was reduced
to  about  65  per  cent  in  the  subsequent  period  during  1993-98,  with  corresponding  increase  in  net
foreign exchange assets of the RBI.
Although  the  practice  of  automatic  monetisation  of  the  budgetary  deficit  was  done  away  with,
effective from April 1997, it can significantly reduce the pressure on monetisation only if the size of
the Central Government’s market borrowing programme is kept  within  reasonable  limits.  However,
there is a qualitative difference, since the RBI has some flexibility now in respect of the extent of its
support to Government borrowing programme.
With increasing market orientation of the financial structure and international capital flows, monetary
policy responds to developments on an ongoing basis. In an administered interest rate and exchange
rate  regime,  the  quantity  variables  dominated  and  transmitted  monetary  policy  impulses.  However,
external and financial sector reforms have since enhanced the sensitiveness of quantity variables to
their market determined price, i.e. interest rate and exchange rate.
It must be recognised that in recent times, the emphasis has also been on closely monitoring different
indicators apart from relying on the intermediate  target.  For  aiming  at  the  intermediate  target  (viz.,
broad money) the underlying operating target is reserve money, particularly the banks’ reserves, while
the supplementary operating target is the short-term interest rate proxied generally by the overnight
call money rates.
Operating Procedures and Instruments
The  reforms  in  the  monetary  and  financial  sectors  have  enabled  the  RBI  to  expand  the  array  of
instruments  at  its  command.  As  already  mentioned,  the  operational  target  of  monetary  policy
continues  to  be  banks’  reserves  which  is  controlled  by  changes  in  reserve  requirements  effected
mainly  through  the  instruments  of  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR).  However,  the  use  of  CRR  as  an
instrument  of  monetary  control  is  sought  to  be  de-emphasised  and  the  liquidity  management  in  the
system is increasingly undertaken through open market operations (OMO), both outright and repos.
In view of the overall downward movement in CRR, except on occasions of exchange rate volatility,
the excess liquidity in the system is mopped up by outright sales of government  securities  by  RBI.
Over the reform period, the market absorption of government securities was facilitated by reforms in
the government securities market, which ensured market related rates of interest and thus some of the
basic conditions were provided for developing a secondary market.
BIS Review   62/1999
2
The short-term liquidity management is also aided by conduct of repos on a regular basis. Usually, the
RBI  conducts  repos  for  a  maturity  of  up  to  14  days,  which  is  the  cycle  for  reserve  requirements.
Recently, the RBI has been conducting 3-4 day fixed rate repos to absorb very short-term liquidity and
to even out money market rates, especially overnight call money rates. The repo rates and the amounts
tendered  in  the  repo  auctions,  apart  from  reflecting  liquidity  conditions,  provide  a  floor  for  the
overnight call money rates. In the event of tight liquidity conditions, the RBI’ s liquidity support to
primary dealers (PDs) enables it to directly intervene in the market, thereby moderating pressures on
the overnight call money rates.
The RBI also reactivated the Bank Rate in April 1997 as a reference rate and as a signalling device to
reflect  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  The  interest  rates  on  different  type  accommodation  from  the
RBI including refinance are linked to the Bank Rate. The activation of the Bank Rate endowed the
RBI  with  an  additional  instrument.  It  must  be  noted  that  the  announcement  impact  of  Bank  Rate
changes has been pronounced on the prime lending rates of commercial banks.
The  refinance  window  of  the  RBI  provides  an  additional  instrument  for  influencing  reserves.  Until
recently,  the  RBI  provided  two  types  of  refinance  facilities  to  banks  -  export  credit  refinance  and
general refinance. While the former facility is formula based and is extended to banks against their
outstanding export credit eligible for refinance, the latter facility was provided to enable banks to tide
over their temporary liquidity shortages.
The  general  refinance  window  has  since  been  replaced  by  a  Collateralised  Lending  Facility  (CLF)
within the overall framework of an Interim Liquidity Adjustment Facility (ILAF).
Currently, the liquidity management at the short end is in the form of ILAF. Liquidity is injected by
the  RBI  through  CLF  to  banks,  export  credit  refinance  to  banks,  and  liquidity  support  to  PDs.  All
these facilities are available subject to quantitative limits [formula-based] for specified duration and at
the Bank Rate. Additional limits could be availed by banks under Additional Collateralised Lending
Facility (ACLF) and by PDs at two percentage points above the Bank Rate. Absorption of liquidity
will continue to be through fixed rate repo i.e., at repo rate announced on a day to day basis. These are
supplemented by OMO in Government dated securities and Treasury Bills by the RBI. OMO involve
decisions by the RBI on a daily basis or even intra-day basis in regard to the quantities and the cut-off
yields at which the dated securities and Treasury Bills are operated upon. It may be noted that these
operations are in the given framework of the CRR that directly affects liquidity and the Bank Rate.
Often,  the  periodic  Treasury  bill  auctions  by  RBI,  themselves  provide  opportunities  for  the  RBI  to
signal its overall stance on the appropriateness of interest rate and liquidity.
Thus, the ILAF provides a mechanism by which liquidity would be injected at various interest rates,
and  absorbed  when  necessary  at  the  fixed  repo  rate,  so  that  the  volatility  in  the  money  market  is
minimised and the market operates within a reasonable range.
At present, there is no formal corridor for market interest rates, but the Bank Rate often has provided
an upper bound and the fixed repo rate provided the lower  bound.  In  a  sense,  an  informal  corridor
exists for short-term interest rates and the introduction of ILAF has facilitated the evolution of this
corridor.
The experience with the movements in the interest rates and exchange rate in the last two years has
increasingly  reflected  the  integration  among  various  market  segments.  The  interest  rates  of  major
market  instruments  [91-day  and  364-day  Treasury  Bills,  Commercial  Paper  and  Certificate  of
Deposit] in recent period show some correlation with reasonable speed of adjustment, which augers
well for some element of targeting of interest rates in the conduct of monetary policy.
Dilemmas
3
BIS Review   62/1999
Monetary  management  poses  dilemmas  not  only  at  the  analytical  level  but  also  at  the  operational
level.  In  fact,  some  of  these  dilemmas  have  been  articulated  in  the  recent  policy  statements  of
Governor Bimal Jalan.
First,  the  basic  dilemma  arises  out  of  the  trade  off  between  growth  and  inflation.  Although  a
consensus has emerged on the basis of empirical evidence that in the long run there is no trade off
between  employment  and  inflation,  it  is  the  inconclusive  evidence  in  the  short-run  that  poses  a
challenge  for  monetary  management.  Given  the  deleterious  effects  of  inflation  on  distribution  of
income,  there  is  an  imperative  need  in  developing  countries  to  keep  the  inflation  rate  as  low  as
possible. In the last year’s Economic Survey, it was stated that “As world inflation rates are currently
of the order of 0 to 3 percent, 4 to 6 percent inflation rate could be regarded as an acceptable level for
India at present.” This order of inflation has been, it may be noted, built into the monetary operating
framework of the RBI.
Secondly,  even  a  moderate  inflation  rate  poses  a  dilemma  in  an  open  economy.  If  the  domestic
inflation rate of an economy, however low it may be, is higher than the average inflation rate of its
trading partners, it puts pressure on the exchange rate. In this context, the question of simultaneous
balance of the internal and external sectors becomes a major issue.
Thirdly,  in  a  dynamic  setting,  when  the  financial  markets  are  continually  evolving,  and  payment
systems and technology are changing, one may not find a clear cut evidence of stability in the money
demand, which is taken as a basis for intermediate targeting; and in such circumstances, one needs to
look also at other relevant indicators. It is not that such dilemmas are specific to us and by and large,
countries follow a menu approach or a ‘check list’ to track a number of relevant variables.
Fourthly,  the  dilemma  that  the  central  bank  faces  as  a  manager  of  public  debt  and  the  monetary
authority is well known. While the former may require keeping its cost low, the latter may demand a
reduction in the extent of government debt that it holds, considering the impact it has on aggregate
expenditures and thus on demand. The market-borrowing programme of the government is determined
by  the  fiscal  parameters,  but  the  size  of  the  government  debt  impacts  on  the  interest  rates  in  the
economy and it should be clearly recognised that there is a limit to the extent of market borrowing
that the central bank can support. These dilemmas can be resolved through proper fiscal monetary co-
ordination.
Fifthly,  the  conflict  between  roles  of  the  regulator/supervisor  and  as  a  conductor  of  the  monetary
policy  has  often  been  discussed.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  case  of  a  central  bank,  as  a  monetary
authority, which may require to reduce the liquidity in the system by raising the rate of interest. But,
such a rise in the rate of interest could be detrimental to the interests of the weak banks. Similarly,
while  tightening  prudential  norms,  the  central  bank  has  to  take  into  account  its  impact  on  banking
systems’ capacity to intermediate credit.
Finally,  in  an  open  economy,  the  potential  conflict  between  the  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate
objectives  could  arise  when  short-term  and  volatile  capital  flows  occur.  For  example,  the  bouts  of
volatility in exchange rate experienced by us recently necessitated that market conditions are rendered
less  liquid  even  if  it  meant  that  the  interest  rates  are  kept  high.  This  policy  has  implications  for
promoting domestic output growth in that the interest rates may for this purpose, be required to  be
kept  at  moderate  levels.  But  the  larger  objectives  of  evading  the  likely  potential  disruption  of
domestic activities arising out of an exchange rate crisis should also be kept in view.
Conclusion
As part of financial sector reforms, a number of steps have been taken to enhance the effectiveness of
monetary  policy,  and  these  include,  improvement  in  the  payments  and  settlement  systems,
development  of  secondary  market  in  government  securities  with  a  diversification  of  investor  base,
BIS Review   62/1999
4
reduction  in  non-performing  assets,  introduction  of  ALM  guidelines,  and  reduction  in  the  overall
transactions  costs.  In  particular,  the  recent  initiatives  of  RBI  to  develop  money  market  and  debt
markets should contribute to improving the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy.
All  the  reforms  in  the  monetary  and  financial  sectors  may  not  have  the  desired  results  without
credible  fiscal  adjustment.  Notwithstanding  the  discontinuation  of  automatic  monetisation  of  fiscal
deficit,  the  responsibility  for  management  of  a  large  government  borrowing  programme  does
circumscribe the manoeuvrability of monetary policy.
5
BIS Review   62/1999
