Mr Bäckström elucidates the economic situation in Sweden
and describes the consequences it may have for future monetary policy
Speech given by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank at Föreningssparbanken,
Ulricehamn on 1 September 1999.
 First a word of thanks for the invitation to visit Ulricehamn and talk about something that is close to
the  heart  of  a  Riksbank  governor,  namely  Sweden’s  economic  situation.  I  shall  be  describing  the
situation  as  I  see  it  and  saying  something  about  the  consequences  it  may  have  for  future  monetary
policy.
Unexpectedly strong trend
The new statistics in recent months show that economic activity is stronger than most forecasters had
foreseen  as  recently  as  in  the  spring.  The  growth  of  both  domestic  and  external  demand  has  been
higher than expected. Relative to the first half of 1998, the GDP growth rate for the first six months of
this year is an estimated 3.7%.
Most observers are in the process of revising their forecasts upwards, if they have not already done so.
In the Inflation Report last June the Riksbank judged that growth this year would reach 2.5%, followed
by  3%  next  year  as  well  as  in  2001.  When  the  Executive  Board  discussed  monetary  policy  on
12 August,  however,  our  assessment  was  that  this  year’s  growth  rate  would  be  3.5%.  We  also  saw
grounds for an upward revision of growth in the next two years, though the prospects for that period
are more uncertain.
It is not just total output that has exceeded expectations. The same applies to employment. In the first
half  of  1999 there  were  approximately  100,000  new jobs  compared  with  the  same  period  last  year.
Much  of  the  increase  occurred  in  the  private  sector.  This  has  been  accompanied  by  decreased
unemployment,  if  one  disregards  the  temporary  seasonal  upturn  during  the  summer.  However,  the
reduction of unemployment is less marked than the increase in employment because many people are
returning to the labour market now that jobs are becoming available.
Meanwhile,  price  increases  have  been  moderate.  The  underlying  rate  of  inflation  (UNDIX,  which
measures inflation excluding interest expenditure, indirect taxes and subsidies) fluctuated during the
spring between 12-month figures of 1.0 and 1.5%. Other indexes also point to low inflation, despite an
increase in some commodity prices, oil in particular.
Altogether, then, the Swedish economy is developing very well. We are now entering the seventh year
of favourable economic growth – an average annual rate of about 3% – since the upturn in the summer
of 1993. Today, moreover, there is no immediate threat to price stability.
Market interest rates rising
The better economic situation and expectations that inflationary pressure will be somewhat higher than
before have caused a worldwide increase in market rates of interest. Sweden is no exception. During
the summer the five-year T-bond rate, for example, has moved up just over 1.0 percentage point.
Along  with this  increase,  the  spread  between  T-bond  and  other  interest  rates  has  widened.  In  other
words, the rates for long borrowing by housing institutes and firms have risen relatively more than the
rate the Treasury has to pay for government borrowing with the same maturity. Since June, the rate for
a five-year housing bond has moved up around 1.3 percentage points.
1
BIS Review 92/1999
Similar shifts have been noted in the international financial markets. Spreads of this kind often tend to
widen when the future path of interest rates becomes more uncertain. Besides the uncertainty  about
interest  rate  tendencies  in  the  cyclical  upswing,  a  contribution  to  the  wider  spreads  is  said  to  have
come  from  the  turn  of  the  millennium:  concern  about  limited  liquidity  at  the  turn  of  the  year  is
considered to induce some investors and borrowers to try to carry out transactions earlier.
In  this  context  I  should  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  underscore  that  the  Riksbank,  with  its
responsibility  for  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  has  the  instruments  that  are  needed  to
manage any liquidity problems that may arise. Together with the extensive preparatory work that has
been done in the financial sector, this means that the turn of the millennium should not be seen as a
serious problem.
The revised expectations of future inflationary pressure have entailed  an adjustment  of  expectations
about monetary policy. Price setting in the financial markets includes built-in expectations that in the
coming years many central banks, including the Riksbank, will be raising their instrumental rates.
A point worth noting is that, if they continue, today’s higher market interest rates will have a direct
impact  on  inflation  from  household  interest  expenditure,  just  as  the  recent  years’  steeply  falling
interest rates had a sharp downward effect on inflation.  In  that  case, the  higher interest expenditure
would  pull  CPI  inflation  upwards  fairly  rapidly  towards  the  targeted  rate  and  above  inflation’s
underlying rate (UNDIX). Monetary policy would then face the same situation, albeit in reverse, as on
so many occasions in the recent past. An attempt to counter the tendency by tightening the monetary
stance would accentuate the direct impact and add to the increase in CPI inflation. That is why it is
inflation excluding transitory factors that is the focal point for monetary policy.
Central issues for monetary policy in an upward phase
About a fortnight ago the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  confirmed  that  the  stronger  growth  can
lead  to  increased  price  pressure.  Monetary  policy  may  accordingly  need  to  be  conducted  in  a  less
expansionary direction in the future.
But the Board also emphasised that the Swedish economy is not yet in such a situation. The trade-off
between inflation and growth is uncertain and earlier relationships therefore have to be tested in the
light of new information.
I consider that this conclusion still holds.
When the Riksbank begins to talk of a less expansionary monetary stance, I can imagine it raises a
number of questions. I should like to take this opportunity of discussing some of them.
One  such  question  could  be:  Why  must  the  Riksbank  spoil  the  party?  The  Swedish  economy  has
finally  begun  a  period  of  good  growth,  rising  employment  and  decreased  unemployment,  while
inflation is low. So why do central bank representatives have to talk about the need to raise the interest
rate in such a situation? May it not lead to a renewed increase in unemployment?
Another question is how strongly the Swedish economy can expand without risks for inflation. Can it
be the case that even the Swedish economy is displaying new tendencies, as certain observers argue
has happened in the United States, that is, that growth can be higher without inflation taking off? If so,
why is the Riksbank talking of a need to raise interest rates?
Let me begin with the first question.
Why spoil the party?
History teaches that when the growth of demand outpaces the economy’s long-term output trend, this
leads  in  time  to  risks  of  capacity  shortages  and  bottlenecks  that  result  in  turn  in  rising  prices  and
wages.  At  the  same  time,  as it takes  one  to  two  years  for  an  adjustment  of the  instrumental  rate  to
affect the economy, the central bank’s monetary policy decisions have to be based on assessments of
the future. Faced with the risk of a situation of this type occurring, it is therefore better to try to slow
BIS Review 92/1999
2
things down with a small interest rate increase at an early stage. Demand growth can then be brought
into line with the growth of production capacity and result in a more stable path. By acting in good
time in a manner that is predictable, it is hopefully possible to avoid interest rate adjustments that are
more drastic. Meanwhile, economic agents can continue to count on stable, low inflation.
An example of the good results that can be achieved with a forward-looking monetary policy is the US
economy.  With  a  judicious  and  timely  tightening  of  the  monetary  stance,  the  Federal  Reserve  has
contributed to a long period of sustainable growth. Since the gradual increase from 3% between 1993
and  1994,  the  fed  funds  rate  has  fluctuated  between  around  4.5  and  6%.  This  has  accompanied  a
notably good economic development, with the longest postwar period of unbroken growth. The latent
inflationary pressure has been held in  check  without arresting  growth.  Similar reasoning  lay  behind
last  week’s interest rate increase. The  positive  trend  has  been  aided  by  the  consolidation  of  federal
finances.
On the other hand, if inflation has already risen to a high level that is expected to last, the central bank
may  have  to  resort  instead  to  larger  interest  rate  increases  to  signal  its  determination  to  fulfil  the
inflation target. That weakens economic activity and risks a renewed increase in unemployment.
Thus far the  argument  –  and the  question  of  which alternative  is  most advantageous  –  seems  fairly
simple. But that is where the difficulties begin. How is the central bank to  arrive  at  an  interest  rate
increase  that  is  appropriate  in  its  timing  as  well  as  its  size?  A  large,  abrupt  increase  might  lead  to
demand being curbed too early and too much, along with the risk of inflation falling below the price
stability target of 2%1. That is naturally not desirable. Which brings me to the second question: What
rate of GDP growth can the Swedish economy sustain without inflation taking off?
How strongly can the Swedish economy grow?
In situations involving rapid changes, there is a tendency to affix labels such as the new economy. The
logical  implication  is  the  existence  of  an  old  economy  that  works  less  well.  I  find  this  misleading.
There  have  been  periods  in  Sweden’s  economic  history  when  the  economy  performed  exceedingly
well; one example is the 1950s and 1960s. There have also been periods that were less successful, for
instance the 1970s and 1980s.
The concept of a new economy might be apposite if the comparison is confined to the present and the
preceding decade. There are signs that the Swedish economy is functioning better in the 1990s than it
did in the 1980s. But what does this concept actually stand for?
One of the many interpretations of the new economy is that long-term growth’s trajectory has shifted
upwards on account of a better productivity trend. For a given input of the production factors labour
and capital, the economy is able to sustain higher overall growth. It follows that if the supply side of
the  economy  works  better,  then  its  demand  side  can  expand  more  rapidly  without  leading  to
bottlenecks and inflation.
One of the driving forces behind the new and better functioning of the US economy is sometimes said
to be the rapid advances in data and telecommunications. By improving production and distribution
processes, the innovations are seen as a basis for stronger productivity growth.
Some consider that, for the United States, the potential growth rate has been raised from 2 to 3%. It
also  looks  as  though  the  potential  growth  rate  for  Sweden  has  become  somewhat  higher  –  still
compared with the 1980s – but it does not seem to have reached an annual rate of as much as 3%.
1
I refer here, not to the consumer price index but to an index of underlying or core inflation, e.g. UNDIX, which Statistics
Sweden  publishes  regularly  on  behalf  of  the  Riksbank.  That  index  excludes  house  mortgage  interest  expenditure  and
indirect  taxes.  If  the  Riksbank  were  to  raise  the  interest  rate  prematurely,  the  resultant  increase  in  house  mortgage
expenditure  could  cause  the  CPI  to  overshoot  the  target,  while  UNDIX  is  on  the  low  side.  This  is  the  reverse  of  the
situation in recent years when the interest rate was lowered.
3
BIS Review 92/1999
A common, but not entirely certain estimate is that today the Swedish economy can sustain an annual
growth rate of between 2 and 2.5%. Growth above this level leads to decreased  unemployment  and
vice versa. But it is not just the strength of demand growth that determines the level of unemployment.
Other factors, such as economic structures, are also involved and at some level of unemployment the
only result of additional growth stimuli is bottlenecks and shortages. Wage  costs  will then rise in  a
way that conflicts with low and stable inflation.
The  GDP  growth  rate  of  3.7%  for  the  first  half  of  this  year  accordingly  exceeds  any  reasonable
assessment of the Swedish economy’s long-term potential. For a time, however, such a high growth
rate can be feasible if firms are able to recruit the necessary labour, for instance because the economy
is recovering from a situation with high unemployment. That has been the  case  in  Sweden’s  labour
market  and  pressure  from  wages  and  prices  has  thereby  been  able  to  remain  low.  Neither  are  any
dramatic changes foreseen in respect of wages in the near future. But how long can this situation last
in the present economic upswing? How far can unemployment be reduced without firms encountering
recruitment problems more generally?
Even with the high unemployment at present, it is, for example, already difficult to recruit computer
consultants  and  some  other  occupational  categories.  The  situation  in  certain  segments  of  the
Stockholm  labour  market  is  also  tighter  than  in  other  parts  of  Sweden.  But  so  far,  the  bottleneck
problems seem to be fairly restricted. As yet there are no indications of more widespread shortages. It
is  a  positive  sign  that  the  matching  of  job  seekers  and  job  vacancies  is  still  running  comparatively
smoothly, as it is that although the shortages of skilled workers in manufacturing have grown, the level
remains relatively low. To date this year, moreover, the wage drift statistics show increases that are
lower than expected.
Good credibility promotes price stability
Experience  from  the  1990s  and  earlier  periods  demonstrates  that  the  relationships  which  are
discernible in economic models have to be constantly questioned and reviewed. Above all, they can
never be adopted uncritically when forecasting the future. So much happens in different economies,
not least as regards economic policies, that earlier truths have to be reassessed continuously.
Inflation has been subdued in recent years for a number of reasons. Imported inflation has been low
because  of  subdued  commodity  prices  in  connection  with  the  Asian  crisis.  Productivity  growth  in
Sweden  has  been  better  than  before.  Another  major  factor  is  the  increased  confidence  in  monetary
policy and economic policy in general. All the survey data, as well as the underlying trend in market
prices, show that no one expects inflation in the somewhat longer run to be anything but 2%.
The inflation target accordingly seems to constitute a clear anchor for price formation. In the 1970s
and  1980s,  inflation  prospects  did  not  depend  on  the  level  of  domestic  economic  activity  alone.
Relatively abrupt shifts in more long-term inflation expectations also played a part. Today, there are
no  abrupt  shifts  of  that  kind.  Economic  players  simply  count,  with  good  reason,  on  the  Riksbank
acting if signs of rising inflation were to appear. In such a world, overall price formation centres above
all on the level of economic activity. The improved credibility is thus a further factor that may have
contributed to a level of inflation that is lower despite relatively strong growth.
At  the  same  time,  the  Riksbank  has  the  major  responsibility  of  keeping  a  close  eye  on  the  more
long-term  inflation  expectations  in  order  to  maintain the  credibility  that  has  been  built  up  in  recent
years.
Demand assessments difficult
A  question  that  naturally  has  to  be  included  in  the  assessments  is  whether  the  stronger  growth  of
demand we have experienced, not least this year, will last. An important matter to bear in mind in this
context is that as long as the monetary stance is expansionary, demand growth will normally be above
its sustainable level. But some restrictive effect has, of course, already started to come from the higher
bond rates in recent months.
BIS Review 92/1999
4
However, both the Swedish and the international economy can be exposed to unforeseen shocks. We
need to remember that no one foresaw either the extent or the course of the crisis in Asia. Neither was
attention drawn at an early stage to the risks behind last autumn’s international financial unrest. Our
knowledge about phenomena of this type  is still  limited.  It  may  be  asked  whether  we  shall ever  be
capable of making definite predictions in this field. The models being tested at present are simply too
rough  and  ready.  They  tend  to  sound  the  alarm  about  events  that  never  occur  and  miss  those  that
actually happen.
Although  the  picture  looks  bright,  we  know  there  are  countries  in  the  global  economy  that  are
vulnerable, with a situation that may deteriorate. Share prices, moreover, have climbed very high, not
least in  the  United  States. There  are also  imbalances in  the  US  economy  that  may  affect  the  future
course of events.
There is also the possibility, however, of demand growth in Sweden becoming even stronger. We do
not know how other components  of  economic  policy  will  be  constructed in  detail.  I  am  thinking  in
particular  of  the  current  discussion  about  the  direction  of  tax  policy.  The  Riksbank  is  in  no  way
opposed  to  tax  cuts.  On  the  contrary,  strategic  tax  reductions  could  make  the  Swedish  economy
function better and thereby lead to higher growth. But we have a duty to issue a warning about a tax
policy that would give additional force to a growth of consumption that is already rapid and thereby
lead to economic overheating in Sweden. At the same time, I believe that decision-makers are aware
of these risks.
Taken together, all these factors make it difficult to assess the future development of demand. So there
is reason to monitor developments closely.
Conclusion
At  present  I  do  not  for  my  part  see  any  direct,  immediate  threat  to  price  stability  in  the  Swedish
economy. But I do believe that a continuation of strong demand growth, with all else equal, requires
the members of the Riksbank’s Executive Board to consider how we can best ensure that economic
growth in Sweden remains stable. How soon and with what safety margin shall demand be brought
back to the rate that is sustainable in the long run? Do we need to take out the insurance provided by
an  early,  small  adjustment  of  the  interest  rate?  Or  can  we  wait?  That  is  something  about  which
opinions can differ slightly.
In my opinion, there is no reason as yet to reduce the expansionary effect on the Swedish economy
that monetary policy is currently exerting. A monetary policy adjustment will indeed be called for at
some time in the economic upswing but I still see its timing as an open question. My colleagues and I
on  the  Executive  Board,  as  well  as  all  those  who  analyse  us,  must  follow  the  incoming  statistics
closely. New knowledge and new insights must be continuously woven into the analysis.
Maintaining  price  stability,  as  the  law  prescribes,  accordingly  means  that  the  Riksbank  delivers  its
contribution to making growth in the Swedish economy sustainable.
5
BIS Review 92/1999
