Mr Issing’s speech entitled “Hayek – currency competition and European monetary union”*
Text of the Annual Hayek memorial lecture delivered by Mr Otmar Issing, a member of the Executive
Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  hosted  by  the  Institute  of  Economic  Affairs  in  London  on
27 May 1999.
1.
Introduction
As  a  young  student  I  read  “The  Road  to  Serfdom”.  It  was  the  first  book  written  by  Hayek  I  came
across, and it has left a deep and lasting influence on me. Only 11 years after the Hitler regime and the
war  I  suddenly  started  to  understand  the  interdependence  between  totalitarianism  and  economic
policy. Since then I have read most of Hayek’s publications. Many left their marks, only to mention
the impressive “The Constitution of Liberty”.
But, perhaps more than anything else, it was the perception of “competition as a discovery process”
which  has  shaped  my  thinking.  This  approach  is  of  extreme  relevance  for  economics  but  goes  far
beyond  this.  Related  to  this  “discovery”  is  “pretence  of  knowledge”  as  a  permanent  danger  for
societies.  All  those  in  public  office  responsible  for  making  decisions  should  never  forget  this
message.
Against this background you can imagine that it is a great honour for me to be invited to  give  this
lecture  on  the  occasion  of  Hayek’s  100th  birthday.  Even  more  so  as  the  invitation  came  from  the
Institute of Economic Affairs, an institution devoted to the study and propagation of liberal ideas – to
the idea of liberty. I accepted immediately, not reflecting on the obvious time constraints.
It was the Institute of Economic Affairs which in 1976  published  Hayek’s  “Choice  in  Currency:  A
Way  to  Stop  Inflation”.  I  chose  the  subject  for  my  lecture  for  the  following  reasons.  First  of  all
because  I  might  have  some  comparative  advantage  in  a  subject  related  to  monetary  economics.
Having joined the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, the relations of Hayek’s ideas on
currency offer a special kind of interest. And, finally, it was the publication mentioned which brought
me  into  personal  contact  with  Hayek.  Fascinated  (but,  to  indicate  already,  not  convinced)  by  the
approach, which was out of line with anything discussed in mainstream monetary theory at that time, I
wished to include this paper in a reader on monetary policy issues I was preparing.
I  proposed  to  put  in  front  of  the  text  a  quote  by  Hayek:  “Inflation  is  made  by  government  and  its
agents. Nobody else can do anything about it”. But we could not agree on the translation of the word
“government” into German. After an extended correspondence we finally came to the conclusion over
the phone that this quote should remain, but not be translated.1
It only comes home  to  us  fully  how  long  and  fruitful  Hayek’s  career  was  when  we  realise  that  his
rightly renowned monograph on the denationalisation of money was published some 60 years after his
pioneering contribution to the theory of intertemporal equilibrium in Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv2 in
1928.
The  monograph  has  to  be  seen  against  the  background  of  decades  of  worldwide  inflation.  Hayek
himself  mentioned  the  great  German  inflation  of  1923.  After  the  second  World  War,  prices  had
moved  worldwide  only  in  one  direction.  In  the  course  of  the  1960s  “booming”  US  Federal
Government  expenditure,  which  was  partly  associated  with  the  Vietnam  War,  led  to  a  sustained
period of strong growth in nominal aggregate demand. This, in turn, led to an increase in inflation in
the United States. In 1969 the inflation rate was already up to almost 6%, after having been less than
2%  at  the  start  of  the  decade.  Given  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates,  the
inflationary pressures emanating from the United States spread to other areas of the world, including
Europe.  The  strain  in  the  Bretton  Woods  system  became  apparent  in  the  late  1960s.  In  1973  the
                                                     
*
I wish to thank Frank Browne and Vitor Gaspar for the valuable co-operation in preparing this article.
See Jürgen Badura und Otmar Issing, Geldpolitik, Stuttgart 1980.
“Das intertemporale Gleichgewichtssystem der Preise und die Bewegungen des Geldwertes” which can be
translated as “The system of intertemporal price equilibrium and movements in the value of money”.
1
2
1
BIS Review   66/1999
system finally collapsed. The problems created were magnified by the increase in oil and commodity
prices in 1973. This led to soaring inflation.3
A few years later the industrial world was caught in a combination of high inflation and substantially
increased unemployment. The policy that had brought the world to such an unfavourable conjuncture,
and that could be characterised by a belief that  “money does not matter” and a hubris of excessive
reliance  on  demand  management,  had  ostensibly  failed.  As  Robert  Lucas  commented:  “This  is  the
legacy of stagflation: a general loss of confidence, whether warranted or not, in the formerly accepted
framework guiding discretionary economic management”.4
Hayek’s  view  about  these  developments  becomes  clear  from,  for  example,  an  excerpt  of  his  Nobel
Lecture,  delivered  in  December 1974:  “Economists  are,  at  this  moment,  called  upon  to  say  how  to
extricate the free world from the serious threat of accelerating inflation which, it must be admitted,
has  been  brought  about  by  policies  that  the  majority  of  economists  recommended  or  even  urged
governments to pursue. We have indeed at the moment little cause for pride: as a profession we made
a mess of things.” He expanded upon this in 1976:5 “practically all governments of history have used
their exclusive power to issue money in order to defraud and plunder the people”.
It was against this background that Hayek proposed his radical solution. It called for no less than the
complete abolition of the government’s monopoly over the issue of fiat money, leaving the way open
for comprehensive competition in its supply by the private sector. In his Hobart Paper Special No. 70,
he spelt out his philosophy with respect to free competition in the supply of money: “The purpose of
this scheme is to impose upon existing monetary and financial agencies a very much needed discipline
by  making  it  impossible  for  any  of  them,  or  for  any  length  of  time,  to  issue  a  kind  of  money
substantially  less  reliable  and  useful  than  the  money  of  any  other.  As  soon  as  the  public  became
familiar  with  the  new  possibilities,  any  deviations  from  the  straight  path  of  providing  an  honest
money  would  at  once  lead  to  the  rapid  displacement  of  the  offending  currency  by  others.  And  the
individual countries, being deprived of the various dodges by which they are now able temporarily to
conceal the effects of their actions by ‘protecting’ their currency, would be constrained to keep the
value of their currencies tolerably stable” (p.125).
Although his proposal was not implemented, his contribution kindled a lively and far-reaching debate
on the role of government in the monetary system, a debate that addressed the choice between a free
market monetary regime and government management of the monetary system via a central bank. The
proposal was so profound and radical in its conception that some leading advocates of a laissez-faire
approach to most aspects of economic life (Milton Friedman, for example) were put on the defensive.
As  it  happened,  Hayek  also  held  some  pretty  strong  views  on  Monetary  Union  in  Europe,  an  idea
which was still only in a rather embryonic stage when he commented on it in 1978: his own scheme of
competing  currencies  seemed  to  him  “…  both  preferable  and  more  practicable  than  the  utopian
scheme of introducing a new European currency, which would ultimately only have the effect of more
deeply entrenching the source and root of all monetary evil, the government monopoly on the issue
and control of money” (p. 126).
                                                     
3 See  Michael  Bruno  and  Jeffrey  Sachs,  “Economics  of  Worldwide  Stagflation”,  Harvard  University  Press,
1985, for an excellent presentation of this period.
4 Robert  E  Lucas,  Jr,  “Rules,  Discretion  and  the  Role  of  the  Economic  Advisor”,  in  Stanley  Fischer  (ed.),
Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, Chicago 1980, p. 204.
“Choice in Currency: a Way to Stop Inflation”, IEA Occasional Paper 48, 1976.
5
BIS Review   66/1999
2
2.
Summary presentation and assessment of Hayek’s proposal for competing currencies
The proposal put forward by Hayek, that is, full competition between private issuers of currency, is an
extremely interesting concept. It relates to the debate on the viability of unregulated banking and to
the literature on the historical experience with free banking.6
The basic idea seems to be as follows: creating the possibility of banks issuing currency would open
the way to competition. Banks could issue non-interest-bearing certificates and open cheque accounts
on  the  basis  of  their  own  distinct  registered  trade  mark.  Different  banks  would  issue  different
certificates,  that  is  currencies.  The  currencies  of  different  banks  would  trade  at  variable  exchange
rates. Competition and profit maximisation would lead to an equilibrium in which only banks paying
a  competitive  return  on  liabilities  could  survive.  Since  currency  corresponds  here  to  non-interest-
bearing certificates, the crucial requirement  is  the  maintenance  of  the  value  of  the  currency.  So,  in
equilibrium, only currencies guaranteeing a stable purchasing power would exist. Banks that failed to
build up such a reputation for their currency would lose customers and be driven out of business.
Hayek was of the opinion that his proposal would, if implemented, contribute to the overall stability
of  the  economy.  In  his  monograph  he  wrote:  “The  past  instability  of  the  market  economy  is  the
consequence of the exclusion of the most important regulator of the market mechanism, money, from
itself being regulated by the market process” (Denationalisation of Money – the Argument Refined,
p. 192; Hobart Paper Special No. 70, 2nd (Extended) Edition, IEA (1978); italics in the original).
Let  me  now  examine  the  characteristics  of  the  equilibrium  envisaged  in  Hayek’s  proposal.7  The
marginal  costs  of  producing  and  issuing  a  currency  (in  the  form  of  notes  and  coin)  are  rather  low
(close  to  zero).8  In  the  context  of  the  type  of  competition  envisaged  by  Hayek,  the  nominal  rate  of
interest would be driven (close) to zero. If the real rate of interest required by lenders to lend funds to
borrowers were positive (say 3%), equilibrium in the loan market would require that lenders would
have to be rewarded by a rate of deflation equal to this real rate. This would produce an outcome that
has been advocated as a normative rule for inflation by Friedman in the past, that is, in a situation in
which money is non-interest-bearing, the optimal rate of inflation should be set equal to the negative
of the real rate of interest. This is analogous, in this context, to the well-known correlation between
free competition and efficiency (Pareto optimality).
Hayek’s  privatisation  proposal  would,  initially  at  least,  involve  a  multiplicity  of  privately  issued
moneys.  If  these  failed  to  trade  at  par,  which  is  not  unlikely  given  that  the  financial  health  of  the
different issuers is likely to be different, then it is also likely that a multiplicity of exchange rates will
also emerge between these privately issued currencies. So long as there is no restriction imposed on
the holding of the different currencies, those that are likely to depreciate in value would, according to
Hayek’s logic, be driven out of existence, leading to a situation in which only currencies with stable
values would remain in existence.
Hayek believed that such competition between currencies was a discovery process, which would lead
to a stable non-inflationary outcome. In this respect, it may be best to let Hayek speak for himself,
which I do by quoting from his Denationalisation of Money: “Indeed, if, as I am convinced, the main
                                                     
6 Hayek’s  proposal  must  be  distinguished  from  free  banking,  which  refers  to  a  monetary  system  without  a
central  bank,  in  which  private  banks  would  be  allowed  to  issue  currency  and  bank  deposits  without
restriction.  As  practised  in  the  19th  century,  this  version  of  free  banking  involved  banknotes  being
redeemable in gold and silver coin. (see Lawrence H White, Free Banking  in  Britain,  Theory,  Experience,
and Debate, 1800 – 1845. Institute of Economic Affairs, London, 1995).
It should be noted that, in Hayek’s proposal, equilibrium is assumed to exist and to be stable, and information
is complete, symmetric and acquired at no cost. See Charles Goodhart, The Evolution of Central Banks, MIT
Press, 1988.
7
8 This is the assumption made by Milton Friedman in his seminal paper, “The Optimum Quantity of Money” in
“The Optimum Quantity of Money and other Essays”, Aldine Publishing Company, Chicago, 1969.
3
BIS Review   66/1999
advantage  of  the  market  order  is  that  prices  will  convey  to  the  acting  individuals  the  relevant
information, only the constant observation of the course of current prices of particular commodities
can provide information on the direction in which more or less money ought to be spent. Money is not
a tool of policy that can achieve particular foreseeable results by control of its quantity. But it should
be  part  of  the  self-steering  mechanism  by  which  individuals  are  constantly  induced  to  adjust  their
activities to circumstances on which they have information only through the abstract signals of prices.
It should be a serviceable link in the process that communicates the effects of events never  wholly
known to anybody and that is required to maintain an order in which the plans of participating persons
match” (p. 192/193).
Nevertheless,  despite  Hayek’s  claims  for  this  discovery  process,  most  economists  would  argue  that
free  competition  with  respect  to  money  couldn’t  guarantee  either  a  stable  or  an  efficient  outcome.
This is the fundamental point.
In order to try to understand and assess Hayek’s proposal, it is essential to take a closer look at money
and  its  role  in  the  economy.  This  is  best  done  by,  as  it  were,  first  breaking  money  up  into  its
constituent functions. The classic textbook treatment of the functions of money is still valid: money
fulfils three functions, namely that of (i) a unit of account, (ii) a means of payment and (iii) a store of
value.
The  use  of  money  as  a  unit  of  account  is,  arguably,  the  most  basic  monetary  function.  It  is  the
numeraire, that is, the unit for quoting prices, for drawing funds,  for  negotiating  contracts,  and  for
performing economic calculations. In this regard, money is a basic convention of society, such as the
language and the standards for measurement. This seems to be a very Hayek-like way of looking at
money.
Indeed, the fundamental problem in economics for Hayek is that of co-ordinating the plans of many
independent  individuals.  Competition  through  the  market  system  leads  to  such  a  co-ordination.
Individuals,  acting  in  their  own  self-interest,  respond  to  price  signals.  Prices,  in  turn,  reflect  the
information  available  in  society.  Price  signals  allow  the  transmission  of  previously  unknown
information in the most synthetic and relevant way for the purpose of economic calculus. Now, prices
– impersonal signals that provide for an extensive social division of labour – are expressed in terms of
money. Irving Fisher coined the term “money yardstick”.9
The unit of account represented by the respective unit of money (that is, the euro, the US dollar, the
Japanese yen, etc.) is a metric or measuring tape. With inflation or deflation, the measuring tape keeps
changing all the time. The unit of account, as represented by money, becomes elastic and of uncertain
dimension at any one time and of even more uncertain dimension over extended periods of time into
the future. Inflation or deflation, therefore, means that the common unit-of-account language or, say,
money language, for which the unit of account provides the foundations, is changing all the time. And
uncertain  inflation,  which  tends  to  accompany  high  inflation,  means  that  the  unit  of  account  is
changing in uncertain ways.
This impairs the efficiency of the common money language  and,  therefore,  communication  and  co-
ordination in the economy. “Its undependability impairs the meeting of minds between borrowers and
lenders  and  other  transactors;  it  impairs  economic  calculation  and  co-ordination”  (Greenfield  and
Yeager, 1983).10 One of these authors (Yeager, 1983)11 invites his readers to “consider how difficult
constructing a house would be (ordering and fitting together the components, appliances, and all the
rest)  if  the  unit  of  length,  the  metre  or  the  foot,  kept  changing  and  accordingly  were  perceived  by
different persons to have different sizes. Consider how preposterous it would be for the length of the
metre  to  fluctuate  according  to  supply  and  demand  in  the  market  for  metre  sticks.  Yet  our  dollar
                                                     
9
Irving Fisher, The Money Illusion, Adelphi Company Publishers, New York, 1928.
See Greenfield and Yeager (1983), “A Laissez-Faire Approach to Monetary Stability”, Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, Vol. 15, pp 302 – 315.
See Yeager (1983), “Stable Money and Free Market Currencies”, Cato Journal, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp 305 –
326.
10
11 
BIS Review   66/1999
4
suffers  from  a  comparable  absurdity  –  or  a  worse  one,  in  view  of  the  associated  macroeconomic
disorders.”
Money  used  as  a  unit  of  account  has  characteristics  of  a  public  good.  Given  the  unit-of-account
function, the medium-of-exchange and store-of-value functions have traditionally, but not exclusively,
been supplied by private enterprise.
Just as stable money is of crucial importance for a stable price level in a macroeconomic context, a
stable price level is of equal significance for the efficient performance of money in a microeconomic
context. A stable price level is, in principle, of central importance in ensuring that the three famous
microeconomic functions which money provides are allowed to operate with maximum efficiency.12
From the point of view of the public involvement in the economy, the unit of account is of the greatest
importance.
Efficient  co-ordination  in  the  economy  cannot  occur  unless  the  various  agents  involved  (that  is,
virtually  everybody)  speak  the  same  money  language.  The  institution  that  allows  them  to  do  so  is
money itself, but more specifically the unit-of-account function of money. The decentralised plans of
hundreds  of  millions  of  consumers  and  millions  of  producers  and  distributors  cannot  mesh
harmoniously in the aggregate if this common money language, as encapsulated in the unit-of-account
function of money, is missing. The efficiency of this language in performing this vital co-ordination
role  depends  crucially  on  whether  the  unit  of  account  always  means  the  same  thing  to  different
individuals both at one and the same moment and over time. A necessary condition for it to mean the
same thing is that price stability prevails both at any moment in time and with a credible commitment
that it will continue to prevail into the indefinite future. From this point of view, the commitment to
maintaining price stability is like the standardisation of units of measurement.
It  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  problems  in  the  Hayek  proposal  arising  from  the  inherent  dynamics
behind the discovery process, which would characterise competition between banks in the supply of
currency.  There  are  many  questions  left  unanswered  by  Hayek  about  how  the  discovery  process
would work in practice. How would the economy function during this discovery process? Since bad
issuers  are,  according  to  the  theory,  driven  out  by  the  fact  that  they  have  recourse  to  inflationary
issuance,  this  suggests  that  the  discovery  process  would  itself  be  characterised  by  inflation.
Furthermore,  if,  say,  a  single  stable  currency  did  initially  emerge  from  the  discovery  process,  how
could one be sure that, having established a monopoly, the private issuer would not then, in a time-
inconsistent fashion that has become all too familiar under politically dependent central banks, start to
engage in inflationary over-issue so as to maximise seigniorage? And even if a few issuers were to
survive,  how  could  one  be  sure  that  the  resulting  oligopoly  situation  would  not  result  in  collusion
and/or instabilities?
Another potential problem with the Hayek proposal is that the real rate of interest would tend to vary
across the business cycle in response to the short-run pressures of supply and demand for loans and so
too, according to his scheme, would the rate of deflation. And, of course, a steady rate of deflation
would only emerge if the whole private sector discovery process is itself stable, which any reasonable
person might be permitted to doubt. It would therefore appear that the outcome earnestly desired by
Hayek, a money of stable value, would not be achieved in practice by his own proposal of competing
currencies.
In a situation in which money were to be issued by many different issuers as in Hayek’s proposal and,
either because of over-issuing by some agents or because of poor investment decisions, these issues
failed to trade at parity, then many different numeraires could emerge. In principle, there could, in the
end,  be  as  many  numeraires  as  there  are  issuers.  In  the  presence  of  many  numeraires  or,  more
meaningfully, in the absence of a single numeraire, financial communication, based on the common
                                                     
12
As is well known by now, the Governing Council of the ECB has not opted for strict price stability as an
objective  but  has  rather  defined  price  stability  “as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of
Consumer Prices (HIPC) for the euro area of below 2%”. Price stability, according to this definition, “is to
be maintained over the medium term”.
5
BIS Review   66/1999
money  language  which  would  be  provided  by  a  single  numeraire,  would  degenerate.  This  would
probably  result  in  very  poor  co-ordination  in  the  economy,  with  the  efficiency  of  the  decentralised
decision-making  of  firms  and  households,  which  is  the  hallmark  of  capitalist  economies,  being
jeopardised and the productive potential of the economy being gravely endangered. The purely private
provision of a public good (the unit-of-account function of money) would, in this case, be sub-optimal
since private issuers cannot easily underpin the single numeraire. Nor do they have an incentive to do
so since they cannot capture the vast social benefits of the common monetary language provided by
the unit-of-account function of money.
There are further issues that any proposal in the spirit of Hayek would have to confront. First, the use
of money in transactions makes it subject to network externalities. Network externalities, in turn, may
inhibit free competition and may make it difficult, if not impossible, to dislodge an incumbent issuer
who  has  resorted  to  inflationary  issuance.  In  other  words,  networking  externalities  would  inhibit
Hayek’s  discovery  process  from  working  as  he  envisaged  it.  Network  externalities  also  provide  a
rationale  for  regulation.  Second,  the  assumption  of  complete,  symmetric  and  free  information
implicitly assumed in the Hayek proposal does not apply to banking. The remark is equally valid in
terms of banking activities (for example, a fundamental activity  in  banking  is  the  evaluation  of  the
creditworthiness  of  borrowers)  and  banks  themselves  (the  special  nature  of  the  balance  sheets  of
banks makes their valuation and risk assessment particularly difficult). In the absence of symmetric
information,  important  issues  of  moral  hazard,  adverse  selection  and  systemic  stability  become
relevant.13
Networking externalities therefore mean that there is no guarantee that new entrants into the market
for  supplying  money  would  be  able  to  dislodge  the  incumbent  issuer(s)  if  these  resorted  to
inflationary issuance, given the inertia that is  an  inherent  part  of  phenomena  subject  to  networking
effects  such  as  currencies.  In  any  case,  why  should  people  be  willing  to  believe  the  claims  of  any
potential new entrant that its currency will, unlike that of the incumbent(s), turn out to be stable? In
my opinion, there are too many unanswered questions for Hayek’s proposal for currency competition
to be a viable candidate for society searching for a stable monetary system.
Furthermore, it is very unlikely that the kind of uncertainty about future prices which Hayek wanted
to banish with his proposal (“..a money of stable value is really the best we can hope for”) would be
the  outcome  if  his  proposal  were  to  be  implemented.  Hayek’s  discovery  process  could,  on  the
contrary,  entail  substantial  costs  in  practice.  According  to  his  own  logic  of  free  competition  in
privately  issued  currencies,  the  nominal  interest  rate  would  be  driven  to  zero  with,  as  already
explained, deflation being the outcome. Hayek’s proposal would not therefore deliver what it seems to
promise, namely price stability. Under his proposal, there would still be uncertainty about the future
price level.
3.  Hayek and Gresham’s Law
Under Hayek’s scheme, market forces would determine the relative values of the different competing
currencies. In other words, the exchange rates between the competing currencies would float freely.
People would not want to hold on to the currency of an issuer that was expected to depreciate relative
to  one  that  was  expected  to  hold  its  value  in  terms  of  purchasing  power  over  goods  and  services.
Therefore, good money that maintained its purchasing power would drive out the depreciation- and
inflation-prone  bad  money.  However,  it  is  not  inconceivable  that  competing  private  issuers  would
decide to collude by fixing the relative values of their currencies. They would do this by agreeing to
intervene mutually whenever any of the currencies in question came under pressure in the market for
these currencies. This would be easier to do, and would be more likely to succeed, if there were only a
few issuers left after the Hayekian discovery process has reached some equilibrium state.
Although  this  could  be  the  outcome  in  a  Hayek  world  of  competing  private  currencies,  it  would
clearly not be appreciated by Hayek himself. This is because if some arrangement were to be arrived
                                                     
13
See, for example, Goodhart, op. cit.
BIS Review   66/1999
6
at by private issuers to counter the tendency for the values of the different moneys to fluctuate against
each other, then the bad money would begin to drive out the good money, the exact opposite of what
Hayek himself espoused. In other words, Gresham’s Law would, most likely, start to apply.
As Hayek himself put it: “If the law makes two kinds of money perfect substitutes for the payment of
debts and forces creditors to accept a coin of smaller content of gold in the place of one with a larger
content,  debtors  will,  of  course,  pay  only  in  the  former  and  find  a  more  profitable  use  for  the
substance of the latter”.14 And: “(Gresham’s Law) is not  false,  but  it  applies  only  if  a  fixed  rate  of
exchange between the different forms of money is enforced” (italics in original15). The bad (i.e. over-
issued  and  inflation-prone)  money  would  start  to  drive  out  the  good  (i.e.  well-managed  and
maintaining  stable  purchasing  power)  money.  More  of  the  bad  money  would  be  produced  at  the
expense of the good money and inflation would accelerate.
In  principle,  Hayek’s  proposal  also  works  with  national  currencies  produced  monopolistically  by
central banks, provided the currencies in question are convertible and can be freely exchanged against
each  other  on  foreign  exchange  markets.  In  such  settings,  good  national  currencies  will  tend  to
increase in importance relative to bad, inflation-prone, national currencies. This naturally constrains
the ability of national governments to use “their exclusive power to issue money in order to defraud
and plunder the people” (op. cit.). In this context, I think it is fair to say that the widespread use of the
Deutschmark,  for  example,  as  an  international  investment  currency  is  symptomatic  of  the  enduring
success  of  the  Bundesbank  in  maintaining,  in  relative  terms,  the  internal  purchasing  power  of  the
Deutschmark.  However,  as  long  as  national  currencies  remain  legal  tender  only  within  their  own
national boundaries, the scope for good national currencies to drive out bad national currencies may
not  be  as  complete  as  in  the  Hayek  world  of  competing  private  currencies  where  none  of  these
currencies has the status of legal tender. In other words, Hayek’s competition between currencies goes
beyond  the  limited  competition  we  have  seen  on  foreign  exchange  markets  between  national
currencies.
If  this  limited  competition  between  national  currencies  is  not  sufficient  to  constrain  domestic
monetary policy not to engage in excessive monetary creation, then a government may decide to tie its
hands further by opting for a currency board arrangement. This would eliminate the possibility of any
discretionary  domestic  monetary  policy  action  since  the  domestic  component  of  the  monetary  base
could only change in response to a change in the foreign currency component of the base. Despite the
only  limited  experience  with  the  currency  board  arrangement  to  date,  the  experience  would
nevertheless allow us to declare it, provisionally, to be a success.
Some governments which have opted for this arrangement have found, however, that during the recent
financial  market  turbulence,  their  economies  were  not  immune  from  contagious  spillover  despite
having fairly healthy economic fundamentals. This is the result of the currency board arrangement not
being  an  unequivocal  one  since  the  government  in  question  retains  the  option  of  revoking  the
arrangement.  Financial  markets  will  therefore  factor  this  possibility  into  their  calculations  and
actions, ensuring that these countries suffer some contagious effects. This has stimulated a debate as
to whether it would not be better for such currency board countries to go beyond the currency board
arrangement and opt for full “dollarisation”, and allow the domestic currency to be replaced entirely
by the “dollar” for all transactions.
Hayek espoused the denationalisation of currencies. He recommended that this be achieved through a
comprehensive  privatisation  of  the  supply  of  money.  It  is  notable  that,  of  the  two  routes  to
denationalisation of currencies that have been taken so far, neither follows the route recommended by
Hayek. One is the route taken by the governments of the EU11 through an international agreement of
equals,  which  has  resulted  in  the  arrival  of  the  euro.  Another  route  is  through  so-called
                                                     
14
15
See Denationalisation of Money, op. cit., p. 142.
See also Denationalisation of Money, op. cit., p. 142 
7
BIS Review   66/1999
“dollarisation”, whereby a country voluntarily relinquishes its own currency in favour of adopting a
foreign currency, the “dollar”.
It appears to me, therefore, that under the Hayek proposal, we are likely to get either one or other of
the  following  unfavourable  outcomes.  On  the  one  hand,  we  could  see  the  emergence  of  floating
exchange rates between different privately issued moneys, resulting in an uncertain discovery process
without  any  guarantee  of  a  stable  outcome,  along  with  a  deterioration  in  economic  communication
and co-ordination in the economy overall. On the other hand, any attempt by private issuers to pre-
empt  these  outcomes  by  fixing  the  exchange  rates  between  their  currencies  would  probably  trigger
Gresham’s Law and result in accelerating inflation.
4.
The importance of inside money
Since  the  birth  of  central  banking,  governments  –  via  the  central  bank  –  have  supplied  financial
instruments  that  have  simultaneously  fulfilled  all  of  the  three  functions  of  money  I  have  already
mentioned. They have suppressed competition in the supply of currency and bank reserves (that is, so-
called  outside  money).  However,  they  have  not  suppressed  competition  in  the  supply  of  the  other
components  of  money,  that  is,  so-called  inside  money,  which  has  been  supplied  exclusively  by  the
private sector. Until just  recently,  inside  money  consisted  exclusively  of  bank  deposits  which  were
supplied  competitively  by  banks.  However,  governments  have  nevertheless  restricted  the  supply  of
means  of  payment  and  stores  of  value  by  the  private  sector  in  the  past.  But  this  has  been  very
substantially  liberalised  over  the  last  20  years  or  so.  The  result  is  that  the  availability  of  efficient
means of payment that can also serve as good stores of value (and thus as a hedge against inflation)
has  improved  almost  beyond  recognition  compared  with  what  was  available  during  the  period  of
financial repression.
Although  governments  have  retained  a  monopoly  on  the  production  of  high-powered  money,  they
have  always  permitted  and  indeed  increasingly  encouraged  competition  in  the  production  of  inside
money. The upshot of this is that outside money now comprises only a rather small fraction of total
money  balances  (taking,  say,  a  broad  definition  of  the  money  stock).  After  undergoing  a  dramatic
decline, particularly in the period following the Second World War, it now ranges from about 1% in
the United States and about 5% in the United Kingdom to about 6% in Germany.16 Governments have
retained  a  monopoly  over  the  production  of  high-powered  money.  There  are  very  good  reasons  for
this. Notes and coin issued by the central bank and, in some cases, by the government are unique in
the  following  sense:  they  are  the  only  instrument  that  can  mediate  a  transaction  and  settle  it  with
finality at one and the same time, which it does by virtue of its legal tender status. Currency is also
unique in that it supplies the unit of account for the whole economy.
Although  privately  supplied  inside  money  and  publicly  supplied  outside  money  compete  with  one
another as transaction media and stores of value, there is nevertheless a kind of symbiotic relationship
between  the  two.  This  is,  first,  because  inside  money  (predominantly  bank  deposits)  may  owe  its
acceptability  to  the  fact  that  its  issuers  promise,  and  indeed  are  legally  bound,  to  redeem  it  [either
immediately  (sight  deposits),  upon  maturity  (time  deposits)  or  after  a  period  of  notice  (savings
deposits)] in outside money and, second, because outside money provides the unit of account for the
whole  system  without  which  inside  money  might  be  less  acceptable  in  the  absence  of  a  single
(commodity) numeraire.
Seen  in  this  light,  it  appears  that  Hayek  was  correct  in  arguing  that  efficiency  and  (price)  stability
would be enhanced if money were to be supplied privately and competitively. Indeed, the fact is that
most of conventionally measured money stocks are now comprised predominantly of inside money,
i.e. money supplied by private enterprise, but more specifically the medium-of-exchange and store-of-
value functions of this inside money. Hayek’s arguments for free competition in the supply of money
are therefore, in principle, applicable to these two functions of inside money. However, I believe he
                                                     
16
Both  the  US  and  German  figures  are  corrected  for  estimated  holdings  of  dollar  and  DM  currency  held
outside the US and Germany respectively.
BIS Review   66/1999
8
was mistaken in thinking that the economy would best be served if his recommendation were to apply
to all aspects or functions of money. His recommendation neglected the public good aspect of money,
which derives from its function as a unit of account. Money with a stable purchasing power serves
agents,  who  do  not  even  use  it  as  a  medium  of  exchange  or  a  store  of  value,  as  the  universally
acceptable unit of account.
It could be argued that, with Monetary Union in Europe, two things have happened which play a role
in the current discussion. First, the geographical reach of the new unit of account, the euro, has been
extended  dramatically,  relative  to  that  of  its  forerunner  currencies  (or  forerunner  units  of  account).
Second,  the  degree  of  competition  between  private  sector  agents  in  the  provision  of  the  other  two
functions  of  money,  those  of  a  medium  of  exchange  and  store  of  value,  will  almost  certainly  be
enhanced, leading – over time – to considerable improvements in the quality of the latter.
The  introduction  of  the  new  single  unit  of  account  means  that  there  has,  as  from  the  beginning  of
January this year, already been a direct and immediate welfare gain for both producers and consumers
since  the  “moneyness”  of  existing  money  balances  has  been  greatly  enhanced.  There  are  several
sources  of  this  welfare  gain.  To  mention  just  one:  the  merger  of  the  currencies  of  the  Euro 11
countries into the single currency, the euro, last January has – in one fell swoop – eliminated foreign
exchange transaction costs for all cross-border transactions within the euro area.
Indeed, it is because of the greatly extended reach of the new single unit of account that the scope
available to the private sector to improve the quality of money has been greatly enhanced. This will
operate  through  the  new  competitive  opportunities  for  the  banking  and  financial  industries  in  the
whole  euro  area.  Welfare  will  be  further  enhanced  over  time  as  the  single  currency  imparts  the
necessary critical mass to the single money and financial services market in Europe.
5.
Hayek transposed onto the world of the new payments technologies and e-money
Hayek’s analysis and comments related to a world of what might be called analogue money, that is,
money that was represented as book entries (bank deposits, so-called inside money) or in the form of
paper notes or metal coin (so-called outside money). Despite the fact that many earlier predictions of
the demise of paper money turned out to be false, I think it is safe to say that it is at last making way
to  the  ongoing  digitalisation  revolution  as  reflected  in  the  dramatic  progress  in  computer  and
communications technologies. These developments are now underpinning rapid advances in payment
and  settlement  infrastructures.  It  has  enabled  new  payment  media  to  emerge  that  compete  directly
with  the  means  of  payment,  that  is  notes  and  coin,  issued  by  the  central  bank  and  backed  by
government. New payment media take many forms, but the most commonly known are prepaid cards
and debit cards. Still more advanced forms of digital money, such as electronic network money, have
now become technically feasible and may soon make their commercial appearance. These present new
opportunities for a much more efficient payment system, but at the same time pose new challenges for
monetary arrangements and monetary policy.
An aspect worth emphasising here is the fact that central bank money in the form of notes and coin
does  not  need  a  payments  infrastructure  in  order  to  mediate  payments.  As  has  already  been  noted,
central bank money can perform the payment and settlement functions (with finality) at one and the
same time, by virtue of its legal tender status. However, privately issued financial instruments (bank
deposits, for example) are not money in this sense unless complemented by a payments infrastructure.
The  analogue  payments  structures  with  which  we  have  become  so  familiar  in  many  countries  are
cheques  and  cheque  clearing.  The  payments  technologies  now  becoming  available  to  the  private
sector  are  undergoing  unprecedented  improvements.  The  effects  are  likely  to  be  profound.  Their
widespread  application  could  eventually  mean  radical  rethinking  about  what  we  understand  by
money.  In  particular,  they  will  increasingly  provide  private  enterprise  with  far  greater  scope  to
compete directly with central bank notes and coin as payment media.
There is a very specific part of this process which deserves special attention. When there is a delay
between a transaction and its settlement, as is the case in most existing privately supplied paper-based
9
BIS Review   66/1999
payment  and  settlement  infrastructures  (using  cheques  and  paper-based  direct  debits,  for  example),
there  is  an  element  of  risk  attached  to  most  of  the  payments  effected  in  this  way.  A  number  of
different  types  of  risk  are  involved  –  credit  risk,  interest  rate  risk,  operational  risk,  etc.  The  risks
involved in these privately based payments media imparted a comparative advantage to currency as a
transaction  medium,  since  the  latter  was  the  only  instrument  that  could  perform  a  payment  and
settlement function (with finality) at one and the same time. And it did so by virtue of its legal tender
status. This meant that notes and coin facilitated transactions in anonymous market situations since
the seller never had to concern himself/herself with the creditworthiness of the buyer.
However,  an  important  feature  of  the  new  electronic  payment  and  settlement  infrastructure  is  its
ability (at least potentially) to compress the transactions settlement time lag to what is virtually zero
in economic time. This creates an essentially new situation which has the potential to obviate many, if
not  all,  of  the  types  of  risk  normally  encountered  in  executing  payments  and  their  settlement  with
inside money and, in principle, allows a much wider array of assets, especially marketable assets, to
be mobilised as transaction media. The new technology allows the vendor to verify that the purchaser
possesses sufficient funds to cover the transaction and, in principle, permits a transfer of these funds
to the vendor’s bank account in real time. It further allows the vendor to verify in real time that the
funds have indeed been credited to his/her account. This allows the settlement of the transaction with
finality to occur at virtually the same time as the transaction itself.
Privately supplied payment instruments therefore now have the potential, when complemented with
the  most  up-to-date  computer  and  communications  technologies,  to  provide  a  more  attractive
alternative to notes and coin as a transaction medium. And, given that the former are also potentially
much more efficient in a number of ways, it is not inconceivable that one could face the prospect of a
rapid erosion of the role of notes and coin as transaction media in the not-too-distant future.
The  type  of  networking  effects  that  support  the  acceptance  of  the  euro  are  the  same  as  those
supporting the growth of electronic competition to notes and coin. More specifically, the price people
are willing to pay for the use of electronic means of payment increases with the number of existing
users (demand-side economies of scale), while the price they would have to pay would be likely to
fall  as  a  result  of  declining  unit  costs  of  production  as  output  expands  (supply-side  economies  of
scale, which tend to be large for  networking  products)  and  as  competition  forces  lower  costs  to  be
passed on to customers. This dynamic would, of course, only start to take effect once a critical mass
of usage has been attained.
There may also be forces promoting the growth of electronic means of payment at work which are
unique to the euro area and the changeover process to Stage Three (B) of Economic and Monetary
Union. The conventional channels of access to a currency at the retail level (that is notes and coin)
will not be available in the case of the euro for the first three years, that is throughout Stage Three (A)
of Monetary Union. The only means of access to the euro for households, and possibly for many small
firms, may therefore be via electronic media, both electronic money and electronic  access  products
that  allow  scriptural  money  (bank  deposits)  denominated  in  euro  to  be  mobilised  for  transaction
purposes.  The  non-availability  of  the  euro  in  the  form  of  notes  and  coin  could  therefore  impart  an
extra stimulus to the growth of e-money and electronic access products.
The  assumption  from  the  current  perspective  is  that  all  of  these  new  payment  instruments  will  be
issued  by  private  issuers.  Despite  fairly  extensive  discussions  of  the  topic  among  central  bankers,
there has been no suggestion that central banks should issue e-money or be involved in the new retail
electronic payments infrastructure as an active participant. Therefore, the growth of electronic means
of payment will amount to an important further step in the process of privatisation in the field of the
payments and monetary system, especially because the new digital payment media compete directly
with the analogue-based media (notes and coin) supplied by the central bank. If this were to happen to
such  an  extent  that  central  bank  money  were  driven  out  of  the  business  of  retail  payments,  then
BIS Review   66/1999
10
Hayek’s  vision  would  almost  have  been  achieved.17  But  with  distinct  differences  because,  first,  it
would have been achieved by a gradual evolution in financial market innovation and by improvements
in payment technologies, rather than by the type of top-down legislative decree that he himself had
envisaged to remove the central bank entirely from monetary management and, second, that evolution
would have occurred without jeopardising the single unit of account.
This  gradual  process  of  privatisation  is  one  which  central  banks  might  logically  be  expected  to
oppose, but this has not been the case. On the contrary, they are actively taking steps to help promote
the  growth  of  electronic  substitutes  for  notes  and  coin.  They  are  doing  so  by  seeking  agreement
between  the  competent  official  bodies  and  potential  private  sector  issuers  on  standardisation  –  the
objective  being  to  promote  inter-operability  between  different  privately  supplied  alternatives.
Although  this  might  seem  like  the  proverbial  turkeys  voting  for  Christmas,  central  bankers  place  a
very high priority on the smooth and efficient working of the payment system at both the retail and
wholesale levels.
Therefore, the ECB considers it essential that the following minimum requirements be fulfilled:
• 
• 
issuers of electronic money must be subject to prudential supervision;
the issuance must  be  subject  to  sound  and  transparent  legal  arrangements,  technical  security,
protection against criminal abuse and monetary statistics reporting;
  issuers  of  electronic  money  must  be  legally  obliged,  at  the  request  of  the  holders,  to  redeem
electronic money against central bank money at par;
the  possibility  must  exist  for  central  banks  to  impose  reserve  requirements  on  all  issuers  of
electronic money.
The ECB has also identified two further objectives, the pursuit of which it deems to be desirable: the
inter-operability of electronic money schemes and the adoption of adequate guarantee, insurance or
loss-sharing  schemes  to  protect  depositors.  The  third  requirement  mentioned  is  of  particular
significance in the context of the current discussion. This is because, from a monetary policy point of
view, “the redeemability requirement is, inter alia, necessary in order to preserve the unit-of-account
function of money, to maintain price stability by avoiding any unconstrained issuance of electronic
money, and to safeguard the controllability of the liquidity conditions and short-term interest rates set
by the ESCB” (p. 106, ECB Annual Report, 1998).
If the whole process triggered by the availability of new electronic retail means of payment is finally
brought to its logical conclusion, as suggested by the dynamics of technological development and free
competition,  central  banks  and  governments  will  be  confronted  with  a  very  specific  problem  of
pivotal  significance:  can  the  unit  of  account  be  separated  from  the  means  of  payment,  while  still
remaining  a  viable  unit  of  account  and  playing  the  crucial  role  of  providing  the  common  money
language  for  the  whole  economy?  If  the  means  of  payment  embodying  the  unit  of  account,  that  is
notes and coin, is – over time – eliminated as a transaction medium by virtue of the competition of
the  emerging  digital  equivalents  issued  by  the  private  sector,  would  the  familiar  existing  units  of
account, the euro, the US dollar, the pound sterling, etc., continue to mean anything? And, if not, what
should be the official response? I don’t propose to address either of these issues today, but you may
rest  assured  that  they  are  crucial  to  our  concerns  regarding  the  future,  albeit  probably  somewhat
distant future.
Hayek  seems  to  have  had  very  little  doubt  but  that  private  enterprise,  operating  in  a  largely
unregulated environment, would deliver a monetary system that is stable, safe and efficient. However,
I remain rather sceptical whether the private sector can cope with all the externalities involved in the
provision of a smoothly working monetary and financial system. It must nevertheless be conceded that
the  private  sector  is  increasingly  helping  to  evolve  a  monetary  and  financial  system,  supported  by
                                                     
17
Central bank money could, of course, remain as a transactions and settlement medium at the  wholesale
level in the interbank market.
11
BIS Review   66/1999
increasingly  sophisticated  payments  infrastructures,  that  promises  to  be  significantly  more  efficient
than  the  system  it  is  gradually  displacing.  There  is,  accordingly,  no  strong  case  to  be  made  for
attempting  to  introduce  such  a  system  by  fiat.  It  is  preferable  that  it  should  evolve  by  piecemeal
engineering,  rather  than  by  some  abrupt  legislative  change  as  sought  by  proponents  of  competing
currencies and free banking, of which Hayek could, with some justification, be regarded as the high
priest.  It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  central  bank  will  continue  to  play,  during  this
transitional period and afterwards, an important role as a regulator of the financial system by, inter
alia, setting the rules for competition between private suppliers of inside money.
6.
Hayek’s legacy and Monetary Union
Hayek referred, in 1978 (op. cit.), to the possibility of Monetary Union in clear and strong terms. He
put it this way: “though I strongly sympathise with the desire to complete the economic unification of
Western Europe by completely freeing the flow of money between them, I have grave doubts about
doing so by creating a new European currency managed by any sort of supra-national authority. Quite
apart  from  the  extreme  unlikelihood  that  the  member  countries  would  agree  on  the  policy  to  be
pursued in practice by a common monetary authority (and the practical inevitability of some countries
getting  a  worse  currency  than  they  have  now),  it  seems  highly  unlikely  that  it  would  be  better
administered than the present national currencies”.
At  one  level,  Monetary  Union  encompassing  the  Euro 11  countries  could,  therefore,  be  seen  as  a
project  diametrically  opposed  to  the  type  of  scheme  advocated  by  Hayek  according  to  the
aforementioned  quotes.  Instead  of  allowing  the  private  sector  to  compete  in  issuing  their  own
currencies, the single currency was introduced by governments coming together and introducing the
euro in a top-down fashion by legislative decree, while continuing to prohibit the private sector from
issuing  currency.  Any  attempt  by  the  private  sector  to  issue  banknotes  or  coins  is  counterfeiting,  a
serious criminal offence.
At another level, one can see many strands in Hayek’s thinking that may have influenced the course of
the events leading to Monetary Union in subtle ways. What has happened with the introduction of the
euro  has  indeed  achieved  the  denationalisation  of  money,  as  advocated  by  Hayek,  at  least  in  the
Euro 11  countries.  Furthermore,  the  euro  is  being  managed  by  a  central  bank  (the  ECB)  that  is
protected from political interference by a Treaty (the Maastricht Treaty), to which all Member States
are signatories. All national central banks that comprise the Eurosystem are now independent of their
respective Euro 11 governments and, according  to  their  respective  statutes,  cannot  take  instructions
from these governments.
Moreover,  the  Eurosystem  is  supranational  and  does  not  therefore  have  any  natural  political
counterpart  in  the  form  of  a  supranational  government  with  full  executive  powers.  This  further
underpins  the  independence  of  the  Eurosystem  and  enables  it  to  pursue  its  mandated  ultimate
objective, that is price stability, without interference from government. Thus, monetary policy in the
Euro 11  countries  has  been  denationalised  and  is  being  conducted  by  a  supranational  central  bank,
which  is  politically  independent  of  the  governments  of  the  Member  States.  Furthermore,  any
monetary financing of the public sector or privileged access to financial institutions is prohibited. The
separation between public finance and monetary policy is thereby ensured.
This is very much in line with views expressed by Hayek:18 “It may still be true that, if there were full
agreement  as  to  what  monetary  policy  ought  to  aim  for,  an  independent  authority  fully  protected
against political pressure and free to decide on the means to be employed in order to achieve the ends
it has been assigned might be the best arrangement. The old argument in favour of independent central
banks  still  has  great  merit”.  He  goes  on  to  elaborate  that  “under  present  conditions  we  have  little
choice but to limit monetary policy by prescribing its goals rather than its specific actions”. He then
comments on employment and price stability as goals for monetary policy, concluding that “the two
aims  are  not  necessarily  in  conflict  provided  that  the  requirements  for  monetary  stability  are  given
                                                     
18
Friedrich von Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty, Routledge, London, 1960.
BIS Review   66/1999
12
first place and the rest of economic policy is adapted to them”. Last, but not least, Hayek emphasised
(again  strongly)  the  dangers  from  monetary  financing:  “if  we  are  to  preserve  a  functioning  market
economy, nothing can be more urgent than that we dissolve the unholy marriage between monetary
and  fiscal  policy,  long  clandestine,  but  formally  consecrated  with  the  victory  of  Keynesian
economics”19 (italics in original).
7.
Conclusions
Hayek  himself  has  explained  the  objectives  of  his  proposal:  “the  abolition  of  the  government
monopoly  of  money  was  conceived  to  prevent  the  bouts  of  acute  inflation  and  deflation,  which
plagued the world for the last sixty years”. Hayek was very clear about where to put the blame: “the
basic tools of civilisation – language, morals, law and money – are all results of spontaneous growth
and not of design, and of the last two organised power has got hold and thoroughly corrupted them”.20
Or, as he put it later, in even stronger terms: “the history of government management of money has,
except for a few happy periods, been one of incessant fraud and deception”.21 The institutional reform
which  he  espoused  to  tackle  this  problem  was  indeed  radical.  It  involved,  as  we  have  seen,  the
denationalisation of money to be achieved by the complete abolition of the government’s monopoly
over  the  issue  of  fiat  money,  leaving  the  way  open  for  supply  of  money  to  be  determined  by
comprehensive private sector competition.
I would not be doing justice to Hayek if I neglected to mention that, at an earlier stage in his thinking,
he put forward proposals for controlling inflation which have now become the conventional wisdom.
In  chapter  21  of  his  famous  book  entitled  “The  Constitution  of  Liberty”  and  published  in  1960,  he
wonders, as I have just flagged, whether an independent monetary authority, fully protected against
political pressure and free to decide on the means to be employed in order to achieve the ends it has
been assigned, might be the best arrangement.
However,  he  seems  to  have  viewed  central  bank  independence  as  an  inadequate  solution  since,  as
early as the 1960s, he concluded that, in light of the high level of government debt, “…an effective
monetary policy can be conducted only in co-ordination with the financial policy of the government.
Co-ordination  in  this  respect,  however,  inevitably  means  that  whatever  nominally  independent
monetary  authorities  still  exist  have  in  fact  to  adjust  their  policy  to  that  of  the  government”  (see
Hayek  1960,  page  327).  I  think  it  is  now  clear  that  it  was  ideas  along  these  lines  that  were  the
inspiration behind the rules and procedures in the EU Treaty, and I refer in particular to Articles 104
and 104a.
In fact, I would argue that one reason for Hayek’s change of mind and his subsequent advocacy of
complete  privatisation  of  money,  as  revealed  by  the  views  expressed  in  Constitution  of  Liberty  in
1960  and  those  put  forward  in  Denationalisation  of  Money  in  1978,  is  to  be  found  in  his
disappointment with the trends in the monetary institutions during his lifetime. He seems to have said
as  much:  “…  high  hopes  of  what  could  be  expected  from  political  control  over  money  have  been
bitterly  disappointed.  …  unchecked  party  politics  and  stable  money  are  inherently  incompatible”
(italics  in  the  original).22  The  tentative  answer  to  Hayek’s  concern  –  the  now  classic  time
inconsistency-induced inflation bias – was finally found in institutional reform. In all industrialised
countries, monetary policy is now being managed by (more or less) independent central banks with
the key objective of maintaining price stability. Monetary financing of the public sector is excluded.
Monetary stability is protected by law and social consensus.
How would Hayek, if he were alive today, see EMU and the ECB? Let me hazard what is probably a
somewhat biased and speculative answer. The route to monetary union taken by member governments
                                                     
19
20
21
22
Friedrich von Hayek, 1978, op. cit.
Friedrich von Hayek, Law, Legislation and Liberty, University of Chicago Press, 1979.
Friedrich von Hayek, The Fatal Conceit: the Errors of Socialism, Routledge, 1988.
Friedrich von Hayek, Market Standards for Money, Economic Affairs, April–May 1986.
13
BIS Review   66/1999
and central banks was almost diametrically opposed to that espoused by him in his later writings. But
should he not welcome what we have achieved? Should he not be pleased that so much of his earlier
(1960) blueprint is now law?
I am convinced that he would welcome the fact that the ECB has not joined the new fashionable wave
arguing  that  money  does  not  matter.  It  is  very  easy  to  slip  into  the  trap  of  thinking  that  money  is
unimportant when inflation is low and to ignore the overwhelming evidence that all past episodes of
persistent inflation have been preceded, or been accompanied, by rapid money growth. Robert Lucas
in his Nobel Lecture has only recently reminded us of the facts and I quote: “…the prediction that
prices respond proportionately to changes in money in the long run, deduced by Hume in 1752 (and
by many other theorists, by many different routes, since), has received ample – I would say decisive –
confirmation, in data from many times and places” (p. 668).23 As I have already argued, the quality of
money,  which  has  to  do  with  how  well  it  performs  its  micro-economic  functions  of  medium  of
exchange, store of value and in particular unit of account, is related to the quantity of  money.  Too
much of the latter, relative to ex ante demand for money, can substantially impair the former. Since
inflation  is  ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon,  money  constitutes  a  natural,  firm  and  reliable
“nominal  anchor”  for  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at  price  stability.  This  accounts  for  why  money  is
given a prominent role in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.
Therefore, although the path taken to achieve denationalisation of money has been very different than
that advocated by Hayek, the ultimate objective being sought by Hayek, i.e. monetary independence
from political interference and price stability, has, to all intents and purposes, already been achieved.
Of course, I should add as an essential precautionary note that price stability is never fully achieved in
the sense that it is a forward-looking concept and the ECB must be eternally vigilant, and act in a pre-
emptive way, so as to ensure that inflationary pressures are not given an opportunity to translate into
actual  inflation.  Having  said  this,  however,  I  am  afraid  Hayek  might  not  be  in  favour  of  a  new
centralised authority with monopoly powers over base money. The Treaty of Maastricht is virtually
the very opposite of what Hayek proposed, because, among other things, the new monetary order in
the EU11 has been created not in an evolutionary process but in a “constructivist” way per statute at a
fixed date, i.e. the first of January this year.
I  am  convinced  that  the  EU11  governments  have,  in  principle,  taken  the  correct  route  to  monetary
union.  They  could  hardly  afford  to  take  what  might  have  been  an  enormous  risk  in  adopting  a
Hayekian discovery process as a route to monetary union, as had been advocated in the so-called hard
ECU  proposal.24  This  would  amount  to  experimenting  with  the  monetary  constitution,  a  very
dangerous  strategy.  Continuity  in  monetary  arrangements  and  institutions  is  of  the  essence.  A
premium must be placed on the tried and tested. It is therefore preferable to subscribe to a philosophy
of  piecemeal  engineering  in  the  reform  of  a  proven  monetary  system  by  allowing  it  to  evolve  in
response to the needs of the economy and to the opportunities provided by advances in technology in
an efficient fashion.
Although  the  hard  currency  proposal  has  not  been  adopted,  and  correctly  so  in  my  view,  it  could
nevertheless be plausibly argued that a kind of Hayekian discovery process has indeed been triggered
by the introduction of the euro. This is because, with the introduction of the euro and the dramatically
extended  geographical  reach  of  the  new  single  unit  of  account,  the  scope  available  to  the  private
sector  to  enhance  the  quality  of  the  medium-of-exchange  and  store-of-value  functions  of  money,
where  its  comparative  advantage  lies,  has  been  significantly  improved.  This  new  and  more  robust
competitive environment should ensure a lively discovery process in the provision of these functions
                                                     
23
24
Robert E Lucas, Jr, “Nobel Lecture: Monetary Neutrality”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 104, No. 4,
1996.
Such a proposal had been advocated at various times by the UK Chancellor and Prime Minister Thatcher
as an alternative evolutionary route to monetary union in Europe.
BIS Review   66/1999
14
of money as new opportunities are presented for the banking and financial industries in the euro area
as a whole.
In the sequencing of events on the road to the political integration of Europe, I once had a distinct
preference  for  political  union  preceding  monetary  union.  As  I  have  argued  elsewhere,25  historical
experience shows that national territories and monetary territories normally coincide. Now, of course,
the reality is that, if political union is ever to occur, monetary union will have preceded it. However,
with the establishment of the ECB and the introduction of the single currency, intentionally or not, a
process towards further political integration has been triggered. Although this process is not without
risks, it nevertheless provides a golden opportunity for Europe to find its proper political shape.
In Hayek’s terminology, “imposing” monetary union on Europe was an act of constructionism. But, to
continue in his way of argumentation, this should also have started a search process for an appropriate
political  framework  so  that,  finally,  the  economic  and  monetary  regime,  and  the  field  of  politics,
together form a viable, if not optimal, institutional arrangement. There are no patterns from the past
available which could easily be imitated. Further political integration might, subsequently, develop in
a  quite  divergent  direction.  In  some  areas,  more  centralisation  of  decision-making  should  be
necessary,  whereas  in  other  fields,  responsibility  might  remain,  or  even  be  enhanced,  at  the  local,
regional or national level.
As I have said recently,26 and I think it bears repeating, what is essential for a successful monetary
union  is  a  sufficient  degree  of  political  commitment  by  all  participating  countries,  the  leading
economic  actors  and  the  wider  public  to  accept  fundamentally  and  genuinely  the  political  and
economic constraints that a single and stable currency represents. The deeper underlying commitment
to  make  European  integration  a  success  even  in  the  most  difficult  of  times  in  history  gives  some
general  grounds  for  hope  on  this  count.  Some  degree  of  political  unity  (not  necessarily  union),  or
rather  a  sense  of  common  responsibility,  would  appear  to  be  important  for  the  long-run  health  of
EMU. However, it is not a substitute for the right economic conditions for lasting success.
                                                     
25
26
See  Otmar  Issing,  “Europe:  Political  Union  through  Common  Money”,  IEA  Occasional  Paper  98,
February 1996.
See Otmar Issing: “The Euro four weeks after the start”, speech delivered at the European-Atlantic Group,
House of Commons, London, January 1998.
15
BIS Review   66/1999
