Mr. Yam discusses the causes of and solutions to the recent financial turmoil in the Asian
region
Speech by the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mr Joseph Yam, JP, at a
symposium in commemoration of 50 years of central banking in the Philippines organised by the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila on 5/1/99.
Introduction
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  to  help  commemorate  this  important  anniversary  in  such
distinguished  company.  Having  recently  had  my  own  fiftieth  birthday,  I  can  confirm  that  fifty
years is  a  very  venerable  age,  and  I  offer  my  heartiest  congratulations  to  all  those  involved  in
central banking in the Philippines over this past half-century. The turmoil of  the  past  eighteen
months has made us all feel older and wiser, and it is appropriate that the Bangko Sentral should
make use of this anniversary to provide us with an opportunity to review recent events and, more
important, to look to what lies ahead.
The  topic  of  this  session  is  “Causes  of  and  Solutions  to  the  Recent  Financial  Turmoil  in  the
Asian Region.” I welcome the way in which causes and solutions are placed here in a regional
context, because the nature of the problem in front of us is such that lasting solutions can only be
found through wider co-operation, particularly among geographical neighbours. In fact, I should
like  to  go  one  step  further  by  suggesting  that,  if  the  turmoil  we  see  around  us  is  regional,  the
crisis we face is an international one. In first discussing the causes of the turmoil, I shall argue
that individual jurisdictions, no matter how sound their economic fundamentals, no matter how
effective their financial management, are finding it more and more difficult to cope on their own
with an increasingly global and volatile financial system. And I shall  sketch  out  Hong  Kong’s
recent experience as a striking illustration of this problem. I shall then focus on what I see as the
solutions to the crisis, emphasising that they should not simply address current problems: they
should also aim at fostering the conditions that will help to minimize the extreme volatility that
we have seen in our region over the last eighteen months.
The causes of the turmoil
Poring over the various commentaries week after week, and matching them against the initiatives
that  are  being  taken  within  the  region  and  beyond,  I  have  been  struck  by  the  way  in  which
changing perceptions of the causes of the crisis have had an important influence on the solutions
that  are  put  forward.  Over  the  last  eighteen  months  the  description  of  the  problem  has  moved
from being local to regional to international. As our own regional turmoil, in combination with
other crises elsewhere in the world, threatens the stability of the whole global financial system,
the focus is more and more on finding international solutions rather than on merely writing out
prescriptions for individual economies.
One thing becomes clear from the profusion of explanations and theories that continue to appear
in  the  newspapers  and  journals:  we  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to  produce  a  definitive  and
comprehensive explanation of the causes of the recent financial turmoil in the very near future.
The turmoil and its effects on our region are still being played out: indeed, although encouraging
signs of recovery continue to appear, the word “recent” in the title of our symposium may well be
wishful thinking. We are still on shifting ground when it comes to finding adequate explanations
and it will be some time before we can stand back and take a cool and dispassionate look at what
has happened. Economic historians, after all, are still debating the causes and consequences of
the 1929 Wall Street Crash.
BIS Review   2/1999
– 2 –
The  much  more  complex  causality  of  present  turmoil  is  enough  to  bewilder  even  the  most
talented economist, more especially since it includes a fair measure of irrational behaviour that
falls more strictly within the province of the psychologist. The diverse effects of the turmoil are
equally perplexing: they present an interesting reflection of the great variety of economic regimes
that we have in the region and of their different stages in the economic cycle. The Philippines,
for  example,  though  not  entirely  unaffected,  has  passed  through  the  turmoil  with  considerably
less  damage  than  many  other  economies  in  the  region.  In  contrast,  its  immediate  neighbour,
Indonesia,  has  been  set  back  years,  if  not  decades.  The  mainland  of  China  continues  to  see
impressive growth under an economic system that is to a great extent insulated from the turmoil,
while Hong Kong, the world’s most open economy, is passing through a sharp but hopefully also
a short recession.
While they vary from place to place, the effects of the current crisis are clear enough. What we
see  throughout  the  region,  in  differing  degrees,  is  a  sharp  wealth  loss,  manifested  in  sudden
capital flight, asset price collapses, and threats to currency and banking stability. These in turn
have  had  macroeconomic  consequences,  such  as  declining  or  negative  growth,  growing
unemployment,  and  deflation.  They  have,  in  economies  as  different  as  Thailand  and  Japan,
brought to the surface severe structural weaknesses in financial systems. Quite why this should
all have come together within the few months that followed the sudden collapse of the Thai Baht
almost exactly eighteen months ago is something of a conundrum. There was no dramatic change
in underlying economic fundamentals, which were, by conventional measures, healthy. Indeed,
the  financial  turmoil  in  Asia  erupted  so  quickly  and  unexpectedly  that  economists  found  it
necessary to put forward special explanations.
The explanations fall into two main schools of thought: their differences derive more from the
emphasis they place on different factors than from any fundamental contradiction, but the logic
of  their  conclusions  points  to  different  solutions.  The  first  school,  usually  identified  with
Professor  Paul  Krugman  of  MIT,  is  best  summarized  by  the  two  fashionable  phrases  “crony
capitalism”  and  “Asian  values.”  The  emphasis  here  is  on  inept  domestic  policies,  inefficient
resource  allocation  to  politically  connected  individuals,  unrealistic  speculation  -  particularly  in
real  estate  -  and  imprudent  public  spending,  all  fuelled  by  over-borrowing,  poor  bank
supervision,  extreme  moral  hazard,  and  a  hubristic  attitude  generated  by  several  years  of  fast
growth.  The  trends  were  unsustainable,  and  the  Nemesis  came  with  a  loud  and  very  messy
bursting  of  bubbles  throughout  the  region.  Asia’s  downfall,  says  Professor  Krugman,  “was  a
punishment for Asian sins, even if the punishment was disproportionate to the crimes.”
The second school, led by Professor Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard, sees the crisis in less moralistic
terms. The turmoil, he says, was a classic financial panic: a run on the banks and mass capital
flight exacerbated by the maturity mismatch of many Asian banks and the currency mismatch of
many  Asian  borrowers.  This  was  accompanied  by  speculative  attacks  on  currencies  and  the
collapse  of  asset  values.  While  this  approach  stresses  the  fragility  of  many  of  the  banking
systems  in  the  region,  it  maintains  that  the  Asian  economies  were  in  relatively  healthy  shape
according to the usual indicators, and that the magnitude of the crisis far exceeded the faults and
errors of individual jurisdictions.
Both  the  Sachs  and  the  Krugman  schools  have  much  in  common.  But  their  logic  points  in
different directions. One - the Krugman school - blames the values, institutions and policies of
particular jurisdictions, and is country-specific, or at least region-specific. The other - the Sachs
school  -  attributes  the  problem  more  to  flaws  in  the  global  financial  architecture:  it  says  that,
even if an emerging economy behaves reasonably soundly, global tidal waves that have little if
anything  to  do  with  the  fundamentals  of  that  economy  have  the  capacity  to  overwhelm  its
BIS Review   2/1999
– 3 –
markets  and  trigger  financial  collapse.  The  problem,  then,  is  an  international  one,  and  it  is
interesting that Professor Krugman himself is moving more and more towards this explanation,
particularly as cracks appear and crises erupt in other parts of the world with far-reaching and
often  unexpected  effects.  The  debt  default  in  Russia,  for  example,  affected  mortgage-backed
securities as far away as the USA and Brazil. The threatened implosion of a heavily-leveraged
hedge-fund in the USA caused major losses to European banks and posed such a threat to the US
financial  system  that  a  special  rescue  package  had  to  be  orchestrated  by  the  Federal  Reserve
Bank. There is no denying that individual economies must put their own houses in order. But it is
increasingly  clear  that  this  alone  is  not  enough.  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  just  the  “Asian
crisis”  or  even  of  the  “Asian  flu”  infecting  other  parts  of  the  world:  the  problems  erupting
throughout the world reveal serious defects in the fabric of the world financial system.
The essence of the problem is in the highly leveraged and very large hedge fund flows that move
around  the  world  rapidly  and  without  any  regulation.  They  are  subject  to  no  disclosure  rules.
They dart from market to market, seizing on weaknesses and contradictions, particularly in the
smaller,  more  malleable  markets  that  are  frequently  carried  away  by  euphoria  or  panic.  By
distorting  or  manipulating  markets  in  search  of  profits  they  are  capable  of  throwing  many
smaller, vulnerable economies into chaos. They have become, in the words of Ian Macfarlane,
the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, “the privileged children of the financial scene,
being entitled to the benefits of free markets without any of the responsibilities”. By exploiting
the weaknesses of free markets they threaten the very survival of these markets. No small and
open jurisdiction can do much on its own to resist their disruptive effects, and their powers for
spreading  chaos  have  threatened  to  disrupt  even  the  strongest  economies.  In  my  opinion,  no
recent case better illustrates this than the dramatic ordeal that we passed through in Hong Kong
in the summer of last year.
The Hong Kong experience: sound fundamentals threatened by speculative disruptions
Hong Kong’s experience over the last eighteen months shows how even a sound economy can be
put under severe strain by manipulative attacks from outside. We managed to survive this strain
by  taking,  on  the  one  hand,  unconventional  and  controversial  measures  to  prevent  market
dislocation  that  could  have  been  very  destabilising,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  belt  and  brace
measures to strengthen the defence mechanism of our financial system. I am pleased to say that
these actions have been successful, as reflected in the marked change in sentiment in our markets
and the sharp fall in the interest rate premium for our currency over the US dollar. Although we
continue  to  endure  what  has  become  a  very  painful  economic  adjustment,  we  can  now  work
through  this  adjustment  without  it  being  grossly  exacerbated  by  the  kind  of  extreme  market
overshooting brought about by the manipulative attacks we faced last summer. The adjustment
taking place is rapid and pronounced: we saw a decline in asset values of some 50% at the peak
of the crisis, a doubling of our unemployment rate to around 5.5% and a fall in our GDP last year
of 5%. However, if this is the adjustment necessary to re-establish our competitiveness we have,
and are prepared, to accept it. But we can do without the collateral damage and general trauma of
overshooting  experienced  by  so  many  other  economies  in  the  region.  We  believe  that  our
fundamental strengths can help us through this adjustment, just as they have helped us through
the many other transitions of the past few decades, whether economic or political.
Amongst the fundamental strengths are, first, our ample foreign currency reserves: at the moment
they  are  the  third  largest  in  the  world,  after  those  of  Japan  and  the  mainland  of  China.  These
reserves enable us to tackle unexpected shocks. Second, we have a rule-based monetary system
characterised by currency board arrangements that work effectively under modern day financial
technology. Our linked exchange rate system has a high degree of credibility. Third, we are very
BIS Review   2/1999
– 4 –
committed to maintaining open and liquid markets. Fourth, we pursue a prudent fiscal policy and
have no external debt: the government sector, which is very small, is not a drag on the economy.
Fifth, as a consequence, our economy, operating largely under free market discipline, is flexible
and responsive to market forces. And, sixth, we have a sound banking system, which is strong,
solvent, and able to cope with the tight discipline and interest rate movements necessary under
our currency board arrangements: strengthened by some thoroughgoing reforms in the 1980s, the
banking  sector  has  weathered  the  current  storms  extremely  well.  Taken  together,  these
fundamental strengths have enabled us to adjust to the new regional realities of the last eighteen
months  without  the  shock  of  a  currency  collapse:  we  have  been  able  to  maintain  the  external
value  of  our  currency  while  keeping  it  freely  convertible,  but  we  have  also  improved  our
competitiveness  through  the  ability  of  the  many  other  variables  in  our  economy  to  respond
quickly and flexibly.
But  some  of  our  fundamental  strengths,  ironically,  have  made  us  vulnerable  to  market
manipulation. Our economy and our markets are small in relation to the rapidly growing volume
of international capital. But they are liquid and open enough to be attractive for large players to
seek  to  exploit  the  smallness  of  our  markets  and  move  prices  to  their  benefit.  And  our  policy
response is highly predictable. This is particularly so with a rule-based monetary system in which
capital  outflow  would,  automatically  and  without  discretionary  decisions  on  the  part  of  the
authorities, lead to higher interest rates. I am convinced that much of the difficulty over the past
year  or  so  in  Hong  Kong  arose  not  out  of  any  problem  in  our  economic  fundamentals,  but
because, by being small, open and predictable, we are vulnerable to market manipulation. Given
that there is not much we could do in the short term to enlarge the size of our markets, and given
our firm commitment to openness, we had to resort to doing something unpredictable to defend
ourselves.
The episode last summer, when we made purchases in the stock and futures exchanges to defend
our financial system against a concerted speculative attack, is so well known now, and has been
so thoroughly debated at home and abroad, that I can dispense with most of the details. The facts,
in brief, are as follows. Since the Asian crisis erupted in mid-1997 we experienced a number of
speculative attacks aimed at toppling the Hong Kong dollar and breaking its fifteen-year-old link
to the US dollar. This link is successfully maintained by a strict and automatic currency board
system, backed by more than adequate foreign currency reserves. During the attacks speculators
took  out  large  short  positions  against  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  with  the  aim  of  destabilizing  the
linked  exchange  rate.  On  all  these  occasions  the  attacks  activated  the  autopilot  mechanisms
under  the  currency  board  and  drove  up  interbank  interest  rates  to  such  high  levels  that  the
speculators (who had to borrow locally to fund their short positions) were forced to unwind their
positions and incur heavy losses. The speculators failed, the currency board worked, and the link
survived.  But  the  interest  rate  volatility,  and  the  consequent  additional  pain  imposed  on  the
community, was extreme: during one attack, on 23 October 1997, the overnight interest rate shot
up to nearly 300%.
In  August  we  faced  a  much  more  complicated  situation,  in  which  speculators  launched  co-
ordinated and well planned attacks across our financial markets. Speculators had discovered that
by  intensively  selling  Hong  Kong  dollars  over  a  short  period  they  could  temporarily  drive  up
interest rates under the currency board system, which would exert a downward pressure on stock
prices. By pressuring the currency and selling stocks short, they could realize a profit on stock
index  futures  contracts,  even  if  they  could  not  break  the  exchange  rate  link.  This  double  play
strategy,  backed  by  massive  prefunding  offshore  (which  protected  the  speculators  against  the
interest  rate  volatility  in  Hong  Kong)  occurred  with  increasing  intensity  and  formed  the
BIS Review   2/1999
– 5 –
background to our controversial operations in the equity markets in late August. We used official
reserves to purchase stocks to ensure that the speculators did not profit: in other words, we did
the unexpected in order to prevent our predictable and transparent  system  from  falling  prey  to
manipulation. We had absolutely no intention of defending a given level of equity prices. Nor do
we  have  any  intention  of  playing  a  role  in  corporate  decision  making  in  Hong  Kong.  The
substantial stock portfolio that we acquired during the operation has since been turned over to an
independent body with wide representation, to be managed in a neutral and transparent manner.
We  further  followed  the  market  operation  with  a  package  of  technical  measures  designed  to
strengthen the currency board system and make it less susceptible to manipulation. At the same
time, stock exchange trading rules have been tightened.
We were roundly condemned at the time for what many saw as a criminal breach of free market
principles.  Milton  Friedman,  for  example,  called  our  operation  in  the  markets  “insane”,  and
suggested that it was part of a plan to socialize Hong Kong. Less dramatic critics feared that it
marked  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  Hong  Kong’s  fabled  philosophy  of  positive  non-
interventionism. Gradually, people came to realize that, if this was an intervention, it was a very
limited,  one-off  intervention  designed  to  keep  the  markets  free  from  disruptive  and  ultimately
destructive forces, and to prevent a possible systemic collapse. The operation was perhaps more
readily  understood  in  Hong  Kong,  where  people  welcomed  the  speedy  return  of  stability  and
reason to the markets, and where the additional interest rate volatility imposed on the community
by unbridled speculation quickly became a thing of the past: it has to be recognized that this was
a community already patiently enduring a painful economic adjustment, and that the additional
pain inflicted by what amounted to a gross abuse of the system was weighing heavily on their
patience and confidence.
More recently, and despite the edict from the Heritage Foundation that we should mend our ways
or  surrender  our  position  as  the  world’s  freest  economy,  international  opinion  has  arrived  at  a
better understanding of our motivations. The success of the operation has, I think, helped. But so
too has the growing realization of the magnitude of the challenge we faced. Since August, further
problems  with  heavily  leveraged,  volatile  fund  flows  have  arisen  elsewhere  in  the  world.  The
LTCM crisis suggested that even the largest economies and their financial systems were at risk.
World  leaders  have  unanimously  called  for  action.  Even  George  Soros  has  vaguely  called  for
international  controls  on  the  cross-border  movement  of  funds,  which,  in  his  recent  book,  he
describes as threatening the disintegration of global capitalism. I would not wish to speak in such
apocalyptic terms. Nor would I go so far as to argue for controls. But I agree that we face a world
crisis,  and  would  add  that  if  Hong  Kong,  with  its  sound  fundamentals  and  prudent  financial
management,  can  be  brought  to  the  brink  of  systemic  breakdown  by  aggressive  cross-border
speculation, then something must be wrong with the world financial order.
The essence of the crisis is this: on the eve of the twenty-first century, as markets continue to
open up, as information technology continues to advance, and as investment tools become ever
more sophisticated, the global financial system becomes less restrained by distance and national
boundaries,  less  inhibited  by  information  barriers,  by  time  differences  or  by  other  physical
limitations.  Yet  the  management  of  the  global  financial  system  remains  primitive  and
fragmented.  It  continues  to  depend  largely  on  the  unaided  efforts  of  individual  jurisdictions,
which are increasingly handicapped by asymmetric information flows between public and private
sectors, and which rely, when they run into problems, more on emergency fire-fighting than on
preventive health. In short, the management of our global financial system has become grossly
inadequate in coping with the demands of global finance.
BIS Review   2/1999
Solutions
– 6 –
So what then are the solutions? I am acutely aware of the fact that a patient suffering from the
contagious  flu  is  not  really  in  a  good  position  objectively  and  dispassionately  to  prescribe
medicine. Let me, nevertheless, put forward my views, for what they are worth. I shall look first
at  the  immediate  and  palliative  responses,  and  then  focus  more  on  the  longer  term  preventive
measures, since the most effective solutions lie not in short-term fixes, but in building healthy
domestic and international systems that minimize the possibility of future turmoil.
Immediate  and  palliative  responses  are  often  necessary  to  cope  with  a  shock  to  the  system,
particularly when the scale and nature of the shock are beyond expectations, even by the most
pessimistic,  as  is  the  case  with  the  financial  turmoil  of  the  past  18  months.  These  responses
include,  first,  rescue  packages  mounted  either  independently  by  individual  economies,  if  they
have the necessary resources, such as Japan, or through the assistance of international financial
institutions,  such  as  the  IMF,  involving  the  provision  of  external  financial  resources.  These
packages are having some effect, and in some countries - Thailand, for example - have already
helped stimulate recovery. It is vital that individual economies get themselves back on their feet
if they are to move on and meet the challenges of and derive the benefits from continued global
economic growth and development. The IMF and other international financial institutions have
an important role to play in this, in mobilising international financial resources,  from  both  the
official and private sectors, to assist those who have stumbled and fallen, very much as victims
of the internationalisation of financial markets. International financial assistance must surely be
provided with conditionality; and the medicine may be strong and painful in order to minimise
the moral hazard of bailing out reckless investors and imprudent lenders.
A  second  kind  of  immediate  response  is  the  kind  of  tactical  counter-measure  that  we  took  in
Hong Kong in August last year. We have devoted a great deal of time and energy to explaining
the necessity of this measure, and you have already heard the reasoning behind it. We stand by
what  we  did,  and  we  do  not  think  that  we  could  have  reasonably  predicted,  and  therefore
prevented, such an unprecedented, sophisticated, and concerted manipulative attack. But we do
not pretend that we enjoyed taking the decision to enter the markets: it was an unconventional,
highly  controversial  measure,  which  carried  many  risks.  The  success  of  the  operation  showed
that  we  could  defend  ourselves,  and  that  our  system  was  basically  sound.  We  have  also  taken
measures  to  reduce  the  likelihood  that  such  attacks  will  recur.  But  it  would  have  been  far
preferable  to  have  had  a  world  environment  in  which  such  defensive  manoeuvres  were
unnecessary.
A third immediate response has taken the form of exchange controls, most notably in Malaysia,
and it is interesting that academics,  including  Professor  Bhagwati  and  Professor  Krugman,  are
increasingly attracted to them. These measures may well suit the needs of some economies, and a
less extreme form of prudential regulation of capital flows has worked well in some places - in
Chile, for example. But the worst time to introduce them is at the peak of a financial crisis, after
the capital has already bolted. And capital controls are not a solution for all economies. For an
open  economy  like  Hong  Kong  they  are  unthinkable,  as  well  as  illegal,  since  our  Basic  Law
prohibits them. Given that one of the themes of this talk is the dangerous state to which the world
financial system has been brought by volatile cross-border fund flows, it is perhaps appropriate
for me  to  restate  here  Hong  Kong’s  commitment  to  economic  liberalization  and  globalization.
This is, in my view, the only long-term viable way  forward  towards  a  more  productive  use  of
resources and more even economic growth throughout the world. The problems that we now face
should  not  cause  us  to  overlook  the  many  advantages  that  globalization  has  brought  to  our
region. The current crisis has not demonstrated that this is the wrong path to follow - merely that
BIS Review   2/1999
– 7 –
that there are dangers and instabilities that have to be tackled. And if the imposition of temporary
exchange  controls  is  the  only  alternative  available,  responsible  commentators  should  at  least
have the courtesy of giving a little respect to those in the most unenviable position of having to
take difficult decisions that they consider to be in the best interests of their people.
Our task now is to ensure that liberalization and globalization remain productive processes, that
our  energies  are  devoted  not  just  to  short-term  cures,  but  also  to  long-term  preventive  health.
There are a number of initiatives that we might pursue, and I mention only a few of them with
the aim of stimulating discussion. The first, and most urgent, is the reform of the international
financial  architecture  to  better  regulate  the  volatile  capital  flows  that  contribute  to  market
instability. This must include improved information and disclosure. The recent experience in this
region has shown that problems were allowed to build up because of a lack of information about
the full financial picture, both in terms of the destination and the source of the funds. Important
steps are being taken in many Asian countries towards greater transparency in the public sector,
and I am pleased to report that Hong Kong is playing a leading role in these efforts. But greater
transparency among the regulators means that a serious asymmetry of information is emerging
between the public and private sectors. We must now consider the need for greater disclosure on
the  investor  side,  since  the  virtual  complete  lack  of  information  about  the  activities  of  huge
global institutional investors poses risks to all participants in the markets - to other investors, to
lenders, and to borrowers.
A second part of this architectural reform must be improved prudential oversight of capital flows,
since mere disclosure is no guarantee that behaviour will be prudent. Part of the initiative must
begin at home, since without effective domestic management international initiatives will lack a
sound foundation. The Asian crisis has demonstrated that the approach towards capital account
liberalization  in  some  Asian  economies  was  clearly  inappropriate,  given  the  weaknesses  in
domestic  financial  sectors.  Poor  supervision,  lax  accounting  standards,  close  relationships
between  lenders  and  borrowers,  and  inadequate  prudential  safeguards  all  conspired  with  “hot”
capital inflows to fuel the crisis. Again, it is worth pointing out that this is not purely an Asian
problem, as the LTCM episode revealed. Prudential regulation begins at home, but it must also
be  extended  into  a  global  prudential  and  regulatory  framework,  which  would  be  an  aid,  not  a
hindrance, in the general trend towards a more liberal financial environment.
A third part of the reform must address cross-border manipulative practices in financial markets.
Rules  exist  against  the  cornering  of  domestic  financial  markets.  The  blatant  collusion  and  co-
ordination in the various recent attacks on Hong Kong’s markets, and the phenomenal financial
resources the manipulators have been able to muster, underscore the need for domestic anti-trust
principles to be applied to cross-border financial speculation.
These are matters of some urgency, and there is already a clear international consensus that they
are  necessary.  Measures  of  the  kind  that  I  have  just  outlined  are  under  active  discussion  in
various international forums, including, at the latest count, the IMF, BIS, APEC, EMEAP, G7,
G10 and G22 or G26. While we may be in agreement on what should be done, these are not easy
issues to put into practice, and my concern is that discussion in so many different groupings may
lead to delay and confusion. If action is not taken quickly, individual economies, and particularly
the small and open economies, will continue to have to deal with the onslaught of unrestrained
international capital using the piecemeal emergency responses that I have already described. The
danger is that they will be forced into increasingly unconventional and controversial action that
may deepen their own problems and impede the healthy development of an open global financial
system.
BIS Review   2/1999
– 8 –
I have spoken about the measures necessary to bring us out of the turmoil and back onto the track
of  balanced  development  and  healthy  growth.  It  is  appropriate,  as  we  celebrate  fifty  years  of
central  banking  in  one  of  the  oldest  financial  centres  in  the  region,  that  we  look  even  more
broadly towards how the region’s monetary system might develop in future decades. I should like
to suggest two areas for development here: one relating to currency; the other to debt markets.
These are important issues, and they will have a considerable influence on the broad shape of our
regional economy in the next century.
First, the question of currency. The recent introduction of the Euro will, in my view, radically
change the way in which the global currency system works and has important implications for
our own region. Until now, the U.S. dollar has played a dominant role in world trade quite out of
proportion to the size of U.S. trade flows. This is particularly the case in Asia,  where,  despite
Japan’s strong commercial and financial influence, the yen has failed to play a major role as an
anchor. While the Hong Kong dollar has been well served by its solid link to the U.S. dollar, less
solid commitments to the dollar in other economies have proved to be expensive and disruptive.
Thus,  despite  the  pre-eminence  of  the  U.S.  dollar,  the  Asian  region  as  a  whole  lacks  a  viable
exchange rate anchor. This is a problem that has to be addressed, and we would do well to look
into it, especially once the current crisis has subsided. We have benefited from our own peg to
the  U.S.  dollar,  and  other  countries  could  similarly  benefit  from  links  to  key  currencies  when
they are in a strong enough position to make such links fully credible.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  will  challenge  the  supremacy  of  the  dollar  elsewhere  in  other
hemispheres  by  introducing  a  second  currency  pole  in  the  global  currency  system.  It  will  also
offer another solid investment option to Asian central banks. The time may come when we might
want to consider the possibility of our own Asian currency - perhaps something along the lines of
an Asian Currency Unit - that would form an anchor currency for our region. This is a long-term
possibility, but it would have the advantage of reflecting the strong trade linkages in the region. It
would  also  create  bigger  and  more  liquid  markets  that  are  less  susceptible  to  manipulation.  It
would also help address problems of intermediating financial resources within Asia. At present,
Asia’s central banks invest massive amounts in foreign securities, particularly U.S. dollar assets,
only to see volatile funds flow back to the region from overseas markets. By investing reserves
directly in Asian financial  assets,  this  type  of  costly  and  unstable  recycling  through  developed
markets could be reduced.
There are, of course, many obstacles in the way of creating an Asian Currency Unit. The various
economies of the region operate under widely differing economic regimes, and are at different
stages  of  development.  An  institution  would  be  necessary  to  administer  the  system,  and  the
politics involved would doubtless be  very  complex.  But  I  believe  that  now  is  a  useful  time  to
raise this topic for discussion, at least at an intellectual level: successful implementation in the
longer term would go a long way towards addressing the currency instability we have seen in the
region over the last year and a half. After all, it has taken the more homogeneous Europe fifty
years to bring the euro into existence.
A further long-term solution lies in the development of stable and transparent debt markets in the
region.  The  excessive  reliance  in  Asia  on  short-term  financing  from  overseas  lenders  through
weakly regulated banking systems, and all the turbulence that this has entailed, is a reflection of
the lack of deep and diversified debt markets in the region. The essence of the problem is the
failure of our financial systems to keep pace with the strong underlying growth in other sectors of
the Asian economies: the industrial and trade sectors surge ahead, while the financial sector lags
behind. Too large a share of Asia’s financial resources has consequently been recycled through
overseas markets, with the inevitable loss of information flows, and a tendency towards the kind
BIS Review   2/1999
– 9 –
of market volatility that has caused us such problems. We need to establish local debt markets
that bring both borrowers and lenders into more direct and  long-term  relationships,  and  which
leaves both sides less exposed in terms of currency and maturity mismatches.
Ironically, the underdeveloped state of our debt markets is attributable in part to the traditional
absence  of  large  budget  deficits  in  most  of  the  region,  which  has  limited  the  development  of
government bond markets. Debt market development needs some official help, since individual
issuers are not in a position on their own to create deep and liquid markets. The APEC initiative
on bond markets - in  which  Hong  Kong  plays  a  leading  role,  will  provide  some  impetus.  The
priority is to examine key impediments to the development of bond markets and to bring together
all  participants  -  market  practitioners,  government  agencies,  and  international  financial
institutions, to tackle these impediments and clear the path for developing Asian debt markets.
The obstacles are large but not insuperable. There is the lack of an objective credit rating system
in  a  position  fairly  to  assess  borrowers  in  the  region.  There  is  also  a  lack  of  benchmark  yield
curves for pricing debt. Tax regimes also tend to provide unequal tax treatment for international
and domestic bond  issuers,  and  usually  favour  international  issuers,  even  though  they  have  no
intention of recycling funds back into the domestic economy. Finally, the regional infrastructure
for clearing and settling debt needs to be improved. Some of these impediments can be dealt with
through  domestic  initiatives,  and  Hong  Kong,  like  many  other  jurisdictions  in  the  region,  is
taking  action  on  many  fronts.  Others,  such  as  harmonizing  tax  treatment  of  debt  or  taking
forward the “AsiaClear” network for linking financial systems, need concerted regional effort if a
really solid regional debt market is to emerge.
Conclusion
To summarize: the solutions to the turmoil in this region require immediate remedial measures
and long-term preventive strategies: they must comprise efforts by individual economies to put
their  houses  in  order  -and  concerted,  collective  action  within  the  region  and  throughout  the
international community. All of these diverse approaches are vital if we are to pull ourselves out
of the crisis. I have argued, however, that, given the global nature of the problem and the risks
that  even  the  best  regulated  economies  are  exposed  to,  the  most  lasting  and  fundamental
solutions  must  lie  in  long-term  prevention  and  joint  action.  These  preventive  measures  should
include  urgent  reforms  to  the  international  financial  architecture  to  enable  it  to  cope  with
changing market practices and to reduce the extreme volatility in fund flows that has been such
an important factor in this crisis. In the medium and longer term, they should also include efforts
to develop stable and transparent debt markets in the region, and greater monetary cooperation,
which might also include the development of an Asian Currency Unit.
At today’s symposium we are both celebrating a fiftieth anniversary and addressing some of the
difficulties  that  we  currently  face  in  this  region.  This  is  not  a  time  for  complacency,  but  it  is
perhaps useful to step back for a moment from present difficulties to reflect on how far we have
come, as a region, in the past fifty years. Fifty years ago most of this region was still recovering
from the devastation of World War Two; many countries were to face more upheaval in the years
that  followed.  But  over  the  last  few  decades  the  region  has,  through  a  variety  of  economic
strategies and in differing degrees, enjoyed growing prosperity, greater stability, advancing cross-
border  co-operation,  and,  increasingly,  freedom  from  the  poverty  and  strife  that  confronted
earlier  generations.  This  has  all  been  achieved  in  a  context  of  globalization  and  economic
liberalization.  The  current  turmoil  has  interrupted  some  of  this  progress,  and  has  reminded  us
that rapid economic expansion is not without its risks. The damage to some economies has been
severe. But the foundations remain strong, and the prospects for the next half-century are, in my
view, favourable ones. The signs of economic revival are already with  us.  Recovery  may  be  a
BIS Review   2/1999
– 10 –
longer and more difficult process than some of us had expected a year or more ago. But there is
no doubt that it will come. It is now up to us, as partners in this large and diverse region, to seize
the initiative, and turn that recovery into an enterprise that will make us stronger, more cohesive,
and more capable of managing the stresses and uncertainties that a global financial system must
inevitably produce.
 BIS Review   2/1999
