Bank of Japan’s March report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 16 March 1999.
The Bank’s View2
Japan’s  economy,  at  present,  appears  to  have  stopped  deteriorating.  With  the  increase  in
public investment underpinning final demand, inventory adjustment has made further progress
and production has stopped decreasing.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  declining  significantly.
Recovery  in  private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  on  the  whole,  although  partial
improvement in sales of goods has been observed. Housing investment remains at a low level
but  has  obviously  bottomed  out.  Net  exports  (exports  minus  imports)  are  leveling  off,  and
public investment is growing considerably. Reflecting this development of final demand and
further  progress  in  inventory  adjustment,  industrial  production  has  stopped  decreasing.
However,  corporate  profits  have  been  declining,  and  employment  and  household  income
conditions  continue  to  deteriorate.  Although  conditions  in  corporate  finance  are  improving,
firms  apparently  cannot  remove  their  concern  about  the  availability  of  funds  in  the  future.
Consequently, corporate and household sentiment remains cautious.
As for the outlook, with the progress in inventory adjustment gradually paving the way for a
recovery in production, the government’s economic measures and the monetary easing by the
Bank  would  underpin  the  economy.  In  addition,  measures  to  restore  the  stability  of  the
Japanese financial system – especially the injection of public funds into banks – are expected
to  exert  positive  effects  on  the  economy  gradually.  With  respect  to  corporate  activities,
however,  large  firms  in  particular  appear  to  take  steps  to  full-scale  restructuring  over  fiscal
1999, facing the continued decline in profits and the remaining concern about their financing.
In  the  short  run,  such  corporate  restructuring  may  reduce  fixed  investment  and  discourage
household  expenditure  through  the  resulting  deterioration  in  employment  and  income
conditions.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  still  difficult  to  expect  an  immediate,  self-
sustained  recovery  in  private  demand.  Overall  economic  developments  require  careful
monitoring in consideration of the above points.
With  regard  to  prices,  reflecting  the  large  output  gap,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  on  a
downtrend,  and  corporate  service  prices  are  weakening.  Consumer  prices  basically  remain
weak. In relation to price developments in the future, distinct narrowing in the output gap is
unlikely for the time being even though the economy appears to have stopped deteriorating.
Furthermore,  the  decline  in  wages  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  since  autumn  1998  are
likely to continue exerting downward pressure on prices. Hence, prices are expected to remain
on a downtrend.
In  the  financial  markets,  the  additional  monetary  easing  by  the  Bank  on  February  12  has
lowered  interest  rates  both  on  overnight  call  money  and  term  instruments.  In  addition,  the
markets’ anxiety about liquidity and credit risks of Japanese banks seems to have subsided –
                                                     
1  This  report  was  written  based  on  data  and  information  available  when  the  Bank  of  Japan  Monetary  Policy
Meeting was held on March 12, 1999.
2  The  Bank’s  view  on  recent  economic  and  financial  developments,  determined  by  the  Policy  Board  at  the
Monetary Policy Meeting held on March 12, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review   31/1999
as  reflected  in  a  rapid  contraction  in  the  Japan  premium  –  partly  due  to  the  progress  in
preparation for public funds injection.
Meanwhile, the amount outstanding of funds in the call money market has decreased, partly
because  some  institutional  investors  have  shifted  a  part  of  their  funds  from  the  market  to
ordinary  deposits.  The  shrinkage  of  the  market  has  not  led  to  any  difficulty  in  funds
settlement. However, close attention should be paid to developments in the flow of funds as
unexpected changes may occur.
Long-term interest rates have, amid nervous market sentiment, declined following the fall in
short-term  rates.  Stock  prices  have  turned  to  be  firm  against  the  background  of  the  recent
depreciation of the yen and the rise in U.S. stock prices.
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  credit  demand  for  economic  activities  such  as  fixed
investment  remains  weak.  Firms’  moves  to  increase  their  on-hand  liquidity  in  the  face  of
difficult fund-raising conditions are settling  down.  Meanwhile,  private  banks  have  basically
retained  their  cautious  lending  stance,  facing  the  worsening  performance  of  borrower
companies. However, severity in their fund-raising conditions has been alleviated, and  their
insufficient capital base is about to be increased. Under these circumstances, banks continue
to actively utilize the credit guarantee system.
As a result, the previously tightened credit conditions are easing somewhat. Nevertheless, the
market is still cautious of credit risk, and thus firms with relatively low credit ratings seem to
remain under severe fund-raising conditions.
The  situation  continues  to  warrant  careful  monitoring,  particularly  with  regard  to  how
corporate finance develops toward the turn of the fiscal year.
BIS Review   31/1999
2
