Mr. Duisenberg reports on the latest meeting of the ECB Governing Council
Introductory statement by the President of the European Central Bank, Mr W F Duisenberg, at
the press conference in Frankfurt 4/2/99.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  here  today  to  report  on  the  outcome  of
today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank.
Let me start with the Governing Council’s discussion on recent economic developments and the
decisions that the Governing Council has taken today in the field of monetary policy.
At today’s meeting the Governing Council reviewed the latest monetary, financial and economic
developments. After a careful examination of recent trends, in the context of its monetary policy
strategy,  it  confirmed  its  earlier  assessment  that  the  outlook  for  price  stability  remains
favourable. Therefore, it decided that for the main refinancing operations to be settled on 10 and
17 February 1999 the same conditions will apply as for the first such operations settled earlier
this year, i.e. they will be fixed rate tenders conducted at an interest rate of 3.0%. In addition, the
interest  rate  on  the  marginal  lending  facility  continues  to  be  4.5%  and  the  interest  rate  on  the
deposit facility remains 2.0%.
Let me report in more detail on the Governing Council’s deliberations and thereby provide the
explanations for the decisions which were taken today.
On  1  February  1999  we  released  the  latest  data  on  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area.
These data confirmed the continuation of a favourable outlook for price stability in the euro area.
The  latest  three-month  moving  average  of  annual  M3  growth  rates  (covering  the  period  from
October  to  December  1998)  was  4.7%.  This  result  was  unchanged  from  the  average  over  the
period  from  September  to  November  1998  and  remained  very  close  to  the  reference  value  for
broad money growth of 4½% set by the Governing Council.
Developments  in  the  narrow  aggregate  M1  have  been  more  buoyant  recently.  Similarly,  the
growth  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  continued  to  be  high  in  December  1998.  These
developments  seem  to  reflect,  in  particular,  the  current  low  levels  of  interest  rates  in  the  euro
area. Although they are not considered by the Governing Council to imply inflationary risks at
this juncture, in particular the developments in credit growth will need to be carefully monitored
in the coming months.
With regard to the broadly based outlook for price developments and risks to price stability in the
euro  area,  financial  market  indicators  suggest  that  market  participants  continue  to  expect  low
inflation. Since early January, euro area long-term interest rates have continued  to  decline  and
the yield curve has shifted downwards.
At  the  same  time,  the  latest  developments  are  giving  mixed  signals  as  to  the  evolution  of  the
world economy in 1999. On the one hand, recent events in Brazil have highlighted the fragility of
the current situation in emerging markets, while on the other, output growth in the United States
was  much  stronger  in  the  last  quarter  of  1998  than  expected.  In  the  euro  area  too,  available
indicators  continue  to  suggest  a  mixed  picture.  According  to  revised  Eurostat  estimates,  real
GDP growth remained broadly robust in the third quarter of 1998, while in more recent months
activity may have slowed down. Such a slowdown is apparent in industrial production growth up
to November 1998, in particular in the intermediate goods sector, which is particularly sensitive
to  any  deterioration  in  the  external  environment.  However,  at  the  same  time,  production  of
capital goods and consumer durables has continued to expand rather strongly. A similar pattern
can be observed in the decline in industrial confidence that has been apparent in the second half
BIS Review   15/1999
– 2 –
of  1998  in  the  euro  area,  while,  however,  stabilising  in  January  1999.  On  the  other  hand,
consumer confidence in the euro area continued to increase in December and in January; it has
now  exceeded  the  peak  level  reached  in  1990,  with  retail  sales  up  to  November  showing
continued solid growth and car sales growing strongly during the last months of 1998. Finally,
the mixed picture is confirmed by other data. Order books, which overall declined slightly further
in December, apparently increased again in January,  particularly  with  respect  to  export  orders.
Capacity  utilisation  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  which  started  to  decrease  in  the  third  quarter
recovered  again  thereafter,  while  December  data  on  unemployment  appear  to  suggest  that  the
decline in unemployment rates stalled around year-end.
Therefore,  with  regard  to  the  cyclical  situation,  recent  data  seem  to  confirm  our  earlier
assessment that there are downside risks for output growth and that production may have slowed
down around the turn of the year. Nonetheless, in the opinion of the Governing Council there are
also no clear signals as yet of a stronger than expected weakening in output growth. Given the
mixed picture outlined above, the Governing Council emphasised that further thorough analysis
and very close monitoring of underlying trends are needed before any conclusions can be drawn
concerning the broad outlook for 1999 and 2000.
With regard to the latest data on the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, the annual increase
for December 1998 showed a further slowdown to 0.8%, compared with 0.9% in November and
1.0% in October. This development was in line with previous trends; i.e. it was due mainly to a
further reduction in energy prices and also, in December, to a decline in the price increases in
non-energy  industrial  goods.  Taking  a  forward-looking  perspective,  the  general  environment
continues to suggest that there are no significant upward or downward pressures on prices in the
short term. Furthermore, the pattern of risks to price stability has remained broadly unchanged.
On  the  one  hand,  downward  risks  could  materialise  if  import  or  producer  prices  were  to  fall
further.  On  the  other,  given  current  wage  demands,  wage  developments,  especially  when
measured in real terms, could become a matter of concern and fiscal policies would also pose a
threat  to  the  favourable  outlook  for  prices  and  growth  and  employment  prospects,  if  the
credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact were undermined. In addition, exchange rate trends
need to be monitored closely given their importance for domestic price developments.
In conclusion, taking into account the latest evidence available, the Governing Council has not
altered its assessment of the outlook for price developments. The Governing Council therefore
decided to keep ECB interest rates unchanged at the levels currently prevailing.
I should like to take this opportunity to recall that real three-month interest rates, if measured as
nominal rates corrected for current HICP inflation (as a very incomplete proxy), stood at a level
of 2.3% in January; this is approximately 80 basis points lower than the level one year ago. At
the same time, real long-term interest rates, measured on a similar basis, have reached a level of
3.0%, which is around 110 basis points lower than in early 1998. These levels are very low, both
in  comparison  with  other  countries  and  with  historical  data  for  the  euro  area.  Monetary  and
financial conditions therefore support continued economic growth in the euro area in line with
price stability.
I should now like to inform you about some other matters considered by the Governing Council.
The  end-of-day  procedures  relating  to  TARGET  and  access  to  the  Eurosystem’s  standing
facilities were reviewed by Governing Council today. The Governing Council agreed that from
tomorrow on the deadline for requesting access to the marginal lending facility will coincide with
the  deadline  for  access  to  the  deposit  facility,  i.e.  30  minutes  after  the  actual  closing  time  of
TARGET.  Furthermore,  the  deadlines  for  requesting  access  to  the  Eurosystem’s  standing
BIS Review   15/1999
– 3 –
facilities will be postponed by an additional 30 minutes on the last Eurosystem business day of a
minimum reserve maintenance period.
As a final point, I should like to inform you that the ECB is planning an information campaign
with  regard  to  the  launch  of  the  euro  banknotes  on  1  January  2002.  One  of  our  aims  in
undertaking  such  an  exercise  will  be  to  ensure  that,  by  the  time  the  euro  banknotes  become
available, every person using and handling them will be fully acquainted with their features to
the extent that everyone will be able to identify the banknotes as being genuine. In this respect,
the ECB will be co-operating with the European Commission and the Member States to ensure
that there will be no duplication of effort.
 BIS Review   15/1999
