Mr Duisenberg discusses the arrival of the euro
Speech  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr  Willem  F.  Duisenberg,  to  the
American European Community Association at the Netherlands Bank in Amsterdam on 14/1/99.
The  euro  has  arrived!  This  was  a  very  happy  occasion.  Although  it  has  yet  to  appear  in  the
tangible form of new banknotes and coins, there is no doubt that the new currency is set to play
an  important  role,  both  in  the  euro  area  and  beyond.  After  years  of  intensive  preparation  and
successful economic convergence, a single monetary policy for the entire euro area determined
by the Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) is now being implemented by the
Eurosystem, which is made up of the ECB and the eleven national central banks (NCBs) of the
participating Member States.
The changeover weekend
The technical and logistical challenges posed by the changeover to the euro over the weekend of
the New Year’s Day public holiday have been successfully met. During the changeover weekend
the Eurosystem monitored the conversion activities at the ECB, at the participating NCBs and at
certain  private  institutions  which  –  in  the  view  of  the  Eurosystem  –  represent  the  core  of  the
financial  infrastructure  in  the  euro  area.  Regular  contacts  were  also  maintained  with  other  EU
and non-EU central banks and the European Commission.
This monitoring activity during the changeover weekend was justified by the concern that, owing
to the extraordinary concentration of operational risks within all the institutions of the banking
and  financial  industry,  events  could  occur  immediately  prior  to  the  launch  of  Stage  Three  of
EMU  which  might  either  impinge  on  the  orderly  conditions  in  the  monetary  system  or  create
risks for financial stability at the very start of Monetary Union. The decision-making bodies of
the ECB stood ready to gather for extraordinary meetings via teleconference, if  necessary.
During the changeover weekend, no incidents that could have impaired the smooth start of Stage
Three were reported to  the  Eurosystem.  The  successful  navigation  of  the  changeover  weekend
was the result of considerable and thorough preparation by a very large set of public and private
institutions,  including  the  ECB  and  the  NCBs.  Indeed,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  marks  the
culmination of a great deal of successful preparatory work over a period of many years. This has
been  reflected  in  the  positive  and  confident  way  in  which  financial  markets  have  received  the
euro in the first two weeks of Monetary Union.
Although some minor problems of a technical nature could not be avoided, overall the TARGET
payments system has functioned well and contributed substantially to the integration of the euro
money market. A number of “teething troubles” have been experienced as participants – in both
commercial banks and central banks – adapt to the new system and environment. Nevertheless,
during these early days of Monetary Union, TARGET has handled more cross-border payments
than  were  anticipated,  thereby  demonstrating  its  processing  capacity.  With  regard  to  monetary
operations, on 4 January the Eurosystem announced its first main refinancing operation, which
was successfully completed on the following day.
BIS Review   5/1999
The role of monetary policy
– 2 –
A successful monetary policy must always be forward-looking, acting to contain threats to price
stability before they become entrenched. Therefore, today I should also like to look to the future.
Monetary  Union  is  a  unique  and  significant  achievement.  It  promises  a  credible  and  lasting
environment  of  price  stability  for  almost  300  million  people.  This  stable  environment  is  the
foundation for sustainable economic growth, better employment prospects and improvements in
the  standard  of  living  throughout  the  euro  area.  Price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for
improved  economic  performance  in  all  these  areas.  I  am  confident  that  the  single  monetary
policy will make the greatest possible contribution in this regard. The stability-oriented monetary
policy  strategy  announced  by  the  Governing  Council  last  year,  and  which  is  now  guiding
monetary policy decisions, was designed with this goal in mind.
Nevertheless, monetary policy alone – however well designed and implemented – cannot solve
Europe’s economic problems. Appropriate fiscal policies and structural reforms implemented by
national  governments  are  vital  and  considerable  progress  is  required  in  these  areas.  Moreover,
continued wage moderation in both the public and private sectors would contribute to reducing
the unacceptably high level of unemployment in many parts of the euro area.
Unemployment  in  the  euro  area  is  largely  structural  in  origin.  Implementing  an  inflationary
monetary policy will not solve this problem, but rather exacerbate it over the medium term, as
inflation distorts investment and saving decisions, raises the risk premium in long-term interest
rates and undermines the allocative efficiency of the price mechanism. Only effective structural
policies  that  improve  the  flexibility  and  efficiency  of  labour  and  goods  markets  can  reduce
unemployment in a successful and lasting manner. I appreciate that these structural reforms are
not  always  easy  to  implement,  not  least  because  the  benefits  they  yield  occur  mainly  in  the
medium  to  long  term.  However,  they  are  unavoidable.  In  those  euro  area  countries  that  have
taken up the challenge of structural reform,  unemployment  has  fallen  significantly.  Other  euro
area  countries  should  and  must  take  note:  structural  reform  throughout  the  euro  area  is
fundamental  to  the  success  of  Monetary  Union  and  to  improving  Europe’s  economic
performance.
The stability-oriented monetary policy strategy
The Treaty on European Union assigned  the  ESCB  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price
stability in the euro area. You may rest assured that the Governing Council of the ECB is totally
committed to fulfilling this mandate. In order to meet this commitment, the Governing Council
has adopted a stability-oriented monetary policy strategy consisting of three main elements.
First, in order to give clear guidance in relation to expectations of future price developments, the
Governing  Council  has  announced  a  quantitative  definition  of  its  primary  objective.  Defining
price stability also serves the principles of transparency and accountability. It clarifies how the
Treaty’s  mandate  is  interpreted  by  the  Governing  Council  and  gives  the  public  clear  guidance
concerning its assessment of the success of the single monetary policy.
Price stability has therefore been defined as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. Needless to say, deflation – that is, a
persistent fall in the price level – would not be consistent with price stability. The annual rate of
inflation in the most recent available data, measured on this harmonised basis, is consistent with
the  definition  of  price  stability.  The  Eurosystem  has  therefore  enjoyed  the  good  fortune  to
assume monetary sovereignty in the euro area in an environment of price stability, owing to the
BIS Review   5/1999
– 3 –
successful process of disinflation and convergence achieved by national central banks during the
last decade.
Price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term.  This  reflects  the  need  for  monetary
policy to be forward-looking and to have a medium-term orientation. It recognises the fact that
monetary policy is not able to control all short-term movements in the price level.
To  maintain  price  stability  according  to  this  published  definition,  the  Governing  Council’s
strategy relies on two pillars. First, a prominent role has been assigned to money, in recognition
of the monetary origins of inflation over the longer term. This prominent role is reflected in the
announcement of a quantitative reference value for the growth of  a  broad  monetary  aggregate,
namely M3. The first reference value has been set at an annual rate of 4 ½%. The reference value
for  M3  is  consistent  with  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  while
allowing for sustainable output growth and taking account of the trend decline in the velocity of
circulation of M3.
Monetary policy will not react to deviations of monetary growth from the reference value in a
“mechanistic”  way.  In  the  first  instance,  such  deviations  will  be  thoroughly  analysed  for  the
signals that they offer with regard to the prospects for price developments. If the deviation points
to a threat to price stability, monetary policy will react in a manner appropriate to counter this
threat, rather than attempting to eliminate the deviation of monetary growth from the reference
value in the short term.
The second pillar of the monetary policy strategy is a broadly-based assessment of the outlook
for price developments and the risks to price stability in the euro area as a whole. The Governing
Council of the ECB recognises that it is important, in parallel with the assessment of monetary
growth in relation to the reference value, to look at a wide range of other economic and financial
indicators,  including  economic  forecasts.  This  systematic  analysis  of  all  other  relevant
information about economic and financial conditions will ensure that the Governing Council is
as well informed as possible when taking monetary policy decisions.
Recent developments in monetary policy
A  moment  ago,  I  emphasised  the  importance  of  the  formal  introduction  of  the  euro  on  New
Year’s Day. However, co-operation among European national central banks has been close for a
long  time  and,  among  the  NCBs  of  the  countries  participating  in  Stage  Three,  has  become
increasingly so in recent years and months. The co-ordinated interest rate cut at the beginning of
December last  year  is  an  illustration  of  this  co-operation.  This  co-ordinated  interest  rate  move
was thoroughly discussed by the members of the Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  De  jure,  the
decision  to  change  interest  rates  had  to  be  taken  by  the  national  central  banks  but,  de  facto,
Monetary Union existed in all but name prior to its formal implementation on 1 January 1999.
At its first December meeting, the Governing Council made a thorough assessment of the latest
monetary  data  and  other  economic  indicators,  noting  in  particular  the  decline  in  business
confidence  in  the  euro  area  arising,  in  part,  from  the  deteriorating  external  environment.  This
deterioration  in  the  international  economy  has  its  origins,  to  a  large  extent,  in  the  Asian  and
Russian financial crises. Following its appraisal of both pillars of the monetary policy strategy,
the Governing Council concluded that key central bank interest rates of 3% would best serve the
maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term.  National  central  banks
adjusted their interest rates accordingly.
BIS Review   5/1999
– 4 –
This co-ordinated interest rate move allowed the ECB to announce that the new level of interest
rates  would  prevail  “for  the  foreseeable  future”.  In  other  words,  in  the  absence  of  further
disturbances to the economy or the emergence of new and unanticipated threats to price stability,
this  level  of  interest  rates  should  be  appropriate  to  fulfil  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining
price stability over the medium term. This announcement helped to resolve some uncertainty at a
time when the practical, technical and logistical tasks necessitated by the changeover weekend
were uppermost in our minds and in those of market participants.
Following the second Governing Council meeting in December, I was therefore able to announce
that the interest rate on the first main refinancing operation of the Eurosystem would also be 3%.
Moreover,  the  interest  rates  for  the  deposit  and  marginal  lending  facilities  –  which,  in  normal
circumstances, would constitute the upper and lower bounds for overnight market interest rates –
were  set  at  2%  and  4.5%  respectively.  As  a  transitional  measure  to  help  the  financial  system
adjust  to  the  new  institutional  environment  resulting  from  the  transition  to  Stage  Three,  from
4 January until 21 January a narrower band of 2.75% to 3.25% has been set for the rates on the
deposit and marginal lending facilities.
During  the  first  few  days  of  Stage  Three  we  observed  a  relatively  large  recourse  by  credit
institutions  to  these  facilities.  This  was  to  be  expected,  given  the  relatively  narrow  spread
between  the  Eurosystem’s  marginal  lending  facility  and  the  overnight  money  market  rate.
Although the narrow corridor is intended to facilitate the transition by market participants to the
new regime, over a longer period of time such a measure would hamper the development of an
efficiently functioning euro area money market. We therefore intend to terminate the transitional
measure of the narrow band next week, in line with our pre-announced schedule.
Assessment of the current economic situation
At the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB on 7 January it was confirmed that the 3%
rate would apply to the Eurosystem’s next two main refinancing operations. This level is based
on  the  Governing  Council’s  current  assessment  of  the  economic  situation,  viewed  from  the
perspective of the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy.
First, monetary growth in recent months has been broadly in line with the quantitative reference
value.  This,  together  with  further  analysis  of  the  monetary  data,  signals  that  monetary
developments are consistent with the maintenance of price stability  over  the  medium  term.  Of
course,  monetary  growth  relative  to  the  reference  value  should  always  be  interpreted  in  a
medium-term  context.  Short-run  deviations  from  the  reference  value  are  inevitable  and,  while
being monitored and assessed carefully, would not automatically signal an immediate threat to
price stability. Nevertheless, it is reassuring that the three-month moving average of the annual
growth  rates  of  M3  up  to  November  1998  stood  at  4.7%,  very  close  to  the  reference  value  of
4½%.
Second,  as  regards  the  broadly-based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments,  a
number of indicators have recently proved noteworthy. Following the co-ordinated interest rate
cut  at  the  beginning  of  December,  long-term  interest  rates  have  also  fallen,  suggesting  that
financial markets viewed the cut favourably and considered it to be consistent with the credible
maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The  indicators  emerging  from  the  real
economy are mixed. Overall, real GDP growth in the euro area weakened in the third quarter of
last  year  as  compared  with  the  first  half.  While  business  confidence,  orders  and  capacity
utilisation have developed less favourably in recent months, the latest data for employment, retail
sales and consumer confidence suggest more favourable trends.
BIS Review   5/1999
– 5 –
Against this background, the annual rate of increase in the HICP for the euro area slowed further
in November, falling to 0.9% as compared with 1.0% in the previous two months. This reduction
in the rate of increase of the HICP resulted from further moderation of food price increases and
continued falls in energy prices. On balance, the general environment continued to suggest that
there is no significant upward or downward pressure on the price level.
Of course, the Governing Council is fully aware that potential risks to price stability do exist. On
the one hand, the external environment could again deteriorate if the financial crises in Asia and
Russia  were  to  spread  or  deepen  further.  On  the  other,  fiscal  indiscipline  by  national
governments  failing  to  respect  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  or  inflationary  wage  settlements
could threaten the 2% upper bound of the Eurosystem’s published definition of price  stability.
The  Governing  Council  is  monitoring  all  these  developments  very  closely  and  will  react  in  a
prompt and pre-emptive manner to ensure that neither inflationary nor deflationary pressures take
hold.
The international role of the euro and the ECB
Changes  in  the  external  environment  –  that  is,  in  the  economic  condition  and  performance  of
countries outside the euro area – may affect the outlook for price developments within the euro
area,  and  thereby  the  conduct  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  The  effects  of  financial  crises  on
external  demand  and  business  confidence  are  a  notable  recent  example.  However,  this
relationship works in both directions. The introduction of the euro has created a single currency
area  of  a  size  and  importance  and  with  a  population  broadly  similar  to  the  United  States.  An
event of this magnitude is likely to have major implications for the rest of the world, especially
the international financial system. In the remainder of my speech, I shall consider some of these
implications.
In  its  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  Eurosystem  deliberately  does  not  specify  a  target  for  the
exchange  rate  of  the  euro  against  the  US  dollar  or  the  Japanese  yen.  Although  it  will  always
stand ready to exchange views with other central banks concerning the development of exchange
rates,  there  are  no  explicit  or  implicit  target  zones  for  the  euro  exchange  rate  against  non-EU
currencies.  The  euro  area  is  a  large,  relatively  closed  economy,  similar  in  this  respect  to  the
United  States.  Pursuing  a  target  for  the  euro  exchange  rate  could  easily  jeopardise  the
maintenance  of  price  stability.  The  level  of  interest  rates  required  to  sustain  an  exchange  rate
target may, in some cases, not be that which best serves the maintenance of price stability over
the medium term. I might add that it may also conflict with the achievement of other domestic
policy objectives. It could be very painful if it were necessary to raise interest rates in a recession
in order to defend the exchange rate of the euro. Finally, it should be acknowledged that today
we are living in a world with high capital mobility. Exchange rate arrangements  that  could  be
implemented  thirty  years  ago  may  no  longer  be  feasible.  The  required  amount  of  foreign
exchange reserves could simply be too large.
Within  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  euro  exchange  rate  is  the  outcome  of
current and expected economic policies and developments in both the euro area and elsewhere,
and  of  the  market  participants’  perception  of  these  policies  and  developments.  Supporting  the
Eurosystem’s  approach,  the  Ministers  of  Finance,  who  are  assigned  ultimate  responsibility  for
the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  have  agreed  not  to  issue  so-called
“general  orientations”  for  the  exchange  rate  policy  to  the  Eurosystem  other  than  in  clearly
exceptional circumstances, such as when there is a substantial and persistent misalignment of the
euro against other currencies.
BIS Review   5/1999
– 6 –
However, the absence of a target  for  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  against  major  international
currencies does not imply that the ECB ignores or is indifferent to the exchange rate of the euro
vis-à-vis the US dollar or the Japanese yen. The exchange rate will be monitored as one of the
indicators  of  monetary  policy,  within  the  broadly-based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price
developments that constitutes one pillar of the overall strategy. Nor does the absence of exchange
rate targets suggest that these rates will necessarily be unstable or volatile. On the contrary, the
pursuit  of  stability-oriented  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  puts  in  place  one  of  the  major
prerequisites for stable euro exchange rates. The Eurosystem’s stability-oriented monetary policy
strategy is a significant contribution in this regard. Absolute stability of the exchange rate is, of
course, impossible to guarantee. It would not even be desirable if, for example, the United States
and  the  euro  area  were  to  go  through  business  cycles  that  were  not  fully  synchronised.  This
possibility cannot be ruled out, as even recent history has shown.
We are aware that the emergence of an international role for the euro may sometimes complicate
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  if  a  significant  proportion  of  the  money  stock  is  circulating
outside the euro area. Nevertheless, the Eurosystem will accept the international role of the euro
as  it  develops  as  a  result  of  market  forces.  To  the  extent  that  the  Eurosystem  is  successful  in
meeting its mandate and maintaining price stability, it will also automatically foster the use of the
euro  as  an  international  currency.  The  pace  at  which  the  euro  will  emerge  as  an  international
currency is hard to predict. If history is taken as a guide, it will be a gradual process, but it is
possible that, in today’s more dynamic and flexible financial markets, the euro could assume a
prominent role more rapidly than past experience might suggest.
Finally, I should like to discuss briefly the role of the ECB in international co-operation. As the
representative of a monetary union comparable in size and importance to the United States and as
the central bank managing a currency that is likely to play a large and increasing international
role,  the  ECB  will  inevitably  play  an  important  role  in  the  international  financial  system.  The
ECB will embrace the implied responsibility, but at the same time it will have to be modest and
realistic in its actions on the international stage. Its role will develop over time, drawing on the
experience of those national central banks that have played an important international role in the
past.
At the end of last year, the ECB was accorded observer status at the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). Full membership of the IMF is restricted to individual nations. Nevertheless, this observer
status will allow the ECB to participate fully in the relevant work and assessment by the Fund of
economic policies in the euro area and beyond. The ECB also participates in the work of the G-7,
the G-10, the Bank for International Settlements and the OECD. It enjoys good bilateral relations
with other central banks throughout the world.
The ECB stands ready to participate fully in, and contribute to, international policy discussions.
It will, of course, offer expertise and exchange views, when and where appropriate. However, in
general,  the  best  contribution  the  ECB  can  make  to  a  stable  international  monetary  system,
including stable exchange rates and well-functioning international capital markets, is to maintain
price stability within the euro area. Fulfilling the mandate assigned to the ESCB by the Treaty on
European Union will help the ECB to meet its international responsibilities.
Concluding remarks
The  euro  has  arrived.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  taken  up  the  reins  of  monetary
sovereignty in the euro area and a truly single monetary policy has been in place for two weeks.
For  those  of  us  who  have  been  involved  in  the  long  and  at  times  arduous  preparations  for
BIS Review   5/1999
– 7 –
Monetary Union, this is an occasion which provides a sense of satisfaction. However, as I have
outlined  in  this  speech,  in  many  ways  the  real  work  of  the  ECB  is  only  just  beginning.  The
stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  is  in  place.  I  am  confident  that  this  framework  will
enable the Governing Council to fulfil the Treaty mandate of maintaining price stability. Meeting
this mandate will ensure that the single monetary policy makes its best possible contribution to
improving  the  standard  of  living  in  the  euro  area  and  helping  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the
international financial system.
 BIS Review   5/1999
