Mr Heikensten discusses global capital: advantages, problems and remedies
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, the Swedish central
bank to the Institute of International Affairs in Stockholm on 3 May 1999.
First a word of thanks for the invitation to talk here about the global financial markets. Many of the
questions raised by financial developments in recent years are clearly connected with foreign policy.
The crisis in the international financial system that began in Asia in summer 1997 developed, to cite
President Clinton, from being just ‘a few small glitches in the road’ into ‘the worst financial crisis in
fifty  years’.  The  extensive  financial  turbulence  has  fuelled  the  debate  about  globalisation  and  the
increasingly integrated world economy.
In certain respects it can be said that, compared with  the  present  situation,  the  degree  of  economic
integration  was  greater  at  the  beginning  of  this  century.  Expanding  trade  was  accompanied  by
innovations  that  simplified  international  dealing.  A  common  currency  was  available  in  the  form  of
gold. In the years before World War One the net financial flows between countries, represented by
current-account  deficits,  were  even  larger  than  today.  In  certain  periods,  moreover,  migration  was
higher than at present.
All in all, however, integration is presumably more extensive  today.  Many  more  countries  are  now
participating  in  the  global  exchange,  gross  capital  flows  are  larger  and  market  reactions  are  much
swifter.  New  technology  has  paved  the  way  for  continued  integration  and  is  likely  to  go  on
contributing to further developments in this direction.
Against this background my talk today focuses on global capital: its advantages and problems and the
remedies for the latter that are being discussed internationally. Let me begin by looking at what has
shaped the global financial markets as we know them today.
Emergence of today’s global financial markets
Today’s  global  financial  markets  largely  date  from  the  1970s,  when  the  oil-exporting  countries
needed  to  invest  surpluses  and  many  western  countries  had  incurred  budget  deficits  that  had  to  be
financed. There was thus a need for a more efficient international market for capital. Another factor
behind the development of financial markets was that after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system
in the early 1970s, the major world currencies started to float in relation to each other. This generated
a  demand  for  instruments  that  would  render  the  exchange  rate  movements  less  deleterious  for
exporters and importers.
The evolution of the financial markets has been promoted by rapid technical advances that, besides
facilitating  international  communications  and  transactions,  have  aided  calculations  and  made
advanced  financial  instruments  available.  This  has  been  accompanied  by  theoretical  work  on  the
pricing  of  risks.  A  market  for  risks  has  accordingly  been  established.  Instruments  whereby  players
could  choose  a  particular  level  of  risk  had  existed  for  centuries  but  could  now  be  made  more
sophisticated.
Before the financial markets could be globalised, moreover, national economies had to be opened up
and the existing capital controls abolished. This process got under way in the 1970s and 1980s. The
players in financial markets had found ways of getting round the regulations, which in some cases had
thereby  become  virtually  toothless.  In  Sweden,  for  example,  the  capital  controls  had  gradually  lost
much of their bite; companies were able to take up exchange positions, for instance, by shifting trade
credits  over  time.  There  was  also  a  growing  awareness  that  economic  growth  would  benefit  from
fewer controls. The interventionist line of economic policy had not been particularly successful. The
pace of deregulation varied from country to country and the process was rather protracted. Britain and
1
BIS Review   52/1999
the  United  States  led  the  way.  Sweden  was  one  of  the  last  countries  to  abolish  controls  on  cross-
country flows of short-term capital.
Since the 1970s, financial market turnover has risen markedly and is now very much larger than the
flows generated by global cross-country trade in goods and other services. According to the latest BIS
study, from 1995, global exchange market turnover, for instance, was 1200 billion dollars, which is
approximately five times the value of Sweden’s annual GDP. The figure is roughly twice the level at
the end of the 1980s. A new BIS study, for 1998, is due next week and can be expected to show a
further  increase  in  global  exchange  market  turnover.  Equity  and  bond  market  turnovers  have  also
risen rapidly.
To some extent, the nature of the flows as well as the players in international financial markets have
changed. The earlier domination of investment and borrowing is giving way to increasing flows from
transactions in securities. New players have become more and more important. The quest for the best
possible return on private savings is giving insurance companies, pension funds and highly leveraged
funds  a  dominant  position.  Whereas  the  players  used  to  be  a  more  homogeneous  group,  consisting
mainly of banks, households are increasingly opting to have their savings managed more actively than
simple deposit accounts. While these changes have occurred in the various national financial markets,
they have obviously also had consequences for the international capital flows.
Advantages of free capital flows
International financial markets that are free and integrated can enhance global growth through more
efficient  resource  utilisation.  Savings  can  be  channelled  to  the  best  investment  opportunities,
unrestricted by national borders. Capital-importing countries can build up productive facilities, obtain
access to modern technology and expand in sectors with relatively high productivity, while capital-
exporting countries can earn a higher return. The industrialisation of Sweden in the latter part of the
nineteenth century is a good example of what access to foreign capital can do; the construction of the
railway network, for example, was financed with foreign loans.
Financial  markets  also  make  it  easier  for  economic  agents  to  manage  risks  so  that  the  economy
functions more efficiently. The wide variety of financial instruments enables investors and borrowers
to choose their preferred level of risk. Some players may want to avoid all exchange rate fluctuations
for  a  time,  while  others  are  prepared  to  take  this  risk  in  return  for  a  premium;  by  operating  in  the
derivatives market they can arrive at the appropriate risk profile.
Globalisation has led to increased competition across countries and markets and aided the emergence
of  new  activities  and  structures.  This  in  turn  seems  to  have  contributed  to  increased  capital
productivity—more can be done than before with a given capital input. It is just these factors—more
efficient  financial  markets  and  higher  capital  productivity—that  are  often  cited  as  the  main  forces
behind the American economic miracle: the combination of high growth and low inflation despite low
saving.
Problems
The  globalisation  of  financial  markets  is  also  dogged  by  some  problems.  It  affects  the  scope  for
national economic policies. Moreover, financial market prices tend to fluctuate widely, sometimes for
little apparent reason.
Before considering these issues, I just want to say a few words about the reality behind the notion of
the financial market, which consists in practice of various categories of savers and borrowers. Besides
private  individuals,  these  include  national,  regional  and  local  governments,  small  and  large
companies, high-risk hedge funds, banks, insurance companies and long-term pension funds. So the
market  cannot  be  reduced  to  what  goes  on  in  trading  rooms,  even  though,  for  want  of  a  better
BIS Review   52/1999
2
alternative, television’s financial newscasting often visualises the market in such terms. Every saver
and borrower exerts some influence on the market but naturally not to the same degree. The stage is
set by the biggest players, be they individuals, companies or nations.
The scope for economic policy
Free capital mobility is sometimes criticised for encroaching on democracy and rendering economic
policy less effective.
Even in a world with integrated financial markets, economic policy is decided by the national political
systems. They are free in principle to alter tax rates, boost public spending and adjust interest rates
whenever they wish. In this direct sense, a more open economy does not mean that policy is restricted.
In many ways, access to international capital can actually enlarge the scope for action. Unlike the case
in earlier centuries, a country that is stricken today by severe crop failures, for instance, can borrow
external funds to buy seed. Similarly, a country wishing to strengthen its growth potential by more
than  domestic  saving  permits  can  expand  its  production  apparatus  more  rapidly  with  the  aid  of
imported capital.
At the same time, loans and other financial transactions do entail dependence. If a country’s economic
policy does not inspire confidence, the consequences may be unfavourable. Perhaps investors will no
longer  be  prepared  to  provide  new  loans  and  may  even  stop  existing  credits.  Long  bond  rates  are
liable to rise, accompanied by a depreciating currency. Such reactions are the market’s way of passing
judgement on economic policy and a country’s creditworthiness. This mechanism is the same as that
for private borrowers. Access to credit enhances welfare but also exposes the borrower to the scrutiny
and discretion of creditors.
A  good  example  of  how  this  works  is  provided  by  the  Swedish  economy.  From  the  mid  1970s,
problems with government finances led to external borrowing, which mitigated the effect on interest
rates. But debt accumulated and an acceleration of this trend in the early 1990s led to an acute loss of
confidence: interest rates shot up and after a time the krona fell.
Besides illustrating how a country can be hit if its economy is not managed properly or if problems
arise from other causes, this example shows that the imbalances may be generated gradually, so that
timely  signals  can  be  an  advantage.  Perhaps  prompter  warnings  would  have  put  a  stop  to  the
economic mismanagement at an earlier stage. Something may thus be gained from the market sending
clear signals without delay.
But the situation should not be idealised. The functioning of financial markets is by no means perfect.
Real  economic  problems  can  build  up  without  attracting  attention  and  when  they  are  detected,  the
financial unrest is liable to spread to other countries for no apparent reason. The financial market’s
reaction may also be out of proportion to the underlying imbalance. This brings me to the next type of
problem.
Financial instability in a global market
Just as in any other market, financial market prices are basically a function of supply and demand.
This means that they are dependent on the path of economic fundamentals; in the case of government
bonds,  for  example,  the  relevant  factors  include  the  budget  balance,  monetary  policy  and  inflation
expectations.
Financial asset prices are highly susceptible both to expectations of how the market ought to move,
given the underlying conditions, and to how it will move, given the expectations of how other players
will act. This can result in wide fluctuations. Prices may deviate for a considerable time from what
could be regarded as their long-term equilibrium. Markedly inflated prices can result in ‘bubbles’, out
3
BIS Review   52/1999
of  touch  with  the  level  that  seems  to  be  fundamentally  justified.  Examples  of  this  are  the
developments in some Asian countries in the mid 1990s, as well as price movements in the Swedish
property market around the turn of the 1980s.
To some extent, such phenomena can be explained in terms of how economic policy is conducted. But
the causes of large price movements are also to be found in the construction of financial markets. If a
market  is  to  function  properly,  all  the  relevant  information  should  be  available  simultaneously  to
every  player.  In  practice,  that  is  evidently  not  the  case.  Moreover,  financial  players  can  act  in  the
knowledge that what they do will influence the market. The fact that performance is assessed in the
short run, in many cases in comparisons with other players, makes herd behaviour common. The risk
models that are in use are liable to accentuate this phenomenon, even though such models are actually
intended  to  do  the  opposite,  namely  minimise  risk  and  instability.  A  signal  from  a  risk  model  can
trigger  sales  by  numerous  investors,  whereupon  prices  fall  still  further.  In  this  way,  a  mechanical
application of risk models is liable to exacerbate price fluctuations.
Financial  market  globalisation  also  leads,  as  I  mentioned  initially,  to  increased  capital  flows.  Low
transaction  costs  and  high  liquidity  enable  individual  investors  to  pledge  assets  in  the  market  to  a
greater  degree.  This  leads  to  closer  links  and  more  interaction  between  different  markets;  a  player
may  take  large  positions  not  just  in  markets  for  different  assets  but  also  in  markets  in  different
locations.  Price  movements  may  be  affected  if  market  players  lose  confidence  in  a  particular
geographical  market  or  incur  losses  that  oblige  them  to  dispose  of  other  assets.  Globalisation  has
naturally increased such contagious effects, as we clearly saw last autumn.
Recurrent financial crises
In many ways, global economic development in the past two to three decades has been outstanding.
Annual growth since 1980 has averaged over 3 per cent. The rate in the industrialised countries has
averaged just over 2.5 per cent as against almost 5 per cent in the developing countries. Many East
Asian countries have achieved even higher  growth  and  thereby  a  radical  improvement  in  economic
prosperity.  But  development  has  by  no  means  been  smooth.  The  Latin  American  debt  crisis  in  the
1980s, the Mexican crisis in 1995 and the turbulence that started in Asia in the autumn of 1997 are
some examples of the financial crises in recent decades. While the circumstances behind the various
crises differed, they did have certain features in common. The extensive problems have usually arisen
out of a combination of inadequate credit assessments by lenders and investors and shortcomings in
economic policy.
In an initial phase, credit stocks have risen rapidly in connection with hopes of a high return and the
perception  of  low  risks,  partly  because  investors  trusted  the  financial  system  and  the  regulatory
apparatus. A characteristic  example  is  the  developing  countries  that  were  transformed  in  the  1990s
into  emerging  markets—the  risks  seemed  to  be  virtually  non-existent.  When  the  inflow  of  credit
reduced  interest  rate  differentials  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  this  strengthened  the  notion  that
investment in these countries carried relatively small risks.
Exchange  rate  policy  often  contributed  to  the  problem.  Investors  and  creditors  expected  exchange
rates to remain fixed. Cross-country interest rate spreads encouraged the use of foreign-currency loans
for investment in domestic assets, often without matching the maturities of assets and liabilities. The
countries’ central banks were expected to carry the exchange risk and convert at the predetermined
rate.
At some stage, however, there has been a reappraisal. Signs that the economies were less robust than
expected  have  led  to  a  sudden  change  in  the  perception  of  risk.  This  checked  the  supply  of  credit,
which  in  some  cases  caused  a  dramatic  increase  in  lending  rates  to  these  countries  relative  to
countries with a better credit rating. Exchange rate pressure grew and there have been acute currency
crises, with collapsing exchange rates and thereby increased uncertainty.
BIS Review   52/1999
4
It  seems  that  the  stronger  the  inflow  of  credit  in  the  first  phase,  the  more  serious  have  been  the
consequences  in  the  second,  with  declining  production  and  rising  unemployment.  The  reversal  of
capital flows, if these were channelled through the banks, has also created difficulties in the financial
system.  In  many  instances  the  financial  system  proved  to  lack  the  resilience  to  cope  with  the  huge
flows.
The  crisis  that  began  in  Asia  in  the  autumn  of  1997  had  extensive  contagious  effects  in  other
countries. Some of the latter were countries that had conducted a broadly judicious economic policy
and  were  thus  hit  undeservedly.  Singapore  and  Australia  are  two  examples.  Others  were  countries
with  their  own  economic  problems.  One  was  Russia,  which  was  obliged  to  suspend  foreign  debt
payments in August. This elicited contagious effects that hardly anyone had foreseen. The turbulence
spread to financial capital’s citadel when an American hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management,
encountered extensive problems that had repercussions throughout the US capital market.
Some of the crises that have begun in emerging markets have also been compounded by problems of a
different sort. The Asian crisis, as well as other financial crises, included elements of nepotism and
corruption. Bank lending was directed in some cases from the authorities or the government to favour
specific interests. Factual information, from private as well as public sources, was unsatisfactory in
many instances. As a result, appraisals of the countries’ economic fundamentals were based on faulty
information and sometimes even on expectations that the close links between the political sphere and,
for example, the banks and corporate sector were a guarantee of government support should problems
arise.
Can the functioning of financial markets be improved?
The crises have made it obvious that the financial system needs to be strengthened,  both in individual
countries  and  globally.  Can  this  be  done  without  losing  the  advantages  I  mentioned  earlier?  These
matters are being discussed intensively in various fora where the Riksbank is represented, such as the
IMF, BIS, OECD, G-10 and even in the European Union. The need to reconcile the desire for national
sovereignty in these questions with free capital movements, as well as international surveillance and
control, is a major political challenge. It is also a challenge with several dimensions: many different
technical  changes  are  needed  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  at  the  same  time  as  forms  for
cooperation are developed and the question of who decides is tackled. Let me devote the rest of my
time to these matters, arranged under four headings.
1.  Properly functioning economies
The  primary  condition  for  creating  a  more  stable  financial  system  is  perhaps  that  the  economies
function properly. Although the crises can be explained in terms of shortcomings in the workings of
the  financial  system,  the  instability  has  almost  invariably  stemmed  from  macroeconomic  and
structural problems. A reasonable economic policy is, of course, not just a requirement in emerging
markets but also a standing order in the industrialised countries. Yet it is barely five years ago that
Sweden regained a fairly firm economic foundation after the profound crisis in the early 1990s. There
are many parallels between the Swedish crisis and the crisis in Thailand, for instance.
An  important  factor  here  is,  as  I  mentioned,  the  exchange  rate  regime.  Experience  has  shown  that
exchange  rates  that  are  fixed  but  adjustable  may  often  contribute  to  problems  and  currency  crises.
They presuppose that fiscal policy is capable of countering economic shocks at the same time as they
invite speculation. In the debate it is therefore sometimes proposed that the emerging markets ought to
set up currency boards (a system whereby all outstanding currency can be converted into some hard
currency)  or  participate  in  some  well-established  regional  monetary  cooperation.  These  systems  do
demand just as much of policy but their stronger links are intended to confer greater credibility. There
is a risk, however, of financial players being lured into a false sense of security, giving imbalances
more time in which to grow. Another feature that fixed exchange rates and currency boards have in
5
BIS Review   52/1999
common is the negative effects they may exert on other countries if they have to be abandoned. This
is clear from the Asian crisis. The alternative is floating exchange rates. They have the advantage of
permitting  interest  rate  adjustments  to  the  needs  of  the  domestic  economy.  But  they  also  entail
exchange  rate  fluctuations  and  their  drawbacks.  The  problem  of  exchange  rate  regimes  is  being
discussed internationally but a consensus has not been reached.
Financial market deregulation, moreover, must be adapted to the financial system of the  country  in
question and supported by a consistent economic policy. To some extent, the developments in Asia
probably had to do with an inappropriate sequence of deregulations; that was the case in Sweden in
the  1980s  and  it  resulted  in  problems.  Short-term  foreign  currency  loans  made  the  countries
vulnerable and subsequently resulted in currency outflows. The forms for deregulation have therefore
been  considered  in  the  international  discussions.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  will  be  taking
these aspects into account in future evaluations of individual countries. It is important, for example,
that deregulations are accompanied by a reinforcement of the supervision of financial institutions and
markets, so that any ‘bubbles’ are detected in good time.
2.  Strengthening systems
A sounder macroeconomic policy improves the conditions for making systems more robust. This is
necessary but not always sufficient. A reinforcement of the financial system’s infrastructure is also
needed. Such efforts are required both in the emerging markets and in the industrialised countries, as
well  as  at  the  global  level.  The  emerging  markets  must  build  up  better  systems  for  oversight  and
supervision. The IMF, the World Bank and the BIS are all involved in this work. Knowledge must be
enhanced.  The  rule  systems  in  many  Third  World  countries  must  also  incorporate  bankruptcy
legislation, arbitration procedures, and accountancy rules that are fair and transparent.
Extensive and well-motivated work on reforms in also in progress in many industrialised countries.
The tasks and methods of central banks and financial supervisors are being specified. Many private
institutions are reviewing risk models and adapting them to the global reality. Conventional models
must be augmented. Supervision also needs to be developed to cover new instruments and types of
risk,  risks  that  the  Asian  crisis  has  brought  to  the  fore.  The  Basle  Committee  is  now  working  to
identify respects in which supervision may need to be extended, for instance to create standards for
the bank’s transactions with highly leveraged institutions. The problems in LTCM clarified the central
importance of this.
At the global level, closer coordination of authorities’ work on supervision is being called for; today,
such coordination is confined to sectors. A Financial Stability Forum has therefore been set up and
consists,  at  least  for  the  time  being,  of  representatives  of  the  finance  ministries,  central  banks  and
supervisory authorities in the G-7 countries, together with IMF representatives. The  Forum  met  for
the  first  time  some  weeks  ago.  Discussions  are  also  in  progress  in  what  is  known  as  the  Group  of
Thirty-Three, consisting of the participants in the G-10 and some twenty emerging market countries.
In  its  country  evaluations,  the  IMF  will  also  be  paying  more  attention  to  the  development  of  the
financial  system.  There  is  to  be  cooperation  with  the  World  Bank;  these  two  organisations  have
agreed on a joint model for the appraisal of national financial sectors. These appraisals are to be based
on  the  current  minimum  standards  for  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  a  broad  review  of
developments  and  risks  in  the  country’s  financial  sector,  and  other  conditions  such  as  legislation,
accountancy rules, payment systems and financial markets, for example.
3.  Greater transparency
A  more  stable  development  also  calls  for  greater  transparency.  If  the  global  capital  markets  are  to
function  as  intended,  their  players  must  know  about  the  actual  risks  and  be  in  a  position  to  make
realistic  profit  assessments.  This  in  turn  means  that  international  organisations  as  well  as
BIS Review   52/1999
6
governments, private companies and financial institutions must convey a fair picture of the prevailing
conditions. As regards the IMF, increased transparency has been proposed in the country assessments,
for  example.  A  pilot  project  has  been  initiated  for  the  voluntary  publication  of  material  about
individual countries. Sweden has promised to participate in the project.
Transparency also applies to the individual countries and the private sector. One element in the recent
crisis has been a misleading account of both private debt and the size of foreign exchange reserves in
a number of countries. The standard for countries wishing to participate in the international capital
market—the Special Data Dissemination Standard—is being revised to give a better account  of  the
level of foreign reserves and the debt position in individual countries. At country level, moreover, a
code for monetary policy transparency and measures for maintaining financial stability is being drawn
up by the IMF together with the BIS, central banks, supervisors, the World Bank and the OECD. A
fiscal policy code is already in place.
4.  Managing future crises
Even with these measures, we have probably not yet seen the last financial crisis. A readiness for the
management of future crises therefore needs to be created. A central issue in international discussions
is  the  distribution  of  risks  among  the  parties  concerned.  While  the  IMF  has  been  provided  with
additional  financial  resources,  it  neither  can  nor  should  be  prepared  to  contribute  the  main  part  of
what may be needed in a crisis. This is because expectations that any costs will always be carried by
someone else can result in an overall increase in exposure to risks, the problem of moral hazard. Such
expectations are liable to drive up credit supply and demand and can influence private agents as well
as national policy-makers.
One way of dealing with moral hazard among private investors is to arrange for them to carry a larger
share of the burden in a crisis. At the same time, there has been an ambition to construct any measures
so that they do not have larger negative consequences later on, for instance by deterring banks from
providing desirable credit. These two perspectives are liable to conflict. The discussion has focused
on preparatory measures as well as steps that can be taken in more extreme situations. As regards the
preparatory measures, it has been proposed, for example, that bond contracts be constructed so that
the renegotiation of scheduled repayment can be authorised by a majority. Another proposal is that
capital adequacy standards be constructed so as to limit the proportion of short-term interbank credits
from industrialised countries to emerging markets.
Recently, moreover, a decision was reached on contingent credits to countries that are judged to have
a sustainable economic policy and have nonetheless been  hit  by  a  loss  of  confidence  and  liquidity.
This  is  intended  to  reduce  contagious  effects.  The  IMF  also  plans  to  promote  increased  contacts
between the borrowers in the emerging markets and their private creditors.
If a crisis has already occurred—without there being a clause for renegotiation—credit to the country
in question can be renewed instead by the lenders acting in concert. The central banks in the countries
with the largest bank loans to the crisis area can then agree to try to persuade those banks to prolong
the loans. That is what happened in South Korea; the credits were renewed when the banks’ loans had
been monitored.
Conclusion
Let me now summarise what I have said and draw some conclusions. The global capital markets are
here to stay. They have contributed to the good economic growth in many countries in recent decades
by providing capital efficiently.
At  the  same  time  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  global  capital  markets  can  generate  problems,  as  we
have seen in recent years. There have been marked fluctuations and they have spread from country to
7
BIS Review   52/1999
country. Shortcomings in national economic policy have been the cause in many causes but not in all.
Small  countries  with  less  liquid  markets  have  been  heavily  hit  when  highly  leveraged  funds  have
shifted capital between markets. For some countries with a weak political and economic system, the
capital movements have been sufficient to elicit political crises and considerable social costs. A part
has also been played by problems in financial institutions in the industrialised countries, even in the
very  centre  of  the  international  financial  system  through  the  Manhattan-based  fund  LTCM.  Last
autumn  the  US  Federal  Reserve  found  it  necessary  to  reduce  the  instrumental  rate  and  take  the
initiative in solving the problem of credit.
Against this background it is not surprising that an active discussion is now in progress about what is
called  the  new  international  financial  architecture.  International  meetings  are  being  held  in  quick
succession.  For  the  time  being  at  least,  it  is  a  matter,  as  I  indicated  earlier,  of  renovating  and
extending  the  existing  building  rather  than  of  executing  drawings  for  a  new  one.  A  former  British
colleague wrote recently in the Financial Times that ‘the work on the new international architecture
should rather be called a plumbing activity’.
If the discussions have a common theme, it is risk: how risk is managed and priced, as well as who
should pay for any mistakes. This brings me to the last aspect of the ongoing discussion: how power
relationships in the world economy have shifted and the consequences of this for the institutions that
regulate and supervise the global financial markets.
As many former developing countries become more central players in the world economy, the balance
of power has gradually changed. These realities are not fully reflected in the institutional system that
was built up at the end of World War Two, in Bretton Woods and elsewhere; the United States still
has  a  major  role  in  these  institutions  and  so  does  Europe.  Together  with  EMU,  this  raises  many
questions about future representation in the international bodies. Those of us who represent Sweden
have  the  important  but  difficult  task  of  maintaining  our  country’s  position  in  the  international
financial  cooperation  in  a  constructive  way,  despite  several  decades  of  relatively  weak  economic
development.
Perhaps  that  should  be  a  topic  for  a  future  discussion  under  the  auspices  of  the  Institute  of
International Affairs.
BIS Review   52/1999
8
