Mr Carse gives a speech on the subject of credit risk during the Asian crisis
Speech by Mr David Carse, a Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at  the  Asian  International  Conference  &  Trade  Credit  Workshop  in  Hong  Kong  on  5  May
1999.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak to you today on the subject of credit risk
during the Asian crisis. Given the fact that just about every economy in the region has been
affected by the crisis to a greater or lesser extent, this is rather a large topic; and I hope that
you will forgive me therefore if I begin with some generalities about the region as a whole,
but then make some specific observations based on my own direct experience of credit risk as
it has affected banks in Hong Kong. Hong Kong is a melting pot of international and regional
banks and you can be sure that any credit problems that surfaced in Hong Kong during  the
crisis manifested themselves elsewhere in the region, and probably in a much more virulent
form.
It  is  a  sobering  fact  that  we  are  only  two  months  away  from  the  second  anniversary  of  the
Asian crisis, and we are still analyzing what went wrong. Explaining the origins of the crisis
has  helped  to  maintain  many  academics,  particularly  in  the  United  States,  in  gainful
employment.  Their  explanations  emphasize  different  factors  in  the  crisis,  but  one  point  on
which there seems to be general agreement is that banks were at the heart of the problem. A
highly stylized description of their role in the Asian crisis might run as follows. When banks
are already weak, for example because of a high level of non-performing loans, an external
shock  such  as  an  attack  on  the  currency  will  severely  damage  confidence  in  the  banking
system.  Banks  will  lose  domestic  deposits  and  will  find  themselves  unable  to  rollover
short-term  external  borrowing.  The  resultant  capital  outflows  will  put  further  downward
pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  force  up  interest  rates  and  drive  down  asset  prices.  The
customers to whom banks have lent will get into financial difficulties, further weakening the
position of the banks. With their capital and liquidity impaired, the banks are in no position to
lend, and this leads to the phenomenon of the “credit-crunch” and resultant shrinkage of the
real economy that we have witnessed in so many countries in the region.
Banks can get into difficulties in many ways. But, as is usually the case, the principal culprit
in  banking  weakness  in  the  region  was  weak  credit  policies  and  procedures.  Although  the
particular  way  this  manifested  itself  varied  from  country  to  country,  some  of  the  common
themes were as follows:
•  First,  banks  overlent  to  unproductive  sectors,  notably  the  property  and  stock  markets.
This created the familiar pattern of boom and bust. Moreover, much of this was funded
by  short term  capital  inflows.  When  the  asset  bubble  collapsed  the  banks  and  the
companies or individuals who had borrowed foreign currency to finance the investments
were  unable  to  repay.  The  problem  was  compounded  by  the  depreciation  of  domestic
currencies that increased the real burden of debt repayments.
•  Second, banks in a number of economies were ordered or persuaded by governments to
lend  heavily  to  companies  that  were  not  commercially  viable.  This  “policy”  lending
destroyed the banks’ incentive to exercise credit judgment and allowed the companies
concerned to become overleveraged and thus vulnerable to economic downturn.
1
BIS Review   53/1999
•  Third,  over-exposure  to  connected  parties  was  endemic  in  some  economies.  Such
lending  is  not  usually  made  at  arm’s  length  and  will  seldom  satisfy  normal  credit
criteria.
•  Fourth, partly because much lending in the region was politically influenced or insider in
nature, there was not much opportunity to develop a proper  credit  culture  or  adequate
credit skills. Name lending and relationship lending were widespread. This went hand in
hand with an over-reliance on collateral whose value of course diminishes sharply when
asset values collapse - assuming of course that the security can be enforced in the first
place, which has certainly not been the case in countries such as Thailand.
•  Fifth, a feature of the lack of credit skills was a failure to recognize bad debts and to face
up  to  the  full  scale  of  the  bad  debt  problem.  Banks  did  not  classify  loans  properly  or
make adequate provisions against them. This allowed insolvent or near-insolvent banks
to continue in business and to build up further losses.
The  end-result  of  this  has  been  the  need  for  large-scale  restructuring  of  banking  systems
across the region, a process that is still going on. Inevitably, this involves use of public funds,
to take over or recapitalise the banks that might have a chance of survival, or to pay off the
depositors of those banks that are hopeless cases and have to be closed.
Let me now turn to how Hong Kong’s experience has compared with that of other banking
systems  in  the  region.  The  first  point  to  make  is  that  our  banks  have  by  no  means  escaped
unscathed from the Asian crisis. This could hardly be the case when the scale of the recession
of  the  last  18  months  has  been  the  deepest  since  records  began  in  1961.  Real  GDP  fell  by
5.1% in 1998 after rising by about the same percentage in the previous year. Unemployment
has  risen  to  6.2%,  a  level  unprecedented  for  Hong  Kong.  This  was  accompanied  by
plummeting  asset  prices  that  at  their  lowest  had  fallen  by  50%  in  the  case  of  residential
properties and 60% in the case of the Hang Seng Index. In an economy as used to prolonged
economic  growth  and  full  employment  as  Hong  Kong  and  so  heavily  dependent  on  asset
values, it is not surprising that this translated into a sharp rise in bad debts for the banks. The
bad  debt  charge  for  our  locally  incorporated  banks  in  respect  of  their  Hong  Kong  business
more than tripled in 1998, albeit from a low base. Non-performing loans (measured by those
that have been classified as substandard, doubtful and loss) rose from around 2% at end-1997
to 7.3% at the end of last year.
This is a sharp increase but it is important to put it into regional perspective. The equivalent
figure  for  non-performing  loans  in  Thailand  at  present  is  around  46%.  The  picture  in
Indonesia is even worse. Hong Kong has therefore fared better in respect of credit risk than its
neighbours.  It  has  no  doubt  been  helped  in  this  by  the  solid  regulatory  framework  in  Hong
Kong and the infrastructure of business laws that makes it relatively easy to take and realize
collateral and to put defaulting borrowers into liquidation. Banks are also free to carry on their
business without political interference. I believe that Hong Kong has also benefited from its
openness as a financial centre, though this can also have its drawbacks. Major international
banks  are  allowed  to  play  a  full  role  in  our  banking  system,  including  in  many  cases
participating  as  full  retail  banks.  This  has  allowed  cross-fertilization  of  talent,  systems  and
products between the local and foreign banks. Finally, another point in Hong Kong’s favour is
that it had already gone through a banking crisis in the early 1980s, in which abuses such as
connected lending had played a part. This provided a stimulus to major reform of the banking
law and to improvement of supervisory standards, a process that has continued to this day.
BIS Review   53/1999
2
We should not however allow the relatively better credit performance of Hong Kong during
the crisis to lull us into a sense of complacency. Much of the blame for the rise in bad debts in
Hong Kong can indeed be laid at the door of the recession, as is shown by the rise in non-
performing loans at even our best-managed banks. But it is also possible to argue that the rise
in bad debts has been accentuated by certain weaknesses in the credit environment during the
1990s.
What sort of things am I talking about? As Alan Greenspan has suggested in his usual oblique
manner,  the  period  prior  to  a  financial  crisis  is  often  characterised  by  “over-exuberance”.
Hong Kong in the years prior to the Asian crisis was no exception. The mood of the times was
well captured in a magazine article from 1997:
“Prospects  couldn’t  have  been  rosier.  In  the  early  1990s,  the  stock  market  was  booming.
China’s  economic  reforms  were  in  full  swing,  opening  up  enormous  opportunities  for  the
risk-takers.  Liquidity  was  abundant,  corporate  bankers  were  eager  to  lend  and  listed
companies were keen borrowers.”
In  such  a  mood  of  euphoria,  it  is  typical  that  too  much  money  is  borrowed  from  too  many
banks. Newly listed companies were a prime lending target of both local banks and the many
foreign banks that had established offices in Hong Kong. Having done so, local management
needed  to  justify  the  existence  of  these  offices  and  were  keen  to  lend  to  companies  whose
newly listed status seemed to provide an image of financial respectability. During this period
Hong Kong experienced the shift away from relationship banking that has been seen in other
markets  around  the  world.  It  was  not  unusual  to  find  even  medium  sized  companies  with
dozens  of  bankers.  Companies  often  ended  up  with  more  cash  than  they  needed  and  in  a
number of cases this was channeled away from core businesses into ill-advised diversification
or  into  speculative  ventures  in  the  stock  and  property  markets.  Typically  these  property
ventures  were  in  Mainland  China  and  came  to  grief  when  austerity  measures  began  to  be
enforced there from 1993 onwards.
Problems with medium-sized corporates in Hong Kong had therefore surfaced even before the
onset of the Asian crisis. But the crisis accentuated the problems and reduced the chances that
the companies concerned could turn themselves around.
In the light of this, coupled with the fact that the prolonged nature of the crisis is putting the
finances of even well-managed companies under strain, it should come as no surprise that the
main bad debt problems of the Hong Kong banks have surfaced in their corporate lending. It
may be of interest to this audience to know that trade finance has been a particular problem
area and has attracted higher than average bad debt provisions. On the face of it, this seems
strange since trade finance is normally seen as being short-term, self-liquidating and secured
on the underlying goods. In practice, companies found it possible to obtain trade lines from a
multiplicity  of  banks  in  excess  of  their  underlying  needs.  In  this  situation,  trade  finance
becomes in effect part of the general working capital of the company and can be siphoned off
into the kind of speculative activities I have already described. In many cases, short-term trade
finance financed long-term property developments in China.
What lessons can be drawn from this? Banks should obviously have a thorough knowledge of
their  customers’  business  and  of  their  real  funding  needs.  Banks  should  know  what  their
lending  is  being  used  for  and  try  to  ascertain  the  borrowers’  facilities  from  other  banks.
3
BIS Review   53/1999
However, in situations where banks are too anxious to lend, it is all too easy for the borrower
to deny information to the banks and to play the banks off against one another.
In  granting  credit,  banks  thus  need  to  undertake  proper  financial  review  of  their  customers
based on reliable information. Particular attention needs to be paid to cash flow and the ability
to service debt in stress situations as well as normal conditions. As in many countries in the
region, some  banks  in  Hong  Kong  have  placed  too  much  emphasis  on  collateral  in  making
their lending decisions. Collateral does of course have an important part to play in providing
secondary  protection  to  the  lender  if  the  borrower  defaults.  But  the  primary  consideration
should  be  debt  servicing  capacity  of  the  borrower.  The  drawbacks  of  over-reliance  on
collateral become all too clear when asset values collapse as they have done during the Asian
crisis. The act of realizing collateral can in itself be destabilizing as we have seen when banks
have  sold  shares  in  listed  companies  pledged  by  their  owners  to  secure  their  private
borrowing. In such cases, confidence in the company concerned can be seriously undermined.
I  should  point  out  however  that  some  of  the  worst  fears  that  had  been  expressed  about  the
property  exposure  of  banks  in  Hong  Kong  have  so  far  proved  to  be  unfounded.  The  major
property  developers  have  come  through  the  recession  relatively  unscathed  and  the
performance  of  the  all-important  residential  mortgage  portfolio  has  been  much  better  than
other  types  of  lending.  At  end-March  of  this  year,  the  delinquency  ratio  for  mortgages  was
only  1.13%.  This  seems  to  confirm  that  homeowners  will  do  all  they  can  to  avoid  default,
though this may be at the expense of cutting back on other forms of discretionary spending.
Bad  debt  problems  due  to  strains  on  personal  finances  have  therefore  cropped  up  in  other
areas, such as loans to the retail or restaurant trades that have borne the brunt of the reduction
in consumer spending. It is however important not to take the good quality of the mortgage
portfolio for granted. As we have seen in Hong Kong, mortgage loans can fall into negative
equity  and  the  banks  would  suffer  a  loss  if  they  had  to  foreclose.  Banks  must  therefore
maintain sound lending criteria in granting new loans, including paying careful attention to the
debt service ratio and requiring income proof from the applicant.
I have mentioned name lending as one source of credit problems in the region. A particular
case of this in Hong Kong has been the lending to Mainland related companies, including the
investment  and  trust  companies  such  as  GITIC.  Over  a  long  period  of  time,  a  set  of
assumptions  has  grown  up  amongst  banks,  both  inside  and  outside  Hong  Kong,  about  the
readiness  of  state  or  provincial  government  shareholders  to  support  Mainland  companies  if
they  got  into  difficulties.  In  short,  it  was  believed  that  foreign  creditors  at  least  would  be
protected, and this seemed to be confirmed by a number of practical examples. The closure
and liquidation of GITIC have overturned these assumptions. The Mainland authorities have
told banks that they must now base their lending decisions on the intrinsic financial strength
of the borrowers and disregard implicit guarantees.
It  must  be  right  in  the  longer  term  that  lenders  should  get  back  to  fundamentals  of
creditworthiness and apply conventional lending standards; indeed this is one of the themes of
this  speech.  Implicit  parental  guarantees  have  enabled  companies  such  as  GITIC  to  borrow
more than they should have done and the lending has not been sensibly used. However, the
adjustment process cannot happen overnight. The transparency is not there in many Chinese
companies; and even if it was there, it would not in many cases support the present levels of
borrowing if the companies were looked at on a stand-alone basis. The banks will therefore
need to be patient and allow borrowers sufficient time to manage their debts down to more
sustainable  levels.  The  banks  will  also  need  to  cooperate  in  assisting  distressed  Mainland
BIS Review   53/1999
4
companies to work out their problems over time and to restructure their debts. The other side
of  the  coin  is  that  the  companies  and  their  shareholders  must  be  prepared  to  be  open  and
transparent with their creditors.
Dealing  with  the  financial  problems  of  companies  in  general  has  become  a  major
preoccupation  of  banks  in  Hong  Kong  and  elsewhere  in  the  region.  There  is  still  not  much
new lending going on - in Hong Kong domestic lending has fallen for ten months in a row.
The main priority for many banks is therefore to limit the damage from loans already on the
balance sheet. To be successful in this objective requires a number of factors to be in place at
both  the  individual  bank  and  sector  levels.  In  individual  banks,  there  must  be  an  effective
system of credit monitoring and loan classification to detect problem loans at an early stage
and to enable corrective action to be taken as soon as possible. As I have already indicated, the
shift  from  relationship  banking  and  the  unwillingness  of  borrowers  to  supply  sufficient
information  have  been  hindering  factors  in  Hong  Kong  in  enabling  banks  to  pick  up  early
warning signals. Once problems have been detected, it may be sufficient in the early stages to
leave the handling of these with the account officers. But  when  the  problems  are  too  deep-
rooted,  there  will  usually  be  advantage  in  transferring  problem  loans  to  a  dedicated  loan
recovery unit where specialist expertise attention can be devoted either to restructure the loans
or to take recovery action and liquidate any collateral. This is the theory, but it is easier said
that  done  to  find  loan  recovery  specialists  when  many  bankers  in  the  region  have  not
experienced a prolonged period of economic decline. Outside experts, for example from the
accounting firms, can help to fill some of the gap. But it is also essential that the banks build
up  their  own  resources  and  provide  more  training  to  their  own  staff  on  how  to  deal  with
problem loans.
At the sector level, it is necessary to have an effective insolvency regime to ensure that non-
viable  companies  can  be  wound  up  in  an  equitable  manner  before  they  have  the  chance  to
build up even further losses. However, liquidation should generally be a last resort and there
should  be  an  alternative  to  insolvency  that  allows  distressed,  but  commercially  viable,
companies to survive as going concerns, thus preserving employment and productive capacity.
This  requires  a  framework  that  encourages  negotiation  and  compromise  between  distressed
borrowers and their creditors. The objective should be to agree a standstill on debt payments
and a moratorium on legal proceedings to provide a breathing space during which negotiations
on  a  debt  restructuring  can  take  place.  In  Hong  Kong,  the  Association  of  Banks  has  issued
non-statutory guidelines for the conduct of debt workouts. These are based on the so-called
London Approach to workouts that was developed by the Bank of England. Other countries in
the region have also used this as a model for dealing with corporate restructuring. The success
of some of these schemes has yet to be proved, but I can say that the Hong Kong approach has
generally worked well. The increase in the number of companies requiring financial assistance
and  the  multiplicity  of  banks  involved  are  however  putting  some  strains  on  the  system.
Workouts are becoming more protracted and more difficult to arrange. This is partly because
of  the  shortage  of  workout  specialists  already  referred  to,  but  also  because  banks  do  not
always display the necessary spirit of cooperation. I have therefore recently suggested to the
Hong  Kong  Association  of  Banks  that  it  would  be  timely  to  review  the  manner  in  which
workouts operate in Hong Kong.
I will close by pulling together some of lessons that can be drawn from our experience during
this difficult period. The Asian crisis has demonstrated weaknesses in banks’ credit controls
and even Hong Kong has not been immune from these. Improvements need to be made to deal
5
BIS Review   53/1999
with the aftermath of the crisis and to reduce the chances of similar problems in the future.
The key points I would recommend to the banks are as follows:
•  Be clear about your lending strategy, including how much risk, and what types of risk,
you are prepared to undertake.
•  Know  your  customer,  his  business  and,  to  the  extent  possible,  his  other  financial
commitments.
•  Keep track of what your lending is actually being used for.
•  Lend on the basis of cash flow rather than collateral.
•  Maintain  an  effective  early  warning  system  for  problem  loans  and  make  sure  that  the
loan portfolio is properly graded.
•  Devote sufficient resources to debt recovery and make sure that your workout staff are
properly trained.
•  Approach debt workouts in the right spirit of compromise and consensus.
These are very basic messages that should be familiar to any prudent lending banker. But the
experience of credit risk during the Asian crisis shows that they are all too easily forgotten.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to issue this reminder.
BIS Review   53/1999
6
