Mr Repse describes general economic developments
 and banking in Latvia
Notes  delivered  by  Mr  Einars  Repse,  Governor  Bank  of  Latvia,  at  the  5th  Annual  International
Conference and Exhibition “Banking and Finance in the Baltics 99”, held in Riga on 13-15 October
1999.
 General economic developments
Since 1996 and until the third quarter of 1998 Latvia experienced a period of accelerated economic
development.
It was characterised by:
• 
• 
• 
• 
High GDP growth - 8.6% in 1997 and the same level of growth in the first half of 1998.
Continuously declining inflation - 2.8% at year end 1998.
Growth in exports and orientation of trade increasingly towards the European Union (EU).
This has been a continuous and sustainable trend backed by sound and responsible economic
policies  of  the  government.  No  budget  deficit  -  even  a  surplus  was  recorded  in  1997  and
1998. Public borrowing in mid-1998 was just around 10% of GDP.
      These  policies  were  and  continue  to  be  strongly  supported  by  the  tight  monetary  policy
pursued by the Bank of Latvia. For more than 5 years, the cornerstone of this policy has been
and  continues to  be  exchange  rate stability.  The  national currency  has  been  pegged  to  the
SDR (the IMF basket of currencies) since February 1994, and its value against the SDR has
remained unchanged.
Macroeconomic  stability,  improving  investment  climate  and  continuing  structural  reforms
have  all  contributed  to  increasing  investor  confidence.  Foreign  direct  investment  (FDI)
attracted in 1996-1997 more than doubled and in 1997 constituted 9.3 % of GDP, covering
the current account deficit.
However, unfavourable external developments, first and foremost the Russian crisis, caused
a considerable slow-down in Latvia’s economic growth in the second half of 1998 and at the
beginning of this year.
The  budget  for  1999  originally  adopted  by  the  central  government  was  balanced.  Under
current circumstances, however, a fiscal deficit of 3-3.5% of GDP is planned for this year. It
is  important  to  stress  that  this  was  an  extraordinary  measure.  The  government  has  every
intention to reduce the  deficit  to  a  minimum  next  year,  and  a  balanced  budget remains its
objective for the near future.
Despite the unfavourable external conditions, the Latvian economy already shows signs of
recovery.  After  the  first  six  months  of  1999,  there  has  been  a  visible  upward  trend  of
economic  activity,  particularly  due  to  a  much  stronger  performance  in  the  service  sector.
Substantial  number  of  Latvia’s  export-oriented  businesses  have  made  concerted  efforts  to
find  new  markets,  and  the  geography  of  Latvian  foreign  trade  has  expanded  as  a  result.
Currently, more than 60% of Latvian foreign trade is with the EU countries, and new export
partners have been found in Latin America, Middle East and other regions.
FDI  still  remains  the  main  source  of  financing  for  the  current  account  deficit.  Denmark,
USA, Sweden, Germany, Russia and the United Kingdom are at the top of the investor’s list.
1
BIS Review 124/1999
 These positive developments allow us to forecast a moderate GDP growth of roughly 1% in
1999, with annual inflation remaining low at approximately 2.5%.
The Central Bank
The main objective of the monetary policy of the Bank of Latvia, as defined by law, is price stability.
Independence of the Bank of Latvia is guaranteed by law and ensured in practice. No  institution  or
person  can  influence  the  Bank  of  Latvia’s  decisions.  The  Governor  and  members  of  the  Board  of
Governors  are  appointed  by  the  parliament  for  a  six-year  term  and  cannot  be  dismissed,  thus  their
personal independence is ensured. The central bank’s budgetary independence is also secured.
The Bank of Latvia has adopted the full set of indirect, market-based monetary policy instruments in
use at the European Central Bank. Currently we are in the process of fine-tuning these instruments and
increasing their efficiency.
Capital movements
Both current and capital account transactions have been fully liberalised from the first days of Latvian
independence. There are virtually no restrictions on cash and capital flows to and from Latvia.
Banking sector development
At present there are 25 commercial banks in Latvia, including a branch of the French Société Generale
and  subsidiaries  of  the  German  Vereinsbank,  Finnish  Merita  Nordbanken  and  Estonian  Hansabank.
Important foreign banking institutions are major shareholders in several Latvian banks.
The  restructuring  of  the  banking  sector  is  practically  complete:  the  industry  is  almost  entirely  in
private  hands.  Only  one  medium-sized  bank  (Mortgage  and  Land  Bank)  remains  state-owned,  and
another one (Latvian Savings Bank) has the state as an important shareholder (41%).
At  end-September  1999,  total  assets  of  the  banking  sector  reached  Lats 1.73  billion  (around
USD 3 billion), and total equity - Lats 169 million (around USD 290 million).
Stable growth from 1996 to the first half of 1998; impact of the Russian crisis after August 1998
The  banking  sector reported  particularly  rapid  growth  starting  with  the  second  half  of  1996.  It  was
stable, orderly and controlled growth that went hand in hand with positive developments in the real
economy  and  occurred  within  the  tight  framework  of  banking  regulations  and  strengthened
supervision.
In 1996-1997, the annual increase in the banking sector’s main indicators (assets, equity and deposits)
was  in  the  range  of  50-60%.  This  growth,  which  continued  during  the  first  half  of  1998,  was  very
much fostered by considerable improvement in the economic and legal environment in Latvia.
The  Russian  crisis  of  1998  held  the  development  back  somewhat:  some  contraction  of  the  banking
sector took place in the last quarter of 1998.
Most  banks  proved  able  to  withstand  the  external  shock  and  re-orient  their  investment  and  lending
policies  rapidly.  The  first  9  months  of  1999  witnessed  stable  growth  of  10%  to  15%  in  all  major
banking  indicators  (assets,  equity,  deposits  and  credits).  The  total  profit  of  the  Latvian  banking
industry reached Lats 17 million in the first three quarters of 1999.
Bank lending
Development has been most pronounced in the area of bank lending, and it has continued despite the
Russian  crisis.  The  remarkable  increase  in  bank  lending  was  not  accompanied  by  deterioration  of
credit portfolios - on the contrary, the quality of bank assets has improved considerably since 1996.
BIS Review 124/1999
2
Most of the loans - more than 90% - are issued to the private sector.
A  gradual  shift  towards  medium-  and  long-term  lending  normally  associated  with  lending  to  the
productive sector of the economy has been ongoing and currently accounts for 63% of total loans.
Loan loss provisions
At the end of September 1999, the share of non-performing loans in total loans for the whole banking
sector was 6% (bad or “lost” loans 1%). This indicator  has  considerably  improved  since the end  of
1996.
In our opinion, these figures indicate realistic credit risk assessment and, in a transition economy, can
scarcely be provided any lower that proper evaluation methods are used. Our loan-loss provisioning
scheme is very tight (tighter than in western economies) and strictly enforced, so that non-performing
loans do not pose any threat to the stability of the banking system.
Banking sector: legislation and supervision
General
The  legislative  framework  for  banking  meets  EU  requirements  and  in  some  respects  exceeds  them.
International Accounting Standards (IAS) have been fully introduced; annual reports are prepared in
accordance with IAS and audited by internationally recognised auditing firms. Practical supervision is
very tight and bank inspections are more frequent than in EU countries.
Licensing
Required minimum initial capital to establish a bank is 5 million euro. There are no restrictions for
foreign banks to establish subsidiaries or branches in Latvia except for prudential requirements, which
are the same for domestic and foreign banks.
Legislation
The  principal  basis  -  the  Law  “On  Credit  Institutions”  -  was  adopted  in  1995  and  incorporates
subsequent amendments. The Bank of Latvia regulations make the requirements set by the law more
specific.  The  whole  set  of  regulations  normally  used  by  a  supervisory  authority  is  in  place  and
corresponds  to  EU  standards.  The  regulations  apply  to  minimum  initial  capital,  own  funds,  capital
adequacy  ratio,  liquidity  requirements,  large  exposures,  open  foreign  exchange  positions,  loan
classification and provisioning.
The law against money laundering came into effect on  1 June  1998. The law  fully  conforms  to the
respective EU directive: it requires customer identification, keeping records on all transactions, defines
suspicious transactions and obliges banks to report them to a special control institution (Disclosures
Office).
Law on deposit guaranties came into effect on 1 October 1998. Presently deposits are guaranteed up to
the rather moderate level of Lats500, however, the law sets a timetable for increasing this amount to
the level required by the EU directive. Initially the law will cover only natural person deposits, and
later on we will apply to legal persons as well.
Remaining tasks
We  are  currently  working  on  the  implementation  of  two  more  advanced  EU  directives,  relating  to
consolidated  supervision  and  capital  adequacy.  This  means  that  by  the  end  of  1999  the  regulatory
framework for banking activities in Latvia will be completely harmonised with EU requirements.
3
BIS Review 124/1999
Practical supervision
Banking supervision in Latvia is well advanced and among the strictest in Central and Eastern Europe.
The Bank of Latvia has been invited  by  the  EU  Tacis (Technical  Assistance to  CIS)  programme  to
participate in a major project aimed at bank restructuring in Ukraine.
Currently there are 55 staff members in our Credit Institutions Supervision Department. A number of
them deal with  on-site  banking  inspections,  others  with off-site  analysis.  Our inspection teams  visit
each commercial bank 2 to 3 times per year, in addition to regular audits by external auditors. In 1998,
95 on-site inspections by the Bank of Latvia took place in Latvian commercial banks. Compared to
western practices, these figures are very high. Due to the improvement of analytical skills of our staff,
in the future more emphasis, as elsewhere, will be put on off-site analysis, and the frequency of on-site
inspections will obviously decrease.
As a result of all this work, we have been able not only to set regulations for banks, but also to fully
enforce their compliance.
Bank of Latvia’s policies and the introduction of the euro
Our policy responses to the euro are based on the general objectives set by our country. Accession to
the EU is a strategic aim for Latvia, and we see entry in the European Monetary Union as a part of this
task.
We have adopted the fulfilment of Maastricht convergence criteria as a medium-term target, and will
be able to meet all of them in 4 to 5 years. Latvia already complies or is close to complying with most
of them:
• 
• 
the public debt is much lower than Maastricht requirements, i.e. 13% of GDP;
there has been no budget deficit in 1997 and 1998; the fiscal situation in 1999 was strongly
influenced  by  external  factors,  and  the  government  intends  to  reduce  the  deficit  in  2000
below Maastricht requirements;
  the  Lats  has  been  pegged  to  the  SDR  at  a  constant  exchange  rate  since  1994,  and,  in
principle, we are meeting the currency stability criteria;
inflation has declined to a stable level below 3%, close to the Maastricht targets;
government bond yield rates, while still high, are on the downward trend, and we expect to
be able to meet the requirements in the medium-term.
The  Bank  of  Latvia  will  be  prepared  to  join  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  at  the  time  of
Latvia’s  accession  to  the  EU.  The  structure  and  objectives  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  the  degree  of  its
independence and the set of monetary policy instruments are fully in line with those defined for the
European System of Central Banks.
During the pre-accession period, the exchange rate peg of the Lats to the SDR will be maintained. This
peg  has  served  us  well  and  has  ensured  less  exchange  rate  fluctuation  than  a  peg  to  any  single
currency.  In  addition,  the  composition  of  Latvia’s  foreign  trade  by  settlement  currencies  closely
resembles the composition of the SDR basket, with USD being the major component in both.
However, we are closely monitoring the new European currency. We hope that the euro will become a
stable  currency  and  anticipate  its  wider  use  in  world  trade.  If  this  happens,  we  will  have  all  the
necessary economic grounds for joining the European Monetary Union after Latvia’s accession to the
EU.
BIS Review 124/1999
4
