Mr Duisenberg explains the thinking of the European Central Bank
on the issue of whether markets need guidance
Introductory statement delivered by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
at  the  Frankfurt  European  Banking  Congress  Session  I:  “Do  markets  need  guidance?”  held  in
Frankfurt on 19 November 1999.
 Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to explain the thinking of the European Central
Bank (ECB) on this important issue.
Let me start by summarising my answer to your question: yes, the  markets  need  guidance from  the
ECB. This guidance should mainly focus on reducing uncertainty in the markets. This requires above
all  a  clear  and  credible  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  ECB  and  sound  economic  analysis.  Thus,
guidance  should  be  given  through  a  credible  monetary  policy  strategy  and  a  transparent  ongoing
assessment of euro area developments in line with this strategy. Reducing uncertainty also implies that
in  our  communication  we  do  not  pretend  that  we  know  more  than  we  really  do.  Obviously,  our
knowledge of the future course of the euro area economy will always be subject to uncertainties and
limitations. It thus goes without saying that guidance certainly cannot be given in such a way that the
ECB indicates a path for future ECB interest rates far in advance.
This  leads  me  directly  to  the  second  part  of  your  question.  (“Is  any  particular  mode  of  guidance
preferable?”) How should the ECB give guidance to the markets? At the heart of the answer to this
question is the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy.
Indeed,  this  strategy  is  designed  to  make  both  our  objective  and  the  monetary  policy  aimed  at
achieving  this  objective  credible,  transparent  and  comprehensible,  and  thus  make  our  decisions
predictable. However, let me be very clear. Being predictable in no way implies that the central bank
intends to follow the market. On the contrary, the causality should run in the other direction. Markets
should  be  in  a  position  to  anticipate  monetary  policy  decisions  based  on  a  credible  strategy  of  the
central bank. This does not exclude that certain monetary policy decisions may sometimes surprise the
markets, but this is not our aim.
As was argued in an article in the most recent issue of the ECB Monthly Bulletin, a stability-oriented
monetary policy contributes to reducing certain risk premia in interest rates and thereby to increasing
the efficiency of the allocation of capital, thus enhancing overall welfare. This shows that it is very
important to give clear guidance to the markets by conducting a credible monetary policy focused on
price stability.
As  you  know,  the  strategy  selected  by  the  Governing  Council of the  ECB  comprises  a  quantitative
definition of price stability, which should contribute to anchoring long-term inflation expectations, as
well  as  the  two  so-called  pillars.  The  quantification  of  the  primary  objective,  combined  with  the
transparency and the credibility of the Eurosystem, provides the most important guidance to financial
markets.  Our  monetary  policy  should  contribute  to  keeping  inflation  expectations  safely  below  2%.
This  ensures  a  high  degree  of  likelihood  that  future  price  developments  will  be  consistent  with  the
definition of price stability.
The Governing Council bases its monetary policy discussions on the information revealed by the two
pillars of its strategy.
The first  pillar is  a  prominent  role for  money,  implying  that  monetary  and credit  developments  are
thoroughly analysed for their information content with regard to future price developments and risks to
price  stability.  The  prominent  role  for  money  is  signalled  by  the  announcement  of  a  quantitative
reference value for monetary growth in terms of M3. I like to emphasise again that the M3 reference
1
BIS Review 128/1999
value  is  not  a  monetary  target.  Monetary  policy  will  not  react  mechanistically  to  deviations  of  M3
growth from the reference value.
The second pillar is a broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments. This comprises
analysis  of  many  individual  non-monetary  indicators.  We  also  look  at  macroeconomic  forecasts
prepared both externally and internally.
I know that some analysts in the market would prefer if the Eurosystem had a very simple strategy,
where interest rates are changed quasi-automatically in response to a few (or even a single) observable
variable(s). Some would prefer monetary targeting, others favour inflation targeting.
I acknowledge that our strategy is complex. However, we have to recognise that we live in a rather
complex economic world and that there are additional uncertainties related to the changeover to the
new regime of Monetary Union in the euro area. It would therefore be impossible for the Eurosystem
to conduct a successful policy by mechanistically following a simple rule whereby policy decisions are
closely linked to a few indicator variables or to a central inflation projection at a particular point in
time.
Two  key  features  of  the  ECB’s  communication  with  the  public  and  the  markets  are  our  Monthly
Bulletins  and  the  monthly  press  conferences.  The  latter  usually  directly  follow  the  first  Governing
Council  meeting  of  each  month.  By  these  means  we  publicly  conduct  a  detailed  review  of  current
monetary, financial and other economic developments in the euro area against the background of the
strategy.  This  aims  at  illustrating  the  application  of  the  strategy  in  practice,  guiding  market
expectations.  Although  the  strategy  is  complex,  we  generally  try  to  end  with  an  overall  assessment
which summarises the opinion of the Council on the future situation.
The  press  conference  provides  prompt  information  in  an  even-handed  way,  and  it  offers  the
opportunity  for  immediate  two-way  communication.  As  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  other  central  bank
regularly  communicates  with  the  public  in  such  a  prompt  and  open  manner  immediately  after  its
monetary  policy  meetings.  We  are  convinced  that  this  contributes  to  reducing  uncertainty  in  the
markets and thus gives important and clear guidance, also with regard to short-term policy moves.
In this respect, one should recognise that the ECB is facing a completely new environment. We do not
only have to decide on the single monetary policy for a new monetary area comprising 11 independent
countries, but also to communicate with the public and markets of these 11 countries, which were used
to quite different monetary policy strategies and communication policies in the past.
This  diversity  of  monetary  history,  communication  and  culture  across  the  euro  area  obviously
constitutes a great challenge for communicating in a comprehensible and transparent way both with
the general public and the markets.
Obviously,  journalists,  financial  markets  and  the  public  are  still  in  the  process  of  learning  the  new
strategy of monetary policy in the euro area and, over time, the Eurosystem will further improve its
communication.
Let  me  finally  address  the  third  part  of  your  question:  (“does  more  information  necessarily  mean
better  guidance?”).  I  am  convinced  that  it  is  misleading  to  assume  that  more  information  always
means better policy and a clearer guidance to the market.  What is important  is  that  the  information
given to the public is clearly structured and understandable, avoids adding uncertainty and is provided
in an even-handed way. The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy has been designed with these aims
in mind.
Moreover,  as  indicated,  a  high  degree  of  credibility  of  monetary  policy  can  make  a  substantial
contribution to reducing uncertainty in the markets and is thus a key aim of our policy. What is clearly
more important than the amount of information given is that the communication policy, as part of the
strategy, is consistent with the structure of the internal decision-making process. I can assure you that
this is indeed the case.
During the monthly press conferences, I make an introductory statement summarising the Governing
Council’s discussions and conclusions before answering questions from journalists. As the statement
is  agreed,  in  substance,  with  all  the  Council  members  beforehand,  it  is  similar  to  what  others  call
BIS Review 128/1999
2
minutes. I am convinced that, for the purposes of establishing credibility and reducing uncertainties in
the market, informing the public of such an agreed position on the part of the Governing Council is
superior to publishing details of a Council discussion which are naturally difficult to assess for those
who are not present at the meeting. Moreover, as mentioned, we should not pretend to know more than
we do. It is thus important not to try to give guidance when the ECB itself is not sure. I very much
agree  that  giving  too  much  information  is  not  always  helpful.  I  am  convinced  that  the  Eurosystem
already  provides  timely,  high-frequency  information  of  good  quality,  but,  as  I  have  said,  trying  to
further improve our communications is an ongoing exercise.
3
BIS Review 128/1999
