Mr Lee examines issues relating to the changing financial landscape
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Lee  Hsien  Loong,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  The  Monetary
Authority of Singapore and Deputy Prime Minister, at the 16th General Meeting of the Asian Bankers
Association, held in Singapore on 26 November 1999.
Introduction
The  international financial  landscape is changing  rapidly.  In  Asia,  economies  and  financial  systems
have undergone a traumatic two years. Weakening economies uncovered flaws in financial institutions
and  supervision.  Entire  financial  systems  went  down,  undermined  by  slack  lending  practices  and
inadequate legal frameworks. The financial troubles in turn affected the real sector, sending economies
into steep decline.
Now  the  crisis  is  passing.  In  many  countries,  macro  indicators  have  stabilised,  and  growth  has
resumed.  But  it  will  take  years  of  hard  work  to  clean  up  the  bad  loans,  recapitalise  the  banks,
strengthen the legal and supervisory framework, change long established cosy relationships, and put
long-term growth on a firmer foundation.
While Asia has been preoccupied with reconstruction and recovery, globalisation and technology have
progressed apace, especially in the US and Europe. Technology is both a critical cause and a catalyst.
Financial  arenas  are  becoming  more  open,  new  products  and  services  are  being  invented  and
marketed,  and  regulators  everywhere  are  scrambling  to  assess  the  changes  and  master  the  flux.  An
international wave of mergers and acquisitions has swept the industry, as boundaries between financial
sectors and products have blurred dramatically. The recent repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act in the US
will allow  the  creation  of  “financial super-markets”  or  one-stop  shops  that  offer  banking,  securities
and insurance services, and further push this trend towards consolidation.
Developments in banking
In this brave new world, one fact remains unchanged: the need for countries to have sound, resilient
banking  systems,  and  strong  banks.  But  countries  cannot  achieve  this  by  closing  their  markets  and
excluding  foreign  competition,  except  at  a  very  high  price.  Instead,  they  must  use  competition  to
strengthen  and  upgrade  their  institutions,  so  that  they  can  hold  their  own  in  an  increasingly  open
environment.
This is why Singapore has embarked on a five-year bank liberalisation programme, granting foreign
banks new licences and more access to the domestic market, lifting foreign ownership restrictions on
local banks, and upgrading standards of disclosure and corporate governance of local banks.
Corporate governance
Strengthening  corporate  governance  is  key  to  upgrading  standards  of  integrity,  professionalism  and
service in banks in Asia. Relationships between shareholders, the board of directors, management, and
other  stakeholders  must  all  be  configured  in  a  way  that  encourages  sound  and  rigorous  banking
practices  and  strengthens  corporate  performance.  To  be  an  effective  instrument  of  corporate
governance,  the  board  of  directors  must  act  independently,  and  participate  actively  in  shaping  the
strategies  of  the  bank. The  board  should  deliberate  and  decide on  issues  in  the  best  interests  of  the
bank, its depositors and all its shareholders. Board members must also be able to participate actively in
strategic  discussions,  to  facilitate  the  flow  and  cross-fertilisation  of  ideas,  and  exercise  effective
oversight  over  the  management.  Thus  in  the  US,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  inspects  banks’  board
minutes  to  determine  if  all  board  members  are  active  and  contribute  to  discussions  on  important
matters.
BIS Review 130/1999
1
Singapore  banks  are  prudently  managed  and  financially  sound.  According  to  the  latest  Moody’s
ratings,  they  were  collectively  rated the  ninth  best in the  world and  best  in  Asia.  But  benchmarked
against international best practices of corporate governance and disclosure, they still have some way to
go.  One  major  step  we  have  taken  is  to  require  all  local  banks  to  appoint  nominating  committees
within  their  boards,  following  common  practice  in  the  developed  economies.  The  task  of  the
nominating committees is to ensure that only the most competent and qualified individuals, who can
contribute actively to the bank and discharge their responsibilities in the interests of all shareholders,
are appointed to the board and to key management positions.
Such appointments are not a one-off exercise, but a continuing requirement. In Singapore politics we
have  made  self-renewal  of  leaders  a  norm.  As  a  result  the  political  leadership  belongs  to  the  same
generation  as  the  population,  and  stays  vigorous,  up  to  date,  and  in  tune  with  the  electorate.  But
self-renewal is necessary in every field, including banking. The boards of Singapore banks have done
commendable  jobs  discharging  their  responsibilities.  But  on  the  whole  they  have  not  given  enough
attention to self-renewal, to inducting and testing out new talent and getting people who have served
long and well to make way gracefully for a younger team. In contrast, many international banks have,
as a matter of board policy, set age limits and limited the length of tenure of all board members.
MAS has discussed this important issue with the local banks. We understand how difficult it is for a
director to give way to a younger replacement, particularly if he has performed well over many years
and still feels able to fulfil his responsibilities. But unless we overcome this psychological hurdle, we
will be unable to sustain the vitality and drive of the organisation, and the quality of our banks will
decline.
The local banks have agreed that self-renewal of their boards should be a priority, and have told MAS
that they will start to make some changes soon. MAS looks forward to receiving nominations from the
local  banks  for  new  board  appointments,  and  to  working  with  their  boards  to  strengthen  corporate
governance in the local banks.
Technological innovation: cheque truncation
A second area of focus for banks is technology. Technological innovations have dramatically altered
the  financial  landscape.  Payment  systems,  for  example,  can  be  improved  by  technology.  Ideally,
payment systems should be paperless, and in the long run this will happen. But today’s reality is a long
way from that. Even a technology pioneer like the US depends on large volumes of paper cheques.
Therefore to apply technology to the payment system, a realistic interim target is to aim for cheque
truncation.
Cheque truncation means that the physical cheque is scanned at the point of deposit, and thereafter the
electronic image of the cheque, rather than the paper cheque itself, is transmitted to the clearing house
for sorting, and then onwards to the paying banks. In other words, the flow of the physical cheque is
fully truncated at the point of deposit.
The Singapore Clearing House Association, together with the Association of Banks in Singapore, is
currently  developing  a  cheque  truncation  system.  This  should  be  much  faster  and  cheaper  than
handling paper cheques.
We  are  also  considering  a  national  image  archive  to  centralise  the  storage  of  cheques.  The
consolidation of such shared back-end services will yield economies of scale at an institutional level.
To  the  customer,  cheque  truncation  will  mean  faster  processing  of  cheques  deposited,  thereby
increasing  the  customer’s  liquidity  and  reducing  settlement  risk.  The  system  will  be  implemented
nationwide  by  2001,  making  Singapore  the  first  country  to  implement  cheque  truncation  on  such  a
scale.
BIS Review 130/1999
2
Development of capital markets
Besides the need for strong banks, a second lesson from the Asian crisis is the importance of deep and
liquid capital markets. There is now widespread recognition that Asian countries depended too heavily
on bank loans for financing. Domestic banks lent excessively. Foreign banks also went on a lending
binge in Asia in the years leading up to the crisis in 1997, and just as surely accounted for the bulk of
the sudden withdrawal of capital in the two years that followed. Had Asia relied more on bond and
equity financing, it would have had alternative sources of financial intermediation, and the subsequent
credit crunch in the banking system would have had a smaller impact on the real economy.
Bonds and equities offer significant advantages over bank borrowing. They are a means of long-term
financing and investment to corporates, unlike short-term credit lines which mean funds being pulled
out of a company at the first sign of trouble. They facilitate asset-liability management. They mobilise
savings and widen the range of investment alternatives for both institutional and retail investors. They
create transparent market-determined assessments of creditworthiness.
Singapore believes there is good potential for developing domestic bond markets, and an Asian bond
market. We have actively promoted the growth of the bond market in Singapore, as one of the centres
for  the  Asian  bond  market.  Previously,  MAS  did  not  allow  foreign  entities  to  borrow  in  Singapore
dollars, whether from banks or through bond issues, except to finance economic activities related to
Singapore. This was to deter the internationalisation of the S$. But last year we reviewed this policy,
and issued new guidelines, a Notice (MAS 757) that made it easier for foreign entities to list S$ shares
and issue S$ bonds, subject to safeguards. For example, the S$ proceeds must be swapped into foreign
currency if they are to be used outside Singapore.
Our approach was a cautious one, for although we wanted to promote the bond market, we maintained
our  basic  stance  of  discouraging  the  internationalisation  of  S$.  But  we  stated  that  so  long  as  the
stability  of 
the
non-internationalisation policy would continue to evolve as we gained experience with the new rules,
and as our financial sector and capital markets grew and developed. We also committed to review the
restrictions after a year.
the  exchange  rate  was  not  compromised, 
implementation  of 
the  actual 
We have now completed the review. The response to our new policy has been encouraging. Since the
new Notice was introduced, there have been 19 S$ bond issues by 16 foreign entities, raising a total of
almost S$3 billion. The issuers were a good mix of supranationals, financial institutions and corporates
of good credit standing from around the world.
The  financial  institutions  have  given  MAS  feedback,  proposing  changes  to  the  Notice  to  give  the
players more flexibility and generate more liquidity and depth in the market. We have adopted many,
but not all, of their suggestions. We will liberalise guidelines in four key areas.
Repo consultation limit
The development of a liquid repo market is critical to the Singapore government securities (SGS) and
S$  debt  market.  An  active  repo  market  enables  investors  and  primary  dealers  to  finance  their  bond
inventories and hedge their S$ debt positions. This would facilitate more active trading of SGS and S$
bonds and deepen bond market liquidity.
Repo transactions with non-residents are presently subject to a S$20 million consultation limit. Banks
have told us that this requirement to consult is a psychological hurdle, even though MAS has assured
them that the decisions will be liberal and quick.
A non-resident borrowing S$ through a repo must first obtain the equivalent amount in SGS, which is
a S$ asset. Given that MAS Notice 757 already limits a non-resident to no more than S$5 million of
Singapore  dollar  credit  for  such  investments,  allowing  banks  to  transact  S$  repos  freely  with
non-residents will not lead to a significant net increase in S$ credit facilities to non-residents.
MAS has therefore decided to lift the S$20 million consultation limit. Banks in Singapore may now,
without prior consultation with MAS, enter into repo transactions in Singapore government securities
BIS Review 130/1999
3
and S$ denominated bonds listed on SES with any party, and for any amount, on condition that there is
full delivery of collateral.
OTC interest rate derivatives
OTC interest rate products would open more avenues for non-resident investors to  manage  their  S$
interest rate risks arising from investing in the S$ debt market. But hitherto MAS has restricted OTC
interest rate derivatives, because they could facilitate speculative volatility in the S$.
In September this year, SIMEX introduced the S$ three-month interest rate futures contract. MAS will
follow  up  by  allowing  S$  OTC  interest  rate  derivatives,  such  as  interest  rate  swaps,  forward  rate
agreements,  interest  rate  options  and  swaptions,  to  be  transacted  freely  without  consultation.  Banks
will, however, be required to submit monthly reports on details of interest rate derivative transactions
exceeding S$5 million with counterparties outside Singapore.
Credit rating of foreign entities issuing S$ bonds
So far, we have required foreign entities which wish to issue S$ bonds to be of good credit standing.
Up till now the lowest credit rating of foreign entities that have tapped the S$ bond market has been
single A. Debt intermediaries have told us that investors in the S$ market would like to see a wider
credit spectrum of S$ bonds. MAS recognises that allowing more diversely rated bond issues would
increase  investment  opportunities  for  investors  with  different  risk-return  appetites,  allow  portfolio
diversification, and create more investor interest in our debt market.
To widen the credit spectrum of foreign entities tapping the Singapore dollar bond market, MAS will
allow the following to issue Singapore dollar denominated bonds: a) all rated foreign corporates; b) all
sovereigns, rated or unrated; and c) unrated foreign corporates, provided the investor base is restricted
to sophisticated investors.1
However, the requirement for the non-resident issuers to convert or swap the S$ proceeds into foreign
currency  for  use  outside  Singapore  remains.  MAS  still  does  not  allow  S$  funding  of  non-residents
where the proceeds are to be used outside Singapore, or for purposes which do not generate economic
value to Singapore.
S$ equity listing
Related  to  the  bond  market  is  the  development  of  the  Asian  equities  market.  Companies  will
increasingly  turn  to  the  equity  market  to  raise  capital  or  reduce  their  debt-equity  ratios.  They  will
either seek to list in their home exchange or list abroad, and their shares will often be traded on more
than one exchange. The Singapore stock exchange aims to be one of the centres in the Asian equities
market.
Foreign companies seeking to list on SES often want to do so in S$. This enables them to tap the local
investor  base,  which  contributes  significantly  to  liquidity,  and  hence  to  higher  stock  valuations.
However,  we  have  required  foreign  companies  wanting  to  list  in  S$  to  have  at  least  20%  of  their
revenues, profits, or expenses attributable to Singapore.
MAS has now decided to remove this requirement. We will allow all foreign-owned companies to list
S$ denominated shares freely on SES, without consultation, subject of course to meeting SES’ listing
1 Defined  in  the  Companies  Act  (Cap  50)  as  an  individual  whose  total  net  personal  assets  exceed  S$1 million  or  its
equivalent in foreign currencies or whose income in the preceding 12 months is not less than S$200,000 or its equivalent
in  foreign  currencies;  or  a  corporation  whose  total  net  assets  exceed  S$5 million  in  value  or  its  equivalent  in  foreign
currencies as determined by the last audited balance sheet of the corporation.
BIS Review 130/1999
4
requirements.  However,  the  S$  proceeds  from  the  share  issue  must  be  maintained  with  a  bank  in
Singapore and converted into foreign currency before they can be used outside Singapore.
Foreign-owned companies whose shares are currently traded in foreign currencies on SES can convert
the  quotation  of  their  stocks  into  S$.  SES  will  announce  details  for  such  conversion  shortly.
Subsequent share issues by such companies will be subject to the same requirement, i.e. proceeds must
be converted into foreign currency before being used outside Singapore.
This  change  is  in  line  with  the  caveat  emptor  principle.  Singaporean  investors  considering  buying
shares in a foreign company not operating in Singapore should learn for themselves what the company
is doing, how successful it is likely to be, and what the risks are, before deciding whether or not to
invest in the company. There is no need to deter them from investing in the company, by making the
company list in a foreign currency.
MAS will be issuing a revised MAS 757 shortly, incorporating these revisions. We hope the changes
will increase international participation in our S$ capital markets and add to their depth and critical
mass. MAS will, of course, continue to review the Notice on an  ongoing  basis, in line  with  market
needs and financial innovation.
Year 2000
Lastly, it being so close to the end of the year, let me make some remarks on Y2K.
Singapore’s financial sector is fully ready for the new millennium. All banks and financial institutions
have  taken  all  necessary  steps  to  achieve  Y2K  readiness.  They  have  tested  all  important  internal
systems  and  participated  in  extensive  industry-wide  tests,  both  within  the  financial  sector  and  with
critical infrastructure providers. MAS has also established a Y2K liquidity  scheme  for a  two-month
period, from 29 November 1999 till 28 January 2000, to help meet temporary Y2K-related liquidity
needs of banks and finance companies, in the unlikely event that they are unable to obtain funding in
the market during the crossover.
Independent assessments by global industry bodies rate Singapore among the countries best prepared
for the date change. In the nature of the Y2K problem and despite all best efforts, some glitches may
still  occur.  We  therefore  have  a  range  of  contingency  plans  ready.  MAS  and  many  financial
institutions  in  Singapore  will  set  up  command  centres  during  the  crossover  to  monitor  closely  all
aspects of operations, and respond promptly to any problems that arise.
Singaporeans should rest assured that electronic services such as ATMs, electronic funds transfer and
credit card facilities have been fully tested. All their financial records are backed up daily and are safe.
They need not take any special measures in preparation for the New Year, like withdrawing additional
amounts  of  cash.  Their  money  in  the  banks  will  be  as  safe  as  it  has  always  been.  The  Y2K
technological  issue  will  not  be  a  major  thing  in  Singapore.  We  are  determined  to  ensure  that  Year
2000 will be remembered for its celebration of the new millennium, not for disruption due to a simple
programming convention inherited from the 1950s.
Conclusion
Beyond the immediate Y2K issue, it is clear that Asian bankers face many serious challenges. They
need to  keep  abreast  of  changing  developments,  and  anticipate  new  trends.  They  must  significantly
improve  their  corporate  governance.  Technological  innovations  will  continue.  Policymakers  have  a
full  agenda  to  liberalise  prudently,  while  tightening  standards  of  supervision  and  enforcement.  As
financial liberalisation proceeds, new market opportunities will emerge and there will be a demand for
more  differentiated  products  and  services.  Capital  markets  should  grow  in  Asia,  providing  an
alternative means of intermediation for regional economies. If Asian financial  systems  can  do these
things and respond to new opportunities, they will be a source of strength, and not weakness, to their
countries as the new millennium dawns.
BIS Review 130/1999
5
