Mr Quaden addresses the impact of the single currency on
the financial markets and looks at the international role of the euro
Speech  by  Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium  and  a  member  of  the
Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a  conference  by  the  Belgian  Banker’s
Association (ABB) in Brussels on 14 October 1999.
I would like to leaf with you through the photo album of a baby, whose name is euro. He is now nine
months old and he took years, not months, to conceive.
 Introduction
On  1  January  1999,  the  final  phase  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  started  with  the
successful  launch  of  the  euro.  This  followed  a  period  of  both  intensive  technical  preparation  and
considerable progress in the economies of the participating countries. The changeover of all operations
on  4  January  went  without  upset  and  the  major  technical  and  logistical  challenge  which  the
preparation and success of the conversion weekend represented, has been fully met.
Since the beginning of this year the Eurosystem, made up of the European Central Bank (ECB) and
the 11 participating central banks, is responsible for the conduct of a single monetary policy for the
whole of the euro area. Assessing the first nine months of EMU means first to focus on how the new
System  has  been  put  in  place  and  how  it  has  been  able  to  conduct  the  new  single  monetary  policy
efficiently.
Monetary union also marks a significant milestone in the process of European integration, whose first
beneficiaries are the financial markets. Their integration must indeed complement the integration of
the goods, services and capital markets. I will successively address the impact of the single currency
on the money markets, the bond markets and the equity markets.
To conclude I will turn to the international role of the euro. Does the euro succeed a few months after
its birth in becoming a genuine international currency?
The single monetary policy
On  the  macroeconomic  level,  the  birth  of  the  euro  has  not  only  meant  the  coming  of  a  new
international currency, but also the emergence of a new supranational body, which has as its task to
implement  the  new  single  monetary  policy  in  an  independent  way  and  with  the  participation  of  the
national central banks.
After  a  conversion  weekend,  during  which  the  whole  of  the  interbank  payment  systems  and  the
various financial markets changed over to the euro in four days, the Governing Council of the ECB
(formed by the six members of the Executive Board and the eleven governors of the National Central
Banks)  was  able  from  its  first  meeting  of  the  year  to  take  its  first  decisions  and  to  launch  its  first
monetary policy operations.
The  objectives  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  which  are  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  are
ensuring  price  stability,  and  without  prejudice  to  this  primary  objective,  contributing  to  the  general
economic policy of the EU. Price stability has been defined by the Governing Council of the ECB as
an increase of the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) of below 2% for the euro area as a
whole from a medium-term perspective.
To reach  this  objective  a  strategy  has  been  established  that  rests  on  two  pillars.  As  there  is  a  large
consensus about the fact that in the medium term inflation is a monetary phenomenon, the Governing
1
BIS Review 114/1999
Council has decided to adopt a reference value for the growth of a broad monetary aggregate, namely
M3. The short-term relationship between money supply and prices being more complex to interpret,
deviations of monetary growth from the reference value  need to  be addressed  carefully.  Beside  this
first  pillar,  the  second  is  based  on  a  large  set  of  indicators,  including  inflation  forecasts,  wage
developments and the exchange rate.
The Governing Council has proven its capacity to think and act for the  euro  area as  a  whole by  its
decision in April to cut the ECB’s main refinancing rate from 3.0% to 2.5%, a historical floor. At that
time production was slowing and inflationary expectations were going in a downward direction.
The cut has served its purpose. It has contributed to the resumption of growth. The rate of increase of
consumer prices (1,2% in August for the annual rate of change in the HICP) is still well  below  the
ceiling  of  2%.  Recent  monetary  developments  (the  growth  of  M3  and  especially  of  credits  to  the
private sector) signal, however,  a rather  generous  liquidity  situation  in the euro  area  while  with  the
acceleration of the economic growth the balance of risks to price stability is at present on an upward
trend.
The  Governing  Council  is  monitoring  the  evolution  closely  and  is  now  contemplating  the
appropriateness  of  modifying  its  interest  rate.  We  don’t  envisage  adopting  a  restrictive  monetary
policy stance, but rather a less accommodating one which would be better adapted to the new context.
The  goal  is  in  any  case  not  to  hinder  growth  but  to  preserve  its  sustainability  by  the  mastering  of
inflationary risks.
The euro area - and in particular Belgium -  could perfectly  enjoy,  next  year,  a nice  combination  of
strong economic growth and low inflation.
The integration of the financial markets
The  integration  of  the  European  financial  markets  was  one  of  the  advantages  expected  from  the
introduction of the single currency. What can be said today?
As far as money markets are concerned, a very strong convergence of short-term interest rates could
be  observed  by  the  end  of  1998.  After  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  implementation  of  the
operational framework for the single monetary policy and the new TARGET system have accelerated
the  creation  of  a  liquid  and  integrated  money  market  for  the  whole  of  the  euro  area.  The  speed  at
which the eleven national money markets have integrated into one single large market is remarkable.
The  TARGET  system  has  allowed  for  a  swift  and  efficient  transfer  of  funds  within  the  monetary
union,  thus  reducing  interest  rate  differentials  between  countries.  The  elimination  of  short-term
interest rate differences was in turn necessary to enable the Eurosystem to conduct its monetary policy
in  an efficient  manner in the  entire euro  area. The  success  of TARGET cannot  be denied,  not  only
from  a  technical  point  of  view,  but  also  from  a  commercial  one  as  it  has  for  the  moment  captured
about 70% of the total volume of large value cross-border payments in the euro area.
Although it started earlier, the process of integrating bond markets will take longer. The impact of the
single monetary policy is indeed slighter on these markets and national characteristics - in particular
different tax regimes - still remain important. However, the disappearance of the exchange  risk,  the
harmonisation of market practices, the redenomination of government debt into euro at the beginning
of the third stage of EMU and important issues of government bonds in euro have contributed greatly
to  accelerate  the  process.  Yet  this  has  not led to  the  disappearance  of  interest  rate  spreads  between
countries.  The  European  bond  market  is,  as  you  know,  largely  dominated  by  the  national  Treasury
departments which still place the major part of their issues on their domestic markets. While one has
witnessed a decreasing spread between interest rates as a result both of the commitments made within
the stability and growth pact and of the disappearance of the exchange risk, differences due to the size,
liquidity and to the specific risk of each sovereign issue, however, still remain.
Though  the  European  market  of  government  bonds  still  suffers  from  a  certain  segmentation,  the
corporate bond market has already at present exceeded all expectations. During the first six months of
this year, European companies are said to have issued more than double the amount registered in 1998.
BIS Review 114/1999
2
Moreover,  the  average  size  of  these  issues  has  increased  considerably.  This  evolution  results  from
financing  needs  arising  from  Mergers  and  Acquisitions’  activities,  but  first  and  foremost  from  the
enormous  potential  the  private  bond  market  represents.  It  indeed  benefits  from  the  decrease  in  the
financing needs of governments, from the disappearance of exchange risk and from  the  advent  of  a
large, more liquid and more homogeneous European bond market. European companies will therefore
turn  more  and  more  directly  to  the  financial  markets.  The  increased  demand  of  companies  for  new
ratings is another example of the growing interest of the large European companies to issue securities
rather  than  to  make  use  of  traditional  bank  credits  (a  development  which,  as  you  know,  will  have
implications for the banking sector).
Among the issued securities there are bonds, but also shares, and the introduction of the euro should
foster the convergence and the progressive integration of the equity markets of the euro area. Things
have evolved, but sometimes at a slower pace than had been hoped. Since the beginning of this year
investors  have  indices  at  their  disposal  that  are  aggregated  for  the  whole  of  the  euro  area.  Several
sometimes competing projects have emerged aiming to establish a common platform or to create links
between  stock  exchanges  to  handle  important  European  securities.  These  initiatives  reflect  the  new
perspectives monetary union offers. But a certain slowness and some hesitation also bear witness to
the numerous obstacles that still check the stock markets’ harmonisation and integration. However, the
evolution that has started is unavoidable and will gradually lead to the formation of European financial
markets whose size and importance as for the reallocation of resources will become comparable to the
markets  of  the  US.  In  this  way  one  will  see  the  differences  subside  that  characterise  the  respective
roles of banks and financial markets on both sides of the Atlantic in the collection of savings and the
financing of investments. We should mention that while bank deposits are higher in the euro area than
in the US, stock market capitalisation is four times higher in the US than the capitalisation of the sum
of all the stock exchanges of the euro area. This transformation of the financial markets in Europe will
become even more pronounced in view of the demographic evolution and the increased importance of
pension funds and insurance companies as institutional investors.
The euro as an international currency
In such a context, the euro has not taken long to establish itself as an international currency.
At  present  the  euro  is  the  second  most  widely  used  currency,  after  the  US  dollar.  The  euro  has  of
course inherited the weight of the former national currencies it replaces but its utilisation also stems
from the economic importance of Europe in the world economy. With its 290 million consumers, the
euro area is an economy similar in size to the US. GDP is lower than the one of the US, it contributes
for a larger part to world exports. GDP of the euro area represents about 22% of world GDP, this is
somewhat less than the US whose GDP reaches 29%, but considerably higher than Japan’s GDP that
stands at 13%. On the other hand the euro area is the largest commercial partner, with some 20% of
total exports, against 16% for the US and 8% for Japan. The emergence of a European international
currency is one of the results that was expected from the introduction of the euro and it is an obvious
advantage for European companies. However, the Eurosystem has adopted a neutral stance concerning
the international status of the euro. Its importance as an international currency will be determined by
the markets.
To assess the international character of the euro after somewhat more than nine months, I will briefly
go  into  the  few  functions  usually  attributed  to  an  international  currency.  We  can  distinguish  the
official use of the currency and its use for private transactions. In the first instance, the euro can be
used by public authorities as a reserve currency or as a pegging currency. Although no recent data are
available on the relative share of the euro in the official reserves, one may suppose the euro to be the
second reserve currency after the dollar, if one transposes the international weight of the currencies the
euro has replaced. On the other hand the euro is used and will in all probability be even more used in
the future as a pegging currency by some EU countries that have not joined the EMU, by countries of
Central  and  Eastern  Europe  that  are  candidates  for  EU  membership  and  by  some  other  emerging
countries. I would also like to mention countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Canada and South Africa
3
BIS Review 114/1999
which have issued international bonds denominated in euro in order to diversify their foreign debt to
the benefit of the European single currency.
The  international use  of  the  euro  by  private  operators  can  primarily  occur  within  the  framework  of
transactions or for investment and financing operations. At the beginning of the 90s one estimated that
about  50%  of  the  exports  of  goods  and  services  was  invoiced  in  dollars,  one  third  in  one  of  the
currencies that participate in the euro and only 5% in yen. Although the part of the euro area in world
exports  is  greater  than  that  of  the  US,  the  euro  will  only  assert  itself  progressively  as  a  payment
currency  in international transactions.  Indeed, the  evolution  of  invoicing  practices  will  be  slow  and
will  depend  among  others  on  the  usual  practices  in  the  field  of  price  setting  on  the  international
markets and in particular on the commodities and on the oil markets. The almost exclusive use of the
US dollar stems from both custom and ease as these products are quoted in dollars, a fact which will
not be easy to change. The international transactions denominated in dollars are therefore four times
higher  than  US  exports.  While  the  relative  share  of  the  euro  as  a  payment  currency  is  bound  to
increase, this evolution will in all probability be slow and progressive.
As  an  investment  and  financing  currency,  the  euro  already  plays  an  important  part  on  international
capital markets. During the first two quarters of this year, the share of euro denominated issues in the
total of international issues has by far exceeded the aggregate part of its preceding currencies. In the
first six months of this year, new euro denominated bond issues have surpassed by almost 50% the
amount issued in the first six months of 1998 in the currencies that now participate in the euro. The
international  issues  in  euro  now  stand  for  more  than  40%  of  the  total  amount  issued  on  the
international  markets,  which  is  a  proportion  that  comes  close  to  the  one  of  US  dollar  denominated
bond issues. Several factors which I have already referred to can explain this evolution: the financing
of  operations  with  regard  to  mergers  and  acquisitions,  the  bigger  size  and  greater  liquidity  of  euro
markets and the euro issues undertaken by several major countries wishing to diversify the distribution
of their foreign currency debt.
Given the international importance of the new currency, it is not surprising that the development of the
euro exchange rate has attracted considerable attention despite the fact that the level of the exchange
rate is less important for the euro area as a whole than it was for each of the participating countries
before the start of EMU, in particular for a small country like Belgium. For this reason the level of the
euro exchange rate is not in itself a precise policy objective of the Eurosystem. Nevertheless it is an
important indicator in its monetary policy strategy.
In the first part of the year the relative weakness of economic activity in the euro area compared with
the high growth in the US has affected the euro exchange rate. But now, with the good prospects for
an economic upturn in the euro area, the firm commitment of the Eurosystem to internal price stability,
which constitutes the best basis for the strength of the euro in the long run, is already better reflected
in the external value of the currency.
Conclusions
The introduction of the euro  stands for  a  profound  and  irreversible change  in  European integration.
The euro did not only replace the participating currencies, it has given a new dimension to the single
market by introducing changes in the structure of the European financial markets that now match the
size of the single market. The euro has also made a promising start on the international capital markets
and has contributed to a closer integration of European financial markets. Though these developments
are certainly not complete they are impressive if one takes into consideration the short time covered.
They show the confidence of European but also international investors in the soundness of the  new
European monetary policy based on the stability of the euro.
I  add  that  the  euro  is  not  only  the  financial  sector’s  concern.  For  the  non-financial  sectors,  the
remaining  part  of  the  transition  period before the  permanent  disappearance  of  the  different  national
currencies offers companies the opportunity not only to change over to the single currency gradually,
but  also  to  reposition  themselves  in  the  new  economic  and  competitive  environment  the  euro  area
from now on represents.
BIS Review 114/1999
4
Finally, for private persons new efforts should be made in the field of information and I wish that both
on the European and on the national level the period to exchange banknotes and coins will  prove  a
success and will reflect the European know-how as was the case during the changeover of the financial
sector and the payment systems.
The baby is in good health. He is even sturdy for his age. He looks older than he is. But he has still to
grow. For him life is only starting.
5
BIS Review 114/1999
