Mr Duisenberg looks at the euro and a dynamic Europe
Speech given by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of
a conference organised by VNO-NCW in Scheveningen, Netherlands, on 5 November 1999.
 Introduction
1.
Your Majesty, ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  Scheveningen  today  and  I  should  like  to  congratulate
VNO-NCW on its hundredth anniversary. I have met less healthy centenarians. I should also like to
thank Hans Blankert for my pleasant cooperation with him in my former position, and I should like to
wish his successor, Jacques Schraven, every success.
Since  1 January  1999  the  euro  has  become  a  reality.  As  you  know,  the  euro  area  experienced  a
slowdown in economic growth in the early part of the year. Fortunately, the recovery  is  now  under
way. The challenge posed to policymakers, but also to entrepreneurs like many of you, at this juncture
is to ensure that the cyclical recovery is the beginning of a long period of growth without inflation. As
regards the economy of the United States, there has been extensive debate on the question of whether
the United States has entered an era of a “New Economy”. Growth would be sustainably higher than in
the  past,  inflation  would  be  a  thing  of  the  past,  while  economic  fluctuations  would  be  much  more
limited than formerly. The cause of all this would be the boom in information technology. However
true  this  may  be  for  the  United  States,  for  Europe  the  “New  Economy”,  particularly  in  a
macroeconomic sense, is a goal rather than reality. This also holds for countries in the euro area, such
as the Netherlands, which are performing relatively well. Growth is high here, but this cannot (yet) be
said of increases in productivity. Inflation is on the high side, especially relatively speaking, and it is
still too early to put the theoretical books on the economic cycle away on the shelves forever.
However, I do not want to sound pessimistic. Europe can become a dynamic economy. What is needed
is the comprehensive administration of by now well-known prescriptions to get rid of old illnesses and
to avoid old mistakes. This can improve the conditions for entrepreneurs to do what they  are really
good  at:  enterprise.  Policy  creates the conditions,  but  real  growth  has  to come  from  entrepreneurial
activities.  Whether  that  will  lead  to  a  “New  Economy”,  we  may  discuss  at  a  future  anniversary.  I
should like to deal with monetary policy first, and subsequently with the other economic policy needed
to allow Europe to use the potential which it certainly has.
The role of monetary policy: maintaining price stability
2.
The euro is not and cannot be a cure for all of European problems. In particular, the introduction of the
euro will not by itself solve the unemployment problem and automatically increase growth. The single
monetary policy can provide a sound basis for economic growth and employment, but the degree to
which  the  economic  potential  of  the  euro  is  realised  depends  first  and  foremost  on  accompanying
stability-oriented fiscal and appropriate labour market policies. Let me start by elaborating on the role
of monetary policy.
Among  central  bankers  and  economists,  overwhelming  agreement  exists  that  there  is  no  long-run
trade-off between real activity and inflation. Attempts to use monetary policy to raise real economic
activity above its sustainable level will, in the long run, simply lead to ever higher inflation, not faster
economic growth. The best contribution which monetary policy can make to sustainable growth and
employment in the euro area is to maintain price stability in a credible and lasting manner, allowing
the considerable benefits of price stability to be reaped over the medium term.
It is also generally acknowledged that monetary policy does indeed affect real activity in the short run.
Although  the  focus  must  always  be  on  price  stability,  in  many  cases  the  policy  action  required  to
1
BIS Review 123/1999
maintain  price  stability  will  also  help  sustain  short-run  economic  and  employment  prospects.
However,  in  situations  where  monetary  policy  might  face  a  short-term  trade-off  between  adverse
developments in real activity and deviations from price stability, the overriding priority accorded to
maintaining  price  stability  must  be  made  absolutely  clear.  Any  ambiguity  on  this  point  will  simply
endanger the credibility and thus the effectiveness of the monetary policy response. The medium-term
orientation of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy permits a gradualist and measured response
to threats to price stability. Such gradualism helps to avoid the introduction of unnecessary uncertainty
into the real economy.
Non-monetary policies: stability and reform-oriented
3.
The full benefits of the single currency will arise only if there is appropriate support from a variety of
other policy areas, above all national fiscal and labour market policies, and if structural reforms are
carried out in these areas. Price stability is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for grasping all
the opportunities of EMU.
What  role  can  national  governments  still  play,  now  monetary  policy  has  been  centralised?  A  very
important  one.  A  single  monetary  policy  requires  variation  in  other  policies.  It  is  of  the  utmost
importance  that national  governments  continue  to  implement  fiscal  policies  that  aim  at  a  budgetary
position close to balance or in surplus, as stipulated in the Stability and Growth Pact. If governments
achieve  balanced  budgets  or  surpluses  in  normal  periods  of  the  cycle,  they  create  a  safety  margin,
sufficient to allow the operation of automatic stabilisers in the event of fluctuations in growth without
risking  excessive  deficits.  Moreover,  sound  government  finances  are  important  to  strengthen  the
conditions  for  price  stability  and  for  the  strong  and  sustainable  growth  necessary  to  support
employment growth.
Structural policies are another key area where national flexibility is needed and a uniform approach
would be fatal. Many of the important challenges which the euro area countries currently face can only
be  addressed  through  national  policies.  This  concerns  in  particular  the  high  and  persistent  level  of
unemployment, which is rightly a source of deep concern. Clearly, the approaches that are most likely
to have a lasting effect are those that address the root cause of the problem, not the symptoms. The
root  causes  of  high  and  structural  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  are  structural  rigidities  in  labour
markets as well as tax and public transfer policies.
The  situation  in  euro  area  labour  markets  differs  considerably.  National  unemployment  rates  range
from  2.8%  in  Luxembourg  and  3.2%  in  the  Netherlands  to  15.7%  in  Spain.  Some  countries,
particularly those with more flexible labour markets, more moderate wage increases and better tax and
social security policies, have managed to avoid the trend of ever-rising unemployment. For example,
the Netherlands, Ireland and Portugal all currently show unemployment rates well below the euro area
average. There are also examples of other countries with higher unemployment rates, such as Spain,
that have begun to take steps  to reform  their labour  markets  and  are  now  beginning  to see tangible
results. We can also look at some of the non-participating EU Member States, such as Denmark and
the United Kingdom, to see that high unemployment can be reduced through structural reforms.
There  are  many  examples  of  what  can  be  done.  First,  there  are  measures  to  ensure  that
low-productivity workers are not forced out of the labour market. To this end, the burden of taxes and
non-wage labour costs could be reduced for low-paid workers. In addition, minimum wage schemes
and wage agreements reached by collective bargaining need to take account of the need to preserve
jobs for low-productivity workers by reducing labour costs. Second, there are “active labour market
measures”  which  provide  programmes  of  education,  training  and  work  experience  targeted  at  the
long-term  unemployed.  Third,  reforms  to  the  tax  and  benefit  systems  could  be  implemented  which
ensure that people are significantly better off in work than out of it.
I  should  like  to  emphasise  that  the  structural  reform  agenda  available  to  national  governments  to
promote  economic  development  extends  well  beyond  the  reform  of  labour  markets.  For  example,
national governments can take steps to promote entrepreneurship and make it easier for people to start
and  run  businesses  and  thus  create  new  jobs.  This  could  involve  encouraging  competition  through
BIS Review 123/1999
2
measures to promote the entry of new firms, such as reducing the administrative burdens they face and
making  markets  more  competitive.  Governments  can  also  liberalise  previously  highly  regulated
sectors,  such  as  utilities,  to  increase  efficiency  and  reduce  prices  to  the  benefit  of  industrial  and
household  users  of  these  services.  National  governments  may  also  wish  to  take  steps  to  raise
productive  investment  in  research  and  development  to  increase  growth  in  expanding  high-tech
industries.
Experience  in  the  Netherlands  shows  that  reform  programmes  indeed  have  the  potential  to
substantially  improve  the  labour  market  situation.  The  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  from  its
historical  peak  at  11.6%  in  1983  to  today’s  3.2%  is  indeed  impressive.  However,  even  in  the
Netherlands there is  little  reason  to  become  complacent.  Thus,  there  seems  to  be  a  need  to  step  up
efforts  to  reduce  inactivity  and  improve  the  flexibility  of  the  labour  market  in  order  to  help  ensure
responsible wage developments and price stability. It would also seem that the Netherlands has not, as
yet, been successful in increasing output growth. A “polder model” yes, a “New Economy”, no, not
yet.
Conclusions
4.
To  conclude,  I  am  convinced  that  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  provides  a  great  opportunity  to
create  and  maintain  a  large  zone  of  price  stability  and  economic  prosperity  in  Europe,  including  a
substantial  reduction  of  unemployment.  However,  while  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for
fully grasping the opportunities of EMU, it is not sufficient. Stability-oriented polices regarding  the
development of national fiscal positions and structural changes to improve the functioning of markets
are  of  crucial  importance  as  well.  Policymakers  in  all  areas  must  take  the  new  environment  of
Stage Three  of  EMU  and  its  consequences  appropriately  into  account  when  forming  their  policies.
Only then will the euro be able to function as a true accelerator of economic growth in Europe.
The  introduction  of  the  euro  and  a  common  monetary  policy  have  certainly  not  rendered  national
governments  impotent.  With  the  possibility  to  vary  fiscal  policy  and  undertake  structural  reforms,
national  governments  retain  the  key  powers  to  improve  the  performance  of  their  economies.  If  the
terms of the Stability and Growth Pact are adhered to, there is sufficient flexibility to allow automatic
stabilisers to work in the event of cyclical fluctuations. Together with the social partners, governments
have a key responsibility to act decisively to ease  the  unemployment  problem  in  Europe.  Structural
reforms provide the only means of achieving lasting reductions in unemployment,  preparing  for the
ageing of the population and reducing the burden of government debt.
3
BIS Review 123/1999
