Mr Noyer discusses implications of the
introduction of the euro and some basic structural features of EMU
Speech  delivered  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
European Institute in New York on 29 September 1999.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a pleasure for me to be able to address you today and to share with you some remarks about the
changes  which  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  in  Europe  has  brought  about.  In  so  doing,  I
should like to focus my comments on the introduction of the euro and the immediate implications for
European and international financial capital markets, for central banking and the European economy
as a whole. However, the launch of a new currency, historic as it was, does not constitute a one-off
event. In fact, it is the longer-term dynamics of EMU which represent the great challenge for the years
to come. In the second part of my address I should therefore like to touch upon some basic structural
features of EMU – which have perplexed  observers  within  the  EU,  but  especially  outside  Europe  –
namely, how a single monetary policy can indeed function in the absence of a unified political entity.
Before that, allow me to briefly explain our terminology, with which you may, as yet, be unfamiliar.
The “Eurosystem” is the name given to the European Central Bank (ECB) and the – at present – 11
national central banks of those countries which have introduced the euro. The “euro area” is the term
used to refer to these 11 countries. The “European System of Central Banks” also includes the central
banks of the four EU Member States which have not, as yet, adopted the euro.
The launch of the euro
On  1  January  1999  the  European  Union  achieved  a  new  and  unprecedented  stage  of  economic
integration.  With  the  launch  of  the  euro,  11  countries  merged  their  monetary  sovereignty  and
transferred  the  task  of  conducting  a  common  monetary  policy  to  a  supranational  institution,  the
Eurosystem.
This  historic step  was the culmination of  a long  period  of  preparation,  the  magnitude  of  which  can
hardly  be  overestimated.  EU  Member  States  embarked  upon  an  ambitious  and  sometimes  painful
fiscal consolidation process; exchange rate crises and hostile public opinion in some countries had to
be overcome by a clear political conviction that the project would eventually succeed. At the technical
level,  the  banking  and  financial  sectors,  EU  legislators  and  many  others  diligently  prepared  the
changeover to the new currency in cooperation with the ECB itself, its precursor organisation – the
European Monetary Institute – and the national central banks.
Indeed, the thorough preparation has paid off: the euro got off to a smooth start. Given the sheer scale
and significance of the project, it is, of course, unsurprising  that it  did  not proceed entirely  without
hitches; on the whole, however, there were no major complications. External developments such as the
initial depreciation of the euro against the dollar have attracted somewhat pessimistic headlines; but
there  are,  in  fact,  several  reasons  for  some  satisfaction.  The  Eurosystem,  and  specifically  the
Governing Council as its main decision-making body, has taken up its responsibilities of formulating
and implementing the single monetary policy. In so doing, the Governing Council – which comprises
the 11 national central bank governors of the euro area countries and the six members of the Executive
Board of the ECB – has not only shown its determination to think and act for the euro area as a whole
but has also proven its capacity for decisive action – as exemplified by the decision to cut the ECB’s
main refinancing rate to 2.5% in April.
With  the  launch  of  the  single  currency,  the  Eurosystem  successfully  began  to  operate  a  system  of
centralised setting and decentralised implementation of monetary policy, using a new set of rules and
1
BIS Review 104/1999
procedures.  In  line  with  its  Treaty  mandate,  the  Eurosystem  has  also  assumed  its  wider  tasks  and
responsibilities, relating, inter alia, to the collection of statistics, the preparations for the issuance of
banknotes or the operation of payment systems.
The impact of the euro on financial markets
The introduction of the euro has brought about momentous change in the financial markets, not only
within the euro area, but also on a global scale.
• 
First,  a  functioning  money  market  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is  a  precondition  for  the
successful operation of the Eurosystem’s single monetary policy. In order to allow this euro
area  money  market  to  operate  smoothly,  the  Eurosystem  has  established  the  requisite
cross-border  transfer  and  payment  systems.  The  progress  achieved  in  overcoming  the
previous  fragmentation  is  highlighted  by  the  rapid  increase  in  transaction  volumes  within
money  markets  and  the  almost  immediate  normalisation  of  bid-ask  spreads.  Even  at  this
early stage there is every justification for observing that the euro money market has already
achieved considerable depth and a high degree of liquidity.
   Second,  the  advent  of  the  new  currency  has  also  brought  about  a  transformation  of  the
European capital markets. Even though capital movements within the European Union had
already  been  liberalised  by  the  early  1990s,  the  prospect  of  a  truly  pan-European  capital
market  was  still  remote.  It  was  the  advent  of  the  euro  which  provided  a  decisive  impetus
towards the further development of a single euro area capital market. This market is set to
become even deeper and more liquid over time, and hence more efficient.
One particular area of the capital market in which the markets in euro area countries have
traditionally  been  considerably  less  active  than  in  the  United  States  is  the  corporate  bond
and  commercial  paper  market.  The  evidence  of  the  last  few  months  suggests  that  the
issuance of euro-denominated bonds has indeed exceeded dollar-denominated issues. These
data  indicate  not  only  the  high  level  of  confidence  in  the  new  currency,  but  also  point
towards the gradual establishment of a deep and liquid bond market in the euro area in the
foreseeable future. Such a development should have a favourable impact on business activity
and might stimulate further consolidation by way of mergers and acquisitions.
Third, the introduction of the euro also appears to lend new urgency to greater integration
and efficiency in equity markets. As consolidation within the financial service and banking
sectors  has  increased  the  size  and  geographical  reach  of  intermediaries  and  fund
management  institutions,  they  seem  to  be  pressing  for  market-places  to  become  more
concentrated  in  order  both  to  reduce  costs  and  to  enhance  liquidity.  These  developments
might  eventually  also  lead  to  a  closer  coordination  of  trading  practices  and  technology
among  stock  exchanges,  and the  planned  link-up  of  eight  exchanges  in  Europe  appears  to
point  in  this  direction.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  the  use  of  advanced  information  technology
renders the physical location of stock exchanges less relevant. A  developing  perception  of
the  euro  area  as  an  entity  in  itself  is  also  reflected  in  the  emergence  of  area-wide  equity
indices which provide investors with opportunities to monitor area-wide equity positions as
well as, in some instances, positions in area-wide industrial sectors.
To sum up, the introduction of the euro has led to a perceptible shift in euro area (and EU) financial
markets; greater depth, liquidity and integration should improve their efficiency, and a more efficient
allocation of capital should mean improved financing opportunities for both sovereign and corporate
borrowers.
Having  set  out the immediate  impact  of  monetary  unification  on financial  markets,  I  should  like  to
give  you a brief overview of the institution at the  heart  of  managing  our  new  currency,  namely  the
Eurosystem.
BIS Review 104/1999
2
The role of the Eurosystem
Since 1 January 1999, the Eurosystem has had exclusive competence for monetary policy in the euro
area.  In  fulfilment  of  this  task,  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  assigns  to  the
Eurosystem  the  primary  task  of  maintaining  price  stability.  In  order  to  guide  expectations  of  future
price  developments  and  to  facilitate  the  public’s  assessment  of  the  success  of  the  single  monetary
policy, the Governing Council has announced a quantitative definition of its primary objective: price
stability  has  been  defined  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices
(HICP) for the euro area of below 2%, to be maintained over the medium term.
The Treaty also states that the European System of Central Banks shall support the general economic
policies in the European Community, as long as it can do so without prejudice to the objective of price
stability.  The  very  wording  of  the  Treaty  reveals  its  logic,  namely  that  the  best  contribution  which
monetary policy can make to high employment and economic growth is to maintain price stability.
In its very essence, Economic and Monetary Union is of course a European endeavour. However, even
at  this  stage  it  is  clear  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  implications  for  the  global  economy.
Figures relating  to  the  official  and  private  use  of  the  new  currency  reveal  that  the  Eurosystem  will
have responsibility for an international currency of considerable standing. However, allow me to stress
in this context that the Eurosystem does not pursue a policy of actively encouraging or discouraging
the international use of the euro.
As has probably become clear from my remarks so far, we can derive considerable satisfaction from
observing how well the immediate challenges of the introduction of the euro have been mastered, both
by the financial markets and monetary policymakers. Allow me in the second part of my address to
concentrate on some of the longer-term challenges which the project of monetary unification will face.
One single monetary policy for 11 different economies
Looking at EMU from an external perspective, one might be tempted to ask: “It has worked so far, but
will it last?” Is it sustainable for the Eurosystem to conduct a single monetary policy while economic
policies continue to be shaped by 11 different governments?
The  blueprint  for  economic  and  monetary  union  as  set  out  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  does  indeed
envisage  the  establishment  of  a  single  monetary  policy  to  be  conducted  by  a  new  supranational
institution, the  Eurosystem,  with  the  ECB  at  its  centre.  Economic  policies,  on  the  other  hand,  have
essentially remained the competence of the Member States. At the time, many commentators doubted
the feasibility of a monetary union in Europe without some form of “political union”.
Today,  nine  months  into  the  life  of  the  new  currency,  our  first  experiences  allow  us  to  paint  the
following  picture.  From  the  very  outset,  monetary  union  in  Europe  has  been  conceived  as  a
complement to the Single Market, a logic neatly summarised in the title of the Delors Report study:
“One  market,  one  money”.  Europe’s  Single  Market  already  represents  a  remarkable  degree  of
economic integration. A plethora of common rules govern economic life in the 15 Member States and
create, to a large extent at least, a unified market serving 375 million people. The realisation of the free
movement  of  goods,  services,  capital  and  people  has  integrated  national  economies  and  rendered
national borders increasingly obsolete. A common competition policy has created a level playing-field,
and common norms and standards guarantee Europe-wide market access.
Certainly,  Europe’s  Single  Market is  yet to  be  fully  completed: a  number  of  sectors  have  yet  to  be
fully  liberalised  and  brought  into  the  remit  of  common  rules.  Nevertheless,  the  notion  of  a  unified
“European  economy”  has  acquired  real  substance,  not  least  in  the  wake  of  the  prominent  “1992
Programme”.
But  is  the  degree of  economic  integration  achieved  so  far  with  the  Single  Market  sufficient  for  the
proper functioning of a monetary union on a lasting basis? From the Eurosystem’s point of view, the
Europe-wide economic “governance” is of particular importance in a number of policy areas.
3
BIS Review 104/1999
First,  the  completion  of  the  Single  Market  in  the  area  of  financial  services  is  paramount  to  the
functioning of Monetary Union. In fact, euro area financial markets began the process of integration
even before the introduction of the euro, and a large amount of work is currently under way to further
develop  a  prudent,  harmonised  regulatory  framework  and 
to  harmonise  market  practices.
Harmonisation of, for example, repurchase agreements, national company laws (including bankruptcy
laws)  and  other  aspects  of  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  are  set  to  enhance  legal  clarity  and
certainty and thereby improve the efficiency and stability of the financial markets.
Beyond the realm of financial markets, a functioning Economic and Monetary Union will require an
increased awareness on the part of all Member States of the spillover effect of their national policies,
especially their budgetary policies. Without this, the Eurosystem’s single monetary policy would face
severe pressures. In order to anchor responsible fiscal policies in the EMU rule book, the Treaty itself
contains stipulations which oblige Member States to treat national economic policies “as a matter of
common  concern”  and  subject  them  to  a  multilateral  surveillance  procedure.  These  rules  derive
additional  force  from  the  existence  of  sanctions  in  the  event  of  persistent  excessive  deficits.  The
stipulations  have  been  further  refined  and  made  more  effective  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact
agreed in 1997.
Our first experiences with these EU-level economic policy instruments show that the consolidation of
public  finances  has  indeed  become  a  priority  for  all  Member  States,  and  that  efforts,  although  not
always sufficiently ambitious, have been undertaken to achieve balanced budgets in the medium term.
Given  Member  States’  high  overall  debt  burden,  the  Eurosystem  continues  to  call  for  heightened
efforts to this end, especially in times of cyclical upturn such as the one we are experiencing at the
current juncture. But even so, striving towards sound public finances, combined with the Eurosystem’s
stability-oriented monetary policy, should help to create favourable macroeconomic conditions such as
Europe has not enjoyed in the past.
However, the euro area economies will only achieve higher growth rates and cut their chronically high
unemployment rates in the long run if the necessary structural reforms are enacted. Not least due to the
constraints  imposed  by  the  single  currency,  there  now  appears  to  be  a  growing  recognition  among
policymakers in Europe that over-regulation of labour markets, perverse incentives created by some
elements of the welfare systems and rigidities throughout the economy urgently need to be addressed.
In so doing, Member States are increasingly willing to learn from each other, to accept “peer pressure”
and study examples of “best practice”.
That said, it would be ill-advised to overrate the need for coordination, for example, with  regard  to
social security or direct taxation systems: a healthy competition between national economic policies in
such fields can certainly produce superior results. The process of economic convergence in the euro
area,  despite  great  progress  over  the  past  years,  is  not  yet  complete  and  will  not  be  so  for  the
foreseeable  future.  Under  these  circumstances,  Member  States  must  retain  sufficient  room  for
manœuvre to allow for differentiated policy responses.
In  any  case,  developing  an  awareness  of  the  euro  area  dimension  of  domestic  economic  policy
decisions will be a gradual process. In this context, there should be no illusions: adapting to the new
conditions of the single currency – where monetary policy is exogenously set by the Eurosystem – will
demand a steep learning curve from policymakers, businesses, trade unions and the public at large.
Conclusion
I should like to conclude by remarking that the establishment of Economic and Monetary Union marks
an outstanding historical achievement, a new quality in the process of Europe’s integration. While we
can certainly look back on the first few months of this endeavour with considerable satisfaction, we
are aware that the task of making EMU a success will be an ongoing one. But, as my remarks have
revealed, there is every reason for optimism: the euro’s success is built on sound foundations. Further
improvements are, of course, necessary, but we are confident that they will be accomplished. Clearly,
the Eurosystem’s stability-oriented monetary policy is a principal ingredient of a successful EMU, in
which the euro enjoys both the trust of citizens as well as the confidence of investors.
BIS Review 104/1999
4
