Usha Thorat: Banking in the Hinterland 
Keynote  address  by  Ms  Usha  Thorat,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference  on  “Banking  in  the  Hinterland”,  organised  by  the  Indian  Banks  Association  and  Rural 
Marketing Agencies Association of India, Mumbai, 14 February 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to be here this morning to share my thoughts on banking in the hinterland. 
The theme of my talk today is that there is a huge business opportunity in banks going rural. Rural 
banking  has great  potential  if  banks  adopt  appropriate  approach  and  suitable  strategies  – scale  up 
their  business  levels,  achieve  capacity  utilisation  and  devise  innovative  ways  to  cater  to  the  typical 
needs of the vast rural sector. 
I  will  divide  my  address  into  three  parts.  In  the  first  part,  I  shall  describe  the  rural  urban  divide  in 
banking.  In  the  second  part,  I  will  describe  some  changes  that  are  happening  in  the  rural  sector. 
Finally, I will try and elaborate on the kind of strategies that could be considered for banking in the 
hinterland. 
Part – I: The rural urban divide 
Analyses of certain indicators of banking penetration of scheduled commercial banks in the country, 
including RRBs, amply testify to the rural urban divide existing in their operations/business, as will be 
seen from the following: 
Average population per branch office (APPBO) 
The average population served per branch office is an important indicator of banking penetration. The 
trend in this indicator ever since the last decade is as under: 
While  the  population  per  branch  has  decreased  for  urban  areas,  the  same  has  increased  for  rural 
areas  indicating  that  branch  expansion  has  not  kept  pace  with  the  population  increase  in  the  rural 
areas. 
 Number of accounts per 1000 population 
The  number of  deposit  (current  plus savings)  and credit  accounts  per  thousand  population  is  given 
below: 
It is seen that the deposits (current plus savings) accounts per 1000 population in the rural areas as a 
whole, is about sixty per cent of the urban areas. North Eastern states, Orissa Bihar and Chattisgarh 
have particularly low ratio. Similar position is generally evident even in terms of credit accounts per 
 BIS Review 21/2007 
 1
1000  population.  However,  Southern  states  are  relatively  better  off  in  this  regard  (Annex  1  and 
Annex 2). 
Number of accounts per branch 
The number of deposit and credit accounts per branch in the rural areas is generally lower than the 
position in urban areas as shown under: 
Outstanding balances per branch 
The deposits and credit outstanding per branch also reflect the rural urban divide. 
  It is seen that deposits per branch in the rural areas is far lower than that in the urban areas, notably 
states  in  the  North  East  ,  Northern  and  Western  region.  In  terms  of  credit  per  branch  also,  the 
difference is more pronounced in Northern and Western regions. 
Outstanding balances per account 
The outstanding balance per account, both deposit as well as credit, reveals the much larger values in 
urban areas as evident from the following: 
The average size of a deposit account in the rural areas is about one-third the size in urban areas and 
ranged  from about Rs.7000/-(in  Andhra)  to  about  Rs.17,000/- (in Punjab).  The  divide  is as is  to  be 
expected sharper in terms of credit per account. The average credit account in rural areas ranged from 
Rs.19,000/-(in Tripura) to Rs.1.31 lakh (in Haryana). 
 2 
 BIS Review 21/2007
Share of different credit agencies in the total cash dues of households 
The share of different agencies in the total cash dues of rural and urban households reveals the extent 
of penetration of formal financial sources. 
This table clearly shows that the coverage of banks in the rural areas has fallen from 64 per cent to 57 
per cent while, significantly, the share of money lenders has increased from 17.5 per cent to 29.6 per 
cent in these areas. 
 Part – II: The rural sector – some interesting pointers 
I would like to briefly dwell upon some facts, which bring home the potential of the rural sector: 
• 
The savings rate has increased to nearly 31 per cent in the recent period. Remittances from 
urban  to  rural  areas  are  becoming  more  significant  as  migration  increases.  The  need  for 
banking facilities – savings, remittances and credit – has increased in rural areas. 
The share of agriculture in GDP has fallen from 43 per cent in 1970s to 20 per cent currently; 
within this, the share of food grains and cereals has declined from 31.7 per cent to 24.1 per 
cent  and  that  of  commercial  crops  increased.  Within  the  agricultural  sector,  the  share  of 
fishing and livestock has gone up from 20.3 per cent to 29.3 per cent. Agriculture is getting 
increasingly  diversified  as  floriculture  horticulture  and  other  value  added  activities  gain 
importance. 
The proportion of rural households, described as low income by National Council for Applied 
Economic Research (NCAER), has gone down from two thirds in early 90s to 25 per cent 
currently  and  those  with  middle  income  from  one  third  to  70  per  cent.  This  represents 
increase of 50 million middle income households in rural areas. 
Retail  credit  has  grown  in  the  last  four  years  by  nearly  50  per  cent  per  annum  mostly  at 
urban centres. As incomes increase, there is growing demand for retail credit in rural areas 
that  is  perhaps  being  met  by  the  informal  sector.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that 
moneylenders  in  rural  areas  face  more  competition  from  other  moneylenders  rather  than 
from the banks. 
With  the  growing  rural  connectivity  and  tele-density,  a  host  of  non-farm  activities  are 
mushrooming in the rural sector. Currently, the rural market accounts for 53 per cent of the 
Fast Moving Consumption Goods (FMCG) and 59 per cent of the durable market in India. 
The rural consumers represent more than 50 per cent of the country's `consuming classes'. 
    BIS Review 21/2007 
 3
Part – III: The way forward – some thoughts 
Having discussed the rural urban divide in banking and the potential in rural banking, the question that 
remains to be addressed is – how can banks meet the challenges of banking in the hinterland? 
(i) 
To start with, I believe, fuller utilisation of existing capacity can itself give huge dividends. 
Given the existing number of nearly 48,000 rural and semi-urban branches, an increase of 
loans by rupees one crore per branch could imply additional profits of about Rs.480 crore to 
the banking system. 
Currently each rural branch services only around 1000 loan accounts. If we assume that a 
bank branch can serve at least 3000 households, it would imply at the minimum tripling of 
the business at rural branches This might require redeployment and some increase in staff, 
especially  field  staff,  and  would  be  more  than  worth  the  effort  considering  the  increase  in 
business and profitability that it would result in. 
Banks would need to decide the kind of delivery channels required for meeting the banking 
and  remittance  needs  of  the  rural  population.  Today  the  branch  is  not  the  only  way  of 
delivering  banking  services.  All  options  such  as  mobile  and  satellite  offices,  rural  ATMs, 
smart  card  and  mobile  phone  based  banking,  use  of  intermediaries  including  SHGs, 
including  post  offices  need  to  be  explored  for  penetrating  into  the  rural  markets.  Several 
banks have tie-up arrangements with corporates engaged in contract farming. IT solutions 
can  take  banking  to  the  remotest  corner  and  cut  costs  apart  from  providing  valuable 
databases for furthering business strategies. Whatever be the mode of penetration, it is clear 
that  unless  there  are  well  thought  out  strategies  for  marketing  banking  services  in  the 
hinterland,  banks  will  be  missing  emerging  opportunities.  As  mentioned  earlier  50  million 
households in rural areas have moved from low income to high income giving rise to equal 
number  of  potentially  bankable  households.  To  look  at  the  scope  for  branch  banking  and 
provision of banking services through other delivery channels in rural areas, banks can make 
use of the research already available on the monthly per capita expenditure centre-wise and 
district-wise, corroborated by data on consumption patterns for FMCG and mobile phones as 
also other indicators of expenditure patterns. 
Banks need to have appropriate strategies for rural banking. Rural clientele need savings, 
remittances,  loan  and  insurance  products.  When  banks  think  of  agricultural  credit  they 
generally think of crop loans especially, food crops. The needs of agriculture are, however, 
getting  diversified  and  the  required  scale  of  finance  is  increasing.  There  is  much  more 
demand for allied activities such as dairy, fishing and livestock, cash crops, besides ancillary 
activities  such  as  sorting,  grading,  processing,  packaging  and  transporting  to  final 
destinations and markets. Other service sector activities that spin-off the main activities are 
also  growing.  This  is  giving  rise  to  additional  credit  demand  from  a  variety  of  new 
enterprises,  besides  demand  for  retail  and  consumer  credit.  Are  banks  geared  for  the 
surging  credit  demand  in  the  rural  areas  in  all  sector,  particularly  allied  agriculture  and 
services sector? 
The strategies of banks will need to focus on the following: 
o 
Developing products 
A uniform banking/financial product for the entire country would obviously not work. Products 
need  to  be  designed  and  packaged  taking  into  account  local  culture,  customs,  language, 
literacy  and  social  indicators.  Also,  rural  households  need  to  be  provided  credit  in  a 
composite way covering all their needs, including life-cycle needs; the traditional crop loans, 
term  loans,  housing  loans,  consumption  loans  bouquet  may  not  work.  Regional  offices  of 
banks may need to be delegated with appropriate powers for product design, while ensuring 
consistency  with  Board  policies.  Banks  need  to  look  at  the  overall  cash  flow  of  rural 
households  and  fix  general  credit  limits,  which  could  be  scaled  up  depending  on 
new/additional activities taken up. 
Creating awareness and brand building 
Banks  need  to  consciously  evolve  strategies  for  financial  education  in  the  rural  areas. 
Products  developed  for  the  region  will  need  to  be  actively  marketed  in  a  responsible  and 
effective  manner,  with  top  priority  at  all  times  being  accorded  to  transparency,  customer 
education and satisfaction. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
o 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2007
o 
o 
o 
o 
Having the right staff for marketing products 
In  rural  lending  there  is  an  imperative  need  for  the  marketing  staff  to  be  knowledgeable 
about agricultural practices and operations, besides being well acquainted with the features 
of  the  products  and  their  suitability  to  the  targeted  category  of  customer.  In  a  sense, 
providing financial services will also involve providing extension services as a risk mitigant. 
Hence, banks will need proactive technical officers who can not only provide such services, 
but also train their field staff. Another very important requirement is relationship management 
in terms of face-to-face familiarity and continuity of contact. Surely, it is not without reason 
that  the  rural  folk  are  comfortable  with  persons  like  the  postmen  and  even  the  local 
moneylender, with whom they have occasion to regularly interact. Banks would do well to 
address this need for building up a relationship and rapport with the rural clientele. 
Use of Information Technology (IT) 
There are a variety of ways in which IT can be used by banks. Delivery of banking services 
through  IT  based  solutions,  such  as  mobile  phones  and  smart  cards,  while  keeping  costs 
low, is one huge opportunity for increasing outreach afforded by modern technology that is 
rapidly innovating. Other uses of IT are in credit risk management and pricing, which require 
maintaining  a  comprehensive  computerised  data  base  –  this  can  be  used  for  a  variety  of 
purposes,  such  as  marketing,  credit  scoring,  pricing,  credit  monitoring  including  rating 
migration and devising appropriate internal control systems, etc. There is clearly a need to 
have  credit  information  companies  across  the  entire  country;  the  huge  externalities 
associated  with  having  comprehensive  credit  records  can  be  derived  for  more  efficient 
financial intermediation. With appropriate IT solutions in place and suitable field staff, banks 
can  also  provide  market  insurance  and  capital  market  products  for  increasing  their  non 
funded business. 
Developing and using risk mitigants 
The three important risks identified in agricultural lending are yield risk (or input output risk), 
calamity risk and price risk. Banks will need to aim at minimising these risks if they have to 
deliver  affordable  credit  to  agriculture.  Extension  work,  including  proper  advice  on  use  of 
fertiliser and pesticides, ensuring quality seeds and inputs are activities that minimise yield 
risk. Enterprises providing such services would need to be supported by banks and actively 
encouraged. Calamity risk minimisation involves insurance of crops and assets, including of 
livestock/cattle  and  fisheries.  While  restructuring  of  loans  can  provide  more  time  for 
repayment,  repeated  rescheduling  could  lead  to  instalments  ballooning  beyond  the 
repayment capacity. Banks will have to evolve policies to address this issue while providing 
vulnerable  groups  opportunities  to  engage  in  activities  that  supplement  the  household 
income  at  times  of  natural  calamities.  Development  of  appropriately  priced  insurance 
products  is  obviously  a  challenge  especially  id  such  insurance  has  to  be  affordable  and 
sustainable. Price risk in agriculture is inherent, having regard to the nature of agricultural 
operations where supply cannot respond to prices immediately. Hence, price support policies 
have been followed over the years. A more recent development is the futures markets, which 
can  provide opportunity  to  hedge risks.  However,  the  players  in  these  markets  are  mostly 
traders and speculators. There is a need to find ways in which commodity markets can be 
used to provide price support to farmers. 
Micro finance 
A separate strategy for micro finance may have to be evolved, as this involves providing low 
income  families  with  access  to  banking.  Invariably  banks  have  found  it  advantageous  to 
partner  with  community  based  organisations  and  NGOs  working  in  the  area  for  micro-
finance. Promoting SHGs, nurturing them and transforming them from micro-finance to micro 
enterprise  is  something  many  banks  are  already  engaged  in.  Banks  could  explore  the 
possibilities  of  working  with  the  State  governments  by  offering  them  efficient  technology 
solutions, such as smart cards for distribution of budgeted allocations for NREGP, pension 
payments and various other social sector expenditures. As some of you may be aware, a 
pilot project is under way in Andhra Pradesh (AP), where the AP government will tie up with 
banks, who will offer smart cards to BPL families /pension recipients /NREGP workers for 
disbursements of wages, pensions and other benefits. These smart cards can be operated at 
village level through VOs – federated SHGs registered as cooperatives – that are eligible to 
be used as business correspondents by banks. It is expected that as the SHG members get 
BIS Review 21/2007 
 5
o 
used to the smart cards, there will be return flow of funds as they use their bank accounts for 
savings. The cards could also be used as normal debit cards at merchant establishments. 
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) as partners 
One in every three rural/semi urban branch in the country is an RRB branch. Moreover, the 
staff  members  of  RRBs  belong  to  the  region  and  have  knowledge  of  local  language  and 
customs. These are significant strengths and need to be leveraged by sponsor banks, who 
should  view  RRBs  as  their  partners  in  rural  banking.  The  initial  costs  for  up  scaling 
technology and skills in the RRBs will be amply rewarded by the benefits that would accrue 
in due course. 
Conclusion 
Competition in urban areas is squeezing bank margins. Even though agriculture contributes only 20 
per cent of GDP, the rural population constitutes 70 per cent of population and as reported accounts 
for 60 per cent of consumer durable market. This implies that there is an untapped business potential 
for  aggressive  banking  in  the  rural  areas.  The  challenge  lies  in  locating  these  areas  and  providing 
them with the financial services through appropriate delivery channels and products. I am sure that the 
banks  with  their  extensive  network  of  branches  in  the  rural  areas  will  be  able  to  leverage  their 
presence and meet these challenges. 
My  thanks  to  the  Indian  Banks  Association  and  Rural  Marketing  Agencies  Association  of  India  for 
giving  me  this  opportunity  for  delivering  the  keynote  address  at  this  conference.  I  am  sure  that  the 
day’s  deliberations  will  bring  new  insights  to  banking  in  the  hinterland.  I  wish  the  conference  every 
success. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2007
 7
BIS Review 21/2007 
  8 
 BIS Review 21/2007
