Toshihiko Fukui: The outlook for Japan’s economy and the conduct of 
monetary policy  
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Naigai  Josei 
Chousa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Toyko, 10 May 2007. 
 Introduction 
In  the  year  since  I  last  spoke  to  you  here,  Japan's  economy  has  continued  to  expand  moderately. 
Semiannually in April and October, the Bank of Japan explains its projection for the nation's economy 
in its Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, or the Outlook Report for short. In the latest Outlook 
Report, which was released at the end of April, the Bank projected that from fiscal 2007 through fiscal 
2008, the economy is likely to continue its sustained expansion, growing at a rate slightly above its 
potential.  Today,  I  will  focus  on  the  Bank's  view concerning  developments  in  economic  activity  and 
prices  based  on  the  projection  in  the  Outlook  Report,  and  I  will  also  explain  the  basic  thinking 
regarding future monetary policy conduct.  
Developments in overseas economies 
I. 
I  would  first  like  to  touch  upon  developments  in  overseas  economies,  which  form  the  basis  for  the 
Bank's outlook for Japan's economy. Overseas economies taken as a whole continue to expand, with 
momentum being gained across a wide range of economies, and are likely to keep expanding. In the 
United States, although the pace of economic growth has recently been decelerating due mainly to 
ongoing adjustments in the housing market, the economy is likely to realize a soft landing and move 
onto  a  growth  path  at  a  rate  near  its  potential  as  adjustments,  particularly  in  household  spending, 
become  less  severe.  In  the  euro  area,  economic  recovery  has  been  solid,  as  the  increase  in 
production and improvement in corporate profits have led to recovery in business fixed investment and 
private consumption. Looking at East Asia, the Chinese economy continues to expand strongly with 
both  exports  and  business  fixed  investment  showing  high  growth,  and  the  NIEs  and  ASEAN 
economies continue to expand at a moderate pace on the whole as domestic demand remains firm, 
despite a lull in exports. It was also the consensus view among delegates at the G-7 meeting in April 
that the global economy continues to expand robustly and is becoming more balanced.  
Current situation of Japan's economy 
II.  
Against  the  background  of  the  generally  favorable  developments  in  overseas  economies,  Japan's 
economy has continued to expand moderately. Although exports to the United States are somewhat 
weak, overall exports continue to increase steadily reflecting the expansion of overseas economies. 
Business  fixed  investment  continues  to  increase  as  corporate  profits  remain  high.  Production 
decreased in the January-March quarter of 2007 in reaction to the high growth in the previous quarter 
led by production in automobile-related goods, but it seems to be on a trend of 1 percent quarter-on-
quarter growth.  
As for the household sector, although growth of wages per worker has been somewhat sluggish due 
mainly to weak regular payments, employee income has continued to rise moderately supported by 
the increase in the number of employees. Property income such as dividends is also increasing. In this 
situation,  growth  in  private  consumption  has  recently  resumed  its  upward  movement,  after  sluggish 
growth over the summer of 2006 due to unfavorable weather conditions and consumers' reluctance to 
buy before the introduction of new products.  
In sum, although the pace of improvement in the household sector has been somewhat slow relative 
to the strength in the corporate sector, Japan's economy as a whole is expanding moderately.  
On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have recently been about the same as their levels 
of three months earlier. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding 
fresh food has recently been around 0 percent due to the drop in crude oil prices.  
BIS Review 46/2007 
 1
Characteristics of the current economic expansion 
III. 
Let me now review the characteristics of the current economic expansion, in order to project the future 
course  of  the  economy.  The  economic  recovery  began  in  January  2002,  and  its  most  distinctive 
feature is that the economy has been growing amid rapid globalization. Japanese firms – which have 
regained  competitiveness  as  adjustment  of  excesses  in  production  capacity,  employment,  and  debt 
proceeds – have been increasing exports, against the background of global economic expansion and 
growing prevalence of international division of the production process. They have increased exports of 
a  wide  variety  of  goods  –  including  capital  goods  and  parts,  automobiles,  IT-related  goods,  and 
consumer goods – to an increasing number of countries. This strong performance of Japanese firms in 
the  global  market  has  led  them  to  expect  higher  demand  growth,  thus  accelerating  business  fixed 
investment.  
Economic growth achieved in this way has affected the distribution of the profits of economic growth to 
households. Faced with intensifying global competition and greater exposure to the discipline of the 
capital  market,  firms  have  changed  the  way  they  distribute  profits.  In  an  ever-changing  competitive 
environment,  they  have  been  constraining  increases  in  fixed  costs  and  thus  have  continued  to  be 
cautious  about  increasing  wages,  particularly  regular  payments.  Meanwhile,  employees,  having 
experienced a severe employment situation and currently facing intensifying global competition, have 
tended  to  prefer  stable  employment  to  a  wage  increase.  Wage  growth  has  therefore  remained 
moderate despite the continuing high corporate profits.  
Nonmanufacturing firms, which have relatively little access to the global market, are also experiencing 
a  severe  market  environment.  In  the  nonmanufacturing  sector,  not  only  has  deregulation  led  to 
increased  supply  with  new  entrants  into  the  market,  but  also  the  decline  in  public  expenditure  has 
reduced  demand.  Given  that  changes  in  wages  have  become  more  closely  linked  to  the  level  of 
corporate performance, the pace of increase in wages has been slower among nonmanufacturing than 
among manufacturing firms, reflecting their lower profits.  
In  order  to  maintain  competitiveness  in  the  severe  market  environment,  firms  have  continued  to 
restrain labor costs. As a result, the pace of recovery in the household sector seems to be slower than 
people's expectations, despite the strength in the corporate sector.  
These features of the current economic expansion may also be affecting the environment surrounding 
prices.  As  firms  have  been  restraining  wages  and  also  increasing  productivity,  upward  pressure  on 
prices seems to have been contained. Also, given that the driving force of current economic growth 
has been the corporate sector, especially globally active firms, and that the positive influence of the 
strength in the corporate sector has been relatively slow in feeding through into the household sector, 
supply  and  demand  conditions  for  consumer  goods  and  services  are  likely  to  improve  more  slowly 
than overall supply and demand conditions. In other words, while, from the demand side, growth in 
consumer  demand  is  likely  to  be  moderate  given  the  slow  pace  of  the  flow  of  income  from  the 
corporate sector to the household sector, supply is likely to increase given the rise in imports due to 
economic globalization coupled with new entrants coming into the market as a result of deregulation. 
Looking at firms' perception of resource utilization, an indicator for supply and demand conditions, the 
weighted  average  of  the  diffusion  indices  of  production  capacity  and  employment  conditions  in  the 
Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  suggests  that  the  pace  of 
improvement in resource utilization in consumption-related industries, such as retailing and services, is 
slower than the average for all industries. In recent years, the sensitivity of consumer prices to a rise in 
the utilization of resources such as production capacity and labor, or to changes in the output gap, has 
been declining, and this seems to have been due not only to deregulation and technological innovation 
but also to economic globalization.  
Another  characteristic  of  the  current  economic  expansion  is  that  the  financial  environment  has 
continued  to  be  extremely  accommodative,  and  this  has  been  supporting  private  demand.  This 
accommodative  financial  environment,  together  with  the  expansion  of  the  global  market  and  the 
progress  in  adjustment  of  excess  production  capacity  mentioned  earlier,  has  also  underpinned  the 
increase in business fixed investment. Interest rates have been very low relative to economic activity 
and price conditions. For instance, comparison of the real GDP growth rate with the real short-term 
interest rate – although the latter varies depending on how the expected inflation rate is estimated – 
shows that while the GDP growth rate has been around 2 percent, the real short-term interest rate has 
been in the range of around 0-0.5 percent if the actual year-on-year change in the CPI is used as the 
expected  inflation  rate.  The  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  have  been  positive  reflecting 
expansion  of  risk-taking  capacity  as  a  result  of  improvement  in  their  financial  condition,  and  in  this 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2007
situation,  the  amount  outstanding  of  lending  by  private  banks  has  been  increasing.  In  sum,  the 
financial environment continues to be accommodative, both in terms of interest rates and availability of 
funds. The yen in terms of the real effective exchange rate has been moving at around its lowest level 
since the 1985 Plaza Accord, and this has been supporting growth in Japan's exports. Increases in 
asset prices, such as a more widely observed upturn in land prices, particularly in major cities, also 
seem to be exerting upward pressure on private demand.  
Outlook for Japan's economy 
IV.  
Next, I would like to elaborate on the outlook for Japan's economy based on the assessment of the 
current  economic  situation  that  I  have  described.  From  fiscal  2007  through  fiscal  2008,  Japan's 
economy is likely to continue its sustained growth of around 2 percent, somewhat above its potential. 
Given that the expansion of the global market and the accommodative financial environment – the two 
distinctive features of the current economic expansion – are likely to continue, the virtuous circle of 
production, income, and spending is expected to remain intact.  
In the corporate sector, business fixed investment is expected to keep increasing as exports continue 
to  rise  and  corporate  profits  remain  high.  According  to  the  March  Tankan,  firms'  business  fixed 
investment plans for fiscal 2007 are strong for initial estimates. As for the household sector, household 
spending is expected to follow a moderate upward trend as the positive influence of the strength in the 
corporate sector feeds through into the household sector slowly but steadily. Although firms are likely 
to continue to restrain labor costs, upward pressure on wages is likely to increase gradually as firms 
feel a growing shortage of labor. In fact, wages for temporary and part-time workers are rising, and an 
increasing number of firms are planning, for the first time in many years, to raise their starting salaries 
for  new  graduates.  In  this  spring's  wage  negotiations,  labor  unions  demanded  slightly  larger  wage 
increases  than  hitherto  and  firms'  management  tended  to  accommodate  them,  at  least  to  a  certain 
extent.  Firms  may  become  more  eager  to  hire  or  retain  skilled  workers  in  order  to  maintain  and 
enhance  their  quality  control  expertise  and  their  ability  to  provide  value-added  goods  and  services, 
both of which will give them a competitive edge in the long term. Acceleration in wage growth, coupled 
with the ongoing rise in the number of employees, will likely lead to a more firmly established uptrend 
in  employee  income.  Property  income  of  households  is  also  expected  to  continue  to  increase  due 
mainly to the rise in dividends, since households have been increasing their investments in financial 
instruments such as stock investment trusts. Furthermore, how baby boomers, who have started to 
retire,  will  spend  their  retirement  benefits  and  savings  should  be  watched  closely.  Thus,  private 
consumption is likely to follow a moderate upward trend as the positive influence of the strength in the 
corporate sector feeds through into the household sector via various channels.  
In this situation, the environment surrounding prices is expected to gradually improve. If the economy 
continues  to  grow  at  a  rate  exceeding  its  potential  for  the  next  two  years,  the  rate  of  utilization  of 
resources such as production capacity and labor will further increase. In other words, the output gap 
will continue to indicate tighter supply and demand conditions. As the strength in the corporate sector 
leads  to  further  increases  in  employee  income,  it  is  natural  to  expect  that  supply  and  demand 
conditions for consumer goods and services will improve and that this will exert upward pressure on 
consumer  prices.  Moreover,  unit  labor  costs  (labor  costs  per  unit  of  output),  although  currently  still 
declining with the growth rate of wages hovering around 0 percent, are likely to stop falling and start 
showing  modest  increases  reflecting  gradual  rises  in  wages.  Although  inflation  expectations  in  the 
private sector have shifted down due mainly to past falls in the prices of petroleum products, prices in 
general are still expected to increase moderately.  
Taking  these  developments  into  account,  the  year-on-year  rate of  change  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to  be 
around  0  percent  in  the  short  run  depending  on  developments  in  crude  oil  prices,  but  is  expected 
gradually to rise in the longer run. However, the pace of increase is likely to be moderate, given that 
the  sensitivity  of  prices  to  changes  in  the  output  gap  is  declining  due  to  factors  such  as  economic 
globalization and deregulation. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is expected to be slightly 
above 0 percent in fiscal 2007 and around 0.5 percent in fiscal 2008.  
Upside and downside risks to the outlook for economic activity 
V.  
I have so far outlined the most likely projection for the next two years or so. However, the economy 
constantly faces various risks, and due attention should be paid to the possibility that economic activity 
and prices might deviate from this projection should particular risks materialize.  
BIS Review 46/2007 
 3
In the April 2007 Outlook Report, we pointed out the following as upside and downside risks to the 
outlook for economic activity: developments in the global economy; supply and demand conditions for 
IT-related goods; and possible larger swings in financial and economic activity. Let me elaborate on 
each risk.  
The first risk concerns developments in the global economy, which is expected to keep expanding with 
momentum being gained across a wide range of economies. In the United States, adjustments in the 
housing market, including problems in the market for subprime mortgage debt, are still ongoing, and 
some  leading  indicators  of  business  fixed  investment  have  been  showing  somewhat  weak 
developments. If adjustments in the housing market turn out to be greater than expected or business 
fixed investment weakens, economic growth may decelerate further. On the other hand, there is a risk 
that inflationary pressures in the United States may persist longer than expected, given that the rate of 
change  in  the  core  CPI  has  been  somewhat  elevated  reflecting  higher  utilization  of  resources.  If 
inflationary pressures do not subside, there is a risk that not only the U.S. but also the global economy 
and  financial  markets  may  be  adversely  affected,  for  instance,  through  the  reaction  of  long-term 
interest  rates  and  foreign  exchange  rates  to  this  situation.  In  China,  there  is  an  upside  risk  of  the 
economy growing faster than expected, particularly fixed asset investments and exports. Whether this 
risk can be reduced and the Chinese economy can realize stable growth even after the 2008 Olympic 
Games in Beijing should be the focus of attention.  
The second risk concerns supply and demand conditions for IT-related goods. Inventory adjustments 
of IT-related goods are continuing, and this seems to be the result mainly of specific domestic factors, 
namely,  the  slow  improvement  in  the  balance  of  inventories  and  shipments  for  electronic  parts, 
particularly those related to cellular phones. Global demand for IT-related goods has so far been on an 
upward trend due partly to the rapid growth in emerging-market economies, such as the BRICs, and 
thus inventory adjustments should basically come to an end in or after the middle of 2007. However, if 
expected global demand is revised significantly downward in response to, for instance, a deceleration 
in the global economy, there is a possibility that adjustment pressures on inventories may intensify, 
since the pace of increase in global supply tends to be rapid in the IT-related sector.  
The third risk concerns possible larger swings in financial and economic activity based on optimistic 
assumptions  regarding,  for  example,  financial  conditions.  Japan's  current  economic  circumstances, 
with  the  financial  positions  of  both  firms  and  financial  institutions  improving  and  real  interest  rates 
remaining very low, are such as potentially to encourage assertive financial and economic activity. As 
for foreign exchange rates, the real effective exchange rate is at the lowest level since the 1985 Plaza 
Accord, and the upward trend in land prices in major cities has become increasingly distinct as seen in 
the fact that commercial land prices in Tokyo and Osaka in March's Land Price Publication showed a 
double-digit  increase  from  the  previous  year.  These  developments  in  foreign  exchange  rates  and 
asset  prices  may  also  cause  activity  of  both  firms  and  financial  institutions  to  accelerate.  Should 
greater assertiveness  be based  on  optimistic assumptions  regarding  future  profitability,  such  as  too 
rosy expectations for the growth rate, financing costs, foreign exchange rates, and asset prices, the 
result could well be a misallocation of resources in the long run as agents become over-extended in 
financial markets or pour funds and other resources into inefficient economic activities. Such behavior 
may push up economic growth and asset prices in the short run, but it can lead to later downward 
adjustments and hamper the sustainability of economic growth.  
Upside and downside risks to the outlook for prices 
VI.  
These upside and downside risks to the outlook for economic activity may affect prices if they should 
materialize,  but  there  are  also  upside  and  downside  risks  unique  to  price  developments  that  could 
cause  prices  to  deviate  from  the  projection.  In  the  April  Outlook  Report,  two  risks  are  noted: 
uncertainty concerning the sensitivity of prices to changes in the output gap, and developments in the 
prices of crude oil and other commodities.  
The sensitivity of prices to changes in the output gap has been declining in recent years due partly to 
economic  globalization.  This  tendency  has  been  taken  into  account  in  the  projection  for  prices 
mentioned earlier, but the sensitivity of prices may turn out to be lower than assumed in the projection. 
If,  despite  prolonged  economic  expansion,  wage  growth  were  to  remain  low  relative  to  the  pace  of 
productivity  gains,  downward  pressure  on  prices  from  labor  costs  would  persist.  Moreover,  if  the 
positive  influence  of  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector  feeds  through  into  the  household  sector 
slower  than  expected  due  to  sluggish  wage  growth,  supply  and  demand  conditions  for  consumer 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2007
goods  and  services  may  not  improve  in  line  with  the  diminishing  slack  in  the  economy.  In  such  a 
situation, prices may not be responsive to the improvement in the economic situation.  
On the other hand, if the economy continues to grow at a pace exceeding the potential through fiscal 
2008, it is likely that the rate of utilization of resources such as production capacity and labor will rise 
further  and  the  output  gap  will  show  further  tightening  of  supply  and  demand  conditions.  Inflation 
expectation, which has been low and stable, may increase with higher resource utilization, particularly 
in labor. Moreover, although firms are likely to continue to restrain labor costs, they may change their 
attitude with the aim of hiring or retaining skilled workers. These potential changes would exert upward 
pressure on prices.  
Prices of crude oil and other international commodities may deviate either upward or downward from 
the  projection  depending  on  factors  such  as  geopolitical  risks.  Close  attention  should  be  paid  to 
developments in these prices, since they will have a substantial effect on domestic corporate goods 
prices and consumer prices.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
VII.  
Let me now explain how the Bank will conduct monetary policy based on the outlook for the economy 
and prices I have outlined, giving due regard to the possibility of upward or downward deviation.  
In  March  2006,  when  the  quantitative  easing  policy  was  terminated,  the  Bank  introduced  the  "New 
Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy." It consists of three elements. The first is releasing the 
"understanding of medium- to long-term price stability," the second, assessment of the economic and 
price  situation  from  two  perspectives  taking  account  of  the  "understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term 
price stability," and the third, outlining the Bank's thinking on the future course of monetary policy.  
The "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" is the level of inflation that each member of 
the  Policy  Board  understands,  when  conducting  monetary  policy,  as  being  consistent  with  price 
stability over the medium to long term. Each member, with this understanding in mind, judges whether 
Japan's  economy  will  achieve  sustainable  growth  under  price  stability,  and  makes  policy  decisions 
based  on  this  judgment.  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  at  the  end  of  last month,  we conducted  a 
review of the "understanding," in accordance with the decision that it should be reviewed, in principle, 
annually. First, the basic understanding concerning price stability was reviewed, and it was reaffirmed 
as follows.  
(1) 
Price stability is a state where various economic agents including households and firms may 
make decisions regarding economic activities without being concerned about fluctuation in 
the general price level.  
Given that the effects of monetary policy take time to work through the economy and that the 
volatility of output may actually be amplified when attempts are made to absorb every short-
term change in prices resulting from various shocks, the Bank should forecast developments 
in economic activity and prices from a sufficiently long-term viewpoint and strive to realize 
price stability over the medium to long term.  
(2) 
Furthermore,  in  examining  the  "understanding  of medium-  to  long-term  price  stability,"  the  following 
points were considered. First, the significance of measurement bias in the CPI. Second, the necessary 
extent  of  the  "safety  margin"  that  acts  as  a  buffer  against  the  risk  of  falling  into  a  vicious  circle  of 
declining prices and deteriorating economic activity. And third, possible changes in the level of inflation 
perceived by households and firms as consistent with price stability. As for the first point, it seemed 
that measurement bias remained insignificant even taking into account last year's rebasing of the CPI. 
Regarding  the  second  point,  the  "safety  margin,"  the  risk  of  the  economy  falling  into  a  deflationary 
spiral seems to have further decreased, since the strength of the corporate sector and robustness of 
the financial system have further improved. Finally, on the third point, the level of inflation perceived by 
households  and  firms  as  consistent  with  price  stability  is  unlikely  to  have  changed  much,  since 
changes in the inflation rate have been small.  
Based  on  these  considerations,  it  was  agreed,  as  was  also  the  case  a  year  ago,  that  the 
"understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" expressed in terms of the year-on-year change 
in the CPI, takes the form of a range approximately between 0 and 2 percent with most Policy Board 
members' median figures falling on one side or the other of 1 percent.  
BIS Review 46/2007 
 5
The  next  step,  the  examination  from  two  perspectives,  involves  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  the 
economy and prices from two standpoints – whether the main scenario leads to the attainment of our 
objective and how other relevant risks should be evaluated.  
From the first perspective, we examine the prospects for economic activity and prices for one to two 
years ahead – this time, through fiscal 2008 – and assess whether the most likely outlook is for the 
economy to follow a path of sustained growth under price stability.  
Through fiscal 2008, the economy, as I said earlier, is likely to continue its sustained expansion with a 
virtuous circle of production, income, and spending in place. The year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI (excluding fresh food) is likely to be around 0 percent in the short run, but is expected gradually to 
rise  in  the  longer  run.  Such  developments  can  be  regarded  as  in  line  with  the  "understanding  of 
medium- to long-term price stability" that each member of the Policy Board has in mind. In sum, we 
judged that, through fiscal 2008, Japan's economy is likely to realize sustainable growth under price 
stability.  
This  outlook  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  market  participants  and  firms  make  decisions  by 
factoring in future changes in monetary policy. Thus, adjusting the level of the policy interest rate will 
become  necessary  for  the  economy  and  prices  to  continue  to  follow  the  projection.  The  pace  of 
necessary adjustment, however, will depend on the degree of future improvements in the economy 
and price situation. We do not, therefore, have any predetermined schedule.  
The second perspective extends the time horizon and assesses the risks considered most relevant to 
the conduct of monetary policy. In this assessment, we take account of the cost incurred should risks 
materialize, even though the probability of this happening may be low. In this regard, both upside and 
downside risks need to be borne in mind. In terms of the upside risks, we need to be mindful of the 
stimulative effect of monetary policy being further amplified with the improved prospects for economic 
activity and prices. If, for instance, the expectation takes hold that interest rates will remain low for a 
long  time  regardless  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  then  firms  and  financial 
institutions may over-extend themselves based on such expectation, resulting in medium- to long-term 
risks of larger swings in the economy and inflation rate, and of misallocation of funds and resources.  
On the other hand, if the downside risks mentioned earlier should materialize, the improvement in the 
economic  situation  may  stall.  It  is  also  possible  that  prices  will  continue  not  to  rise  despite  the 
improvement in economic conditions. Nevertheless, the risk of the economy falling into a vicious circle 
of  declining  prices  and  deteriorating  economic  activity  seems  to  have  further  decreased,  since  the 
strength of the corporate sector and the robustness of the financial system have been enhanced.  
Based on this outlook and assessment of risks, we have decided to maintain the current basic thinking 
regarding the conduct of monetary policy, employed since the termination of the quantitative easing 
policy  in  March  2006.  The  Bank  adjusted  the  level  of  the  policy  interest  rate  in  July  2006  and  in 
February 2007. Adjustments were made in view of the outlook for the economy and prices, with the 
Bank  judging  that  sustained  economic  growth  would  continue  with  a  virtuous  circle  of  production, 
income, and spending in place, and that consumer prices would be likely to increase moderately in the 
long  run  in  line  with  the  "understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability."  Based  on  this 
assessment, we have been realizing the idea of "adjusting the level of interest rates gradually in the 
light of developments in economic activity and prices." With inflationary pressures weak, the pace of 
adjustment has been slow and the accommodative financial conditions ensuing from very low interest 
rates  have  been  maintained.  The  Bank's  basic  thinking  in  this  regard  will  remain  the  same  in  the 
conduct  of  future  monetary  policy.  In  sum,  while confirming  that Japan's  economy  remains  likely  to 
follow a path of sustainable growth under price stability in light of the aforementioned "understanding" 
and  assessing  relevant  risk  factors,  the  Bank  will  adjust  the  level  of  interest  rates  gradually  in 
accordance with improvements in the economic and price situations.  
Concluding remarks 
Lastly, I would like to touch upon the Bank's communication of information concerning the conduct of 
monetary policy. The Bank will continue to explain carefully to the public its assessment of economic 
activity  and  prices  and  its  basic  thinking  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  line  with  the  "New 
Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," through, for example, the Outlook Report.  
In  relation  to  this  point,  there  are  voices  that  call  for  the  Bank  to  communicate  information  on  the 
specific time schedule of a policy change, but we neither believe it possible nor consider it appropriate 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2007
to  do  so.  The  Bank  considers  that  there  are  two  key  pieces  of  information  that  it  should  provide, 
namely,  its  assessment  of  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  its  basic  thinking  on  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Taking into consideration such information provided by the Bank, market participants 
carry out transactions based on their views regarding economic activity and prices; the Bank in turn 
obtains information regarding market participants' views on economic activity and prices from interest 
rates formed in financial markets as a result of transactions carried out by market participants, and 
uses  it  in  making  its  assessment  of  economic  activity  and  prices.  We  think  such  a  two-way 
communication  process  is  important.  If,  however,  the  central  bank  were  to  indicate  a  specific  time 
schedule for a policy change, market participants would carry out transactions based not on their own 
views regarding economic activity and prices but on the Bank's indication. Therefore, we think it is vital 
that the central bank's communication to the public should be limited to the extent I have just outlined 
for the market to fully perform its function of price discovery and allocating resources efficiently. The 
Bank will continue to conduct monetary policy appropriately and to contribute to achieving sustainable 
economic growth under price stability.  
BIS Review 46/2007 
 7
