Rundheersing Bheenick: Brief look at the commercial banking sector in 
Mauritius 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  official 
100th Foundation Day Celebrations of the Bank of Baroda, Port Louis, 20 July 2007. 
 Honourable Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and Economic Development 
His Excellency the High Commissioner of India 
The Vice President of the Bank of Baroda 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to be present today and share this historical moment with you. 
Let me first congratulate Bank of Baroda on reaching this milestone in its history. Allow me 
also  to  commend  all  those  whose  work  and  dedication  have  positioned  the  bank  as  a 
successful and respected global bank. 
A centenary should indeed be celebrated. 
This  celebration,  however,  cannot  start  without  saluting  the  founder  of  Bank  of  Baroda, 
Maharaj  Sayajirao.  Under  his  rule, a  hundred  years  ago,  Maharaj  Sayajirao  erected  a  tiny 
building in the princely town of Baroda. His vision, I understand, was to set up a bank which 
would “prove to be a beneficial agency for lending, transmission and deposit of money and a 
powerful factor in the development  of art, industries and commerce of the state of Baroda 
and adjoining territories”. 
The vision of the Maharaj is today a legend which has etched footprints in the sands of time. 
The  small  Baroda  building  has  today  grown  into  an  empire  with  an  impressive  network  of 
around 2700 branches in India. Bank of Baroda has also created history beyond the frontiers 
of  India.  The  bank  migrated  with  the  Indian  diaspora  and  settled  in  over  20  countries,  of 
which our very own. 
Indeed, this year marks the 45th year of close association of Bank of Baroda with Mauritius. 
Bank  of  Baroda  started  operations  in  Mauritius  in  1962  at  a  time  when  we  were  still  an 
underdeveloped  country.  We  had,  at  that  time,  only  three  full  commercial  banks;  the 
Mauritius  Commercial  Bank  Ltd,  Barclays  Bank  DCO  and  Mercantile  Bank  of  India.  There 
were, in addition, two other quasi banks, namely the Mauritius Cooperative Central Bank, a 
“bank” operating for the benefit of cooperative societies, and the Post Office Savings Bank. 
We  cannot  overlook  the  contribution  of  the  Bank  of  Baroda  in  the  economic  and  social 
development of our country over the years. We all recognise the social mission of the bank. 
Bank of Baroda brought banking to the unbanked. It pioneered mobile banking giving access 
to banking services to needy segments of the population in villages throughout the country. 
The mobile bank is today a legacy. 
Bank of Baroda also made significant contributions towards financial literacy and commercial 
education. A  couple  of  years  later,  Habib  Bank  joined  the  Bank  of  Baroda  in  this mission, 
followed by the State Bank of Mauritius Ltd. 
A centenary bank has past successes. However, it cannot afford to be complacent about its 
success stories. A centenary should also be an occasion to look at challenges ahead. 
The world today is fiercely competitive. Innovation, creativity and re-engineering should be 
on the business agenda of our banks. Our banking sector should be always on its toes and 
tap new markets. 
BIS Review 83/2007 
 1
The banking sector will be faced with stronger competition by the end of this year with the 
opening of three new banks, which have been granted banking licences last year. Also, as 
part  of  the  outfall  of  the  Honourable  Prime  Minister’s  visit  to  China,  we  expect  a  Chinese 
bank to be part of our financial landscape before long. 
The sector is becoming more and more competitive and consumers can only stand to gain in 
this process. As the regulator and watchdog of the banking sector, we at the central bank 
shall  keep  an  eye  on  developments  to  ensure  that  credit  standards  are  not  lowered,  that 
depositors’  interest  are  safeguarded  and  that  our  reputation  as  an  international  financial 
centre is not at risk. Our consumers expect no less from its central bank. 
Mauritius enjoys cultural and economic ties with Asia and Africa and offers huge potential for 
the provision of banking services in the region. I strongly urge our banks to take full benefit of 
opportunities that lie ahead. 
Islamic financial services are being introduced. In this context, I will shortly be meeting with 
the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  of  Malaysia  to  discuss  the  adherence  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius  to  this  international  standard  setting  body  comprising  regulatory  and  supervisory 
agencies  worldwide  which  have  interest  in  enhancing  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the 
Islamic Financial Services Industry. 
I believe that the time is now right to envisage a suitable currency exchange system between 
our two countries. There has been significant expansion in trade and tourism between India 
and  Mauritius.  I  understand  that  around  50,000  tourists  from  India  are  expected  to  visit 
Mauritius this year and that 20,000 Mauritians would have travelled to India. This measure 
will avoid the inconvenience for travellers having to convert their Indian rupee banknotes into 
a  foreign  currency  first  when  travelling  to  Mauritius  and  secondly,  to  reconvert  them  into 
Mauritian rupees for spending in Mauritius. I believe that the flow of tourism between India 
and  Mauritius  may  be  enhanced  under  a  suitable  exchange  system  between  our  two 
countries. Bank of Baroda can be called upon to play a prominent role in this respect. The 
application of a mechanism similar to this one has helped to maintain a steady and growing 
level  of  tourism  between  South  Africa  and  Mauritius  over  the  years.  South  African  rand 
banknotes are today freely exchanged by South African travellers in Mauritius. 
I  now  wish  to  commend  the  recent  marketing  initiatives  of  Bank  of  Baroda  to  make  itself 
more visible in our banking industry. “Rapid Funds2India”, a service free of cost to the bank’s 
customers in Mauritius and India, is a laudable effort towards lower cost of banking services. 
The bank has made substantial investment in IT and its entire banking operations have now 
migrated  to  state-of-the-art  IT  platform  enabling  global  connectivity.  It  is  a  fact  that 
technological  innovations  have  today  significantly  brought  down  administrative  costs.  I 
strongly  believe  that  such  reductions  in  costs  should  be  passed  on  to  customers  through 
lower fees and charges. 
In  today’s  world  of  financial  globalization,  banks  can  no  longer  limit  themselves  to 
geographical  areas.  I  understand  that  Bank  of  Baroda  ranks  among  the  top  400  banks 
worldwide and they are not alone. Two other Indian banks namely, the State Bank of India 
and ICICI are also performing very well. 
I again congratulate the Bank of Baroda on its 100th Foundation Day and wish it another 100 
years of success. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2007
