Kemal Kozarić: Launch of the Eurosystem Needs Assessment Program 
Speech by Mr Kemal Kozarić, Governor of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at the signing 
of  a  protocol  between  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  Delegation  of  the  European  Commission  in 
Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  and 
the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Sarajevo, 
16 February 2007. 
 Mrs. Tumpel-Gugerell, Mr. Lys 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I have a great pleasure to welcome you today in the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to 
announce the signing of Protocol among the European Central Bank, on behalf of the Eurosystem, the 
Delegation of the European Commission in BH and the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  welcome  all  the  representatives  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the 
partner Central Banks included in the Program – Deutsche Bundesbank, Eesti Pank, Bank of Greece, 
Banco  de  España,  Banque  de  France,  Banca  d’Italia,  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  and  Banka 
Slovenije,  then,  the  representatives  of  the  Delegation  of  European  Commission  in  BH  and  the 
Resident Program Coordinator, Mr. Santiago Fernandez de Lis. 
I  also  wish  to  welcome  the  Resident  Representative  of  the  World  Bank  Office  to  BH,  Mr.  Dirk 
Reinermann and the state Minister of Finance and Treasury, Mr. Dragan Vrankić. 
With  today's  signing  of  the  Protocol  among  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  Delegation  of  the 
European  Commission  in  BH  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  we  are  officially 
marking  the  start  of  Eurosystem  Needs  Assessment  Program  to  the  benefit  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina.   
This Program, which will be funded with Euro 300.000 by the European Union, identifies the areas in 
which the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina should achieve progress, in order to have its own 
standards adjusted with those adopted in the European System of Central Banks.  
On this occasion I would like to thank to the Delegation of the European Commission to BH for its 
contribution in the realization of this Program. I also thank to the European Central Bank, which has 
recognized  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  as  the  institution  ready  to  accept  the 
European standards and to adjust its rules, policies and practice to the European ones. We are very 
happy that the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, by joining this Program, will receive such kind 
of assistance from the European Central Bank and other partner central banks.  
This  Program  is  highly  important  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  because  it  will 
provide the assessment of situation in seven areas and compare them with the standards of European 
System of Central Banks. In the same time, the Program is important for Bosnia and Herzegovina as a 
whole,  because  by  its  implementation  we  mark  the  strengthening  of  economic  and  financial 
cooperation between the European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina.  
All  citizens  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  have  a  wish  to  join  the  European  Union.  On  this  road  it  is 
necessary that each institution should make a lot of efforts in order to reach the European standards. 
My pleasure is even larger, because the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina is among the first 
going in that direction. 
I  sincerely  hope  that  this  is  only  a  first  step  in  cooperation  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina and the European Central Bank. 
To everybody with whom we will cooperate in the realization of this Program during the following six 
months, I wish a pleasant stay in Sarajevo, 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 18/2007 
 1
