Goh Chok Tong: Building a brighter future for Asia together  
Keynote address by Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister of the Republic of Singapore and Chairman 
of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Nomura  Asia  Equity  Forum  2007,  Singapore, 
4 July 2007. 
 Welcome to Singapore. I thank Nomura for holding its fourth Asia Equity Forum here, and for bringing 
together this diverse group of companies, financial institutions and investors. I hope that this forum will 
serve as a platform for forging new business relationships and conceiving new growth opportunities. 
Last week, the World Economic Forum on East Asia hosted more than 300 leaders from business, 
politics, government, civil society and media in Singapore. The mood was upbeat. The overall feeling 
was that 10 years after the Financial Crisis, Asia has emerged stronger and its growth built on firmer 
foundations. The belief was that despite some challenges ahead, Asia would continue to rise. 
As leaders of governments and companies, we have to anticipate the future. I am not suggesting that 
we do this with a crystal ball but we should have a mental road-map of the terrain ahead. This will help 
us position ourselves to seize the opportunities, manage the risks and devise strategies for growth. 
This morning, I would like to share with you how I see Asia’s regional architecture evolving, and how 
we are building a brighter future. I will take a medium term timeframe as I believe this is more relevant 
to business planning. 
Asia’s share of global wealth 
Let us start by taking a look at Asia’s share of global wealth to see how far it has come, and where it is 
projected to go. 
Back in 1980, Asia accounted for 19% of global GDP in PPP (purchasing power parity) terms. Today, 
Asia’s share stands at 35%. In 2020, this is expected to rise to 45%. Compare this with America and 
the EU. Each accounted for roughly 21% of global GDP in 1980 and 2005. Both are expected to see 
their share drop to 19% by 2020. 
Let us look at another measure. Asia’s share of global exports in 1980 was 14%. It doubled to 27% in 
2006.  By  2020,  this  is  expected  to  rise  to  35%.  The  picture  is  the  same  for  Asia’s  share  of  global 
outward FDI (Foreign Direct Investment) stock. In 1980 it was 5.9%. By last year, it doubled to 11.4%. 
It is expected to grow to 20% in 2020. What this suggests is that Asia is no longer just a recipient of 
investments from US and Europe. Increasingly, Asia will become a major source of FDI for the rest of 
the world. 
In  terms  of  private  wealth,  a  2006  Merrill-Lynch  study  noted  that  Asia-Pacific  contains  27%  of  the 
global population of High Net Worth Individuals (HNWI) and 23% of global HNWI wealth. Merrill-Lynch 
expects private wealth in Asia-Pacific to exceed US$10trillion by 2010, growing at an annual growth 
rate of 6.7%, outpacing the global rate. These are vast resources which can be harnessed to finance 
future growth. 
Strategic stability within the region 
Politically, I expect the strategic environment in Asia to be stable. 
On a bilateral level, the key relationships which underpin the region’s stability – US-China, US-India, 
China-Japan  and  China-India  –  are  sound.  The  major  players  will  compete  and  cooperate  over  a 
range of issues. There will be occasional tensions over trade, history and territorial disputes but these 
will be managed as the major players want stability and growth, not conflict and instability. They have 
also taken steps to strengthen their relations. 
Although slow, progress is being made to resolve the crisis over North Korea’s nuclear programme. 
Tensions may arise in cross-strait relations should Taiwanese politicians play the independence card 
as Taiwan heads for elections in 2008. But so long as the US maintains its clear stand that it will not 
support Taiwan’s independence, the situation will not get out of hand. 
BIS Review 76/2007 
 1
I do not expect major military conflicts to break out in Asia. All countries in Asia understand that any 
such  conflict would  set  themselves  and  the  region  back.  This  will  detract  from  everyone’s  focus on 
economic  growth  and  building  cross-national  and  cross-regional  ties.  There  is  strong  optimism  that 
Asia  can  make  it  in  this  century  and  strong  determination  to  succeed.  I  therefore  expect  a  stable 
strategic environment to provide the backdrop for the region to grow. 
Deepening economic integration and interdependency 
Within Asia, economic integration is deepening, and we are becoming more and more interdependent. 
Intra-Asian trade as a share of the region’s total trade has grown from 34% in 1980 to more than 50% 
today. Asia is being woven together by trade and investment flows, MNCs spreading their production 
chains and a growing web of bilateral and multilateral FTAs (Free Trade Agreements) and regional 
processes. 
China  plays  a  critical  role  in  quickening  the  pace  of  regional  integration.  China  is  serving  as  a 
production  platform  for  foreign  firms.  Many  manufacture  there.  Others  export  intermediate  goods  to 
their affiliates in China for assembly and then shipping the finished products to key export markets in 
the  US  and  Europe.  What  we  are  seeing  is  production  sharing  and  the  intensification  of  an  Asian 
production network. 
However, both China and other Asian countries also know that due to China’s sheer size and strategic 
weight,  its  re-emergence  exerts  a  displacement  effect.  To  use  an  image,  it  is  like  a  huge  elephant 
wading into a pond. This will displace the water and reduce the space of others using the pond. What 
do  we  do?  We  cannot  live  without  water.  The  answer  is  to  enlarge  the  pond  so  that  there  is  more 
space for everybody. 
China is conscious of its size. It emphasises peaceful development so that while it displaces, it does 
not  threaten.  Hence,  China  is  negotiating  an  FTA  with  ASEAN  so  that  its  growth  will  translate  into 
more  opportunities  for  ASEAN.  Asian  countries  welcome  China’s  peaceful  development  and  are 
getting together to find ways to tap China’s growth. 
But  the  boost  from  China  to  the  region  is  not  confined  to  production  and  exports  alone.  As  China 
grows, it will also consume more. Already, China is buying more from the region and the rest of the 
world. Chinese tourists are seen in large numbers in many parts of Asia, Europe and the Americas. 
China  has  also  started  to  invest  its  surplus  savings  abroad  in  a  more  strategic  and  active  way.  Its 
recent landmark investment of US$3billion in Blackstone is just the beginning. Such investments will 
continue to grow, given China’s vast foreign reserves. And as China – and also other Asian countries 
–  look  to  diversify  the  ways  in  which  their  stocks  of  surplus  savings  are  invested,  the  scope  for 
deepening the Asian financial system will be enhanced tremendously. 
Let me now turn to the other fast emerging large economy in Asia-India. India began to open up its 
economy in the early 90s. Over the past 12 years, India grew by an average of 6.5% per year. Growth 
over the last 3 years was even higher – at 8% per annum. 
Much  of  this  growth  has  been  driven  by  India’s  strength  in  services,  particularly  IT,  rather  than 
manufacturing. Compared to China, India is relatively less integrated in terms of trade and production 
with  the  rest  of  Asia.  But  this  will  change.  India  will  build  its  manufacturing  strength.  Its  policy  on 
Special  Economic  Zones  testifies  to  this.  When  India  diversifies  its  economic  base  in  this  way,  its 
weight will increase, and its effect on the region will be felt more keenly. 
Despite several changes of governments and Prime Ministers, India and its leaders have continued on 
the  reform  path.  A  billboard  at  the  2006  WEF  meeting  in  Davos  proclaimed:  “15  years,  6 
Governments, 5 Prime Ministers, ONE DIRECTION”. The message is clear: reform and liberalisation 
in  India  are  irreversible.  China  serves  both  as  an  example  of  what  a  large  country  can  do  and  a 
compelling reason for India to grow faster to keep up. 
I believe that India will continue to grow at a high rate. I have met Indian leaders across the political 
spectrum.  I  am  persuaded  that  they  will  continue  to  open  up  the  economy  and  welcome  foreign 
investments. Take the case of West Bengal in Kolkata, a state that has been under communist rule for 
30  years.  The  Chief  Minister,  Buddhadeb  Bhattacharjee,  one  of  the  politburo  members  of  the 
Communist Party of India (Marxist), candidly said that he welcomed foreign investment, “whatever the 
colour – be it yellow, red or white”. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2007
Against this dynamic backdrop, individual ASEAN countries have been strengthening their economies 
and competitiveness. Collectively, ASEAN integration is quickening and deepening. 
In January this year, ASEAN Leaders committed to establish by 2015 – five years ahead of the original 
target  –  an  ASEAN  Economic  Community.  In  November,  the  Leaders  will,  at  their  Summit  in 
Singapore, issue a legally-binding blueprint to implement the ASEAN Economic Community. ASEAN 
will eventually evolve into a single market with free flow of goods, services, investment and talent. 
For investors, an integrated market of half a billion people will be an attractive investment proposition. 
For financial institutions, it will mean more projects to finance and more wealth to manage. ASEAN’s 
combined  GDP  of  US$1trillion  is  larger  than  most  economies.  It  is,  in  fact,  bigger  than  India’s 
US$890billion  and  more  that  a  third  of  China’s  US$2.6trillion.  In  addition,  the  ASEAN  Economic 
Community will boost the region’s GDP by 10%. 
To benefit from the growth of China and India, ASEAN is negotiating FTAs with these two giants. They 
are targeted for completion by 2010 and 2011 respectively. Besides China and India, ASEAN is also 
enhancing  links  with  other  economic  centres.  ASEAN  signed  a  regional  Trade  and  Investment 
Framework  Arrangement  (TIFA)  with  the  US  last  August.  It  is  negotiating  FTAs  with  Japan,  South 
Korea  and  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  And  in  May,  ASEAN  and  the  European  Union  decided  to 
launch FTA talks. 
Political coalescence 
At  the  political  level,  Asia  is  also  coalescing.  However,  political  coalescence  is  progressing  more 
slowly than economic integration. And it will be far less defined and institutionalised than what we see 
in the EU. Compared to Europe, Asia is more diverse politically and culturally. There are complexities 
and practical difficulties. However, the basic direction has been set. 
ASEAN  has  made  a  strategic  decision  to  strengthen  the  organisation  politically.  It  is  finalising  a 
Charter  that  will  lay  out  a  bold  and  visionary  future  for  ASEAN.  This  will  provide  an  institutional 
framework  for  the  grouping  and  transform  it  into  a  more  effective  and  efficient  rules-based 
organisation. The Charter will be signed at the Singapore Summit in November. 
Asia is evolving its architecture for regional cooperation. Today, there are already several overlapping 
fora  and  groupings:  the  ASEAN  Regional  Forum  (ARF)  and  Shangri-La  Dialogue  which  discuss 
sensitive security and defence issues, the ASEAN + 3 framework and the recently formed East Asia 
Summit  (EAS).  Countries  in  Asia  understand  that  they  must  work  together  to  strengthen  regional 
cooperation. These structures complement one another and help to deepen regional integration and 
build an East Asian community. 
in 
that 
Building relationships with other regions 
While the final shape of the regional architecture will not be decided for some time to come, what is 
clear is that it will be an inclusive and forward-looking one. This was clearly demonstrated in the way 
participants in the EAS were determined. Instead of going by narrow and outmoded geographical and 
ethnic  notions,  the  leaders  in  Asia  wisely  decided  to  adopt  a  forward-looking,  inclusive  and  open 
definition.  Asia  will  therefore  continue  to  remain  open  in  engaging  external  players  on  the 
understanding 
ties,  connections  and 
interdependency, rather than physical boundaries and ethnicity. 
The US will continue to play a vital role in Asia’s stability and prosperity. American trade, investments, 
technology are vital. The US is also the preponderant military power which underpins regional stability. 
This is something which the region, including ASEAN, India and China, welcomes. 
Europe remains another important political player. It is also a major trading and investment partner. 
Asia  also  welcomes  other  players  and  regions  like  Russia,  the  Middle  East  and  Latin  America  to 
engage us. When we engage each other, there is potential for finding common ground. And when we 
find common ground, we think of ways to share experience, collaborate and grow together. 
today’s  context,  what  defines  a  “region”  are 
BIS Review 76/2007 
 3
Asia and the Middle East rediscovering each other 
What has transpired between Asia and the Middle East recently is a good example. Over the past few 
years,  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  have  started  a  process  of  rediscovering  each  other.  Asia  and  the 
Middle East have had a long, fruitful and ancient history of exchanges. But this flow ebbed some time 
in the last century or so. 
Recent global developments have drawn countries from these two regions closer again. Post-Sept 11, 
Middle  Eastern  countries  became  more  interested  in  Asia.  Their  leaders  began  stepping  up 
engagement  with  Asia  for  collaboration  in  management,  science  and  technology,  education, 
governance systems and development models. 
At the same time, Asian countries began to recognise that the Middle East is an increasingly important 
global player. 
Strategically, the leaders in the Middle East are committed to harnessing the various forces to tip the 
region  in  the  direction  of  peace,  cooperation  and  development.  Economically,  high  oil  prices  have 
given  many  Middle  East  countries  an  unprecedented  opportunity  to  diversify  their  economies  and 
invest in capacity-building for the future. Indeed the Middle East today stands on the threshold of a 
new era of unprecedented infrastructural development and economic activities. 
Asia and the Middle East have concurrently become aware of each other’s dynamism and the mutual 
benefits of closer ties, frequent interaction and a stronger partnership. Some observers have dubbed 
the flourishing trade and business linkages between the Middle East and Asia as a “New Silk Road”. 
But the ties between the two regions will surely become much more multi-dimensional in the years to 
come. 
How Singapore is remaking itself 
How is Singapore responding to these dramatic changes in its external environment?  
We have used the last 10 years to remake Singapore, strengthen our competitiveness and expand our 
economic space. We have progressively restructured and diversified our economy. Manufacturing will 
continue  to  play  a key role  but  we  are  also  moving  into  more  technology-  and  knowledge-intensive 
manufacturing. Fostering cutting edge scientific research and strengthening Singapore’s attractiveness 
as  an  R&D  (Research  and  Development)  hub  is  a  priority.  In  the  services  sector,  we  have 
strengthened  the  key  areas  of  tourism,  healthcare,  education  and  financial  services.  More  of 
Singapore’s growth will come from innovation and knowledge. 
We are also looking outward towards the rest of Asia and beyond. Singapore is located at the heart of 
Southeast Asia, with China to the East and India and the Middle East to the West. As an economic 
hub and financial centre, Singapore is well connected to the major regions. So we are leveraging on 
our  strengths,  experience  and  contacts  to  build  partnerships  and  create  growth  opportunities.  To 
enhance  our  connectivity  and  enlarge  our  economic  space,  we  have  concluded  11  FTAs,  including 
with  the  US,  India,  Japan,  South  Korea  and  Australia.  We  are  negotiating  11  more,  including  with 
China and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). Many MNCs, investors and businesses are making 
use of Singapore’s connectivity to reach out to the region and beyond. 
Financial  services  are  a  prime  example.  Japanese financial  institutions  have  made  inroads  into  the 
Middle East. Interest has centred on servicing Asian investors – primarily project financing and loan 
syndication.  I  encourage  you  to  take  a  wider  perspective  –  consider  making  commercial  banking, 
corporate finance, capital-market services and private-banking services part of your long-term growth 
strategy. There are many opportunities for you to use Singapore to reach out to the Middle East. 
You could explore possibilities for collaborating with Singapore-based financial institutions with strong 
know-how.  You  could  also  start  discussions  with  the  Middle  Eastern  banks  and  players  present  in 
Singapore. 
I  would  also like  to  encourage  you  to use  Singapore  as  a  regional  hub  to  conduct  your  investment 
activities. 
Let me give you some idea of what we’re building here. Allow me to share with you the results of the 
2006 Asset Management Survey. There are three broad trends worth noting. First, total assets under 
management (AUM) have grown robustly over the last six years. The assets managed by Singapore-
based fund managers grew by 24% to almost US$600billion in 2006.  
4 
 BIS Review 76/2007
Second, the sources of funds flowing into or through Singapore continue to diversify. The Middle East 
has becoming increasingly important, along with South Asia. Funds sourced from the Middle East and 
South Asia grew by 21% and 36% respectively year-on-year.  
One of our local banks, DBS Bank, recently formed a joint venture with a group of Arab investors to 
set up Singapore’s first Islamic bank. This will spur the development of Islamic financial products in 
Singapore. I understand that Japan is also moving into Islamic finance. We can learn from each other 
and work together. 
Third, the critical mass of asset management activity in Singapore is continuing to grow. In 2006, 57% 
of  the  total  AUM  in  Singapore  was  invested  in  the  Asian  region.  Fund  managers  continue  to  use 
Singapore as their regional headquarters because they see Singapore as a prime location to service 
clients, raise capital from the region, as well as invest into the region and beyond. 
Singapore  has  also  grown  as  a  centre  for  hedge  fund  managers.  Not  only  have  these  alternative 
investment  managers  contributed  to  the  growth  of  our  asset  management  industry,  they  have  also 
added to its breadth and depth. 
Why has Singapore seen such strong growth as a financial centre? I think much of it has to do with our 
continuous efforts to enhance Singapore’s position as a gateway to Asia by transforming Singapore 
into a global city. Also, our ability to adapt quickly to the changing environment and our resilience in 
overcoming  shocks  and  crises  such  as  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  and  SARS  (Severe  Acute 
Respiratory Syndrome). 
We will continue our efforts to make Singapore one of the world’s most vibrant and liveable cities – a 
unique  city  which  is  Asian  and  cosmopolitan  at  the  same  time.  We  will  preserve  our  greenery  and 
environment.  We  are  building  Integrated  Resorts  with  casinos,  hosting  the  Formula  One  grand  prix 
from next year onward, attracting some of the world’s best golfers to take part in the Singapore Open, 
bringing in world-class entertainment acts and events and jazzing up our nightlife. This will ensure that 
Singapore remains an attractive city where talented people want to come to work, live, have fun and 
feel safe and at home. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Governments in Asia are deepening economic integration and political cooperation. This will create the 
conditions and framework for the private sector to grow and for you to take advantage of the full array 
of opportunities. I hope you now have a mental road-map of where Asia is heading. I wish you a safe 
and fruitful journey ahead. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 76/2007 
 5
