John Hurley: The Eurosystem approach to monetary policy 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
at  the  Conference  “The  Global  Interdependence  Center  Abroad  in  Ireland”,  co-organised  by the 
Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland and the Irish American Business Chamber 
and Network, Dublin, 11-12 June 2007. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me begin by saying how pleased I am to have the opportunity to participate in this conference. We 
in  the  Bank  have  co-organised  this  event  and  we  feel  that  the  high  quality  of  the  speakers  and 
participants will ensure its success. It is both a networking exercise and an opportunity for participants 
to exchange views and hopefully gain further insights into financial and economic issues. 
I have been asked to speak on the topic of monetary policy in the euro area. The single European 
currency project commenced towards the end of the 1980s and resulted in the adoption of the single 
currency  eight  years  ago.  Although  the  euro  area  is  comparable  to  the  United  States  in  terms  of 
population and GDP, it differs significantly in a number of respects. In particular, it is not accompanied 
by political union, nor is there a common language. These factors have not presented major difficulties 
and, by any standards, it can be said that EMU has been a success. 
I will start by briefly recalling the background to the creation of the European single currency. I will then 
talk  on  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  European  Central  Bank  as  well  as  its  communication 
strategy. After briefly describing actual monetary policy since the launch of the euro, I will examine the 
benefits of monetary union for the euro area economy. Finally, I will refer briefly to the effects of the 
single currency on the Irish economy.  
Background  
2.  
The adoption of a single currency by eleven members of the European Union at the start of 1999 was 
an  ambitious  and  unprecedented  event.  It  was  a  very  challenging  task  for  all  concerned.  Despite 
considerable  scepticism  about  the  project  in  some  quarters,  it  has  been  an  undoubted  success. 
Reflecting this, it has attracted two new members, Greece in 2001 and Slovenia in 2007. It has also 
resulted  in  the  physical  replacement  of  national  currencies  by  euro  notes  and  coin  in  2002.  At  this 
stage, the general public in the euro area has effectively altered its mindset to think in terms of the 
euro rather than their previous national currencies. 
How was this success achieved? One important impetus was the strong belief that the full benefits of 
the single market could only be enjoyed if the single market was complemented by a single currency. 
In 1992, the Maastricht Treaty set out a number of economic convergence criteria for the completion of 
EMU. In May 1998, eleven EU Member States were deemed to have met these price stability, public 
finance, interest rate, and exchange rate criteria and they proceeded to participate in the adoption of 
the euro as their single currency.  
The speed of nominal convergence of the economic performance of these Member States in such a 
short period of time was very impressive. This occurred against a background of a crisis in the EMS 
that subsequently led to a substantial widening of the fluctuation margins for the bilateral EMS central 
rates.  The  fact  that  convergence  occurred  relatively  quickly  after  such  a  turbulent  episode  was 
indicative of not only the political will to complete the monetary union project but also the flexibility of 
Member State economies.  
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy 
3.  
The monetary policy strategy of the ECB comprises the following components: 
• 
• 
a quantitative definition of price stability; 
a medium-term orientation; 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 1
a comprehensive analytical framework, based on a two pillar approach. 
• 
To begin with, let me discuss the quantitative definition of price stability, which currently the Governing 
Council defines as a euro-wide inflation rate of below but close to 2 per cent.  
One  of  the  primary  reasons  for  adopting  a  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  was  to  anchor 
inflation expectations for the euro area. There are, however, other benefits associated with an explicit 
quantitative  definition  of  price  stability.  It  enhances  transparency  and  facilitates  the  ECB  in  holding 
itself accountable for achieving its mandated price stability objective. A different, less specific definition 
of price stability could have led to uncertainty among economic agents, which in turn could have led to 
higher  inflation  expectations,  higher  market  interest  rates  and  increased  risk  premia.  Indeed,  the 
stability of market interest rates during the euro changeover period is testament to the success of the 
ECB’s strategy. 
The second aspect of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy is its medium-term orientation, whereby the 
quantitative definition of price stability is to be achieved over the medium term.  
This medium-term orientation reflects the fact that prices can be volatile in the short run for reasons 
outside  the  control  of  the  ECB,  or  indeed  any  central  bank,  such  as  changes  in  indirect  taxes  and 
shocks to commodity prices, especially oil prices. It would therefore be sub-optimal for a central bank 
to stick rigidly to its inflation objective over very short-term horizons. This medium-term horizon also 
obviates  the  need  for  monetary  policy  to  actively  respond  to  short-term  price  developments  or 
temporary economic shocks. It also means that the time horizon over which price stability has to be re-
established  following  a  shock  can  be  tailored  to  the  circumstances  prevailing  at  the  time  and  the 
nature  of  the  shocks  hitting  the  economy.  In  general,  the  horizon  depends  on  a  number  of  factors, 
such  as  whether  the  shocks  are  temporary  or  permanent  and  on  their  potential  for  becoming 
entrenched  in  pricing  decisions.  In  any  event,  the  central  bank  has  to  preserve  its  credibility,  thus 
ensuring that expectations remain consistent with the declared policy objective. 
The third aspect of the monetary policy strategy, and one which I will discuss in some detail, is the 
ECB’s  strategic  framework.  An  important  element  of  this  framework  is  the  “two-pillar  approach”  by 
which  an  economic  analysis  is  cross-checked  against  an  analysis  of  the  development  of  monetary 
aggregates.  By  taking  a  broad  approach  to  the  interpretation  of  economic  conditions,  the  ECB’s 
strategy  aims  at  adopting  a  robust  monetary  policy  analysis  in  an  environment  that  is  typically 
uncertain. 
The  first  pillar  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy  is  the  economic  analysis.  In  taking  monetary 
policy  decisions,  the  Governing  Council  needs  to  have  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  the 
prevailing  and  the  prospective  economic  situation  and  must  be  aware  of  the  specific  nature  and 
magnitudes of any economic developments threatening price stability. This analysis mainly focuses on 
the  assessment  of  current  economic  and  financial  developments  and  the  implied  short-  to 
medium-term risks to price stability, paying particular attention to the nature of shocks hitting the euro-
area economy and their effects on cost and pricing behaviour.  
There  is  a  wide  range  of  indicators  examined  by  the  Governing  Council  for  the  economic  analysis, 
including  product  market  indicators,  financial  market  indicators,  asset  prices  and  exchange  rate 
developments, as part of its overall economic analysis.  
One  of  the  elements  influencing  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment  of  economic  and  inflation 
prospects is the Eurosystem Staff Economic Projections. Macroeconomic models are used as inputs 
in the preparation of these projections. Economic projections are prepared by the Eurosytem staff on a 
quarterly  basis  and  are  based  on  a  set  of  underlying  macroeconomic  assumptions.  The  Staff 
Economic Projections are one of many indicators employed by the Governing Council in reaching a 
decision on the stance of monetary policy. 
The second pillar of the ECB’s analytical framework is its monetary analysis, which complements and 
acts as a cross-check on the economic analysis. The growth rate of broad money (i.e., M3) provides a 
starting  point  for  the assessment  of  monetary developments.  However, given  that  the  nature of  the 
relationship between money growth and inflation is a long-run one, the ECB sees no mechanical link 
between  short-run  changes  in  the  growth  rate  of  the  broad  money  stock  and  the  monetary  policy 
stance adopted by the Governing Council. There are many factors that may influence changes in the 
money stock in the short term. These may include, for example, portfolio shifts, financial innovations or 
changes in the yield curve.  
2 
 BIS Review 63/2007
The  monetary  analysis  consists  of  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  liquidity  situation  based  on 
information about broad money growth along with its components and counterparts, especially credit 
aggregates. This is helpful for extracting the signal being sent by monetary developments, which is 
relevant for identifying the longer-run trend in inflation.  
Communication 
4.  
Transparency is a cornerstone of modern central banking. It serves two main purposes. First, it makes 
central banks accountable to the public and this is particularly important in an era of increased central 
bank independence. The second is related to the notion that monetary policy influences expectations 
and  financial  markets  more  effectively  if  the  public  has  a  better  understanding  of  monetary  policy 
objectives, procedures and decisions. 
However, there are differences across central banks with regards to additional information provided on 
the  day  of  a  policy  rate  decision.  The  ECB  is  unusual  among  central  banks  of  the  advanced 
economies in holding a press conference on the day of a policy rate decision. The press conference 
consists of two components: 
1. 
an  introductory  statement  that  explains  in  depth  the  rationale  behind  the  monetary  policy 
decision taken; and  
a  Questions  and  Answers  session  during  which  the  President  and  the  Vice-President  are 
available to answer questions from the attending journalists.  
2. 
This  enhances  communications  by  allowing  media  representatives  the  opportunity  to  digest  in  real 
time  the  information  provided  through  the  decision  and  the  Introductory  Statement  of  the  ECB,  to 
compare  it  with  their  own  prior  information,  and  to  ask  questions  on  those  issues  that  need 
clarification. 
Communication of the monetary policy stance and outlook for the economy is further supplemented by 
a more in-depth analysis of economic, financial and monetary conditions in the Monthly Bulletin of the 
ECB. Furthermore, members of the Governing Council regularly give interviews and speeches on the 
monetary policy strategy, stance and economic conditions.  
With the ECB operating across 13 different cultures and a large number of different languages, the 
issue  of  communication  brings  many  additional  challenges  than  those  that  confront  other  central 
banks.  
Monetary policy actions of the ECB: a short history 
5.  
Let me say something about the monetary policy actions since the start of EMU. I think it is useful to 
distinguish four distinct phases.  
The first phase, which was the early stages of EMU, was characterised by a combination of factors 
that had already been affecting the countries joining the euro area in 1998, namely downward risks to 
price stability. This led the Governing Council to reduce its monetary policy rate from 3 per cent to 2.5 
per cent in April 1999.  
The  second  phase  was  the  period  between  late-1999  and  late-2000  which  was  characterised  by 
strong inflationary pressures, largely through high oil prices and relatively rapid monetary growth. The 
Governing  Council  undertook  a  series  of  monetary  tightening  measures  during  this  period,  raising 
interest rates by a total of 225 basis points.  
The third phase was the period May 2001 to June 2003 when the euro area found itself in a period of 
subdued economic growth following a number of global shocks. With inflationary pressures abating, 
the Governing Council reduced interest rates by a total of 275 basis points between May 2001 and 
June 2003. This was followed by a lengthy period of slow economic recovery and market uncertainty. 
Expectations  for  economic  growth  remained  moderate  with  the  Governing  Council  leaving  interest 
rates unchanged at 2 per cent until December 2005.  
The fourth phase was the period since then which has seen uncertainty in global markets dissipate 
and the outlook for economic activity improve. The Governing Council has raised interest rates by 25 
basis points on eight occasions between December 2005 and June of this year.  
BIS Review 63/2007 
 3
Remarks on current monetary policy stance 
Let me now turn to the current monetary policy stance. Our assessment throughout the last year and 
one-half  was  that  the  outlook  for  economic  growth  had  improved  and  that  the  recovery  would 
strengthen  and  broaden.  This  indeed  has  been  what  has  happened.  Another  of  our  consistently 
repeated messages has been the need to guard against inflation risks coming from various sources, 
such as high and rising oil prices, increased pass-through to consumer prices, the risk of stronger than 
expected wage developments and, in the medium- to longer-term, strong money and credit growth. 
Our actions, in raising rates eight times, including the most recent increase, have been consistent with 
these messages. 
With  respect  to  the  outlook  for  interest  rates,  I  would  emphasise  that  our  future  decisions  are  not 
predetermined and there is no pre-commitment to any future policy action. Our position is clear and 
has been consistent over time. As we indicated last week, we will monitor developments closely and 
act, as necessary, to ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. 
The euro area economy has gone from strength to strength over the past 18 months. The economy 
expanded at its fastest pace for six years in 2006, and the medium-term outlook for growth remains 
favourable.  The  information  we  have  for  the  first  quarter  of  2007  suggests  that  growth  remained 
healthy.  Looking  ahead,  the  conditions are  still  in  place  for  the  euro  area  economy  to  grow  solidly. 
External demand, while moderating, should still provide some support, while domestic demand seems 
set to maintain good momentum. Our assessment is that the risks to the outlook for growth are broadly 
balanced in the short term. However, over the longer term, there are some downside risks from oil 
price movements and global imbalances. 
While inflation remains below 2 per cent, the rise in oil prices in recent months has meant that the dip 
in inflation that was expected in the first half of 2007 has not occurred. Over the remainder of the year, 
base  effects  are  expected  to  push  up  the  headline  rate  of  inflation  from  September  onwards.  With 
regard to the medium- to longer-term outlook, upside risks remain. These risks are well known and 
relate to oil prices, the potential for increased pass-through and wage growth in a stronger economic 
environment  and,  in  the  case  of  the  longer-run  outlook,  vigorous  money  and  credit  growth.  The 
Governing Council has signalled that close monitoring of all these developments is essential to ensure 
that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. 
Benefits of EMU 
6.  
The  successful  implementation  of  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  has  been  of 
undeniable benefit to the euro area economy, both directly by maintaining price stability and indirectly 
from the lower volatility in real economy variables that price stability facilitates. The introduction of the 
common  currency  has  also  promoted  increased  financial  and  economic  integration  between  the 
Member States of the euro area, thus increasing economic efficiency and providing fresh impetus for 
the deepening of the European Single Market. 
The performance of the ECB in regard to its price stability mandate has been successful. In particular, 
long run inflation expectations have been within the ECB’s definition of price stability. This underlines 
the  credibility  that  the  ECB  has  achieved  since  taking  control  of  monetary  policy.  The  volatility  of 
inflation  has  also  fallen.  It  nearly  halved  during  the  convergence  period  before  the  inception  of  the 
euro  and  has  continued  to  fall  since  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  despite  the  major  economic  shocks 
hitting  the  euro  area  economy  during  this  period.  There  has  also  been  a  large  fall  in  the  average 
volatility of long-term consensus inflation expectations. 
Monetary  integration  in  the  euro  area  has  also  been  accompanied  by,  and  given  rise  to,  increased 
financial and economic integration. For example, the integration of money markets is complete and 
average overnight lending rates have fallen dramatically since the start of the convergence process. 
This  high  level  of  integration  is  also  visible  in  related  markets,  such  as  the  interest  rate  derivatives 
markets. The euro government bond market has also achieved a high level of integration with a large 
degree  of  convergence  in  yield  spreads.  Government  bond  yields  in  the  Member  States  are  now 
largely driven by euro-wide factors with marginal differences related to perceived credit risk. In addition 
to integration in these two markets, there is also significant evidence that euro area corporations are 
taking  advantage  of  the  possibility  of  raising  funds  from  the  full  range  of  euro  area  investors,  as 
evidenced by the growth in the euro corporate bond market. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2007
Ireland and EMU 
7.  
As regards Ireland’s participation in EMU, there is a widespread view that this has been beneficial to 
the  country.  The  European  Commission’s  Eurobarometer  survey  shows  that  in  Ireland  over  70  per 
cent of respondents were of the opinion that the euro was beneficial. This view is buttressed by the 
fact  that  a  strong  performance  of  the  economy  has  been  associated  with  Ireland’s  membership  of 
EMU. 
Becoming a member of a monetary union was not a new experience for Ireland as we were already 
well  versed  in  the  functioning  of  monetary  unions.  Under  the  monetary  arrangements  with  the  UK, 
which lasted from 1922 to the end of 1978, the Irish pound remained tied to sterling on a one-to-one 
no-margins basis. Sterling was exchanged at parity in all banks with no charge and sterling circulated 
freely within Ireland.  
When Ireland joined the European Monetary System when it was established in 1979, adherence to 
the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  of  the  EMS  provided  more  flexibility,  particularly  under  the  wider 
bands, but nevertheless monetary policy remained relatively constrained. Moreover, fluctuations in the 
bilateral  rate  of  the  Irish  pound  with  sterling  frequently  created  uncertainty  and  consequently 
introduced short-term fluctuations in interest rates. Thus to a large extent joining EMU for Ireland was 
not as sharp a change in the monetary regime as is sometimes assumed.  
Membership of EMU conferred immediate credibility on Ireland’s macro-economic policy framework. 
There is little doubt that the cost of attaining such credibility would have been higher if Ireland had 
remained  outside  the  euro  area.  Notwithstanding  asymmetric  shocks  which  could  raise  adjustment 
issues, it is probably true to say that the ECB provided a better policy response than that which would 
have prevailed under independent but uncoordinated monetary policies of individual countries.  
The crucial issue for Ireland, as a regional economy in EMU, remains the manner in which it copes 
with the challenges of asymmetric shocks. In the last decade Ireland has had to face up to some such 
challenges. Notwithstanding these, the macroeconomic performance of the Irish economy in EMU has 
been  very  good.  Since  the  adoption  of  the  single  currency,  the  average  annual  growth  rate  of  real 
gross domestic product in Ireland has been the highest in the euro area. The annual growth rate over 
the period 1997 to 2006 was 7.2 per cent, some 5 percentage points per annum above the euro area 
average. This strong performance is in large part a result of high rates of growth of the capital stock 
(related  in  part  to  a  reduction  in  risk  premia), increases  in  the  working  age  to  population  ratio,  and 
improvements in labour and total factor productivity.  
The challenges for Ireland in EMU remain the maintenance of a high level of living standards, ensuring 
the continuing competitiveness of the economy and adjusting to shocks originating outside the euro 
area.  Ireland’s  economy  and  living  standards  have  converged  on  those  of  the  most  advanced 
countries.  However,  there  is  a  widespread  consensus  that  lower  productivity  growth  than  that 
experienced in the last decade or so will lead to a slower growth in output over the medium term. This 
poses issues for containing domestic inflationary pressures. The social partners have a role in this by 
ensuring  that  pay  increases  take  due  account  of  productivity  developments.  Policies  that  promote 
competition, continue the development of the country’s infrastructure, and that provide a framework 
that fosters research and development, innovation and entrepreneurship are all important for limiting 
inflationary pressures. Fiscal policy also has an important role to play in containing domestic demand. 
On  the  question  of  shocks  originating  from  outside  the  euro  area,  the  resilience  of  the  economy 
depends on the capacity of both the product and labour markets to be flexible. 
Conclusion 
8.  
Before I finish, I would like to reiterate several elements that I believe to be of particular importance. 
Firstly,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  broadly-based,  multi-dimensional  approach  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy strategy, encompassing a monetary analysis that is used to crosscheck the evidence 
from the economic analysis, and the ECB’s commitment to a quantitative definition of price stability. 
The  communication strategy  of  the  ECB  is  also  a noteworthy  aspect  of  the  overall  monetary  policy 
framework.  The  ECB  has  been  innovative  in  communicating  its  monetary  policy  decisions  to  the 
financial markets and public in general, it being the first major central bank to outline policy decisions 
in real time through the monthly press conference that follows Governing Council meetings. 
As  I  have  indicated,  the  ECB  has  been  successful  in  delivering  low  inflation  and  keeping  inflation 
expectations  in  line  with  the  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability.  It  has  also  been  successful  in 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 5
lowering the volatility of inflation and inflation expectations, which has helped reduce volatility in other 
economic variables. The onset of monetary union has also provided momentum for further economic 
and financial integration in the euro area, thus deepening the single market.  
With regard to the Irish economy, the euro has, to date, reduced risk premia and brought lower interest 
rates. These factors have contributed to Ireland’s strong economic growth over the last decade but, on 
the downside, have also been associated with rapid credit growth and rising house prices. The key 
challenges  for  Ireland  in  the  years  ahead  are  to  maintain  its  competitiveness  so  as  to  protect  and 
sustain living standards and to deal with the effects of any asymmetric shocks hitting the euro area. In 
that regard, it will be necessary to continue to have flexible labour and product markets and to use 
domestic policy tools, insofar as is possible, to meet those challenges. 
I would like to thank you all for your kind attention today and I will conclude by passing you back to 
Kathleen Hays. 
6 
 BIS Review 63/2007
