Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Enhancing financial integration in the new Nusantara 
Luncheon  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
Malaysia-Indonesia Investment & Finance Summit, Jakarta, 18 June 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen:  
There has been a long history that transcends several centuries in which international trade flourished 
in the Malay archipelago . The South East Asia region contained the important maritime routes for the 
trade  between  the  East  and  West.  This  had  brought  with  it,  robust  economic  growth  and  regional 
prosperity.  
Today, the South East Asian region – the Nusantara region continues to be one of the world's most 
dynamic regions. Since the turn of this century, our economies have re-emerged to be amongst the 
fastest  growing  in  the  global  economy,  amidst  new  challenges  and  fundamental  economic  and 
financial  developments.  Our  steadfast  reform  and  restructuring  efforts  have  rewarded  us  with 
strengthened  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  sound  and  stable  financial  systems.  These  efforts 
continue to be augmented by the strong the foundations that the region possesses, namely abundant 
natural and human resources, high savings rates and the ingrained aptitude to persevere and rise to 
the challenge.  
The ASEAN 5 group of economies that includes Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and 
Singapore have now for an extended period of time been on a steady growth path.  
A more recent phenomenon in this decade, has been the increased economic and financial linkages 
within  the  region  spurring  further  regional  economic  and  regional  financial  integration.  The 
geographical  proximity  and  cultural  similarities  have  been  reinforced  by  the  diverse  strengths  that 
exists in the region. These factors have been important in enhancing the integration process.  
As  this  greater  regional  economic  and  financial  integration  is  advanced,  it  will  serve  as  a  powerful 
catalyst for the future expansion of intra-regional trade and investment, creating a self-sustaining and 
mutually reinforcing economic growth in the New Nusantara region.  
Ladies and gentlemen:  
It is my pleasure today to speak on the potential role of an integrated economic and financial platform 
within the Nusantara region, a region of rapid economic growth in which almost 300 million Muslims 
resides.  My  remarks  will  focus  on  the  potential  generated  by  a  collaborative  platform  and  the 
significance of building linkages between the Nusantara region with other parts of the world.  
The region's current economic progress, prosperity and financial stability has now accorded us a new 
strategic  window  of  opportunity  to  develop  new  value  propositions  to  unleash  the  full  potential 
accorded  by  the  accelerating  economic  and  financial  integration  process.  There  are  already 
encouraging formal and informal inter linkages between our respective financial markets as well as a 
higher  level  of  engagement  between  the  respective  corporate  communities,  the  market  participants 
and the authorities.  
A  collaborative  platform  that  is  based  on  the  diverse  comparative  advantages  of  the  Nusantara 
economies  can  benefit  from  the  complementarities  between  our  respective  economies.  Essentially, 
these opportunities will increase the potential to expand markets, increase products lines and deepen 
the research and development capabilities. In this regard, the emergence of Islamic finance into the 
mainstream  of  the  financial  system  is  an  opportunity  for  the  Nusantara  financial  intermediaries,  in 
particular, for Malaysia and Indonesia and other neighbouring countries, to open new frontiers and in 
so doing strengthen further the economic and financial linkages.  
The  building  of  a  Nusantara  financial  platform  would  not  only  facilitate  and  mobilise  the  pool  of 
investable funds from the respective economies but also allow for the more efficient allocation of the 
funds  into  the  productive  investments  in  other  parts  of  the  region.  This  would  not  only  contribute 
towards lowering the cost of funds but it would also allow for greater diversifications of risks.  
More recently there has been growing interest in cross border participation in investment activities in 
our  respective  economies.  Malaysia's  capital  inflows  into  Indonesia  has  increased  by  three-fold 
totalling USD2.2 billion in 2006 compared to the previous year. It is estimated that Indonesia requires 
BIS Review 73/2007 
 1
approximately an annual investment of USD22 billion for the next several years for the development of 
its infrastructure, with a large part of the funding to be provided by the private sector. In the same way, 
the Ninth Malaysia Plan for the period of 2006 to 2010 has a financing requirement of RM107.6 billion. 
The development of our regional financial intermediaries and markets will facilitate the mobilisation of 
resources towards financing these potential activities and thus contribute to sustaining development in 
the Nusantara economies.  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
The  profound  changes  in  the  global  economic  and  financial  environment,  has  created  a  greater 
urgency for the Southeast Asian markets to achieve a greater degree of financial integration. This is so 
as to provide the scale and increased efficiency of the financial intermediation process. As the ASEAN 
economies move towards the formation of an economic-bloc by 2015, the pace of financial integration 
will  need  to  accelerate,  to  better  facilitate  achieving  this  goal.  The  wide  spread  distribution  of 
innovative  hybrid  financial  products  and  regional  cross  selling  activities  will  however  increase  the 
multi-dimensional  dynamics  of  the  markets  and  the  risks  across  national  borders.  There  will  be 
increased  complexity  in  identifying  the  risks  which  will  in  turn  complicate  the  process  of  risk 
management.  The  increasingly  integrated  and  liberalised  markets  will  also  expose  our  porous 
economies  to  greater  external  influences  and  to  contagion  risks.  A  higher  level  of  vigilance  is  thus 
required to allow for pre-emptive policy measures in a timely manner. This will require adequate levels 
of cooperation among the regional regulators in addressing potentially contagion systemic risks and 
ensuring regional financial stability.  
The deepening of co-operation between the Nusantara's monetary and regulatory authorities is thus a 
key  factor  in  the  development  of  a  robust  integrated  platform.  Enhanced  cooperation  will  promote 
greater resilience and reduce regional vulnerability to external developments. There are now various 
regional  mechanisms  in  place  to  undertake  regional  surveillance,  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of 
information, to enter into greater engagement on issues affecting the region and in developing regional 
financial markets. In addition, frameworks for enhanced regional risk management, crisis management 
and resolution are also being put in place.  
With greater financial integration, the region will be able to leverage on the advantages of economies 
of  scale,  innovation  and  more  importantly  place  greater  reliance  on  the  cumulative  strengths  that 
resides  within  the  region  including  our  financial  resources,  skills  and  knowledge.  It  will  also  better 
position the region to collectively address emerging issues and challenges faced by the region taking 
into consideration the region's socio-economic context.  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
While  Islamic  finance  is  gaining global  interest  and  acceptance,  the  world's most  populated  Muslim 
region in the world, the New Nusantara offers opportunities for the accelerated expansion of Islamic 
finance.  The  intrinsic  nature  of  Islamic  financial  structures  encourages  stability.  Islamic  principles 
require  that  the  financial  transaction  be  supported  by  genuine  economic  transactions.  To  further 
reinforce this, the governing Shariah principles also serve as a built-in self-regulatory mechanism that 
insulate Islamic instrument issuers from unproductive, speculative and unethical elements and thereby 
contributes to the stability of the financial system.  
Historically,  capital  financing  and  investment  flows  into  the  Nusantara  region  have  generally  been 
sourced  from  the  developed  financial  markets.  While  we  may  see  continued  growth  in  short  term 
capital  inflows  from  these  traditional  sources,  the  more  competitive  global  environment  provides  no 
assurance of the sustainability of such longer term investment flows. Meanwhile, our own South East 
Asian  region  and  that  of  North  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  countries  continue  to  have  high  surplus 
savings seeking opportunities for investment and new asset-classes for greater risk diversification and 
improved returns on their investments.  
Hundreds  of  years  ago,  the  ports  of  Nusantara  were  destinations  for  the  spice  trade  to  Europe  via 
India  and  the  Middle  East  .  In  this  context,  Islamic  finance  can  serve  as  a  bridge  that  links  the 
Nusantara region to the capital surplus economies. Already, our financial institutions are venturing to 
have a presence in the Middle East and we welcome their presence in our financial system. This has 
now in fact resulted in the cross-pollination of talents and resources, giving rise to innovative products 
and services, creating depth and breadth to the respective financial markets.  
Just  as  the  Straits  of  Malacca  served  as  an  important  maritime  conduit  for  the  Nusantara  region, 
Malaysia and Indonesia has the potential to serve as an important intermediary for mobilising capital to 
meet the requirements of the Nusantara region, and to be a distribution centre for shariah compliant 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2007
securities and to extend the regional Islamic capital markets to other parts of the world. Of importance 
will  be  our  joint  efforts  to  promote  the  standardisation  of  the  Islamic  regulatory  and  compliance 
matters.  In  relation  to  this,  Malaysia  and  Indonesia  is  already  working  jointly  to  promote  research 
capabilities and the pool of talent and technical expertise in Islamic finance.  
A critical success factor for the cross-border promotion of Islamic finance is the harmonisation of the 
governing shariah frameworks between our jurisdictions. In this regard, Indonesia's extensive history 
of  scholarly  achievement  in  the  subject  matter  relevant  to  the  principles  of  Islamic  finance  can  be 
leveraged  upon  for  the  benefit  of  the  region.  We  are  most  hopeful  for  substantive  convergence  of 
interpretation  and  application  of  the  shariah  laws  and  guidelines  for  the  region.  The  greater 
collaborative engagement between our respective scholars would indeed facilitate the process.  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
The large gathering of senior representatives of the public and private sectors here today hints to the 
significant interest to capitalise on potential of the Nusantara economies. The efforts of the private and 
public sectors in building a collaborative platform as a resilient base for a network of linkages to the 
wider world, with God's grace, insyallah, will contribute to advancing the Nusantara Agenda that would 
unleash the potential of the region for a greater shared prosperity. Thank you.  
BIS Review 73/2007 
 3
