Hamad Al-Sayari: Financing a changing world  
Speech  by  His  Excellency  Hamad  Al-Sayari,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian  Monetary 
Agency,  at  the  Euromoney  Saudi  Arabia  Conference  2007:  Financing  a  Changing  World, 
Riyadh, 8-9 May 2007. 
 I am pleased to be here today at this international gathering of experts who share a common 
interest  in  the  economic  development  of  Saudi  Arabia.  The  theme  of  this  Conference  is 
"Financing a Changing World" and I intend to share with you my views on the role that the 
Saudi Banks and the Capital Market are playing in this regard. This gives me an opportunity 
to recap the important contribution of our banks and our growing capital market in channeling 
the  financial  flows  to  and  from  the  Kingdom.  I  will  also  outline  the  future  direction  and 
challenges in this regard. 
In  recent  years,  international  fund  flows  have  been  affected  by  different  phenomenon, 
including  rising  imbalances  in  trade  balances  originating  from  the  export  dominated 
economies  in  Asia,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  in  developed  economies  in  Europe  and 
North  America,  and  the  volatile  energy  and  commodity  prices  affecting  all  countries. 
Addressing the impact of these global phenomenon are causing significant challenges to the 
economies of all countries. For the Gulf region including Saudi Arabia, a major challenge is 
to  ensure that  the  increased  financial  flows  into  the  region are  channeled  efficiently  to  the 
most productive sectors of the economy and to profitable enterprises and projects. Unlike the 
earlier decades, when Gulf countries were obliged to recycle their additional revenues into 
the global economy due to limited absorptive capacity in the region; currently, existing and 
projected needs of this region indicate that a significant percentage of the additional flows 
can  be  invested  and  put  to  many  productive  uses  in  the  local  economies.  Also,  the  Gulf 
countries wish to continue to be attractive to international financial flows in form of foreign 
direct investments to encourage partnerships and for transfer of knowledge and technology. 
This is essential for deepening and broadening the economies and opening of new industrial 
and  infrastructure  sectors.  I  will  be  touching  upon  these  challenges  in  some  detail  in  my 
speech.  
Dear Audience, 
As we well know, a well-developed and efficiently functioning financial system is an essential 
prerequisite  for  sustained  economic  growth.  By  intermediating  between  savers  and 
borrowers,  it  promotes  saving  and  investments  and  also  induces  an  efficient  allocation  of 
investable funds. The global integration of financial markets over the past two decades has 
opened up new vistas for resource mobilization and more efficient deployment of investable 
funds worldwide. At the same time, however, market integration exposes domestic financial 
systems to new risks and vulnerabilities. Shocks that occur in one market are now easily and 
quickly transmitted to other markets turning into a contagion that can affect an entire region. 
It is, therefore, imperative that a domestic financial system is strong enough to cope with the 
increased  risk  associated  with  globalization  in  general  and  integration  of  the  financial 
markets in particular. 
Against  this  backdrop,  we  are  well  positioned  in  Saudi  Arabia  to  have  a  strong  financial 
system  that  is  serving  the  economy  well.  The  system  that  has  evolved  over  the  years  is 
broad-based and has a variety of institutions providing a wide range of financial services to 
savers  and  investors.  It  is  efficient,  technologically  advanced,  well-supervised  and  working 
on sound principles. It has demonstrated its strength and resilience during the Gulf conflicts 
BIS Review 85/2007 
 1
in the 1990 and in 2003, and various financial crises in the past decades. On all occasions, 
its stability has remained uncompromised 
The Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA) is at the apex of the Saudi financial system. It 
has almost completed fifty years of its existence. Over these years, it has played a crucially 
important  role  in  the  consolidation  and  development  of  the  Saudi  economy,  by  evolving  a 
monetary  system  for  the  country  based  exclusively  on  national  currency,  striving  for  the 
promotion and maintenance of domestic price and exchange rate stability, and promoting the 
growth and ensuring the soundness of the financial system. It has also been managing the 
Kingdom's foreign exchange reserves, besides acting as a banker to the government.  
Before I describe the important contribution of commercial banks and deal with other sectors 
of the Saudi financial system to managing the domestic and international fund flows, let me 
mention some important achievement of SAMA. SAMA is ordained by its Charter to promote 
and  maintain  domestic  price  and  exchange  rate  stability.  It  is  gratifying  that  SAMA  has 
achieved its objectives of its monetary policy. The average inflation rate has remained at less 
than  1  percent  over  the  last  20  years,  and  these  stable  conditions  have  contributed  to 
sustained economic growth of 3% over the period. The exchange rate of the Riyal has also 
been  maintained  over  the  period  of  Rls.  3.75  per  US  Dollar,  while  the  rates  of  exchange 
against  other  major  currencies  have  moved  within  manageable  limits.  These  positive 
indicators  together  with  the  uninterrupted  full  convertibility  of  the  Riyal  since  1961  and  no 
restrictions  on  payments  from  and  to  the  Kingdom,  have  created  a  stable  business 
environment for the private sector as also for the inflow of capital for domestic investment. 
Since  its  establishment  in  1952,  a  major  responsibility  of  SAMA  has  been  to  maintain 
financial  stability  and  promote  growth  of  the  national  banking  industry.  As  far  as  SAMA's 
objective  of  maintaining  a  stable  financial  system,  its  achievements  have  been  equally 
remarkable.  SAMA  has  followed  prudent  policies  aimed  at  creating  a  sound,  stable,  and 
efficient financial system. Such a system has been characterized by freedom of capital flows, 
open  investment  climate,  availability  of  ample  liquidity,  competitive  environment  and  a 
modern payment system. 
Over  this  long  period,  sound  laws  and  regulations  and  timely  supervisory  actions  have 
ensured that Saudi Banks have stayed strong with adequate capital, efficient management, 
fit  and  proper  directors  and  managers  and  sound  internal  control  systems.  This  is  a 
remarkable  achievement  in  the  face  of  global  and  regional  uncertainties,  political  and 
economic crises, wars and conflicts and the volatilities of the oil and currency markets. 
SAMA's focus on achieving and maintaining financial stability is premised on the belief that it 
is  a  fundamental  precondition  for  sustained  and  dynamic  economic  growth  in  which  all 
market participants are able to make optimum contribution to the economy. Financial stability 
not  only  promotes  efficient  domestic  investment  activity  but  also  creates  a  positive 
environment to attract foreign capital and foreign investors. 
Dear Audience, 
Over  the  past  decade,  the  Saudi  Arabia's  financial  system  has  been  changing  at  an 
escalating pace. The banking sector, being one of the pillars of the financial system, has 20 
licensed  banks  including  16  that  are  operational  and  4  that  are  planning  to  become 
operational  over  the  next  year.  The  newly  licensed  banks  include  6  regional  and  3  major 
international  banks.  As  for  the  Insurance  Industry,  SAMA  has  recently  been  involved  in 
licensing  of  14  Insurance  companies  that  are  now  in  the  process  of  becoming  operational 
within this year. SAMA also continues to regulate a number of money-changer organizations 
as well as a few lease finance and consumer finance companies.  
The  financial  sector  also  includes  several  autonomous  government  financing  agencies  as 
well  as  the  state-owned  pension  fund  and  the  General  Organization  for  Social  Insurance. 
These institutions participate in the financial sector in pursuit of their specific objectives, and 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2007
also play an important role as institutional players and investors in deepening the financial 
market. 
Saudi Banks have made tremendous progress in terms of products, services, technological 
sophistication  and  capitalization.  SAMA  has  all  along  been  keen  that  banks  conduct  their 
business on sound principles. The Banking Control Law, enacted in 1966, has vested SAMA 
with broad supervisory powers. It requires SAMA to conduct on-site and off-site supervision 
and  has  stringent  provisions  for  capital  adequacy,  liquidity  and  reserve  requirements,  loan 
concentration, etc. The law also provides for banks to submit regular financial and statistical 
statements to SAMA and for SAMA to carry out on-site and off-site banking supervision.  
SAMA has also set up, in cooperation with the commercial banks, a number of advanced and 
sophisticated  payments  and  settlement  systems,  including  Automated  Clearing  Houses, 
Saudi Payments Network (SPAN) which supports the ATMs and POS terminals, Electronic 
Share  Information  System.  These  systems  have  been  interlinked  with  each  other  by  the 
Saudi Arabian Riyal Interbank Express System (SARIE), an electronic fund transfer system, 
instituted in May 1997. These technological developments  have contributed significantly to 
improving the level of quality of consumer services, reducing costs, enhancing efficiencies, 
and  strengthening  controls.  They  have  created  a  strong  and  sophisticated  technological 
platform  for  a  quantum  leap  in  electronic  banking  and  financial  services  in  the  new 
millennium. 
Together with SAMA, commercial banks still constitute the backbone of the Saudi financial 
system. Along with the growth of the economy, the volume of business of Saudi banks has 
grown  at  a  phenomenal  rate  during  1997-2006,  with  their  assets  growing  by  about  125.5 
percent, deposits by 313.5 percent and capital and reserves by 83.7 percent. Their average 
risk-weighted  capital  to  asset  ratio,  during  this  period,  has  generally  exceeded  20  percent 
which  is  considerably  higher  than  the  minimum  of  8  percent  recommended  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision. 
In  recent  year,  Saudi  banks  have  become  increasingly  involved  in  the  domestic  economy. 
During 1997-2006, they liquidated a part of their net foreign assets to meet higher domestic 
credit demand, thereby raising the share of domestic credit from 39.1 percent of total assets 
to 57.73 percent, or from 24.1 percent to 38.6 percent of GDP at current prices. Nearly 95.8 
percent of domestic credit represented banks' claims on the domestic private sector which 
went up by 233.1 percent over this period. During this period, there was a sharp increase in 
the consumer loans which grew from a miniscule 6 percent in 1997 to 36.4 percent of total 
bank  credit  by  2006  reflecting  the  needs  of  a  youthful  population  and  changing  risk 
environment.  Saudi  banks  have  also  been  investing  in  government  securities,  thereby 
contributing to the development effort of the government. However, these investments as a 
percentage of total assets have declined from 21.8 percent in 1997 to 14.3 percent in 2006 
due to the government's recent policy of retiring some of its debt. 
With the establishment of the CMA, there has been a considerable increase in the depth and 
breadth of the Saudi Capital Market. The trading activities of all participants relating to the 
Saudi Stock Exchange over the past few year have increased manifolds and, the licensing by 
CMA  of  about  40  non-bank  investment,  asset  management,  brokerage  and  advisory 
institutions, has considerably broadened the financial sector. While many of these companies 
are  still  at  an  early  stage  of  evolution,  they  are  already  having  an  impact  on  the  financial 
market  due  to  heightened  competition.  These  institutions  are  contributing  significantly  in 
terms  of  product  innovation,  introduction  of  new  technologies  and  utilization  of  expert 
resources. 
The contribution of the capital market to the growth of the Saudi economy has been no less 
significant.  Over  the  last  ten  years,  mobilization  of  funds  for  investment  through  the  stock 
market has grown at a phenomenal pace. The number of shares traded has increased by 
over 175 times, value traded by more than 85 times and market capitalization by 5.5 times 
from Rls. 160 billion in 1997 to Rls. 1,226 billion in 2006. At the same time, the mutual funds 
BIS Review 85/2007 
 3
industry has grown significantly with assets under its management increasing by over 4 times 
from Rls. 21.4 billion to Rls. 84.2 billion during 1997 to 2006.  
While  encouraging  domestic  and  regional  savings  and  investment,  Saudi  Arabia  also 
recognizes that foreign capital has an important role to play in accelerating economic growth. 
Measures to gradually open up the equity market to foreigners are also underway. In 1997, 
foreigners  were  allowed  to  participate  in  Saudi  equity  market  through  a  country  fund,  the 
Saudi  Arabian  Investment  Fund  (SAIF),  instituted  in  London.  Since  November  1999, 
foreigners have also been allowed to participate in Saudi equity market through open-ended 
mutual funds offered by Saudi banks. GCC citizens are permitted to directly participate in the 
Saudi  equity  market.  In  2006,  expatriates  residing  in  the  Kingdom  have  been  permitted  to 
invest  directly  in  the  stock  market.  There  are  no  restrictions  on  foreigners'  investment  in 
government securities. 
The role and participation of regional and international banks in the Saudi financial market 
has  evolved  over  time.  Many  international  banks  had  presence  in  Saudi  Arabia  since  the 
1950s  and  their  contribution  in  developing  the  banking  system  has  been  significant.  Many 
other regional and international banks have also been active both as borrowers and lenders 
to  Saudi  counterparties.  In  the  70's  and  80's,  their  main  role  was  to  act  as  a  conduit  for 
transferring the surplus funds and liquidity in Saudi Arabia to international financial markets. 
However, with the expansion of economic activity and increasing demand for credit, many 
regional  and  international  banks  have  participated  in  direct  and  syndicated  loans  to  Saudi 
private and government sector and invested in government securities. 
Looking ahead, the government has identified the expansion of Saudi economy as a major 
objective to meet the expectations of a rapidly growing labor force. Other priorities include 
the  diversification  of  economic  activity  and  maintenance  and  expansion  of  existing 
infrastructures. The government has recognized that private sector should be the engine for 
rapid growth. In this regard, the government has already privatized companies like the Saudi 
Telecommunications Company and the National Cooperative Insurance Company, and has 
announced  schemes  to  privatize  the  Saudi  Electricity  Corporation,  Saudi  Arabian  Airlines 
,Ma'aden  Company,  etc.  In  the  past  few  years,  the  government  has  also  taken  important 
initiatives  including  the  Investment  Law,  the  reduction  of  corporate  taxes  on  foreign 
investments  and  liberalization  of  tourism  and  real  estate.  The  government  also  sees 
significant growth opportunities for job creation in the retail trade, small enterprise, tourism 
and financial services. 
In  the  past  year,  the  government  has  announced  the  creation  of  size  economic  cities  in 
various parts of the Kingdom. These will provide significant opportunities to the private and 
public  sector  as  well  as  to  the  foreign  companies  to  invest  in  many  industrial  and 
infrastructure  mega  projects.  Besides,  the  investment  opportunities  in  the  petrochemical 
sector,  these  economic  cities  would  accommodate  industries  in  steal,  plastics,  glass  and 
ceramics.  Another  area  of  potential  investment  is  the  transportation  sector  where  the 
government  has  announced  several  projects  affecting  the  Railways  network,  air  transport 
and land routes. There are also projects in the pipeline in electric power generation, water 
desalination, natural gas as well as in knowledge based industries such as health, education 
and tourism. 
The  financing  needs  of  these  initiatives  are  immense  and  are  becoming  increasingly 
apparent. Privatization initiatives noted earlier will also require investment of tens of billion of 
riyals. In addition, the maintenance and expansion of infrastructure in the various sectors will 
require significant pools of capital. A rough estimate of the financing needs of the projects 
announced so far by the Government over the next 10 years exceeds USD 500 billion. 
However, the way that these financing needs are met by the Banks and capital markets in 
future  is  likely  to  be  different.  First,  these  projects  and  initiatives  will  require  longer  term 
financing  which  will  be  difficult  to  finance  through  traditional  bank  loans.  Second,  it  will 
require a mixture of equity and debt obligations. Third, the funding could be multi-currency 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2007
and attract multinational institutions and investors. Fourth, it could take form of various types 
of  capital  instruments,  not  yet  seen  in  the  Saudi  and  regional  capital  market  including 
corporate  bonds,  debentures,  mortgages,  subordinated  loans,  preferred  shares,  etc.  Also, 
there  will  be  an  opportunity  to  raise  funds  through  Islamic  finance  instruments  such  as 
Sukuks and Ijara. 
It is no doubt that the financing needs of Saudi Arabia will require a collaborative effort by 
Saudi authorities, Saudi banks, and the regional and international banks. It will also requiring 
tapping various investors through the domestic and regional capital markets. Each will have 
an  important  role  to  play  in  this  process.  Saudi  authorities  will  need  to  enhance  and 
strengthen  the  already  strong  legal  and  regulatory  framework  while  banks  and  capital 
markets will need to bring together the required technology and skills for new products and 
services. 
Looking ahead, we expect that the Saudi financial system will grow further and gain added 
strength and sophistication in coming years. We also expect that the institutional framework 
will expand, the quality of services provided by the financial institutions is bound to improve 
significantly.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 85/2007 
 5
