Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory statement by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the  hearing  before  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs  of  the  Storting 
(Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 10 May 2007. 
Please  note  that  the  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  statement  is  based  on  Norges  Bank’s 
Annual Report for 2006, Monetary Policy Report 1/2007 and the Executive Board’s assessments in the period to the monetary 
policy meeting on 25 April. 
 I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee and thank you for this opportunity to report and 
answer  questions  on  monetary  policy  in  connection  with  the  Storting’s  deliberations  on  the 
Government’s Credit Report. The account is based on the Bank’s Annual Report, but is also updated 
based on the Executive Board’s assessments in the period to the previous monetary policy meeting. 
We also consider the report from Norges Bank Watch. 
In  recent  years,  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  influenced  by  a  number  of  positive  supply-side 
conditions, which have curbed inflation, increased the growth potential of the economy and boosted 
production. At the hearing in 2006, I indicated that inflation would pick up. Rising capacity utilisation 
and a tighter labour market were expected to lead to higher wage growth. There were prospects of a 
gradual increase in the key policy rate to a more normal level.  
 Through  2006  and  into  2007,  inflation  was  lower  than  expected,  but  output  and  employment  were 
higher than expected. Norges Bank has increased its key policy rate by 1½ percentage points in six 
increments  over  the  past  12  months.  By  way  of  introduction,  I  will  take  a  closer  look  at  the 
assessments underlying the interest rate decisions. 
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  operational  target  of 
monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  approximately  2½  per  cent  over  time.  The 
objective of low and stable inflation provides the economy with a nominal anchor. In a small, open and 
decentralised  market  economy  like  Norway,  and  with  our  particular  industry  structure,  cyclical 
fluctuations will occur in periods. When economic agents are confident that inflation will be low and 
stable  over  time,  the  interest  rate  can  also  be  set  with  a  view  to  dampening  fluctuations  to  some 
extent.  
BIS Review 47/2007 
 1
In Norway, inflation fell sharply as from the latter half of the 1980s. As a 10-year average, inflation is 
now 2.1 per cent, which is somewhat lower than, but fairly close the target of 2.5 per cent. Annual 
variability in inflation is considerably lower than in the 1970s and 1980s.  
  Consumer prices vary from one month to the next, partly reflecting wide variations in electricity prices. 
In general, the direct effects on consumer prices resulting from changes in interest rates, taxes, excise 
duties  and  extraordinary  temporary  disturbances  shall  not  be  taken  into  account  in  Norges  Bank’s 
conduct of monetary policy. We therefore look at different measures of underlying inflation. The chart 
shows  inflation  adjusted  for  tax  changes  and  excluding  energy  products,  CPI-ATE,  and  two  other 
measures.  This  does  not  provide  a  precise  measure,  but  an  interval  for  underlying  inflation  on  the 
basis of the different indicators. A weakness of the CPI-ATE as a measure is that the variable has not 
captured the higher rise in energy prices compared with the rise in prices for other goods and services 
in  recent  years. Over  the past  two and  half  years, underlying  inflation  has  been  fairly stable  and  is 
estimated at between 1 and 1½ per cent. The indicators of underlying inflation have recently been in 
the upper end of this interval.  
2 
 BIS Review 47/2007
 The fall in inflation in 2002 was attributable to an increase in imports from low-cost countries and a 
strong krone exchange rate. Prices for imported consumer goods fell sharply. In 2003, slower growth 
in  both  Norway  and  other  countries  also  pushed  down  the  rise  in  prices  for  domestically  produced 
goods  and  services.  In  addition,  competition  was  intense  in  many  industries.  In  2005,  inflation 
appeared  to  be  rising,  but  abated  again  in  2006,  primarily  reflecting  the  low  rise  in  prices  for 
domestically  produced  goods  and  services.  Prices  for  imported  consumer  goods  showed  a 
considerable smaller decline than in the three preceding years.  
Our inflation projections were revised downwards in the light of actual developments through 2006. 
Underlying inflation has recently picked up somewhat and is more closely in line with that expected 
one year ago.  
At the same time as inflation has been low, growth in the mainland economy has been strong, and 
stronger  than  expected.  The  Norwegian  economy  is  booming,  after  a  strong  upturn  since  summer 
2003. The upturn followed a period of slow growth from 1998 and a mild recession in 2002 and into 
2003.  
Growth  has  been  stronger  and  occurred  earlier  than  in  the  cyclical  upturn  in  the  mid-1990s.  When 
Norges  Bank  reduced  the  key  policy  rate  in  2003,  demand  and  output  rapidly  recovered.  Strong 
productivity growth supported the upturn, which was reflected in exports, petroleum investment and 
 BIS Review 47/2007 
 3
after a period in general government demand. So far in this cyclical upturn, the mainland economy has 
grown by an average of a little more than 4 per cent annually. The upturn is now in a mature phase.  
Even though production increased rapidly, it took a long time for employment to pick up. Employment 
growth was lower for a long period compared with the upturns in the 1980s and 1990s. Moreover, high 
growth in labour productivity partly reflected a marked fall in sickness absence in 2004. Employment 
growth  was  also  influenced  by  the  substantial  inflows  of  labour  from  central  Europe  following  EU 
enlargement  in  2004.  Employment  did  not  start  to  increase  until  the  end  of  2005,  and  has  since 
increased markedly.  
 Our projections for capacity utilisation have been adjusted upwards, reflecting stronger-than-expected 
growth in both output and employment. Capacity utilisation is now estimated to be about 2 per cent 
higher than a level that is sustainable over time.  
 4 
 BIS Review 47/2007
In this upturn, it has also taken a long time for inflation to pick up. In the upturn in the 1990s, the rise in 
prices for domestically produced goods and services picked up in pace with capacity utilisation and 
with a lag of about four quarters. Correspondingly, inflation fell after the downturn early in this decade. 
During the present upturn, inflation has remained low so far in spite of solid growth and rising capacity 
utilisation.  
Why has inflation remained that low in an environment of strong economic growth?  
 There are probably several reasons for this.1  
First,  Norway’s  terms  of  trade  have  improved.  Prices  for  oil  and  gas,  freight,  fish,  industrial 
commodities and engineering products have risen markedly. In addition, growth in foreign markets has 
provided  considerable  outlets  for  Norwegian  export  goods.  At  the  same  time,  Norwegian  importers 
have gained access to new markets in central Europe and Asia which provide substantially cheaper 
consumer goods. Norway’s terms of trade have improved by about 40 per cent since 2002. A similar 
situation has not been seen since World War I when earnings in the shipping industry and other export 
                                                       
1   See also the analysis in Norges Bank Watch 2007. 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 5
industries were exceptionally high for a period. Norway’s disposable income increased in real terms by 
30 per cent from 2003 to 2006.  
Second,  an  ample  supply  of  labour  has  boosted  output  growth.  In  particular,  the  supply  of  foreign 
labour  has  increased sharply  after  EU  enlargement  in  2004.  Over  the  past  two  years,  these  labour 
inflows have accounted for over 30 per cent of growth in the labour force in Norway. At the same time, 
this  has  enabled  Norwegian  companies  to  be  bolder  in  accepting  new  assignments  and  investing 
knowing that they can procure labour throughout Europe. In addition to increased labour inflows from 
Poland, Lithuania and other central European countries, we have long benefited from inflows of labour 
from  Sweden.  Many  workers  are  on  temporary  assignment  and  their  consumption  is  primarily 
concentrated in their home country. The Norwegian economy has seen a net capacity increase.  
 Third, the Norwegian business sector has been quick to integrate new technology. This applies both to 
companies  competing  on  international  markets  and  those  supplying  goods  and  services  to  the 
domestic market. In comparison with other countries, it is particularly productivity gains in banks and 
other service sectors that stand out. Examples are automated processes and swifter payments in the 
financial industry and improved inventory and management systems in commerce and transport. This 
results in lower production costs. 
 6 
 BIS Review 47/2007
The strong growth in labour productivity does not seem to reflect an increase in the real capital behind 
each person-hour worked, but rather a considerable improvement in labour and capital efficiency.2  
Intensified competition in product markets may have contributed to the subdued rise in prices. New 
operators have entered markets that were previously fairly sheltered from competition, for example in 
the grocery trade, building materials, telecommunications, banking and insurance.  
With  general  confidence  that  inflation  will  be  kept  in  check  and  that  petroleum  revenues  are  only 
gradually phased into the economy, low import prices, high prices and good market opportunities for 
our  export  goods,  an  ample  supply  of  foreign  labour  and  high  productivity  growth  have  made  it 
possible to combine high growth with low inflation.  
It is possible that some of the driving forces that have boosted the growth potential of the Norwegian 
economy and restrained inflation may now diminish.  
Prices for imported goods are now falling at a slower pace. The shift towards imports from low-cost 
countries  was  less  pronounced  in  2006  than  in  previous  years.  The  rise  in  prices  for  oil  and  other 
commodities over several years has resulted in a somewhat faster rate of increase in producer and 
export prices among our trading partners. Measured in foreign currency, prices for imported consumer 
goods rose in 2006. 
The  labour  market  is  tightening  in  Sweden,  Poland  and  the  Baltic  counties,  which  may  mean  that 
labour flows from this source may not increase as rapidly ahead.  
When the cyclical upturn is in a mature phase, productivity growth will normally drop back somewhat.  
 Capacity utilisation is now very high in most industries. The network of private and public enterprises 
with  which  Norges  Bank  has  continuous  contact  report  little  spare  capacity  in  most  industries  and 
regions, and labour shortages in almost all occupational categories. There are shortages of drivers, 
pre-school  teachers,  supervisors,  engineers,  carpenters,  architects,  auditors,  accountants,  IT 
personnel  and  health  workers.  In  some  regions,  enterprises  report  that  the  number  of  vacancies  is 
now higher than the number of job-seekers. There are also reports of shortages of other factor inputs. 
It  has  probably  not  been  since  the  1970s  that  we  find  such  widespread  reports  of  purely  physical 
production constraints, for example now in the form of shortages of rigs and other equipment in the 
petroleum  industry  or  shortages  of  plank,  concrete,  insulation  and  scaffolding  in  the  construction 
industry.  There  are also  long  delivery times  for  capital  equipment  such  as  industrial  machinery  and 
road haulage vehicles. 
                                                      
2   The  analysis  is  based  on  national  accounts  figures.  There  is  considerable  uncertainty  associated  with  the  variable  real 
capital in this statistics. 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 7
When  so  many  enterprises  are  faced  with  capacity  constraints,  we  can  probably  expect  higher 
inflation. A rising number of enterprises in our regional network expect a faster rise in selling prices 
ahead. It is still uncertain whether inflation will increase rapidly or whether it will only gradually near the 
target of 2½ per cent. 
Unemployment  has  fallen  sharply  in  the  past  few  quarters.  The  rate  of  decline  and  level  of 
unemployment are reminiscent of two previous cyclical peaks, the one in the mid-1980s and the other 
that started in the late-1990s and continued into this decade. Both expansions culminated in a sharp 
rise in wage and cost inflation.  
 While a high level of net inward migration has increased the supply of labour, there have also been 
large flows out of the labour market into various benefit schemes. Sickness absence is at a high level 
and  a  rising  share  of  the  working-age  population  is  on  disability  benefit  or  rehabilitation  schemes. 
Many  choose  to  retire  under  contractual  early  retirement  schemes  at  the  age  of  62,  and  these 
numbers will probably increase in the coming years. In Norway, close to 600 000 persons among the 
working-age population are on benefit and retirement schemes. This accounts for 25 per cent of the 
labour force.  
 8 
 BIS Review 47/2007
 It  may  seem  that  household  saving  has  fallen  markedly  in  Norway  in  recent  periods.  Saving  was 
negative in the latter half of 2006, and probably during the first quarter of 2007, for the first time since 
the mid-1980s. Housing investment in the household sector as a whole is thereby fully debt-financed. 
A favourable economic climate and government surpluses may have created a sense of security that 
is influencing household saving. The low level of saving also reflects a higher risk-willingness among 
households.  
Household debt in Norway is now almost twice as high as disposable income, and the debt to income 
ratio  is  higher  than  ever.  The  increase  in  household  debt  has  occurred  in  tandem  with  a  surge  in 
house prices. 
Non-residential property prices have also increased over the past years. There is now strong growth in 
credit to enterprises. At the same time, enterprises are rapidly building up their liquid assets.  
In the assessment of monetary policy, potential effects of asset prices, such as property prices and 
equity  prices,  but  also  of  movements  in  the  krone  exchange  rate,  on  the  prospects  for  output, 
employment and inflation are taken into account.  
The  krone  exchange  rate  depreciated  in  the  latter  half  of  2006,  but  has  appreciated  somewhat  in 
2007.  
 BIS Review 47/2007 
 9
Under an inflation targeting regime, it is important to be mindful of the effects of higher interest rates 
on the krone exchange rate when inflation is low.  Interest rate developments in other countries are 
therefore of importance for interest rates in Norway. 
Early in this decade, inflation and economic growth were low in many countries. Interest rates were 
cut. The rate cuts, in conjunction with strong growth in emerging economies, particularly in Asia, led to 
cyclical turnaround. Growth in the world economy is now the strongest witnessed in several decades. 
External interest rates have increased and are approaching a normal level. Further interest rate hikes 
are expected in the euro area, Sweden and the UK, while interest rates in the US may fall over the 
next year.  
 In Norway, the interest rate was reduced to a very low level in 2003 and 2004 when inflation fell and 
approached zero.  There  is  a  dynamic inherent  in  interest-rate  setting.  Low  interest  rates  stimulated 
demand and production and eventually led to prospects for higher inflation, to which we are reacting 
by raising interest rates.  
Interest rate developments must be seen in the light of actual price developments and inflation, output 
and employment prospects.  
 10 
 BIS Review 47/2007
It normally takes some time for interest rates to have an impact on prices via changes in expectations, 
exchange  rates  or  capacity  utilisation.  Consequently,  interest  rate  setting  must  be  based  on  our 
expectations of developments ahead. The interest rate was raised in response to the strong increase 
in capacity utilisation and the associated inflation prospects. The interest rate has thus been increased 
well ahead of an actual rise in inflation.  
Growth in capacity utilisation has been stronger than projected one year ago. The interest rate has 
thus been increased somewhat faster than Norges Bank presented as the most likely path at that time.  
In the interest of enhancing the transparency surrounding our conduct of monetary policy, we have 
published  our  own  interest  rate  forecast  over  the  past  year  and  a  half.  According  to  the  latest 
assessments of the Executive Board, the overall outlook suggests that it would be appropriate to raise 
the interest rate gradually to about 5 per cent in the course of this year and to a somewhat higher level 
in the period to summer 2008. At its meeting on 25 April, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to 
leave  the  key  rate  unchanged  at  4.00  per  cent.  The  Executive  Board  considered  the  alternative  of 
increasing the interest rate at that meeting.  
 There is obviously considerable uncertainty surrounding the projections. The projections are based on 
our  assessment  of  today’s  economic  situation,  the  outlook  for  developments  in  other  countries,  the 
functioning of the economy and the conditions necessary for reaching the inflation target. The chart 
 BIS Review 47/2007 
 11
shows  that  we  must  be  prepared  for  developments  in  inflation  and  output  that  may  differ  from  the 
central  path.  This  may  also  imply  that  the  interest  rate  may  be  lower  or  higher  than  our  current 
projections.  
Allow me to summarise: 
The fall in prices for imported goods and services and the increase in export prices have provided the 
Norwegian economy with an appreciable income boost. The mainland economy has expanded rapidly 
in  recent  years.  At  the  same  time,  inflation  has  remained  low.  Increased  efficiency  and  an  ample 
supply  of  labour  have  made  a  contribution  to  these  developments.  There  are  now  limited  idle 
resources.  
Monetary policy increasingly reflects that many Norwegian enterprises are facing capacity constraints 
and that inflation will pick up. Interest rates will continue to be raised gradually ahead so that we can 
assess the effects of interest rate changes and other new information about economic developments. 
Thank you for the opportunity to present these assessments before answering questions. 
12 
 BIS Review 47/2007
