Jarle Bergo: The economic situation, global uncertainty and monetary 
policy  
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  ACI  Norge  –  The  Financial  Markets  Association,  Oslo, 
6 September 2007.  
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
15 August and in Monetary Policy Report 2/07. 
 Introduction 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  your  Annual  General  Meeting.  In 
modern central banks, increasing emphasis is placed on transparency and communication, 
and we feel that coming here to talk about monetary policy is an important part of our work to 
increase  understanding  of  our  activities.  This  has  not  always  been  the  case  in  all  central 
banks.  For  example,  it  was  not  until  1994  that  the  Federal  Reserve  began  to  publish  its 
interest rate decisions. Until that time, market participants had to follow changes in market 
interest rates in order to guess what decision the central bank had taken. I assume that most 
of you present here today are glad that time is past. 
In this address, I will first discuss economic developments in Norway, and the orientation of 
monetary policy. I will then comment on the turbulence in international financial markets in 
recent weeks. I believe many of those present here have a special interest in developments 
in the exchange rate, and will therefore discuss this in more depth towards the end of the 
address.  
The economic situation and the orientation of monetary policy 
The  Norwegian  economy  is  now  in  a  cyclical  upturn.  Over  the  past  three  years,  mainland 
GDP has grown by approximately 4½ per cent annually, and the strong growth has continued 
in 2007. In the first half of the year, annualised growth was close to 6 per cent, and even if 
GDP growth in the third and fourth quarters should be zero, annual growth will be well over 4 
per cent. As the chart shows, there have not been four consecutive years with such strong 
growth since 1971.  
At the same time, productivity growth in the Norwegian economy has been strong, and the 
supply of labour has been ample. The growth capacity of the economy has therefore been 
high. Low interest rates, growth in public demand and in petroleum investment and vigorous 
international  growth  have  resulted  in  high  income  growth  in  the  household  and  business 
sectors.  Moreover,  low  interest  rates  have  made  it  more  profitable  to  bring  forward 
consumption.  In  addition  to  contributing  to  the  increase  in  actual  income,  the  sharp 
improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade  may  have  raised  households’  income  expectations.  On 
balance, this has boosted demand for goods and services.  
So far, there are few signs of a slowdown in the Norwegian economy. Growth in demand is 
still  robust,  and  investment  in  the  petroleum  sector  has  increased  further.  Solid  growth  in 
other  countries  and  high  prices  for  Norwegian  goods  are  still  generating  strong  positive 
impulses to export-oriented mainland enterprises. A number of factors are buoying up growth 
in household demand this year. As a result of a continued increase in employment and rising 
wage growth, household real disposable income is growing at a faster pace this year than in 
2006.  Households  are  optimistic  regarding  their  own  financial  situation  and  the  Norwegian 
economy. Growth in housing investment nevertheless appears to be slowing. This may partly 
reflect  rising  construction  costs  and  a  growing  share  of  capacity  in  the  construction  sector 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 1
being used for commercial buildings. The favourable trend is also reflected in Norges Bank’s 
regional  network,  which  so  far  has  reported  continued  solid  production  growth  in  most 
sectors.  
Capacity  utilisation  has  reached  a  high  level  as  a  result  of  strong  activity  growth. 
Employment has risen as rapidly as in the years prior to the cyclical peaks in the 1980s and 
1990s, and unemployment is now at a very low level, measured both in terms of the number 
of  registered  unemployed  and  according  to  Statistics  Norway’s  labour  force  survey  (LFS). 
Enterprises report a shortage of qualified labour, and many positions are vacant. The number 
of  vacancies  per  unemployed  person  has  not  been  higher  since  the  1980s.  According  to 
Statistics Norway’s business tendency survey, the shortage of labour and intermediate goods 
is now at a higher level than during the booms in the 1980s and 1990s.  
The strong rate of growth has only to a limited extent fed through to a higher rise in prices for 
consumer  goods  and  services.  Consumer  price  inflation  adjusted  for  tax  changes  and 
excluding energy products (CPI-ATE) has admittedly picked up gradually since late summer 
2006, but in relation to the economic situation, underlying inflation remains low. The year-on-
year  rise  in  the  CPI-ATE  was  1.4  per  cent  in  July.  Other  measures  of  underlying  inflation 
show  approximately  the  same  rise  in  prices.  According  to  our  assessment,  underlying 
inflation is between 1 and 1½ per cent, as it has been for a longer period.  
The year-on-year rise in the total consumer price index (CPI) has been just under ½ per cent 
in recent months. This is because electricity prices have been substantially lower this year 
than in 2006, when unusually high electricity prices due to low precipitation levels pushed up 
the  year-on-year  rise  in  the  CPI  close  to  the  inflation  target.  In  recent  months,  electricity 
prices have been at their lowest level since 2002. 
There  are  probably  a  number  of  reasons  why  inflation  has  been  low  in  an  environment  of 
high economic growth. 
First, Norway’s terms of trade have improved. Prices for oil and gas, freight, fish, industrial 
commodities  and  engineering  products  have  increased  considerably.  In  addition,  market 
growth abroad has provided market opportunities for Norwegian export goods. At the same 
time, Norwegian importers have been able to shift demand to new markets in central Europe 
and Asia, which has led to a fall in prices for a number of consumer goods. The terms of 
trade have improved by about 40 per cent since 2002. A similar situation has not been seen 
since World War I when earnings in the shipping industry and other export industries were 
exceptionally high for a period.  
Second, an ample supply of labour has been an important factor behind output growth. In 
particular, the supply of foreign labour has increased sharply after EU enlargement in 2004. 
Over the past two years, these labour inflows have accounted for over 30 per cent of growth 
in the labour force in Norway. At the same time, this has enabled Norwegian companies to 
be  bolder  in  accepting  new  assignments  and  make  investments  knowing  that  they  can 
procure  labour  throughout  Europe.  In  addition  to  increased  labour  inflows  from  Poland, 
Lithuania  and  other  central  European  countries,  we  have  long  benefited  from  inflows  of 
labour from Sweden. Many workers are on temporary assignment and their consumption is 
primarily  concentrated  in  their  home  country.  The  Norwegian  economy  has  seen  a  net 
capacity  increase.  High  inward  labour  migration  and  the  scope  for  relocating  portions  of 
production abroad have led to increased competition in the labour market and have probably 
curbed wage growth.  
Third, the Norwegian business sector has been quick to adopt new technology and to reap 
the benefits. This applies both to companies competing on international markets and those 
supplying goods and services to the domestic market. In comparison with other countries, it 
is particularly productivity gains in service sectors that stand out. Examples are automated 
processes  and  swifter  payments  in  the  financial  industry  and  improved  inventory  and 
management systems in commerce and transport. This results in lower production costs. 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2007
Monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target is annual 
consumer price inflation of close to 2½ per cent over time. The objective of low and stable 
inflation provides the economy with a nominal anchor. Monetary policy shall also contribute 
to stabilising output and employment. In a small, open and decentralised market economy 
like  Norway,  and  with  our  particular  industry  structure,  there  will  be  cyclical  fluctuations. 
When  economic  agents  have  confidence  that  inflation  is  low  and  stable  over  time,  the 
interest rate can also be set with a view to dampening the fluctuations somewhat. 
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  in  line  with  the  monetary  policy  conducted  by  most  central 
banks in the OECD area.  
The  challenge  of  monetary  policy  is  how  the  interest  rate should  be set  ahead  in order  to 
bring inflation close to target while avoiding an overheating of the real economy.  
As a general rule, central banks influence the shortest money market rates via the key policy 
rate.  However,  economic  agents’  consumption  and  investment  decisions  depend  more  on 
their  interest  rate  expectations.  Hence,  monetary  policy  functions  primarily  by  influencing 
expectations regarding future interest rates. Economic agents therefore need to understand 
the central bank’s intentions in its interest rate setting. 
In  the  November  2005  Inflation  Report,  Norges  Bank  published  its  own  forecast  for  the 
interest  rate  for  the  first  time.  The  aim  is  to  enhance  the  predictability  of  monetary  policy. 
With a predictable monetary policy, market participants can react to new information in a way 
that contributes to stabilising developments in output and inflation.  
Norges Bank’s interest rate forecast should satisfy two main criteria. First, the interest rate 
should be set with a view to stabilising inflation close to the target in the medium term. The 
horizon will depend on disturbances to which the economy is exposed and the effects on the 
path for inflation and the real economy ahead. Second, the interest rate path should provide 
a reasonable balance between the path for inflation and the path for capacity utilisation. In 
the assessment, potential effects of asset prices, such as property prices, equity prices and 
the krone exchange rate on the prospects for output, employment and inflation are also taken 
into account.  
Norges  Bank  forecasts  inflation,  output  and  the  interest  rate  simultaneously.  There  is 
considerable uncertainty associated with the forecasts for capacity utilisation in the economy 
(the  output  gap),  and  there  is  no  simple  relationship  between  developments  in  capacity 
utilisation and inflation. It cannot therefore be argued with great conviction that it is possible 
to identify one particular interest rate forecast that provides the indisputably “best” trade-off in 
monetary policy. More often than not, there will be a number of possible interest rate paths 
that might be said to provide a reasonable balance in view of the uncertainty involved.  
The results of this trade-off are presented in the Monetary Policy Report in the form of a chart 
that presents central projections for the interest rate, inflation and capacity utilisation in the 
economy.  
The  formulation  of  a  precise  inflation  target,  our  projection  for  the  interest  rate  3-4  years 
ahead  and  our  desire  to  achieve  a  balance  between  output  and  inflation  stability  may 
perhaps give an impression of excessive optimism with respect to managing the economy 
and invite a repeat of earlier attempts to fine-tune the economy. But it is important to bear in 
mind  the  lessons  drawn  from  the  1970s  and  1980s,  i.e.  high  stabilisation  policy  ambitions 
may lead to wide fluctuations in the economy, with high and variable inflation. In our conduct 
of  monetary  policy,  we  must  not  underestimate  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  decisions 
taken.  
Even if Norges Bank publishes an interest rate forecast, this does not mean that the interest 
rate  will  follow  this  precise  path  throughout  the  projection  period.  Forecasts  of  inflation, 
output,  the  interest  rate  and  other  variables  are  based  on  an  assessment  of  the  current 
situation and a perception of how the economy functions. Disturbances to the economy may 
result in changes in the forecasts. Data revisions imply that the current economic situation is 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 3
not fully known. Our ambition must be to reduce uncertainty with regard to our own response 
pattern.  That  actual  interest  rate  developments  will  deviate  somewhat  from  the  Bank's 
forecast will probably be the rule rather than the exception.  
What  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  actually  adopts  is  a  monetary  policy  strategy  that 
applies until the next Report. When Monetary Policy Report 2/07 was presented in June, the 
Executive Board decided that the key policy rate should be in the interval 4½-5½ per cent in 
the period to the publication of the next Report on 31 October. And even that is conditional 
on economic developments that are broadly in line with projections.  
Financial market turbulence 
Global  economic  developments  are  important  for  economic  developments  in  Norway,  and 
changes in the growth prospects for the world economy may influence our projections. The 
turbulence in international financial markets in recent weeks has heightened the uncertainty 
concerning developments ahead.  
The source of the turbulence can be found in the US housing market and particularly in the 
subprime mortgage market. This segment of the US credit market has expanded sharply in 
recent years. The loans often feature an interest-only period and low interest rates in the first 
years of the loan's term and higher interest rates thereafter. It has been tempting for many to 
take up this type of loan for home purchases even with a poor debt-servicing capacity. These 
borrowers were banking on a rise in house prices that would allow them to service the loans 
once  interest  payments  increased  and  principal  payments  fell  due.  Securities  were 
developed  around  these  loan  portfolios.  A  large  number  of  risk-prone  investors  who  were 
seeking high returns – and with a similar belief that a continued rise in house prices would 
secure the collateral values – made it easy to find buyers for these securities.  
Weak  developments  in  house  prices  towards  the  end  of  2006  and  into  2007  led  to  rising 
defaults  on  subprime  mortgages.  This  resulted  in  a  sharp  increase  in  credit  spreads  for 
securities  backed  by  this  type  of  loans.  Into  spring  and  the  early  part  of  summer,  a 
succession  of  news  releases  reported  large  losses  and  collapses  in  funds  that  had 
specialised in these investments. It was not primarily the size of the actual losses that led to 
the collapse of the funds, but a shortage of liquidity. The news of mounting losses prompted 
a sell-off by investors in these funds. As a result of increased losses and sell-offs, the funds 
had to sell other, more solid securities in a weak market, which made the losses visible and 
reinforced  the  exit  of  depositors  and  other  creditors.  The  unfolding  of  events  became 
increasingly redolent of a classic bank run. 
The turbulence spread during summer. Funds and investors in Europe, Australia and Asia 
started  reporting  higher  losses.  The  turbulence  also  spread  to  other  financial  market 
segments, for example stock markets which have declined sharply since mid-July.  
The  contagion  to  other  markets  was  caused  by  uncertainty  about  the  risk  associated  with 
securities backed by subprime mortgages, and a lack of information about the investors in 
this market. As a result, financial institutions became highly reluctant to provide credit. This 
had a considerable impact on money market rates and gave rise to liquidity problems. On 9 
August  and  in  the  days  ensuing,  many  central  banks  offered  extra  liquidity  to  the  banking 
system to ensure the functioning of the money market. Norges Bank supplied liquidity to the 
Norwegian  banking  system  through  ordinary  market  operations  on  9  August.  A  few  days 
later, the US Federal Reserve lowered its discount rate by 50 basis points.  
The turbulence led to a marked increase in risk premia in financial markets as investors fled 
to safer havens. The price of credit risk in terms of the price of credit default swaps (CDS) 
rose sharply for both banks and other companies, also in Norway. As shown in the chart, the 
increase  in  the  CDS  price  for  DnB  NOR  was  appreciably  smaller  than  for  an  index  of 
European banks, however. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2007
Such an increase in the price of risk in some financial market segments is not necessarily 
negative.  A  normalisation  of  risk  premia  in  relation  to  the  particularly  low  risk  premia 
prevailing  in  recent  years  has  its  advantages.  But  the  adjustments  seem  to  be  marked  by 
overshooting and considerable volatility.  
We do not know how long the turbulence will last or what consequences will be for the real 
economy. So far the turbulence has not led to any major reassessments of the global growth 
outlook among most observers, although it seems obvious that it will have a negative effect. 
The  turbulence  has  increased  the  risk  that  the  problems  that  were  initially  linked  to  one 
segment of the US residential mortgage market will have consequences for the real economy 
in  the  US  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  This  has  led  to  a  fall  in  short-term  interest  rate 
expectations,  particularly  in  the  US.  Long-term  interest  rates  have  also  declined,  reducing 
funding  costs  for  solid  borrowers.  Interest  rate  expectations  have  also  fallen  somewhat  in 
Norway. 
Developments in the krone exchange rate  
In recent weeks, developments in foreign exchange markets have also been marked by the 
turbulence. For example, there has been a substantial reduction in carry trade, resulting in an 
appreciating  tendency  for  low  interest  rate  currencies  and  weakening  tendency  for  high 
interest rate currencies.  
Let us take a closer look at developments in the krone exchange rate and the importance of 
the krone exchange rate for monetary policy. 
Compared to the fluctuations in the first part of the period we see here, from 2002 to date, 
the krone exchange rate has been relatively stable in recent years, but there has been some 
short-term movements. An appreciation of the krone has in some periods occurred in tandem 
with higher oil prices and in other periods with lower oil prices. The krone appreciated when 
the interest rate differential against other countries was high in 2002, but as interest rates in 
Norway moved down to the level among trading partners, the value of the krone fell back. In 
recent years, the actual interest rate differential against trading partners has been close to 
zero.  Earlier  analyses  conducted  at  Norges  Bank  have  shown  that  other  factors,  such  as 
expected  volatility  among  major  international  currencies  and  developments  in  US  equity 
indices,  may  have  been  factors  behind  developments  in  the  krone  exchange  rate,  but  the 
effects vary over time. This reflects among other things shifts in exchange market themes.1
Shifting  themes  in  exchange  markets  make  it  difficult  to  predict  short-  and  medium-term 
exchange rate developments. The exchange rate projections in the monetary policy reports 
are based on the theory of uncovered interest rate parity. According to the theory, the return 
on financial investments will be the same irrespective of the currency involved. If Norwegian 
interest rates are higher than external interest rates over a period, the krone exchange rate 
must  depreciate  during  that  period  or  NOK-denominated  investments  generate  an  excess 
return. If the interest rate differential against other currencies is small, the exchange rate will 
remain stable.  
In  practice,  this  is  not  always  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  studies  indicate  that  short-term 
movements  in  the  exchange  rate  are  best  described  by  the  random  walk  process.  This 
means that the best projection of the krone exchange rate tomorrow is that it will be the same 
as today.  
In  the  somewhat  longer  term,  we  still  believe  that  monetary  policy  and  the  interest  rate 
differential against other countries are important for developments in the exchange rate. But 
                                                 
1   See box "Developments in the krone exchange rate", Inflation Report 2/05. 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 5
is 
in  Norway 
low  and  stable 
target  of  monetary  policy 
in  the  short  run  the  krone  fluctuates  to  some  extent  and  not  necessarily  in  line  with  the 
interest rate differential.  
The  chart  shows  the  effective  exchange  rate  for  Norway  and  some  other  countries. 
Compared  with  the  currencies  of  Switzerland,  the  UK  and  Sweden,  the  Norwegian  krone 
does not fluctuate to any particular extent.  
Compared  with  other  commodity-exporting  countries  such  as  Canada,  Australia  and  New 
Zealand the movements in the krone exchange rate have been modest. If such movements 
are felt to be uncomfortable, hedging instruments can be used. The markets for the purchase 
and sale of currency for future delivery – the forward and options markets – have grown in 
recent  years.  A  deeper  market  has  reduced  trading  costs  and  it  is  easier  to  find 
counterparties. This has improved companies' possibilities for hedging against exchange rate 
risk. Use of instruments that diminish the risk associated with floating exchange rates is also 
gaining ground in Norway.  
The  operational 
inflation. 
Developments in the krone exchange rate are nonetheless important when Norges Bank sets 
the interest rate. There are several reasons for this. First, changes in the krone exchange 
rate  affect  prices  in  krone  terms  for  imported  consumer  goods  and  services.  Second, 
exchange  rate  changes  have  an  impact  on  competitiveness  in  Norwegian  business  and 
industry and on market opportunities at home and abroad. This affects the level of activity in 
the economy and, in turn, price and cost developments. 
In  the  period  between  Inflation  Report  3/06,  presented  in  November  2006,  and  Monetary 
Policy Report 1/07, presented in March this year, the krone appreciated more markedly than 
we had assumed. As a result, Monetary Policy Report 1/07 was based on the assumption 
that the krone would be somewhat stronger throughout the projection period. The exchange 
rate assumption in Inflation Report 3/06 is shown by the broken blue line in the chart on the 
left,  while  the  broken  red  line  denotes  the  exchange  rate  assumption  in  Monetary  Policy 
Report 1/07. The isolated effect on the interest rate path of a stronger krone is illustrated in a 
box in Monetary Policy Report 1/07. As shown in the chart on the right, the stronger krone 
pointed to a somewhat lower path for the interest rate.  
Given  the  inflation  target,  we  will  be  mindful  of  the  effects  of  higher  interest  rates  on  the 
krone exchange rate when inflation is low. Nonetheless, the interest rate path published in 
Monetary Policy Report 1/07 was higher than in Inflation Report 3/06. The reason for this is 
that the prospect of stronger-than-expected growth in both Norway and among our trading 
partners pointed to a higher interest rate path. On balance, this had a greater impact on the 
interest rate path than a stronger krone. 
Over time, however, the nominal exchange rate is not the main force. The most important 
influence on competitiveness in Norwegian business and industry and the purchasing power 
of the Norwegian krone is changes in the real exchange rate. 
The real exchange rate can be measured in a number of ways, for example by  consumer 
prices  or  labour  costs  in  Norway  relative  to  our  trading  partners  measured  in  a  common 
currency.  The  real  exchange  rate  has  fluctuated  widely  over  time  and  has  deviated  over 
longer periods considerably from the average level since 1970. The real exchange rate has 
nonetheless shown a tendency to revert to this level. 
Over time, the exchange rate acts as a buffer in the global economy. When economic activity 
is high in one country, an appreciation of the country’s exchange rate will have a dampening 
effect. Conversely, when there is a need to stimulate the economy, a weaker exchange rate 
will  boost  growth.  Over  the  past  few  years,  the  Norwegian  real  exchange  rate,  whether 
measured by relative labour costs or by relative consumer prices, has been stronger than the 
average since 1970, largely due to a stronger nominal exchange rate. The corollary to these 
developments is the pronounced improvement in Norway’s terms of trade. The strong rise in 
prices for oil and other Norwegian export products has contributed to the krone appreciation 
6 
 BIS Review 97/2007
over  the  past  few  years.  The  strong  real  krone  exchange  rate  is  therefore  a  result  of 
Norway’s position as one of the nations that has benefited most from freer global trade and 
increased  cross-border  flows  of  capital,  technology  and  labour.  In  this  respect,  the  strong 
krone is a sign that the Norwegian economy is faring well. 
Thank you for your attention. 
    BIS Review 97/2007 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 97/2007
    BIS Review 97/2007 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 97/2007
    BIS Review 97/2007 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 97/2007
    BIS Review 97/2007 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 97/2007
 BIS Review 97/2007 
 15
