Shyamala Gopinath: Overseas investments by Indian companies – evolution of 
policy and trends 
Keynote address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International Conference on Indian cross-border presence/acquisitions, Mumbai, 19 January 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to be invited to deliver the key note address at this international 
conference  which  is  really  topical  and  contextual  for  the  present  times  and  I  thank  the  Bombay 
Chambers  of  Commerce  for  giving  me  this  opportunity.  I  particularly  appreciate  the  organizers  for 
keeping the focus on host country perspective in regard to overseas expansion by Indian companies 
and the participants will have the benefit of listening and interacting with experts on the subject. 
Globalization and non-discriminatory multilateral trade have opened new doors for Indian corporates. 
Earlier,  there  was  an  accent  on  inward  flows  -  FDI,  portfolio  investments,  joint  ventures  and 
collaborations  to  tap  the  growing  Indian  market,  and  also  technology  transfers  for  enhancing 
competitiveness  of  Indian  firms.  Exports  were  predominantly  the  main  door  to  step  out  towards 
globalization. Now, the scenario has changed. There is a growing realization that the future growth of 
Indian companies will be influenced by the share that they can garner in the world market, not only by 
producing in the country and exporting, but also by acquiring overseas assets, including intangibles 
like brands and goodwill, to establish overseas presence and to upgrade their competitive strength in 
the overseas markets. 
The policy regime in respect of outward capital flows has accordingly evolved in spirit with the above 
trend.  In  line  with  our  calibrated  approach  to  capital  account,  greater  freedom  is  now  available  to 
corporates  to  make  remittances  overseas  for  their  overseas  expansion.  This  is  reflected  in  the 
increasing  global  operations  of  Indian  corporates  in  search  of  global  synergies  and  domain 
knowledge. Phased liberalization in the policy of overseas investments has enabled Indian corporates 
to establish presence in overseas markets on an unprecedented scale redefining the global outreach 
of Indian entities. Behind this push in overseas acquisitions lies a combination of forces – domestic 
boom, competitive strength, access to credit, keen desire to achieve global scale and above all self-
confidence  about  Indian  business's  ability  to  add  managerial  value  on  a  global  scale.  As  per  data 
available  with  RBI,  during  the  financial  year  2005-06  the  total  value  of  Indian  direct  investments 
abroad was USD 2.7 billion, mainly accounted for by the manufacturing sector. I may hasten to add 
that this figure doesn’t reflect the actual acquisition value. Many acquisitions are taking place through 
an  overseas  SPV  set  up  to  raise  finances  from  international  market  and  such  transactions  are  not 
captured in the overseas investment statistics.  
Evolution of overseas investment policy 
It  would  be  interesting  to  trace  the  evolution  of  public  policy  in  respect  of  liberalizing  outward 
investments,  within  the  broader  ambit  of  capital  account  management.  Indian  overseas  investment 
policies  has been  progressively  liberalized  and  simplified  to  meet  the  changing  needs  of  a  growing 
economy.  The  policy,  which  was  evolved  as  one  of  the  strategies  for  export  promotion  and  for 
strengthening economic linkages with other countries, has expanded significantly in scope and size, 
especially after the introduction of FEMA in June 2000.  
The evolution has taken place in a sustained manner and could be classified into two distinct phases: 
the pre 2003 phase and the post 2003 phase. The first phase was export oriented and with restrictions 
of  cash  flows  from  the  country  reflecting  the  need  to  manage  capital  outflows  to  conserve  foreign 
exchange resources. An important development during this phase was the transfer of work relating to 
overseas investment from Ministry of Commerce to RBI in 1995 to provide a single window.  
The pre 2003 policy regime 
• 
In December 1969, the Govt. of India for the first time issued formal guidelines for overseas 
direct  investment.  Indian  parties  were  permitted  minority  participation  in  turnkey  projects 
involving no cash remittances.  
BIS Review8/2007 
 1
      In April 1978, an Inter-Ministerial Committee in the Ministry of Commerce was set up to clear 
proposals for Overseas Investments. There was a requirement for repatriation of dividend of 
50% of the declared profits.  
In 1992 an Automatic Route for overseas investments was introduced, and cash remittances 
were  allowed  for  the  first  time.  The  total  value  was  restricted  to  $2  million  with  a  cash 
component not exceeding $0.5 million in a block of 3 years.  
In 1995 the work relating to overseas investment was transferred from Ministry of Commerce 
to RBI in 1995 to provide a single window, while laying down a policy framework. In terms of 
the policy, a fast track route was introduced where limits were raised from $ 2 million to $ 4 
million and linked to average export earnings of the preceding three years. Cash remittance 
continued to be restricted to $0.5 million. Beyond USD 4 million, approvals are considered 
under Normal Route at the Special Committee level. Investment proposals in excess of US $ 
15.00 million were considered by MoF with the recommendations of the Special Committee 
and generally approved if the required resources were raised through the GDR route.  
In  March  1997,  Exchange Earners  other  than  exporters  were  also  brought  under  the  Fast 
track  Route  Indian  promoters  were  allowed  to  set  up  second  and  subsequent  generation 
companies, provided the first generation company was set up under the Fast Track Route. A 
series of measures to encourage the software industry in India to expand capacity, reduce 
costs, improve quality and also invest abroad were put in place.  
In 2000, the introduction of FEMA changed the entire perspective on foreign exchange. The 
revised  policies  reflected  this.  The  limit  for  investment  up  to  US$  50  million,  which  was 
earlier available in a block of three years, made available annually without any profitability 
condition. Companies were allowed to invest 100 per cent of the proceeds of their ADR/GDR 
issues for acquisitions of foreign companies and direct investments in JVs and WOSs.  
In  March  2002,  Automatic  route  was  further  liberalised  wherein  Indian  parties  investing  in 
JVs  /  WOSs  outside  India  were  permitted  to  invest  an  amount  not  exceeding  USD  100 
million as against the earlier limit of USD 50 million in a financial year. Also the investments 
under the automatic route could be funded by withdrawal of foreign exchange from an AD 
not exceeding 50% of the net worth of the Indian party.  
Post 2003 regime 
In March 2003, Automatic Route was significantly liberalized to enable Indian parties to fund to the 
extent of 100% of their net worth, which was later increased to 200%. As per a recent FICCI study, 
While India Inc's international acquisitions were rising gradually till 2004, the liberalization in the policy 
regime for outward investment in 2005, which allowed Indian firms to invest in entities abroad up to 
200% of their net worth in a year, triggered a sharp rise in cross-border acquisitions with the number of 
acquisitions rising from 46 in 2004 to a whopping 130 in 2005. 
Present framework 
• 
Proposals  for  investment  overseas  by  Indian  companies/registered  partnership  firms  upto 
200  per  cent  of  their  net  worth  as  per  the  last  audited  balance  sheet,  in  any  bonafide 
business activity are permitted by ADs irrespective of the export/exchange earnings of the 
entity  concerned  within  this  limit  loans  and  guarantees  by  the  parent  company  and 
associates  are  also  permitted.  The  condition  regarding  dividend  balancing  has  been 
dispensed with.  
No  prior  approval  of  RBI  is  required  for  opening  offices  abroad.  For  initial  expenses,  AD 
banks  have  been  permitted  to  allow  remittance  upto  15  per  cent  of  the  average  annual 
sales/income or turnover during last two financial years or up to 25 per cent of the net worth, 
whichever  is  higher.  For  recurring  expenses,  remittance  upto  10  per  cent  of  the  average 
annual  sales/income  or  turnover  during  last  two  financial  years  is  allowed.  Within  these 
limits, ADs can allow remittance by a company even to acquire immovable property outside 
India for its business and for residential purpose of its staff.  
 2 
 BIS Review 8/2007
 Partnership firms registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 and having a good track 
record are permitted to make direct investments outside India in any bonafide activity 200 
per cent of their net worth under the automatic route.  
I must mention that that the liberalization in the policy on overseas investments has been very much 
informed by the detailed framework set out by the Government in 1995 when the work was transferred 
to Reserve Bank of India. For the first time the framework articulated a cohesive policy in regard to 
overseas  investment  policy,  flexible  enough  to  respond  to  likely  future  trends.  To  quote  from  the 
guidelines, they reflected the 'need for transparency, recognition of global developments, capturing of 
Indian realities and learning of lessons from the past'. The basic objectives of the policy, as laid out in 
the notification, were as follows: 
• 
recognising the link between trade and investment flows, to provide a framework for Indian 
industry and business to access global networks.  
to ensure that such flows, though determined by commercial interests, are consistent with 
the macroeconomic and balance of payment compulsions of the country, particularly in terms 
of the magnitude of the capital flows; and  
to  give  liberal  access  to  Indian  business  for  technology-sourcing  or  resource-seeking  or 
market-seeking  as  strategic  responses  to  the  emerging  global  opportunities  for  trade  in 
goods or services.  
to give a signal that there is a qualitative change in the approach of the Government, from 
one of regulator or controller to one of facilitator.  
to encourage the Indian industry to adopt a spirit of self-regulation and collective effort for 
improving the image of Indian industry abroad.  
    Experience and trends 
The overseas acquisitions, which started of on a small scale, have reached to globally visible levels 
with  big  ticket  acquisitions  being  announced  by  large  corporates  regularly.  A  report  of  the  Boston 
Consulting Group (BCG) on the emerging multinationals in the world puts 21 Indian companies among 
the top 100 such multinationals. Only China with 44 companies is ahead of India. Tata group, Bharat 
Forge,  Infosys,  Wipro,  ONGC,  Ranbaxy  and  such  Indian  companies  are  venturing  overseas  and 
expanding at breakneck speed. Industrial goods, steel, automotive components, resource extraction, 
beverages, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, mobile communications, software and financial services are 
some  of  the  sectors  where  considerable  interest  has  been  shown  by  Indian  corporates.  The  BCG 
research has shown that 88% of the emerging market global players are driven by the need to gain 
access  to  new  markets  and  profit  pools.  Overseas  markets  are  expected  to  bring  higher  margins, 
revenue and volumes, besides opportunities for further growth. Energy security is another driving force 
behind global acquisitions.  
• 
Liberalised  guidelines  for  overseas  investment  coupled  with  lower  interest  rate  hitherto 
facilitated Indian corporates to invest overseas  
The  capex  undertaken  by  Indian  industry  coupled  with  buoyancy  in  economy  has 
strengthened the balance sheet of corporates enabling them to look for inorganic growth by 
way of acquisitions outside India.  
The confidence shown by the global business community, particularly, availability of foreign 
funds at competitive rates and acceptance of managerial skills of Indian workforce has led to 
surge in LBO activities.  
Another  trend  which  is  prominent  in  India’s  overseas  investment  is  market  access.  By 
undertaking  overseas  acquisition  transactions,  Indian  corporates  are  gaining  entry  into 
regulated  market  of  developed  countries.  The  best  example  is  pharmaceutical  industry, 
where Indian corporates equipped with USFDA approved facilities are looking for acquisition 
in the regulated market for ease of registration processes. The manufacturing activities will 
still be in India entailing low cost advantage.  
Transfer of technology is another issue driving for overseas investments. The manufacture of 
certain  products  requires  technology  that  is  not  available  to  the  Indian  companies.  By 
    BIS Review8/2007 
 3
     acquiring  companies  abroad,  they  also  acquire  advanced  manufacturing  technologies  that 
further help reduction in the cost of production.  
Indian companies are also going abroad to obtain a new product mix or to acquire products 
that will otherwise require huge investments and a long time to manufacture indigenously.  
Deployment of excess production resources or better yield on assets is another driving force. 
The  Indian  corporates  engaged  in  oil  exploration  /  drilling  /  rig  manufacturing  are  getting 
good returns on their assets by deploying their assets in the companies acquired in the high 
yield market.  
Development of natural resources like mining, oil exploration etc. has given an opportunity to 
Indian corporates, rich with cash and need for energy, to expand their wings in unchartered 
territory.  
Post  quota  regime  has  also  given  an  impetus  to  Indian  corporates  to  look  for  overseas 
ventures for enhancing their R&D and logistics to cater to developed markets. Indian textile 
industry with scalable capacities to cater developed markets is feeling handicapped because 
of logistics issue and delivery frame. However, with bases in and around the European and 
US market, textile industry is capable of meeting its commitments as well as going for high 
end designing studios to meet fashion requirements.  
The  IT  industry,  showcase  of  emergence  of  Indian  economy,  has  its  presence  across  the 
globe  by  way  of  subsidiaries  to  cater  to  business  in  a  particular  region.  The  acquisitions 
made by IT companies are primarily for backward or forward value addition in their product 
profile.  
Funding 
• 
   Overseas  acquisitions  are  funded  through  a  variety  of  sources  such  as  drawal  foreign 
exchange in India, capitalization of exports, balances held in EEFC accounts, share swaps, 
ECBs/FCCBs, ADRs/GDRs, etc.  
A substantial portion of investments takes place through special purpose vehicles (SPVs) set 
up  for  the  purpose  abroad.  Existing  WOS  /  JVs  or  the  SPVs  are  being  used  to  fund 
acquisitions through LBO route and such transactions are not currently captured in overseas 
investment statistics. The major investment destinations appear to be the US and European 
markets.  Tax  havens  like  Mauritius  and  Cayman  Islands  also  feature  significantly  in  the 
Indian acquisitions or setting up of new WOS/JVs.  
In  recent  times,  sustained  growth  in  corporate  earnings  has  boosted  the  profitability  and 
strengthened the balance sheets of Indian companies. This has, in turn, strengthened their 
credit ratings and ability to raise funds overseas.  
Unlike most international M&A transactions that typically feature stock swaps in the financing 
arithmetic, Indian acquirers have for the most part paid cash for their targets, helped by a 
combination of internal resources and borrowings. Share swaps have not yet emerged as a 
favored  payment  option  in  India,  except  in  a  couple  of  large  transactions  in  the  software 
industry.  
Finance by Indian banks: As per existing instructions banks are not allowed to finance the promoters’ 
contribution  towards  the  equity  capital  of  a  company  as  it  should  come  from  their  own  resources. 
However, in view of the expertise in certain areas developed by Indian corporates over the years and 
the importance attached to leveraging of such expertise for enhancing the international presence of 
Indian  corporates,  w.e.f  June  7,  2005,  banks  have  been  allowed  to  extend  financial  assistance  to 
Indian companies for acquisition of equity in overseas joint ventures/wholly owned subsidiaries or in 
other  overseas  companies,  new  or  existing,  as  strategic  investment,  in  terms  of  a  Board  approved 
policy, duly incorporated in the loan policy of the bank. Such policy should include overall limit on such 
financing, terms and conditions of eligibility of borrowers, security, margin, etc. While the Board may 
frame its own guidelines and safeguards for such lending, such acquisition(s) should be beneficial to 
the  company  and  the  country.  The  finance  would  be  subject  to  compliance  with  the  statutory 
requirements under Section 19(2) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2007
In April 2003 banks were permitted to extend credit/non-credit facilities to Indian Joint Ventures (JVs) 
(where  the  holding  by  the  Indian  company  is  more  than  51%)  /  Wholly  Owned  Subsidiaries  (WOS) 
abroad  up  to  the  extent  of  10  per  cent  of  their  unimpaired  capital  funds  (Tier  I  and  Tier  II  capital), 
subject to certain terms and conditions. On November 6, 2006, in order to facilitate the expansion of 
Indian corporates’ business abroad, it was decided to enhance the prudential limit on credit and non-
credit facilities extended by banks to Indian Joint Ventures (where the holding by the Indian company 
is more than 51%) /Wholly Owned Subsidiaries abroad from the existing limit of 10 per cent to 20 per 
cent of their unimpaired capital funds (Tier I and Tier II capital). 
Role of EXIM Bank 
Exim Bank has been involved in supporting Indian direct investment overseas since its inception and 
its role has been unique in this regard, given its mandate. IDBI had first initiated a program of rupee 
term  loans  to  Indian  companies  towards  their  equity  contribution  in  overseas  ventures.  The  related 
facilities extended by IDBI were taken over by Exim Bank on March 1, 1982 as part of the transfer of 
export  financing  functions  of  IDBI  to  Exim  Bank  under  the  Export-Import  Bank  of  India  Act,  1981. 
Subsequently, Exim Bank developed the program further and enlarged its scope from time to time with 
the objective of facilitating Indian corporates’ access to new markets and technologies, and thereby 
enhancing  their  export  capabilities  and  international  competitiveness.  The  Overseas  Investment 
Finance (OIF) program of Exim Bank seeks to cover the entire cycle of Indian investment overseas 
including  the  financing  requirements  of  Indian  Joint  Ventures  (JV)  and  Wholly  Owned  Subsidiaries 
(WOS) with a suite of financing instruments, which include: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Loan against investment in share capital 
Loan against Indian promoter company’s loan 
Loans to Overseas Indian Ventures 
Mezzanine Finance 
Non-fund based facilities to Indian Overseas Ventures 
Direct Equity Investment  
Representative Office 
Branch [including specialized branch like Off-shore Banking Units (OBUs)] 
Subsidiary and 
Joint Ventures.  
Banking presence overseas 
It  is  not  very  surprising  that  in  the  very  period  when  Indian  companies  have  increased  overseas 
presence significantly, in parallel the operations of Indian banks overseas has also increased. There 
are generally four forms of banking presence abroad, viz.  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
The choice of any particular form of presence is guided mostly by the objective of the bank seeking 
presence in a particular country/location, the laws and regulations of the host country and the cost and 
return  from  the  proposed venture, which  in  turn  is  a  factor  of regulatory prescriptions  and business 
potential.  
As  on  December  31,  2006,  nine  public  sector  banks  and  three  private  sector  banks  have  113 
overseas branches spread over 27 countries. Out of these, three banks viz. BOB (40), SBI (30),and 
BOI (21) have got 80.5 % of the overseas branches. As regards geographical spread, Indian banks 
have branch presence of 22 in UK, 9 each in Singapore, Mauritius, Fiji, 8 in Hong Kong, 7 in Sri Lanka 
and 6 in USA. 
In terms of total asset size, the operations of Indian banks overseas have increased by a significant 
113.5% over the last five years i.e. 2002-06. As  on March 31, 2006, total assets of all Indian bank 
branches overseas stood at USD 29.34 billion.  
BIS Review8/2007 
 5
Overview 
To conclude, there is great dynamism amongst Indian corporates to globalize and in the years to come 
we are going to have more Indian multinationals. These will include not only the large corporates but 
also  medium  size  corporates.  Companies  have  to  determine  the  most  optimal  method  for  funding 
these acquisitions as this has implications for the domestic balance sheets of the Indian companies 
and external debt profile depending on the source of funding. In case of investments financed through 
debt  in  the  books  of  domestic  entity  and/or  against  guarantees  issued  by  the  Indian  entity,  it  could 
involve a full or partial recourse to the Indian entity. In case there is recourse to the company, it is a 
direct external liability of the company to that extent.  
Indian companies appear to have so far balanced all  these considerations and raised bulk of these 
funds through LBO for large acquisitions which reduces the risk on the domestic balance sheet. 
As regards external debt, the policy on ECBs allows ECBs for overseas acquisitions within the overall 
limit of USD 500 million per year under the automatic route. The overall remittances from India and 
non-funded  exposures  should,  however,  not  exceed  200  percent  of  the  net  worth.  In  general,  this 
policy has served us well so far.  
Another issue relates to capturing the data in respect of overseas remittances taking into account the 
innovative funding structures being adopted in many cases. Accuracy and timeliness in reporting has 
to be ensured to enable meaningful monitoring at our end. The requirements of compilation of BoP 
statistics have to be kept in mind, in view of the significance of contribution of overseas investments. 
We  are  working  on  revising  the  existing  reporting  formats,  in  consultation  with  some  of  the  leading 
corporates, to first, rationalize and simplify these and second, to make them e-enabled.  
Thank you all and wishing the conference a great success. 
6 
 BIS Review 8/2007
