Toshiro Muto: How do central banks make decisions? – monetary policy 
by committee  
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 
Spring Meeting of the Japan Society of Monetary Economics, Chiba, 12 May 2007. 
 Introduction 
I  am  honored  to  have  this  opportunity  to  address  a  society  with  such  a  long-standing 
tradition.  Today,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  central  banks'  decisionmaking  process, 
especially that by committee. Although policy changes by the Bank of Japan attract a lot of 
attention, I believe that the decisionmaking process, in which policy is decided by a majority 
vote of the Policy Board, is not widely understood. For example, according to the Results of 
the 23rd Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior conducted by the Bank 
in  June  2005,  over  half  of  the  respondents  answered  that  they  had  never  heard  that 
"monetary policy aimed at maintaining price stability is conducted based on decisions made 
at the Bank's Monetary Policy Meetings." 
The Bank has adopted a committee structure in which decisions are made by a majority vote 
of the members of the Policy Board. Based on the Bank of Japan Law, which was revised in 
1997 and came into effect in April 1998, the Policy Board – the highest decisionmaking body 
of the Bank – decides on a wide range of matters, not only those related to monetary policy 
but  also  those  related  to  financial  stability  and the  payment  and  settlement  system.  Policy 
Board  meetings  where  monetary  policy  is  deliberated  and  decided  are  called  Monetary 
Policy Meetings (MPMs). 
Many  other  central  banks  have  also  adopted  a  committee  structure  in  making  monetary 
policy  decisions,  such  as  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System for the United States, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank 
(ECB) for the euro area, and the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Bank of England 
(BOE) for the United Kingdom. 
I. 
The quiet revolution: decisionmaking by committee 
Overview 
A. 
One  of  the  issues  in  which  academic  researchers  have  shown  an  increasing  interest  in 
recent  years  is  monetary  policy  decisionmaking  by  committee.  Professor  Alan  Blinder  at 
Princeton  University,  a  former  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System  during  Chairman  Greenspan's  era,  has  highlighted  a  "quiet  revolution"  in 
central banking practice in the past decade: namely, changes in the areas of decisionmaking 
by committee, transparency, and communication with the market.1
Decisionmaking  by  committee  requires  deliberations  among  committee  members  and 
collective  decisionmaking.  The  committee  structure  is  not  necessarily  unique  to  central 
banking.  For  example,  in  Japan,  the  Diet  has  standing  and  special  committees,  and  the 
government  also  has  independent  committees  such  as  the  Fair  Trade  Commission. 
Furthermore, some corporations have adopted a committee structure. 
                                                 
1   See Blinder (2004). 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 1
Is decisionmaking by committee superior to that by an individual? Intuitively, in line with the 
saying  "two  heads  are  better  than  one,"  groups  might  come  up  with  better  ideas  than  an 
individual.  It  seems  to  me  that  deliberations  among  multiple  individual  members  with 
expertise and diverse insights should lead to a better policy outcome. In other words, through 
deliberations  members  can  share  their  knowledge  and  skills  and  correct  each  other's 
misunderstandings, and the shortcomings of individual decisionmaking such as one-sided or 
prejudiced views, a lack of multifaceted consideration, and dogmatic attitudes can be greatly 
reduced. 
Professor  Stephen  Bainbridge  of  the  UCLA  School  of  Law  has  studied  collective 
decisionmaking  by  the  boards  of  directors  of  U.S.  corporations.2  He  refers  to  the  issue  of 
"bounded rationality" as one explanation of why decisionmaking by group is advantageous 
and argues the following: 
"Decisionmaking requires the use of scarce resources for four purposes: (1) 
observation, or the gathering of information; (2) memory, or the storage of 
information;  (3)  computation,  or  the  manipulation  of  information;  and  (4) 
communication,  or  the  transmission  of  information  .  .  .  If  groups  have  an 
advantage  relevant  to  the  institution  of  the  board  of  directors,  it  therefore 
seems  most 
to  arise  with  respect  to  either  memory  and/or 
computation  .  .  .  Put  another  way,  group  decisionmaking  may  be  an 
adaptive response to bounded rationality, creating a system for aggregating 
the  inputs  of  multiple  individuals  with  differing  knowledge,  interests,  and 
skills." 
likely 
Research on central banks' decisionmaking by committee 
B. 
Next, I would like to refer to some of the literature that specifically analyzes central banking 
and monetary policy decisionmaking by committee.3
Professor Blinder discusses whether monetary policy should be made by an individual or a 
committee  and  explains  why  the  central  banks  of  many  countries  have  now  adopted 
committee decisionmaking as follows:4
"I  believe  that  the  main  factor  underlying  the  worldwide  trend  toward 
monetary policy committees . . . was the perceived success of the Federal 
Reserve and the Bundesbank, both of which had long made decisions . . . 
by committee. Imitation is, after all, the sincerest form of flattery. In addition, 
there is no reason to have a monetary policy committee when the central 
bank  is  simply  taking  orders  from  its  government.  So  the  trend  toward 
central bank independence opened the door to committee decisionmaking." 
In  addition,  Professor  Blinder  summarizes  the  main  arguments  for  preferring  committee  to 
individual decisionmaking under the following four points,5 which seem to be consistent with 
the study on the boards of directors of U.S. corporations that I have just referred to. 
1. 
2. 
"Pooling: A committee pools the disparate knowledge of its individual members. 
Diversity:  Members  of  a  committee  bring  different  decisionmaking  heuristics  to  a 
complex problem. 
                                                 
2   See Bainbridge (2002). 
3   See Fujiki (2005) for references to the related literature. 
4   See Blinder (2006a, b). 
5   See Blinder (2006b). 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2007
3. 
4. 
Checks  and  balances: Committees  are  less  likely  to  adopt  extreme  or  idiosyncratic 
positions. 
Reduced volatility: Owing to “averaging” (which need not be interpreted literally), the 
decisions of a group are likely to be less volatile." 
With regard to the fourth point, however, Professor Blinder argues that it "might conceivably 
be  turned  around  and  viewed  as  a  vice  instead  because  one  person's  low  volatility  is 
another's excessive inertia." 
Professor Anne Sibert of the University of London notes free riding and group polarization as 
possible  shortcomings  of  group  decisionmaking.6  With  regard  to  the  first  issue,  she  points 
out  that  the  free-riding  problem  can  occur,  for  example,  in  gathering  information  and  that 
larger  committees  are  more  likely  to  encounter  this  problem  than  smaller  committees. 
However, I do not believe that the free-riding problem is likely to emerge in decisionmaking in 
committees  based  on  my  experience  at  the  Bank,  where  each  member  participates  in  the 
decisionmaking autonomously and independently. 
With  regard  to  the  issue  of  group  polarization,  biased  group  membership  and  heated 
deliberations make the views of individual members less moderate or more extreme. Group 
polarization can be inconsistent with excessive inertia, which is noted by Professor Blinder. 
Professor Sibert also says that it is debatable whether moderation or polarization is a good 
thing. In my experience, group polarization is unlikely to occur if members of the committee 
have profound experience and diversified backgrounds. 
Summarizing what I have referred to and mentioned so far, the committee structure can be a 
better framework for decisionmaking because of the pooling of knowledge, the diversity of 
views,  and  the  checks  and  balances  it  provides,  and  such  group  decisionmaking  can  be 
superior  to  individual  decisionmaking.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  in  practice,  group 
decisionmaking can be excessively inert and the adoption of the committee structure does 
not necessarily guarantee the right outcome. 
The committee’s structure of the FOMC, the Governing Council, and the MPC 
II.  
I  will  briefly  explain  how  other  central  banks  reach  their  decisions  under  the  committee 
structure. I would like to discuss the FOMC of the Federal Reserve System, the Governing 
Council of the ECB, and the MPC of the BOE. 
The FOMC 
A.  
The FOMC consists of twelve members: seven members of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, including the Chairman and the Vice Chairman, and five Reserve 
Bank presidents, of whom four serve on a rotating basis. The other seven presidents also 
attend  FOMC  meetings  and  participate  in  the  discussions,  although  they  do  not  have  the 
right to vote.  
Members of the Board of Governors are nominated by the President of the United States and 
confirmed by the Senate. In making appointments, the President needs to pay due regard to 
a  fair  representation  of  financial,  agricultural,  industrial,  and  commercial  interests,  and  the 
geographical division of the country. On the other hand, the president of each Reserve Bank 
is nominated by its board of directors. The nomination process is such that members of the 
FOMC would have diversified knowledge and insights. In fact, current members have diverse 
career  backgrounds  as,  for  example,  academics,  executives  of  financial  institutions,  high-
ranking  officials  of  international  organizations,  government  officials,  and  central  bankers. 
                                                 
6   See Sibert (2006). 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 3
With  regard  to  terms  of  office,  members  of  the  Board  of  Governors  have  full  terms  of  14 
years and Reserve Bank presidents have five years. 
Transcripts  of  FOMC  meetings  reveal  that  members  present  various  opinions,  hold  lively 
discussions, and make decisions by majority vote. Mr. Meyer, a former member of the Board 
of Governors during Chairman Greenspan's era, noted that there were two traditions at the 
FOMC: the first was that the Chairman was always expected to be on the winning side of a 
policy vote, and the second was that the FOMC strove to reach a consensus on the policy 
decision.7 However, votes have not always been unanimous and one or two dissenting votes 
are not unusual. In fact, during the second half of 2006, Mr. Lacker, the president of Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond, dissented because he believed that further policy tightening was 
needed. 
The Governing Council 
B.  
The Governing Council of the ECB consists of 19 members: six members of the Executive 
Board,  including  the  President  and  the  Vice  President,  and  the  governors  of  13  national 
central banks in the euro area. The number of euro area countries has increased from twelve 
to 13 with Slovenia joining at the beginning of 2007. Members of the Executive Board are 
appointed  –  from  among  persons  of  recognized  standing  and  professional  experience  in 
monetary  or  banking  matters  –  by  the  European  Council,  following  necessary  procedures. 
The governors of national central banks are appointed in accordance with national laws.  
The 19 members of the Governing Council, with diverse nationalities, have a wide variety of 
career backgrounds, including as academics, executives of financial institutions, politicians, 
government  officials,  and  central  bankers.  Accordingly,  reflecting  historical  and institutional 
factors unique to Europe, the Governing Council is a group of experts with diversity, selected 
in consideration of expertise and geographical factors. Members of the Executive Board of 
the ECB have eight-year terms, and the governors of national central banks, depending upon 
national laws, have terms of five years or more. 
It is often said that the consensus of the Governing Council in decisionmaking is respected 
and that its decision is the result of collective deliberation and debate.8
The MPC 
C.  
The  MPC  consists  of  nine  members:  five  internal  members,  that is,  the  Governor,  the  two 
Deputy Governors, the Bank's Chief Economist, and the Executive Director for Markets (the 
latter  two  are  appointed  by  the  Governor  upon  consultation  with  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer),  as  well  as  four  external  members  appointed  directly  by  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer.  External  members  are  not  necessarily  full  time,  and,  for  example,  some 
members are concurrently faculty  members at universities. Current members have diverse 
backgrounds, including as academics, government officials, private-sector economists, and 
central  bankers.  The  Governor  and  the  Deputy  Governors  have  five-year  terms,  and  the 
others have three-year terms.  
At  MPC  meetings,  dissenting  votes  are  cast  rather  frequently.  Sometimes  there  are  four 
dissenting votes out of nine. For example, at the January 2007 meeting, the MPC decided to 
raise the policy interest rate by a 5-4 majority vote. Governor King was in the majority while 
Deputy Governor Lomax and Messrs. Bean and Tucker were in the minority. Votes among 
external  members  were  three  in  favor  of  the  raise  and  one  against,  and  among  internal 
members, two were in favor and three against. Moreover, at the August 2005 meeting, the 
                                                 
7   See Meyer (1998). 
8   See Issing (2005) and Schill (2005). 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2007
MPC  decided  to  reduce  the  policy  interest  rate  by  a  5-4  majority  vote,  and  this  time, 
Governor King was in the minority. All four votes of external members were in favor of the 
reduction while votes among internal members were split: one in favor of the reduction and 
four against. Interestingly, Governor King later testified before the Treasury Committee of the 
House of Commons on November 24, 2005, saying as follows: 
"[T]he  decision  falls  out  by  majority  vote  .  .  .  it  logically  follows,  as  night 
follows day, that there will be some times when each and every member of 
the Committee may find themselves in a minority, including the Governor, 
and I was in that position . . . I felt comfortable about that . . . We believe 
that  the  right  thing  is  that  at  the  end  everyone  says  what  they  honestly 
believe is the right thing to do." 
The FOMC of the Federal Reserve System, the General Council of the ECB, the MPC of the 
BOE, and the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan have all adopted the committee structure, 
but the design and implementation of the committee structure of each of these differ, partly 
due to political and historical factors. Each central bank has been making various efforts to 
improve its implementation to the extent possible. 
The framework and procedures of MPMs 
III.  
Next, I would like to turn to the case of the Bank of Japan and explain the framework and 
procedures of MPMs.9
The framework of MPMs 
A.  
Monetary policy is deliberated and decided by the Policy Board at MPMs. The Policy Board 
is  composed  of  nine  members:  the  Governor,  the  two  Deputy  Governors  including  myself, 
and six other members. Members are all appointed by the Cabinet and approved by the Diet 
and serve for five-year terms. Under the old Bank of Japan Law of 1942, the Policy Board 
consisted  of  a  total  of  seven  members:  the  Governor,  four  appointed  representatives  with 
outstanding experience in the fields of finance, commerce and industry, and agriculture, and 
two government representatives without the right to vote. The Bank of Japan Law of 1997 
stipulates that the six members other than the Governor and the two Deputy Governors be 
appointed from "among those with academic expertise or experience including experts on the 
economy or finance." Indeed, Policy Board members come from quite diverse backgrounds 
and  include  former  academics,  executives  of  corporations  as  well  as  financial  institutions, 
and private-sector economists. 
The number of members of the Bank's Policy Board is nine, which is the same as that of the 
MPC of the BOE, but it is smaller than the FOMC of the Federal Reserve System and the 
Governing Council of the ECB. According to a survey on central bank laws conducted by the 
staff of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), most central bank committees have seven to 
nine  members.10  If  the  size  of  a  committee  is  too  small,  the  accumulation  of  knowledge 
becomes  difficult,  there  is  less  diversity  in  perceptions  and  opinions,  and  checks  and 
balances may not function well. On the other hand, if the size is too big, discussions become 
less  productive.  For  extensive  and  constructive  discussions  where  Policy  Board  members 
are given sufficient time to express their views, I believe the current size of nine members is 
within the appropriate range for a committee.  
At MPMs, the Governor and the Deputy Governors independently express their assessment 
on the economic and financial situation and their views on the conduct of monetary policy. 
                                                 
9   See Fujiwara (2003). 
10   See Lybek and Morris (2004). 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 5
The Governor and the Deputy Governors are also responsible for carrying out decisions of 
the  Policy  Board,  together  with  the  Executive  Directors  and  the  staff.  The  six  other  Policy 
Board  members  are  full-time  executives.  In  addition  to  MPMs,  they  attend  Policy  Board 
meetings that make decisions, with the Governor and the Deputy Governors, on important 
policy  issues,  such  as  those  on  financial  stability,  business  operations,  and  management 
strategy. Given that they hold important positions that require neutrality, they are prohibited 
from  taking  another  occupation,  and  restrictions  are  also  placed  on  the  types  of  financial 
assets  they  can  hold  and  the  financial  transactions  they  can  make,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Governor and the Deputy Governors.  
MPMs,  where  the  Policy  Board  decides  a  guideline  for  money  market  operations  for  the 
intermeeting period ahead and formulates the Bank's view on recent economic and financial 
developments, are held regularly, once or twice a month. Aside from these meetings, Policy 
Board  meetings  where  the  Bank's  business  operations,  management  strategy,  and  other 
issues are decided are, as a general rule, held twice a week. 
Preparations for MPMs 
B.  
Let  me  describe  how  Policy  Board  members  prepare  for  MPMs.  Policy  Board  members 
accumulate  various  types  of  information  useful  for  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
through their analysis of the economic situation and financial market developments, the daily 
conduct of business operations, and exchanges of views with representatives from various 
fields.  Utilizing  such  information  as  well  as  knowledge,  Policy  Board  members  monitor 
carefully economic and financial developments.  
The details of the preparation for MPMs are as follows. At least two business days prior to 
the MPM concerned, Policy Board members are provided with written reports prepared by 
the Bank's staff, which the Bank's staff later use at the beginning of the meeting to present 
an  assessment  of  the  current  economic  and  financial  situation.  The  reports  include  a 
comprehensive  analysis  of  the  economy  based  on  available  macro  and  micro  economic 
information.  In  preparation  for  the  MPM,  members  read  through  the  staff's  reports  and 
formulate  their  views  on  the  economic  and  financial  situation,  the  outlook,  and  the 
appropriate direction of monetary policy. 
Deliberations on the day of the MPM 
C. 
I will now outline a typical two-day MPM. The first day of the MPM usually starts at 2:00 p.m. 
The  meeting  is  attended  by  Policy  Board  members  and  by  government  representatives, 
namely, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal Policy or 
their designated delegates. Executive Directors of the Bank in charge of departments directly 
concerned  with  monetary  policy,  and  Directors-General  and  other  senior  officials  of 
departments concerned, attend MPMs to report. Others present at the MPM include staff of 
the MPM secretariat supporting the proceedings of MPMs. The chairman of the Policy Board 
is elected by the Board members from among themselves. The Governor has so far always 
been the chairman. 
On  the  first  day  of  the  MPM,  the  staff  present  reports  on  recent  economic  and  financial 
developments. Specifically, the staff report developments including the results of the Bank's 
money market operations and developments in the economy and financial markets in Japan 
as  well  as  those  abroad.  The  meeting  then  moves  on  to  a  question-and-answer  session 
between Policy Board members and the reporting staff.  
The second day of the MPM usually starts at 9:00 a.m. The meeting begins with a discussion 
among Policy Board members on economic and financial developments. First, each Policy 
Board  member  in  turn  expresses  his  or  her  views  on  recent  economic  and  financial 
developments and the prospects for the future, taking into account the reports presented by 
the Bank's staff on the previous day and other members' views. After all the members have 
6 
 BIS Review 96/2007
had  their  turn,  discussion  starts  and  members  freely  and  actively  exchange  views  on 
economic and financial developments.  
Following  the  discussion  on  economic  and  financial  developments,  Policy  Board  members 
next  discuss  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Again,  each  Policy  Board  member  in  turn 
expresses  his  or  her  views,  mainly  on  whether  the  Bank  should  maintain  or  change  the 
guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead, and the reasons. 
Furthermore, Policy Board members deliberate on the Bank's conduct of monetary policy in 
the longer term. Members then exchange views freely to gain a better understanding of each 
other's views and differences in their views, and proceed further with the discussion. In the 
course of the discussion, government representatives have an opportunity to make remarks. 
Votes on policy decisions at MPMs 
D.  
After  the  thorough  discussions,  Policy  Board  members  take  a  vote  on  the  policy  proposal 
relating to the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead, i.e., 
whether the Bank should change or maintain the guideline for money market operations. 
Based on the intensive discussions among Policy Board members at the MPM, the chairman 
formulates and submits a policy proposal that reflects the majority view of the members. As I 
mentioned earlier, sometimes other Policy Board members who hold different views submit a 
proposal separately. The decision is made by a majority vote. This is the process of how the 
guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead and the release of 
public statements, which is also put to the vote, are decided. 
After the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead is decided, 
Policy  Board  members  discuss  "The  Bank's  View"  of  recent  economic  and  financial 
developments  as  well  as  the  outlook,  which  is  published  in  the  Monthly  Report  of  Recent 
Economic and Financial Developments. The draft of "The Bank's View" is formulated based 
on the members' discussion and put to the vote. 
Looking back at past MPMs, votes have not always been unanimous. Since my inauguration 
as Deputy Governor in March 2003, I have attended 63 MPMs up to this April. Among these, 
the number of MPMs where votes were cast against the chairman's policy proposal on the 
guideline  for  money  market  operations  was  as  follows:  two  MPMs  with  three  dissents,  15 
MPMs  with  two  dissents,  and  five  MPMs  with  a  single  dissent.  Moreover,  there  were  24 
proposals other than the chairman's on the guideline for money market operations: at seven 
MPMs  there  were  two  proposals  other  than  the  chairman's,  while  at  ten,  there  was  one 
proposal other than the chairman's. There were five MPMs where dissents were cast against 
the chairman's proposal without the submission of any other proposal. The fact that votes at 
MPMs have not always been unanimous suggests that the autonomy of each Policy Board 
member has been respected. 
Announcement of decisions 
E.  
After going through the above decisionmaking process, the MPM finally comes to a close. 
Policy Board members are provided with sufficient time to hold extensive discussions and the 
decisions made at MPMs are announced so that Japanese financial markets can as much as 
possible  digest  the  decisions  on  the  day  of  the  meeting.  The  guideline  for  money  market 
operations decided at the MPM is announced immediately  after it ends, and the Governor 
holds a press conference on that day, usually from 3:30 p.m. To avoid confusion in financial 
markets,  Policy  Board  members  have  agreed  to  comply  with  the  so-called  blackout  rule, 
which sets a period starting from two business days before an MPM and lasting until the end 
of  the  Governor's  press  conference.  During  this  period,  members  must,  as  a  general  rule, 
refrain  from  making  public  comments  on  monetary  policy  and  economic  and  financial 
developments. 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 7
Decisionmaking by committee and central bank independence 
IV. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  relationship  between  decisionmaking  by  committee  and 
central  bank  independence.  As  previously  noted,  Professor  Blinder  makes  the  interesting 
point  that  "[w]hen  the  central  bank  was  just  following  orders  communicated  by  the 
government, there was not much reason to have a committee . . ."11 However, a committee 
structure  is  not  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  for  a  central  bank  to  maintain  its 
independence from the government. More important is the concrete relationship between the 
central bank and the government. I will not go into central bank independence in depth today, 
but  will  elaborate  on  the  following  points  in  relation  to  the  committee  structure:  the 
significance  of  independence  for  the  Bank  of  Japan;  the  guarantee  of  the  status  of  Policy 
Board members; and the attendance of government representatives at MPMs. 
First, the Bank's independence regarding the conduct of monetary policy, which is referred to 
as "autonomy" in the Bank of Japan Law of 1997, has been strengthened since 1998, when 
the  Law  came  into  effect.  Although  the  Bank  remains  to  a  certain  degree  under  the 
government's  control  as  a  public  organization,  it  is  granted  by  the  Bank  of  Japan Law  the 
explicit mission to conduct monetary policy in pursuit of price stability, and thus the Policy 
Board can make monetary policy decisions independently without external interference. 
Second, in order to ensure the independence of the Bank, Policy Board members' term of 
office  is  set  as  five  years  and  during  this  term  their  status  is  guaranteed,  with  causes  for 
dismissal limited to, for example, physical or mental disorders. 
Third, the attendance of government representatives at monetary policy committees varies 
according to central banks. At the Federal Reserve System, government representatives are 
not allowed to attend FOMC meetings. At the ECB, the President of the ECOFIN Council and 
a  member  of  the  European  Commission  (usually  the  Commissioner  responsible  for 
Economic and Monetary Affairs) often attend the Governing Council meetings. At the BOE, a 
representative from the Treasury attends MPC meetings. 
As for the Bank of Japan, government representatives attend MPMs, as in the case of the 
ECB and the BOE. The Minister of Finance and the Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal 
Policy or their designated delegates attend MPMs, as specified in the Bank of Japan Law. 
They  express  their  views  on  the  state  of  the  economy,  the  government's  conduct  of 
economic  policy,  and  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Although  the  government 
representatives  do  not  have  the  right  to  vote,  they  can  submit  a  proposal  requesting  to 
postpone  the  Policy  Board  members'  vote  on  policy  proposals  to  the  next  MPM.  Such  a 
proposal  was  in  fact  presented  at  the  MPM  in  August  2000.  Moreover,  government 
representatives can submit a proposal for monetary policy measures to be decided by the 
Policy  Board.  In  both  cases,  it  is  up  to  the  Policy  Board  to  decide  whether  to  adopt  any 
proposal submitted by government representatives. 
In short, the Bank of Japan Law sets forth a transparent framework to facilitate the exchange 
of  views  between  the  Bank  and  the  government  and  to  ensure  the  opportunity  for  the 
government  to  express  its  opinion  concerning  monetary  policy  at  MPMs,  thereby  ensuring 
both central bank independence and consistency between the Bank's monetary policy and 
the government's economic policy. 
Decisionmaking by committee and central bank transparency 
V. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  relationship  between  decisionmaking  by  committee  and 
central bank transparency. I will start by describing the communication frameworks regarding 
                                                 
11   See Blinder (2006a). 
8 
 BIS Review 96/2007
policy decisions at the FOMC of the Federal Reserve System, the Governing Council of the 
ECB, the MPC of the BOE, and the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan. 
Transparency of monetary policy decisions 
A.  
The FOMC releases a statement concerning the decision made at the meeting on the same 
day.  The  statement  contains  the  Committee's  basic  view  of  the  U.S.  economy,  the 
Committee's decision regarding monetary policy, and the result of members' vote on FOMC 
monetary policy action. The minutes of FOMC meetings are released three weeks after the 
date of the policy decision, and transcripts of meetings are released with a five-year lag.  
The  Governing  Council  does  not  release  its  minutes,  transcripts,  or  details  of  members' 
votes. After the Governing Council meeting, the President, assisted by the Vice-President, 
holds  a  press  conference.  The  President  makes  an  introductory  statement,  explaining  the 
decision  as  well  as  the  economic  and  monetary  analysis,  and  this  is  then  followed  by  a 
question-and-answer session.  
The MPC announces its interest rate decision immediately following the MPC meeting. The 
minutes of the MPC meetings are published two weeks after the interest rate decision. The 
record of the votes of the individual members of the Committee is released in the minutes.  
As  for  the  Bank  of  Japan,  the  Policy  Board  announces,  immediately  after  the  MPM,  the 
decision  on  its  guideline  for  money  market  operations  for  the  intermeeting  period  ahead. 
Since  the  MPM  in  February  2007,  the  record  of  the  votes  of  the  individual  Policy  Board 
members has also been released in the announcement of MPM decisions. Shortly afterward 
on  the  same  day,  the  Bank  publishes  "The  Bank's  View"  in  the  Monthly  Report  of  Recent 
Economic  and  Financial  Developments,  and  the  Governor  holds  a  press  conference.  The 
minutes  of  MPMs  are  released  around  one  month  after  the  meeting  concerned,  and  the 
transcripts of MPMs are to be published ten years later. The Bank also releases the Outlook 
for Economic Activity and Prices semiannually (the April 2007 issue was released recently). 
In  addition,  the  Governor  reports  to  and  attends  the  Diet,  and  Policy  Board  members 
frequently give speeches and accept interviews.  
Central bank communication with the market 
B.  
Another  important  issue  is  how  central  banks  adopting  the  committee  structure  should 
communicate with the market. Given that the effects of monetary policy are transmitted via 
financial markets, enhancing transparency not only ensures the central bank's accountability 
to the public but also improves the effectiveness of monetary policy. However, enhancing the 
transparency of policy decisionmaking by committee involves difficult issues, unlike the case 
of individual decisionmaking where only one individual needs to be accountable for his/her 
decisions.  Central  banks  that  adopt  decisionmaking  by  committee  need  to  seek  ways  to 
enhance  the  accountability  of  the committee  as  a  whole  as  well  as  that  of  each  individual 
member, including the governor as the chairman. This issue of accountability also relates to 
central bank communication with the market and poses a difficult problem.  
In  2000,  the  third  year  since  the  establishment  of  the  MPC,  the  BOE  asked  the  Vice 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Kohn,  who  was 
then  the  Director  of  the  Division  of  Monetary  Affairs,  to  assess  the  transparency  of  the 
policymaking process at the MPC. One of Mr. Kohn's assessments was that "the committee 
structure greatly complicates transparency; it is far easier to determine and publish the views 
of  a  single  person  than  it  is  those  of  a  Committee  with  nine  individually  accountable 
members."12  The  response  of  the  MPC  was  that  "this  is  particularly  true  of  one  important 
                                                 
12   See Kohn (2000). 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 9
theme  which  runs  through  the  Report,  namely  the  problem  of  reconciling  individual 
accountability of MPC members with the need to present a collective message to the public 
that explains the decisions of the Committee."13
To deal with this problem, the ECB has "placed a premium on speaking “with one voice” and 
consensus in decisionmaking."14 This reflects the need to conduct a single monetary policy in 
the  euro  area  in  the  unique  environment  of  European  integration.  A  typical  example  of 
speaking  "with  one  voice"  is  the  press  conference  by  the  President  held  shortly  after  the 
monetary policy decision. Mr. Trichet, the President of the ECB, has often emphasized that it 
is his role as the captain to speak "with one voice" on behalf of all members of the Governing 
Council of the ECB.  
On  the  other  hand,  with  a  view  to  enhancing  the  transparency  of  policy  decisionmaking 
based on the committee structure, the FOMC, the MPC, and the Policy Board of the Bank of 
Japan release the results of the votes of individual members, thus indicating the existence of 
minority views, and have also made efforts to release the minutes of the meetings sooner. In 
addition,  like  the  President  of  the  ECB,  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  holds  a  press 
conference  after  the  MPM  on  the  same  day  to  enhance  transparency  of  monetary  policy 
decisions.  
While  it  is  important  to  secure  an environment  where  members  can  contemplate  and  hold 
extensive discussions at meetings in order to maximize the merits of the committee structure, 
at  the  same  time  the  transparency  needs  to  be  enhanced,  and  it  is  therefore  important  to 
strike a balance between them. In the case of the Bank of Japan, I believe that through the 
release  of  the  minutes  and  transcripts  of  MPMs,  Policy  Board  members  are  all  the  more 
responsible for the persuasiveness and the consistency of their remarks, and thus the quality 
of deliberations at MPMs has also been improved. 
In sum, the Bank of Japan's Policy Board has a highly transparent framework and is unique 
in that transparency is ensured both through a press conference held by the Governor after 
every MPM on the same day and the release of the minutes and the transcripts of MPMs by 
the  Bank.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  make  every  effort  to  enhance  transparency  so  as  to 
improve its accountability to the public and the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
Lessons learned from recent experience 
C. 
In connection with the February policy change, there is criticism that there may have been 
some confusion in the process of communicating with the market since the end of last year, 
when the policy action began to be the target of speculation. We accept such criticism and 
will try to improve the means of communication in the future.  
I would like to express my views on the Bank's communication with the market before and 
after an MPM in relation to the committee structure I explained earlier.  
First, it should be made clear that information concerning the results of the policy decisions is 
never released by the Bank before an MPM. At MPMs, policy decisions are made by vote 
after thorough discussions among members. Some members may change their views as a 
result of the discussions, and therefore policy decisions are unknown until a vote is taken.  
Second,  immediately  following  an  MPM,  the  Bank  disseminates  information  on  the  policy 
decision through various communicative media that are all easily accessed by the general 
public. The Bank announces the guideline for money market operations, the Governor holds 
a  press  conference,  and 
the  Monthly  Report  of  Recent  Economic  and  Financial 
Developments and the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices are released. Moreover, if 
                                                 
13   See Bank of England (2000). 
14   See Issing (2005). 
10 
 BIS Review 96/2007
some members have voted against a policy proposal that represents the majority view, their 
views, in addition to the majority view, are clearly explained, for example, in the minutes of 
the MPMs. I believe that the process of discussions held at the MPMs has been made more 
transparent through the publication of minority views, and that, as a result, the policy stance 
and the intentions of the Bank have been made clearer. 
Third, I believe there are two key types of information that a central bank needs to provide: 
the central bank's assessment of the economic and price situation; and its basic thinking on 
the conduct of monetary policy. Market participants can form expectations regarding future 
interest  rates  by  adjusting  their  views  of  the  economy  and  prices  on  the  basis  of  such 
information,  while  central  banks  can  deduce  market  participants'  views  regarding  the 
economy and prices from market interest rates and yield curves. What we have in mind in 
terms of communicating with the market is such a two-way exchange of information. Hinting 
at the actual timing of the policy change is generally inadvisable. If such a hint were made, 
market  participants  would  carry  out  transactions  based  not  on  their  own  views  of  the 
economy  and  prices  but  in  response  to  the  central  bank's  hint,  and  this  would  result  in  a 
breakdown of the two-way exchange of information.  
Concluding remarks 
As  I  explained  earlier,  there  are  various  types  of  committees.  Based  on  my  everyday 
experience of conducting monetary policy, I believe that the committee structure has proved 
advantageous and effective in making appropriate monetary policy decisions. In order to take 
full advantage of the merits of the committee structure, central banks should constantly make 
efforts  to improve  the  operation  of monetary  policy  committees  in  line  with  changes  in  the 
environment.  
Today I expressed my practical views on central banking by committee. I would appreciate it 
if you, leading economists, could take some of these points into consideration in constructing 
your economic models and theories in the future.  
I look forward to learning from the fruits of your new research. Thank you very much for your 
attention.  
References 
Bainbridge, Stephen M., "Why a Board? Group Decisionmaking in Corporate Governance," 
Vanderbilt Law Review, 55, 2002, pp. 1-55. 
Bank  of  England,  "Bank  of  England  Response  to  the  Kohn  Report,"  December  6,  2000. 
[Bank  of  England,  "Bank  of  England  Response  to  the  Kohn  Report,"Bank  of  England 
Quarterly Bulletin, 41 (1), 2001, pp. 50-54.] 
Blinder, Alan S., The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern, Yale University Press, 
2004.  
------,  "Monetary  Policy  by  Committee:  Why  and  How?"  DNB  Working  Paper  No.  92,  De 
Nederlandsche Bank, 2006a. 
------,  "Monetary  Policy  Today:  Sixteen  Questions  and  about  Twelve  Answers,"  in  S. 
Fernandez de Lis and F. Restoy, eds. Central Banks in the 21st Century: An International 
Conference Sponsored by Banco de España, Banco de España, 2006b. 
Fujiki,  Hiroshi,  "The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  and  the  Incentive  Problem:  A  Selective 
Survey,"Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  23  (S-1),  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic 
Studies, Bank of Japan, 2005, pp. 37-82. 
Fujiwara, Sakuya, "Inside a Monetary Policy Meeting," speech given at Toyo University on 
March 13, 2003. 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 11
Issing,  Otmar,  "Communication,  Transparency,  Accountability:  Monetary  Policy  in  the 
Twenty-First Century," Review, 87 (2, Part 1), Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2005, pp. 
65-83. 
Kohn, Donald L., "Report to the Non-Executive Directors of the Court of the Bank of England 
on  Monetary  Policy  Processes  and  the  Work  of  Monetary  Analysis,"  October  18,  2000. 
[Kohn, Donald L., The Kohn Report on MPC Procedures,"Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 
41 (1), Bank of England, 2001, pp. 35-49.] 
Lybek,  Tonny,  and  JoAnne  Morris,  "Central  Bank  Governance:  A  Survey  of  Boards  and 
Management," IMF Working Paper No. 04/226, International Monetary Fund, 2004. 
Meyer, Laurence H., "Come with Me to the FOMC," The Gillis Lecture, Willamette University, 
Salem, Oregon, April 2, 1998. 
Schill,  Wolfgang,  "Panelists'  Remarks 
Incentive 
Mechanisms for Economic Policymakers: Macroeconomic Policy and Central Banking at the 
Twelfth International Conference of the Bank of Japan),"Monetary and Economic Studies, 23 
(S-1), Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 2005, pp. 234-239. 
Sibert,  Anne,  "Central  Banking  by  Committee,"International  Finance,  9  (2),  2006,  pp.  145-
168. 
(Concluding  Panel  Discussion  on 
12 
 BIS Review 96/2007
