Glenn Stevens: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public 
Administration, Gold Coast, 17 August 2007. 
 Mr Chairman, members of the Committee. 
Since we last met in Perth, economic conditions in Australia have strengthened. At the same 
time, financial markets globally have recently become extremely skittish and there has been 
a very sharp re-assessment of risk and a sudden desire for liquidity. 
I  will  come  to  the  financial  market  turbulence  shortly.  Before  I  do,  however,  it  is  worth 
recounting  how  the  real  economy  has  performed  over  the  past  six  months.  Given  the 
uncertainty being felt in financial markets at present, it is important to keep a clear sense of 
the economic fundamentals. 
According to the national income accounts, growth picked up sharply in the December and 
March quarters. Over the year to March, real GDP is estimated to have expanded by about 
3¾  per  cent,  despite  the  impact  of  the  drought.  The  non  farm  economy  was  reported  as 
having grown by about 4½ per cent, equal to its fastest pace for four years. 
Gauging the true extent of acceleration is not straightforward given the inevitable noise in the 
data  over  short  periods,  but  a  wide  range  of  survey  evidence  and  other  indicators  also 
suggest that conditions picked up in the first half of 2007. Domestic spending is rising, with 
robust  rises  featured  among  most  of  the  components.  The  exception  is  residential 
construction, where commencements remain flat at slightly below average levels. Demand 
for  credit  also  appears  to  have  firmed,  most  particularly  among  businesses.  Household 
finances, like corporate finances, are generally in strong shape. 
Demand  for  Australian  exports  is  rising  too.  Success  in  transporting  higher  volumes  of 
resources  has  been  mixed,  varying  by  location  and  industry  and  according  to  disruptions 
caused by weather, efforts at adding new capacity, and port and rail delays in some cases. 
But  the  trend  is  upward  and  tonnages  are  set  to  increase  over  the  next  several  years  as 
capacity comes on line. Agricultural exports will benefit from the improved rainfall in some 
parts of the country. 
Not surprisingly in light of the above, the demand for labour has continued to expand. The 
recorded rate of unemployment is at its lowest for a generation. Job vacancies are high and 
surveys suggest that many firms see the difficulty of finding additional labour as among the 
biggest,  or  the  biggest,  impediment  to  expanding  production.  As  yet,  though,  the  pace  of 
growth in labour costs overall has remained relatively contained. 
In  thinking about  why  growth  has picked  up  somewhat  more  than  had  been  expected,  we 
should  not  overlook  the  fact  that  the  global  economy  has  surprised,  once  again,  by  its 
strength. The most recent forecasts for global growth made by the IMF were revised upward 
only a few weeks ago, with growth now thought likely to be over 5 per cent in 2007, close to 
the 2006 result. The US economy has slowed but greater strength elsewhere has, to date, 
more than outweighed the US softening. 
Australia’s terms of trade have kept rising and stand at a five decade high. This has added 
about 1½ per cent of GDP to the annual growth in Australia’s national income over the past 
couple of years, which is quite an expansionary force. Some of the resulting demand spills 
abroad, but there is also a stimulus to spending on non tradeable goods and services arising 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 1
from the income gains being experienced. The rise in property prices in Western Australia is 
a case in point. 
It would be imprudent to assume that this trend will continue indefinitely. Nonetheless, it has 
already  gone  considerably  further  than  most  observers  anticipated.  When  we  lift  our  gaze 
beyond  the  conventional  forecasting  horizon,  the  big  picture  is  that  the  emergence  of 
potentially very large economies like China and India, at such a rapid pace and with such 
consistency,  is  unlike  anything  we  have  lived  through  before.  We  cannot  be  confident, 
therefore, that the cyclical experience of the past few decades is necessarily a reliable guide 
to how things will develop. 
In  its  policy  deliberations  over  several  months,  the  Board  has  weighed  conflicting  trends. 
When we were last before you, we were observing an apparent moderation in inflation. We 
were,  as  you  know,  at  that  time  still  of  the  view  that  there  could  be  a  need  to  tighten 
monetary  policy  further  at  some  stage.  But  having  made  three  adjustments  in  2006,  we 
believed  that  the  improving  short  term  trend  in  inflation  afforded  us  time  to  watch 
developments. 
Information that came in over the ensuing period suggested stronger than expected demand 
in the economy. This meant that the longer term risk of higher inflation was increasing, not 
diminishing.  Hence,  the  likelihood  that  interest  rates  would  need  to  be  increased  at  some 
stage was rising. 
Moderate price and wage outcomes continued, however, for some months, suggesting that, 
at least temporarily, the supply side of the economy was managing to respond to stronger 
demand. It was doubtful that this could continue over an extended period, but taken together, 
the weight of evidence suggested that the best course for monetary policy was to maintain 
the  existing  setting  for  the  time  being,  but  to  be  ready  to  tighten  should  signs  of  a 
strengthening of price pressures emerge. 
The  June  quarter  CPI  data,  available  for  the  August  meeting,  showed  some  pick  up  in 
inflation.  Together  with  a  stronger  growth  outlook,  this  information  led  us  to  expect  a 
somewhat  higher  path  for  inflation  over  the  horizon  of  the  coming  one  to  two  years.  The 
judgement we reached was that the risk of unnecessarily damaging growth with  a modest 
rise in interest rates was small, whereas the cost of not responding to a deterioration in the 
outlook  for  inflation  could  well,  in  the  longer  term,  be  substantial.  On  straightforward 
macroeconomic  grounds,  therefore,  there  was  a  clear  case  to  make  an  adjustment  to 
monetary policy. 
As  our  statement  on  Wednesday  of  last  week  set  out,  the  Board  considered  the  recent 
events  in  international  credit  markets  in  coming  to  our  decision.  Here,  Mr  Chairman,  it  is 
worth taking a few moments to set out some history. 
For some years now, many long term observers, market participants and officials have been 
troubled by very narrow pricing for risk. In other words, it has been easier and cheaper than 
had been normal in the past for risky borrowers to access funding. Investors were prepared 
to take more risk in pursuit of returns in a world of low global interest rates. 
Somewhere or other, returns were eventually bound to disappoint someone. As it turned out, 
the  problems  emerged  in  the  US  housing  sector.  Lenders  into  the  so  called  “sub  prime” 
market attempted to keep the pace of business up as the US housing sector slowed during 
last  year.  But  they  could  do  this  only  by  lowering  lending  standards.  Before  long,  arrears 
began to rise as some borrowers struggled to meet their commitments. 
Once  this  deterioration  in  underlying  asset  returns  had  occurred,  those  with  exposures 
inevitably began to see losses. Because this type of lending was via securitised structures 
sold into global capital markets, losses have been coming to light right around the world. In 
most cases, the losses are embarrassing rather than fatal for the institution concerned. The 
exceptions have been where particular funds invested mainly or solely in these types of risky 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2007
assets, and especially where leverage was involved. Several hedge funds have borne large 
losses, including some in Australia. 
All of this created a climate in July and early August in which investors retreated and pricing 
of  risk  started  to  return  to  levels  that  could  be  regarded  as  more  reasonable  based  on 
historical experience. A number of capital raisings that had sought to take advantage of the 
earlier very generous terms were postponed. Volatility in some financial markets increased, 
share prices declined somewhat and a general sense of heightened uncertainty was evident. 
In considering the implications of all this for our decision on monetary policy, there were two 
questions  to  ask.  The  first  was  whether  there  was  information  to  suggest  that  financial 
developments were likely to make a sufficient difference, over the relevant horizon for policy, 
to  the  global  economy,  and  therefore  the  Australian  economy  and  the  inflation  outlook,  to 
remove the macroeconomic case for a 25 basis point adjustment to cash rates. On balance, 
we  judged  that  there  was  not.  Downside  risks  to  the  US  economy  do  appear  to  have 
increased  over  recent  months,  but  in  other  parts  of  the  world  the  growth  outlook  has,  if 
anything, been marked higher recently. 
The second question was whether a rise of 25 basis points in Australian cash rates would, in 
itself,  be  financially  destabilising.  No  credible  case  could  be  made  for  that  idea.  In  fact,  it 
would probably have been more destabilising to expectations not to have carried out a policy 
adjustment that most people could see was needed. 
Accordingly, as you know, monetary policy was tightened last week, taking the cash rate to 
6.5 per cent. 
Subsequently,  towards  the  end  of  last  week  there  was  a  period  of  stress  in  some  major 
country money markets. Because the exposures to the mortgage problems in the US are still 
coming  to  light,  financial  institutions  are  uncertain  over  the  standing  of  other  market 
participants. Objectively, it is extremely unlikely that the sub prime mortgage exposures could 
significantly damage the core banking system in any significant country. The exposures are 
spread far too widely for that to occur. But precisely because they are spread widely, and 
because the associated financial structures are opaque, information on who is exposed and 
by  how  much  is  incomplete.  Hence  people  remain  wary.  At  times  of  uncertainty,  market 
participants naturally get more cautious and want to hang on to cash, rather than lending it in 
the interbank market. 
In such circumstances, central banks typically respond by being prepared to make additional 
cash  available,  through  purchases  of  high  quality  assets  from  market  participants,  in 
sufficient  quantities  to  keep  the  cash  rate  at  the  level  required  by  monetary  policy 
considerations. Several major central banks made very substantial injections in this way on 
Thursday and Friday last week in the face of an abrupt shift in cash market conditions. While 
the likelihood of a significant problem of this sort arising in the Australian money market was 
low, last Friday the Reserve Bank as part of its normal dealing operations purchased more 
assets,  hence  adding  more  cash  to  the  system,  than  it  otherwise  would  have  done.  The 
intent of this was to ensure that the cash rate remained at the target level set by the Board. 
The market operated normally and overnight funds were available in the market at 6.50 per 
cent,  exactly  as  intended,  and  this  has  remained  the  case  subsequently.  Of  course,  the 
Reserve Bank remains ready, as always, to ensure there is adequate liquidity for markets to 
function normally in the period ahead. 
The broader credit market issue is that the losses arising from the US mortgage problems 
are  still  being  assessed  and  absorbed.  That  is  producing  a  degree  of  uncertainty  that  is 
affecting financial markets around the world, leading to tougher borrowing conditions for the 
moment, and considerable volatility. 
The  fact  that  the  global  economy  has  been  so  strong,  that  core  financial  institutions  after 
years of strong profits are well capitalised, and that real sector corporate profitability in most 
countries is very sound, will be helpful in coping with tougher credit conditions if they persist. 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 3
Indeed, global growth has of late been sufficiently strong that some moderating effect would 
be welcome. 
An  adjustment  to  investor  behaviour  needed  to  occur,  and  was  almost  certainly  overdue. 
Such adjustments often are not entirely smooth, and are frequently triggered, as in this case, 
by the realisation that credit terms had been too generous for too long. Sometimes, however, 
the ensuing retreat can go too far, resulting in a widespread withdrawal from the provision of 
credit that unnecessarily crimps the pace of economic expansion. We will, therefore, have to 
continue to watch carefully how this unfolds over the period ahead. 
The  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  released  a  few  days  ago  contains  our  most  recent 
assessment  of  the  outlook.  It  takes  account  of  the  change  in  interest  rates  as  well  as  the 
recent flow of data at home and abroad. There are, of course, various assumptions on which 
the  outlook  is  based,  and  these  parameters  could  shift  over  time.  The  credit  market 
developments add a further degree of uncertainty about the outlook. 
Subject  to  that  uncertainty,  the  picture  is  one  of  growth  close  to  trend  and  the  economy 
remaining close to full employment. Under such circumstances, inflation is likely to be around 
3 per cent over the coming year, and near the top of the target zone in the following year. As 
far as risks to that forecast are concerned, the possibility that the world economy might end 
up  being  weaker  than  assumed,  due  to  a  persistence  of  credit  difficulties,  is  one  that 
everyone  will  have  in  mind  at  present.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  also  the  possibility  that 
ongoing  strength  of  demand  in  a  fully  employed  economy  might  leave  us  with  inflation 
pressure that is harder to manage than expected. 
These possibilities, and other things that could come along unexpectedly, will be issues that 
the Board will have to assess each month. For now, my colleagues and I are here to respond 
to your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2007
