X P Guma: Formation of a Monetary Union – perspective on the Swaziland 
economy 
Address  by  Dr  X  P  Guma,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  official 
launching of the Skills Corporate Centre, Mbabane, Swaziland, 28 February 2007.  
 Introduction 
1. 
Your  Excellency,  Honourable  Prime  Minister  of  the  Kingdom  of  Swaziland;  Mr  A.T.  Dlamini: 
Honourable Minister, L.E. Dlamini M.P. – Minister of Enterprise and Employment and other Ministers 
here present, Master and Mistress of Ceremonies, fellow speakers, distinguished guests, ladies and 
gentlemen: it is indeed a rare honour to me to be able to address you this evening on this  auspicious 
occasion.  It  is  also a  distinct  pleasure to  be  able  to  do  this  at  the  invitation  of  Ms  Sibongile  Mdluli, 
Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Swaziland, to whom I extend my congratulations for having 
been selected as Business Woman of the Year 2006. Congratulations Madam!  
The  Corporate  Skills  Centre,  whose  objective,  I  have  been  informed,  is  to  build  capacity  of  young 
professionals on cross-cutting short-term courses to meet the skills gaps which have been identified in 
the constantly evolving business environment, is a laudable initiative; and I am particularly honoured to 
be able to offer my support at its inception. With continued support from tonight’s main sponsor and 
the REDI, success is almost assured.  
Formation of a Monetary Union 
2.  
I have been asked to speak about the formation of “Monetary Union, Perspective on the Swaziland 
Economy”:  –  a  matter  which  I  addressed  in  1992  in  a  paper  which  was  presented  under  the  title 
“Questions  regarding  Monetary  Management:  aspects  of  recorded  experience  in  a  quasi-optimal 
currency area”1. In that paper, I argued thus:  
…  Having  shed  the  status  of  being  a  protectorate  of  Great  Britain  upon  obtaining  independence  in 
1968, Swaziland could have refashioned its orientation in a number of ways; including at one extreme 
complete  isolation  (pure  self  reliance)  or,  at  the  other  extreme,  incorporation  into  a  larger  unit  and 
management by some authority other than Britain.  
The nature of the problem, I argued  
… is to find that institutional framework within which to maximise national, social welfare… subject to 
the constraints which are imposed by the decisions which all other countries have made: for it is these 
decisions which define the universe within which choice must be exercised.  
I also asserted that,  
… for a small, emergent economy with limited bargaining power, the option of refashioning the global 
economy in order to maximize national welfare does not exist, whereas such an option does exists for 
the large, mature economies which created the Bretton Woods institutions and the post-war economic 
order.  
Although this was stated in the previous century, I believe it to be true still.  
In  the  event,  the  authorities  have  made  choices:  most  importantly,  in  this  regard,  by  participating 
actively in the institutions of the African Union and the Southern African Development Community, the 
essence of whose programmes are described below.  
                                                      
1   See  X.  Guma  (1992)  “Questions  regarding  Monetary  Management:  aspects  of  recorded  experience  in  a  quasi-optimal 
currency area”, Harare, Zimbabwe : Southern African Foundation for Economic Research 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 1
Monetary Union in Africa  
3.  
Article  44  of  the  Abuja  Treaty  calls  for  the  harmonisation  of  economic  policies  across  the  African 
continent and emphasises two important pillars of economic integration: the promotion of intra-Africa 
trade and the enhancement of monetary cooperation. The latter is guided by the African Monetary Co-
operation  Programme  (AMCP)  which  seeks  to  operationalise  the  monetary  cooperation  mandate  of 
the  Abuja  Treaty  and  the  Constitutive  Act  of  the  African  Union.  In  the  main,  this  involves  a  single 
monetary area, encompassing a common currency and a common central bank by the year 2021.  
In terms of the AMCP monetary union in Africa is to be achieved in six stages starting in 2002/2003 
and  culminating  in  stage  VI  in  2021  with  the  introduction  and  circulation  of  the  common  African 
currency. During these six stages, African governments and central banks will have to work towards 
harmonisation  and  coordination  of  macroeconomic  and  monetary  policies,  the  harmonising  of 
interconnected payment and clearing systems, the strengthening and harmonisation of banking and 
financial supervision and the observance of increasingly strict macroeconomic convergence criteria.  
The African Monetary Cooperation Programme (AMCP)  
3.1  
Stated in point form, the stages of the programme are as follows:  
Stage I (Year 2002-2003)  
- 
Stage II (Year 2004-2009)  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
  Establishment  of  Sub-regional  Committees  of  the  AACB  where  they  do  not  exist  and 
revitalisation of existing Committees.  
Adoption by each Sub-region of formal monetary integration programme.  
Harmonisation and co-ordination of macroeconomic and monetary policies.  
Harmonisation of Concepts and Methodologies including statistical frameworks.  
Gradual liberalization of the capital account.  
Gradual interconnection of payments and clearing system.  
Fostering the development of Banking and Financial Systems, including promotion of African 
banking networks.  
Promotion of sub-regional and regional stock exchanges.  
Strengthening and harmonisation of banking and financial supervision and regulation.  
Observance of the following macroeconomic indicators by year 2008:  
• 
• 
Budget deficit/GDP ratio not exceeding 5 per cent.  
Central Bank credit to government not exceeding 10 per cent of previous year's tax 
revenue.  
Single digit Inflation rate.  
External reserves/import cover of at least 3 months.  
Reduction  of  Current  Account  Deficits  (excluding  grant)  as  percent  of  GDP  to 
sustainable level.  
Pursuit  of  Debt  reduction  initiatives  on  Public  debt  as  percent  of  GDP  to 
sustainable level.  
Achieving and maintaining High and Sustainable rate of Growth of real GDP.  
   Stage III (Year 2009-2014)  
Assessment  of  macroeconomic  performance  and  negotiation  for  the  establishment  of  a  common 
Central  Bank  (Year  2015).  At  this  stage,  countries  would  be  required  to  consolidate  achievements 
made at the third stage. The activities under this stage would include:  
- 
Continued observance of macroeconomic indicators of convergence including:  
2 
 BIS Review 20/2007
   the  macroeconomic 
Inflation rate of less than 5 per cent.  
Overall Budget deficit/GDP ratio (excluding grants) of less than 3 per cent.  
Elimination of Central Bank financing of Budget deficits. 
External  reserves  of  equal  to  or  more  than  6  months  of  imports  of  goods  and 
services.  
Reduction  of  Current  Account  Deficits  (excluding  grant)  as  Percent  of  GDP  to 
sustainable level.  
Pursuit  of  Debt  reduction  initiatives  on  Public  debt  as  percent  of  GDP  to 
sustainable level.  
Achieving and maintaining High and Sustainable rate of Growth of real GDP.  
indicators  of  each  country/sub-region  against 
• 
Assessing 
the 
convergence criteria. A comparative analysis would be made thereafter to the Convergence 
Council.  
Commissioning  of  a  study  on  the  establishment  of  an  African  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism 
(2010).  
Review of commissioned study on the African Exchange Rate Mechanism (2011).  
Observance of the following macroeconomic indicators by year 2012:  
Budget deficit / GDP ratio not exceeding 5 per cent by 2012.  
• 
Elimination of Central Bank credit to government.  
• 
• 
External reserves / imports cover of equal or greater than 6 months.  
Finalisation of arrangements required for the launching of the African Monetary Union.  
This is the completion stage before the take off of the common Central Bank. The following 
activities are expected to be undertaken:  
• 
Preparation  of  institutional,  administrative  and  legal  framework  for  setting  up  the 
common Central Bank and currency of the African Monetary Union. This includes  
a) 
b) 
Achieving and maintaining good governance and  
Achieving central bank autonomy, particularly with regard to instrument, 
personnel and financial independence.  
      Adoption of the institutional, administrative and legal framework for the setting up of 
the common Central Bank and currency of the African Monetary Union.  
Operationalisation of Exchange Rate Mechanism.  
Appointment of key officers of the Common Central Bank.  
Preparation for the introduction of a common currency.  
Recruitment of staff of the Bank.  
Mid-term assessment of country performance.  
Final assessment of countries' performance against convergence criteria.  
Launching of the African Central Bank (ACB).  
Introduction and circulation of the common African currency (2015).  
Stage IV (Year 2015-2021)  
- 
- 
A  transitional  period  during  which  sub-regional  currencies  would  operate  alongside  the  African 
currency is envisaged.  
As the programme has progressed, so adjustments have been made, and the current statement of the 
programme envisages completion by 2015: not 2021 as in the original thinking.  
BIS Review 20/2007 
 3
The SADC region  
3.2  
Within the SADC region, the movement towards monetary integration and eventual union is guided by 
the Committee of Central Bank Governors (CCBG) which has pledged support for the AMCP.  
The  CCBG  was  established  in  1995  with  the  specific  purpose  of  achieving  closer  cooperation  and 
integration  in  the  area  of monetary  policy  among  SADC central banks.  The work of  the CCBG  has 
contributed  to  major  developments  towards  regional  monetary  cooperation  such  as  significant 
progress in the harmonisation of the payment and clearing systems, the approval of Memoranda of 
Understanding on Cooperation, Coordination of Exchange Control Policies in SADC, and Cooperation 
in  the  area  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology.  The  CCBG  has  also  contributed  to  the 
coordination  of  training  for  central  bank  officials  in  SADC  and  the  creation  of  a  Training  and 
Development Forum.  
As at April 2005, the integration programme envisaged the establishment of a SADC monetary union 
by 2016  
• 
Finalise  preparation  of  institutional,  administrative  and  legal  framework  for  setting  up  a 
SADC Central Bank by 2016;  
Launch a regional currency for the SADC Monetary Union by 2018.  
 The Common Monetary Area (CMA)  
3.3  
Lastly, the possibility of establishing a central bank for the Common Monetary Area (CMA) countries is 
raised from time to time: the CMA comprising Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa and Swaziland. A study 
was  conducted  in  2005  under  the  auspices  of  the  CCBG  outlining  the  costs  and  benefits  of  the 
creation of a common central bank for the CMA countries. As is normal, decisions in this regard will be 
taken by the political leaders of the CMA countries, rather than by central bankers.  
In  short:  Programmes  intended  to  achieve  monetary  union  exist  at  the  continental  (AU),  regional 
(SADC) and intra-regional levels (CMA): and Swaziland participates in them all.  
Conclusion  
The  questions  which  policy  makers  will  have  to  continue  to  address  are  clear.  They  include  the 
following. Should we continue down this path? Do the programmes have realistic time frames? Are 
they on target?  
Fortunately,  I  don’t  have  to  wrestle  with  them:  and  any  assessment  by  me  would  be  not  only 
discourteous but also presumptious. I have sketched the issues in broad outline, and thank you all for 
your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 20/2007
