Christian Noyer: Monetary policy, the French economy and its outlook 
Introductory  letter  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  to  the  Bank  of 
France’s  Annual  Report  2006,  submitted  to  the  President  of  the  French  Republic,  the 
President of the Senate, and the President of the National Assembly, 1 August 2007. 
 I have the honour of submitting to you, as required by law, the report on the operations of the 
Banque de France, monetary policy and its outlook. 
The year 2006 was marked by robust and more balanced growth in global economic activity 
across virtually all regions. Thanks to this favourable international environment, the French 
economy  saw  a  return  to  dynamic  growth  conducive  to  employment  and  the  reduction  of 
government deficits. This cyclical upturn should not, however, mask the structural difficulties 
facing  the  French  economy,  which  is  performing  less  well  in  all  these  areas  than  its  main 
trading partners and which, moreover, is witnessing a further widening of its external deficit. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  should  like  to  outline  a  number  of  analyses  of  the  growth 
environment, monetary policy, the state of the French economy and the main challenges that 
it  needs  to  rise  to  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  globalisation  and  make  structural 
improvements to growth and employment. 
In 2006, the European economy entered a period of sustained and balanced growth 
Growth  in  the  euro  area  is  sustained:  after  2.9%  in  2006,  it  could  stand  at  2.6%  in  2007. 
Such a performance – growth above 2% for two consecutive years – has not been observed 
since 1999-2000. In 2006 alone, over two million jobs were created in the euro area, which 
brings  to  13  million  the  total  number  of  jobs  created  since  the  introduction  of  the  single 
currency; this figure is slightly higher than that for the United States over the same period. 
After a catch-up phase in which growth was significantly above its long-term trend, the euro 
area’s GDP is currently increasing at a rate close to the economy’s potential. 
This  growth  is  balanced  since  all  of  the  components  of  demand  are  contributing  to  it  in  a 
harmonious fashion. In the first phases of recovery, the contribution of external demand was 
decisive.  But  productive  investment  and,  almost  everywhere,  household  consumption  are 
now  supporting  the  business  cycle.  This  has  enabled  and  led,  in  most  countries,  to  a 
welcome consolidation of public finances, with no adverse impact on the economy. 
Concerning  the  future,  the  outlook  for  Europe  is  dominated  by  three  questions,  varied  in 
nature. 
The first naturally concerns the international environment. Forecasts for world growth remain 
good. At this juncture, the US economy appears to be absorbing the economic and financial 
impact  of  the  slowdown  in  the  property  market.  Emerging  market  economies  displayed 
encouraging  resilience  in  the  face  of  the  two  episodes  of  financial  volatility  that  affected 
international equity markets in May 2006 and March 2007. Nevertheless, several risks should 
be highlighted: that of a sudden drop in US consumption in the wake of the problems in the 
property market; that of a sharp increase in commodity prices; that of a return to volatility on 
financial markets, after several exceptionally calm years; and, linked to the latter, that of a 
disorderly  adjustment  of  exchange  rates 
international 
imbalances. 
The second concern relates to the extremely rapid growth of monetary and credit aggregates 
in  the  euro  area.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  M3,  which  was  below  6%  in  2004,  gradually 
accelerated and currently exceeds 10%. Loans to the private sector also continue to expand 
by  more  than  10%.  Structural  changes  in  money  and  credit  demand  –  linked  to  financial 
the  build-up  of 
triggered  by 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 1
innovation – may partly account for this acceleration. However, these developments must be 
closely  monitored  in  view  of  their  implications  for  monetary  stability  and  that  of  financial 
systems.  During  2004  and  2005,  household  borrowing  was  the  primary  source  of  credit 
growth;  in  2006,  this  was  replaced  by  lending  to  enterprises,  in  line  with  the  economic 
recovery and the rise in – often highly leveraged – company buyouts. The strong profits and 
financial soundness of firms facilitate and sometimes encourage increased borrowing, which 
is then presented as “optimising” their liability structure. But balance sheets are weakening 
and difficulties could appear in the event of a turnaround in the business cycle. 
The third question concerns the acceleration of productivity observed in the euro area since 
mid-2005:  is  it  purely  cyclical  or  does  it  reflect  a  more  permanent  and  structural 
improvement? Over such a short period, caution would favour the first answer. Nonetheless, 
the  conjunction  of  strong  employment  growth  and  a  rapid  rise  in  productivity  is  highly 
unusual. It constitutes a reversal of the previous trend in Europe since, for over a decade, 
periods in which there has been an improvement in employment have also seen a slowdown 
in  productivity.  In  general,  workers  that  have  just  entered  the  job  market  are  initially  less 
productive than more experienced employees. This effect now appears to be offset by other 
more favourable and fundamental factors. The structural reforms implemented in the last few 
years may account for this development.  
The  answers  to  these  questions  will  make  it  possible  to  assess  the  magnitude  of  risks  to 
inflation  and  the  capacity  of  the  European  economy  to  continue  growing  at  close  to  its 
potential rate. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
After several years in which globalisation fostered moderate inflation, inflationary pressures 
have  appeared  in  the  international  environment.  Commodity  prices,  stimulated  by  strong 
growth in emerging markets, now appear on an upward trend. Most of the world’s economies 
–  including  emerging  market  economies  –  are  currently  close  to  full  utilisation  of  their 
production capacity. Lastly, global liquidity, irrespective of the indicator used to measure it, is 
expanding strongly. 
Against  this  backdrop,  monetary  policy  has  become  more  restrictive  across  all  countries. 
Since  December  2004,  key  interest  rates  have  risen  from  2.25%  to  5.25%  in  the  United 
States, from 4.75% to 5.75% in the United Kingdom and from 2.00% to 4.00% in the euro 
area.  As  regards  the  latter,  the  seven  increases  in  interest  rates  implemented  since 
December 2005 have, as mentioned above, been accompanied by strong GDP growth, and 
during this period monetary policy has ensured price stability at the same time as more than 
two million jobs were created. 
The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  stance  has  aimed,  in  accordance  with  the  Treaty,  to  maintain 
price stability over the long term. In sync with the consolidation of growth in the euro area, it 
has  gradually  been  adjusted  upwards,  with  the  Governing  Council  striving  consistently  to 
calibrate interest rates as precisely as possible to allow growth to firm, while ensuring it is not 
jeopardised by mounting inflationary pressures. 
Price  stability  is  foremost  among  the  objectives  assigned  to  central  banks  in  all  countries. 
This  is  not  a  random  choice.  It  is  the  fruit  of  experience.  Many  countries  have  attempted, 
over recent decades – and particularly after the oil shocks at the end of the last century – to 
stimulate growth via expansive monetary policies. All of these attempts failed. Inflation rose, 
sometimes to very high levels, without there being any improvement in employment. 
Two lessons have been learned from this period, which still inform the conduct of monetary 
policy today. 
First, over the medium and long term, growth is determined by productivity, investment and 
the  quantity  of  labour mobilised  in  the  economy.  At  this  time  horizon,  there  is no  trade-off 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2007
between  inflation  and  growth,  and  monetary  policy  is  neutral  with  respect  to  output  and 
employment. 
Second, inflation itself is strongly influenced by the expectations of economic agents, both 
households  and  enterprises.  These  agents  are  increasingly  well  informed.  They  quickly 
perceive developments that threaten their purchasing power or the value of their savings. If 
monetary policy is likely to encourage inflation, they adjust their behaviour very rapidly, for 
example by asking for higher wages, thereby triggering a wage-price spiral; or by demanding 
greater remuneration of their savings, resulting in higher long-term interest rates and slower 
growth. 
How,  in  the  ECB  Governing  Council’s  view,  can  monetary  policy  make  an  effective 
contribution to economic growth? First and foremost, by anchoring inflation expectations. If 
monetary policy is credible, confidence prevails and economic agents make their decisions in 
a more reliable environment. Economic signals are less blurred by concerns about inflation. 
Shocks  are  more  easily  absorbed,  or  at  least  are  less  amplified  by  economic  agents’ 
attempts  to  shelter  against  the  risk  of  inflationary  pressures.  Overall,  the  economy  is  less 
volatile, business cycles less pronounced and economic growth steadier. 
More  fundamentally  still,  maintaining  the  internal  value  of  money  means  preserving 
consumers’ purchasing power. French citizens, who are clearly committed to price stability, 
know  this.  Conversely,  inflation  is  a  form  of  confiscation,  which  primarily  affects  the  least 
privileged households. In a modern economy, the social contract is based on the confidence 
that citizens have in their currency. With the euro, French citizens now possess one of the 
world’s two foremost currencies, whose legitimacy is based on the stability that it bestows on 
their savings and purchasing power. 
The French economy 
In spring 2007, the picture of the French economy is mixed. 
At  first  glance,  France’s  performance  is  strong.  Growth  is  above  2%,  inflation  is  under 
control, investment is dynamic and 256,000 jobs have been created over the past year (of 
which  155,000  in  the  market  economy).  In  2006,  the  fiscal  deficit  decreased  sharply  and 
government debt was cut by 2 GDP percentage points. 
This assessment is, however, significantly tempered by the two following observations. First, 
and for the first time for a long time, growth in France is below the euro area average. France 
is following and benefiting from a European movement that it is not contributing to fuel. This 
is illustrated in particular by the (negative) growth differential with Germany, which is without 
precedent over the past 20 years. 
Second,  France  records  a  substantial  current  account  deficit,  which  deserves  particular 
attention.  Thanks  to  the  euro,  the  French  economy  is  shielded  from  financial  turbulence 
which  would,  in  the  past  under  such  circumstances,  have  jeopardised  the  stability  of  its 
currency. Although the external balance is no longer a constraint on growth, it nevertheless 
remains a significant and telling signal of the threats to its sustainability. 
What  is  the  cause  of  the  deficit?  French  domestic  demand,  boosted  by  higher  household 
consumption than the European average, may have been one explanatory factor in the past, 
but the main explanation lies elsewhere. 
France’s  declining  export  performance  is  frequently  attributed  to  the  inadequate  degree  of 
sectoral specialisation. This is of course insufficient to explain the movement recorded over 
the past three years. Specialisation tends to evolve slowly over time, whereas the decline in 
the trade balance has been sudden and dramatic; and had not been anticipated by any of the 
analysts who continuously study its structure and developments. 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 3
It is clear that the price-competitiveness of French industries has deteriorated significantly in 
recent  years.  Has  the  euro’s  appreciation  played  a  role  in  this?  On  the  one  hand,  it 
undoubtedly  penalises  export  sectors  whose  competitors  are  located  in  other  monetary 
areas.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  benefits  those  sectors  which  are  large  consumers  of 
imported  commodities.  At  this  stage,  the  overall  effect  on  France’s  growth  and  external 
balance  is  not  clearly  apparent.  Furthermore,  two  observations  must  be  made:  first,  it  is 
mainly intra-euro area trade that is worsening; second, many of France’s European partners 
faced with the same constraints are performing better. 
French competitiveness has in particular been impacted by wage increases and catch-ups 
associated with the reduction in the working week, while Germany has experienced several 
consecutive  years  of  real  wage  cuts.  From  this  point  of  view,  it  is  likely  to  be  positively 
affected by a strict application of the revaluation rules for the minimum wage. 
In addition, industrial output has virtually stagnated over the past six years, in spite of efforts 
aimed  at  making  the  French  economy  more  attractive.  France  is  not  the  only  European 
country in this situation. Industrial output in Italy is also fl at, while that of the United Kingdom 
has  dropped  by  5%  despite  its  buoyant  economic  growth.  At  the  same  time,  however, 
industrial activity in Germany and Spain has grown by 15% and 10% respectively. It is as if 
the French economy had been hit by a “shock” hindering its ability to react to an increase in 
domestic and, especially, world demand. We need to take a look at the origins of this shock. 
Corporate investment hardly seems to account for this shock, given that it has risen by the 
same proportion in France and Germany in recent years (12% in 4 years). Other gridlocks, 
that  are  less  clearly  definable,  are  therefore  hindering  the  industrial  sector’s  reaction 
capacity. Although it is currently impossible to clearly identify them, labour market rigidities 
have  probably  played  a  major  role,  especially  on  the  supply  side.  Thus,  despite  the 
significant  improvement  in  the  employment  situation,  the  total  number  of  hours  worked  in 
France each year hardly increased between 2000 and 2006. 
Higher costs and sluggish supply: overall, the French economy is still absorbing the effects of 
the reduction in the working week and the wage catch-ups which it has given rise to over the 
past  ten  years.  And  these  effects  have  a  delayed  yet  strong  impact  on  the  external 
performance of the French economy. 
Reforms 
In order to reinforce the growth dynamics beyond the current cycle, it seems necessary to 
considerably  increase  the  quantity  of  labour.  The  European  countries  whose  per  capita 
income is expanding most rapidly have enlarged and activated their workforce via increases 
in participation and employment rates. 
This  assessment  is  encouraging  for  France,  which  has,  thanks  to  its  demography,  large 
growth reserves. If these could be “activated” by appropriate policies, France should, in a few 
years, be able to substantially raise per capita income and catch up with, or even overtake, 
the best European performers. 
This  catching-up  is  feasible  and  the  current  economic  recovery  provides  a  particularly 
favourable context in which to implement ambitious reforms. It requires a radical change in 
habits and policies. In addition to reducing the social contributions weighing on overtime, it is 
also necessary to take measures to raise the participation rate. Some would be simple and 
not too costly: for example, allowing pensioners, without any restrictions, to draw a pension 
and a wage concurrently. Others require profound changes and a widespread consultation, 
such  as  the  development  of  part-time  work  or  the  reform  of  employment  contracts.  To 
convince companies to invest and recruit, it seems essential to reassure them of their ability 
to adjust their staff levels to the changes in their order books without undue delays or costs. 
While the solidarity that underpins social cohesion must guarantee financial support and help 
to temporarily unemployed workers seeking to re-enter the labour market, it must not expose 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2007
firms to excessive risks if it is not to deter them from developing their productive capacity and 
job opportunities in France. 
Reforms should not only be conducted on the labour market but also on the goods market. 
The  countries  that  have  succeeded  are  those  that  have  developed  a  virtuous  circle  of 
activity,  productivity  and  employment.  If  one  link  is  missing,  the  reforms  implemented 
elsewhere will not have their expected effects. 
We know that France has vast labour pools in market services. We also know that by their 
very nature, most of these jobs cannot be moved abroad. However, many obstacles still lie in 
the way of their development. It is too often difficult, even prohibited, in France to produce or 
sell services. 
There are a number of causes for these obstacles. First, there is a desire to protect existing 
activities and to ensure that the professional quality of service provided is upheld. Second, 
regulations  aim  to  prevent  excessively  harsh  working  conditions.  All  of  these  reasons  are 
legitimate in themselves. But, taken together, they considerably restrict supply even though – 
as  foreign  examples  have  shown  –  demand  is  potentially  sizeable.  These  restrictions  also 
encourage  the  substitution  of  labour  by  capital  and  therefore  result  in  growth  that  is  both 
constrained  and  has  an  insufficient  employment  content.  They  are  sometimes  based  on  a 
notion  of  working  rhythms  that  is  out  of  step  with  the  functioning  of a modern  society  and 
technological  progress.  They  are  very  costly  for  the  economy.  And,  lastly,  they  do  a 
disservice to those they set out to protect. The main victims are those for whom access to 
employment  requires  flexibility,  adaptation,  and  freedom  to  choose  working  hours,  i.e. 
primarily young people and women. 
A  complete  overhaul  of  all  the  legal  and  regulatory  conditions  governing  a  wide  range  of 
commercial and services activities therefore appears to be an urgent priority. 
Lastly,  in  order  to  increase  France’s  productivity,  a  shift  towards  technology-  and  science-
based  activities  is  essential.  To  do  so,  research  and  development  (R&D)  efforts  must  be 
encouraged.  In  this  respect,  while  the  share  of  public  R&D  expenditure  is  comparable  or 
even greater than that of the country’s main trading partners, private sector R&D investment 
remains well below that in Germany, the United States or  Japan. The creation of poles of 
competitiveness in 2005 and the Industrial Innovation Agency in 2006 contribute to achieving 
this  strategic  objective.  These  recent  initiatives  should  be  pursued  in  order  to  expand  the 
poles of competitiveness, attract researchers and companies, and integrate SMEs and start-
ups that do not benefit from the resources available under these innovation drives. 
In the main, these reforms are currently underway or being examined in our country. It is thus 
becoming  possible  to  create  lasting  conditions  for  stronger  and  more  employment-rich 
growth. 
Public finances 
Despite the partial consolidation seen over the past two years, public finances remain weak 
and call for great vigilance. 
Following  the  reform  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  France  made  a  number  of 
commitments. These commitments have been made for a reason and the credibility of the 
efforts  undertaken  elsewhere  on  the  European  stage  depends  on  their  respect.  France, 
which is the euro area’s second largest economy in terms of size, naturally aims to play a 
key role in this area in order to enhance and develop “economic governance”. 
Come what may, it is in the interest of France’s economy and citizens to consolidate public 
finances. The role traditionally attributed to public spending and welfare is to contribute to a 
better allocation of resources in the economy, foster the desired redistribution of income and, 
if the conditions are in place, help stabilise economic cycles. These three functions are more 
difficult  to  realise  in  a  globalised  economy  that  reduces  leeway  and  creates,  in  practice, 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 5
latent  and  permanent  competition  between  tax  systems  and  public  policies.  A  number  of 
major imperatives thus emerge. 
• 
First,  introduce  a  great  degree  of  selectivity  in  terms  of  public  spending.  Since 
France  is  the  country  in  the  euro  area  with  by  far,  as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  the 
highest level of public spending, it should give priority to forward-looking spending 
that supports reforms. From this point of view, a review is necessary in particular of 
the “defensive” cuts in social contributions that offset the constraints, obstacles and 
costs  facing  our  companies.  These  cuts  now  exceed  the  equivalent  of  France’s 
spending  on  higher  education.  More  generally,  the  effectiveness  of  subsidised 
contracts in the long term is questionable: they are useful, or even essential, when 
they allow those deprived of equal opportunities to integrate into the labour force; 
they are more dubious when, conversely, they financially compensate the effects of 
rigidities  in  hiring  decisions  and  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market.  It  would  be 
extremely useful to conduct a thorough review of these measures on the basis of 
this simple distinction. 
Second, reduce structural expenditure. France has a high quality civil service, which 
is a crucial asset. Current demographic trends and the needs of a modern economy 
require adjustments to be made. France must have a great civil service in terms of 
quality but a less bloated one in terms of quantity. The reforms implemented over 
the  past  decades  are  not  necessarily  consistent  with  this  imperative:  of  all 
developed countries, France has recorded the greatest growth in public sector jobs. 
The  State,  in  particular,  has  not  reduced  staff  numbers  in  proportion  to  the  posts 
transferred to decentralised authorities, whereas the latter have recruited on a large 
scale  to  fill  these  positions.  Demographic  developments  provide  an  opportunity  to 
turn  this  trend  around  and  create  more  flexibility.  Recent  announcements  stating 
that half the posts left vacant following retirements are not to be filled show that this 
opportunity will be seized. 
Lastly,  maintain  cyclical  flexibility.  France,  as  we  mentioned,  is  currently  at  a 
favourable  point  of  the  business  cycle  that  automatically  increases  government 
revenue  and,  all  other  things  being  equal,  reduces  the  deficit.  This  gives  an 
impression of affluence that may be misleading and dangerous. What counts here is 
the general government structural balance. In our country, it is high (above 2% of 
GDP),  which  means  that  our  public  finances  are  particularly  vulnerable  to  an 
economic slowdown or a turnaround in the business cycle. In such a case – unless 
we  are  prepared  to  enter  an  endless  downward  spiral  –  even  the  forward-looking 
spending would have to be sacrificed. 
  One imperative must ultimately dominate the management of public finances: the well-being 
of future generations. It is they who will have to sustain, service and finance the public debt 
that is building up today. It may be understandable and justifiable if this debt were used to 
establish an economic capital that would benefit these generations. But this debt would be 
economically  inefficient  and  morally  unjust  if  future  generations  had  to  finance  current 
generations’  welfare  spending.  Such  a  transfer  would  be  especially  paradoxical  since 
sustainable  development  has  become  a  key  priority  and  the  quality  of  the  environment 
passed  on  to  future  generations  has  never  before  to  such  an  extent  inspired  and  guided 
public action. 
 The  French  economy  must  now  be  allowed  to  fulfil  its  potential.  While  globalisation  offers 
opportunities, it also creates numerous insecurities. The accumulation of such sentiment may 
result in slowing down or preventing the necessary reforms. But because the world economy 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2007
is changing rapidly, the refusal to adapt would lead, inevitably, to weaker growth for France 
and greater insecurity for all French citizens, especially those that are least protected. 
This  dilemma  is  not  peculiar  to  France.  All  the  other  European  countries  are  experiencing 
this  friction  between  the  natural  desire  for  greater  security  and  the  unavoidable  need  to 
adapt.  It  is  important  for  each  country,  according  to  its  traditions  and  culture,  to  find  the 
means of taking up this challenge. 
However,  France  boasts  numerous  and  decisive  advantages:  Europe’s  most  dynamic 
demography;  a  high  level  of  energy  independence,  which  is  an  inestimable  advantage  in 
these  times  of  economic  and  geopolitical  uncertainty  with  regard  to  supplies;  active  and 
dynamic  companies,  which  have  been  able  to  take  ample  advantage  of  the  opportunities 
afforded  by  globalisation;  and  lastly  a  highly-skilled  workforce  which,  to  some  extent, 
accounts  for  France’s  high  hourly  productivity  levels.  These  advantages  must  therefore 
enable France to achieve strong growth that creates jobs in a stable monetary environment. 
This opportunity must be seized. 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 7
