Mario Draghi: Fact-finding preliminary to the examination of the 
Economic and Financial Planning Document for the period 2008-2011 
Testimony of Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Joint Session of the Fifth 
Committees of the Italian Senate and Chamber of Deputies, Rome, 16 July 2007. 
 Against the background of a recovery in economic activity, the public finances have improved 
considerably. However, the structural deficit remains substantial; it does not ensure a rapid 
reduction  in  the  debt  burden  enabling  Italy  to  tackle  the  challenge  of  population  ageing  in 
good time. 
The Economic and Financial Planning Document envisages a budget for 2008 that does not 
improve  the  deficit  on  a  current  legislation  basis.  The  budget  will  nevertheless  have  to 
include  expenditure-side  measures  in  order  to  finance  outlays  deriving  from  commitments 
made by the Government or necessary to continue policies under way but not yet embodied 
in legislation. 
The corrective measures required to achieve a balanced budget are put off to the three years 
2009-11;  in particular,  about  half  of  the  reduction  is  planned  for  2011,  the  last  year  of  the 
current legislature. The present favourable phase of the economic cycle would have made it 
possible to accelerate the budget adjustment. 
The  ratio  of  taxes  and  social  security  contributions  to  GDP  is  near  the  highest  levels 
recorded  in  recent  decades.  The  commitment  to  curbing  and  gradually  reducing  the  fiscal 
burden  is  reaffirmed.  A  plan  for  significant  tax  reductions  would  provide  support  for  the 
policies designed to increase the potential growth rate of the economy. 
The Planning Document indicates controlling the quality and quantity of public spending as a 
priority.  Reducing  the  deficit  and  containing  taxation  require  a  sharp  deceleration  in  the 
growth  of  primary  current  expenditure,  which  in  2007  is  again  high  and  above  the  original 
target. 
The Government is adopting support measures for old people in economic need. Given the 
projected demographic situation in the decades ahead, only courageous choices that raise 
the average effective retirement age can make it possible to pay adequate pensions. 
The state of the public finances 
1.  
The public finances improved in 2006. Excluding cyclical effects and one-off measures, the 
Government estimates that the deficit fell from 4 per cent of GDP in 2005 to 2.7 per cent last 
year; the primary surplus rose to 1.9 per cent of GDP. 
General government net borrowing increased slightly, from 4.2 to 4.4 per cent of GDP. This 
outcome  depended  on  the  extraordinary  charges  deriving  from  the  cancellation  of  railway 
company debt towards the State and from a European Court of Justice ruling on VAT (which 
together cost nearly 2 percentage points of GDP). 
The  improvement  in  the  accounts  in  2006  came  from  the  significant  increase  in  revenue, 
which  benefited  from  stronger  economic  growth,  some  one-off  measures  and  temporary 
factors, and the success of the measures to extend and recover tax base contained in the 
budget  for  2006  and  the  supplementary  measures  enacted  last  July.  The  ratio  of  tax  and 
social security receipts to GDP rose from 40.6 to 42.3 per cent. 
More than half of the €37.7 billion increase in tax revenue can be attributed to trends in the 
main tax bases. Another 30 per cent can be ascribed to discretionary measures enacted with 
the budget for 2006 and the additional measures enacted in July. A further 5 per cent of the 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 1
increase was due to favourable events during the year, in particular large-scale redemptions 
of  post  office  savings  certificates,  which  increased  receipts  from  the  taxes  on  interest 
income,  and  the  return  to  the  usual  due  dates  for  the  tax  on  insurance  companies’ 
mathematical  reserves.  The  remainder  of  the  increase,  some  €6  billion,  reflected  the 
reduction  of  tax  evasion  and  avoidance  both  as  a  result  of  enforcement  action  and  in 
connection with some structural changes in the Italian economy in recent year (such as the 
increasingly important role of mass retailing). 
Despite the acceleration in economic growth, the ratio of primary current expenditure to GDP 
remained  basically  constant,  near  the  highest  levels  of  recent  decades.  The  reduction  in 
intermediate consumption was offset by the rapid increase in social benefits. The contraction 
of public investment spending continued. 
The deficit was considerably smaller than had been forecast both in drafting the budget and 
in the course of the year. Both the official estimates and other forecasts underestimated the 
growth  in  revenue;  for  that  matter,  receipts  exceeded  expectations  in  other  euro-area 
countries as well. 
The general government borrowing requirement decreased by 1.6 percentage points, to 3.7 
per cent of GDP. The ratio of debt to GDP rose for the second successive year, reaching 
106.8 per cent. 
For 2007, Italy’s stability programme update of last December indicated a deficit of 2.8 per 
cent of GDP. In March the Combined Report on the Economy and Public Finances estimated 
net borrowing at 2.3 per cent. The Planning Document now projects it at 2.1 per cent 
By  comparison  with  the  Combined  Report,  the  revenue  projection  is  revised  upwards  by 
more than €2 billion for the year, taking account of the better-than-expected revenues of the 
first  few  months.  Expenditure  is  revised  downwards  by  nearly  €1  billion,  reflecting,  among 
other  things,  the  postponement  to  2008  of  the  renewal  of  several  public-sector  labour 
contracts. 
The  revised  estimates  for  revenue  are  consistent  with  the  results  to  date.  Excluding  the 
amounts collected in January, which appertained largely to 2006, by the end of June central 
government  tax  revenue  was  5.1  per  cent  higher  than  in  the  same  period  of  2006.  The 
Planning  Document  estimates  the  annual  increase  in  general  government  tax  revenues  at 
4.6 per cent for 2007, compared with 3.9 per cent in the Combined Report. 
The  behaviour  of  the  borrowing  requirement  in  the  first  part  of  the  year  is  fundamentally 
consistent with the new estimates of net borrowing for 2007. In the first five months of the 
year  the  general  government  borrowing  requirement  amounted  to  €48.7  billion,  about  €10 
billion less than in the same period of 2006. 
More  than  half  of  the  improvement  in  the  accounts  with  respect  to  the  projections  in 
December has now been earmarked by the Government for additional expenditure. In fact, 
together with the Planning Document, the Government has passed a decree law and a mid-
year  budget  revision  that  according  to  official estimates  will  entail  additional  outlays  of  0.4 
percentage points of GDP this year and 0.1 points in each of the next two. 
A good part of the additional expenditure in 2007 represents an adjustment of resources to 
the necessities of policies already in place; about a fifth reflects new Government initiatives. 
The increase in outlays connected with Decree Law 81 of 2 July 2007 are estimated at €5.6 
billion  for  this  year  and  €1.6  billion  a  year  when  fully  phased  in.  The  decree  comprises  a 
number of measures. Most of the provisions (worth €2.5 billion) involve central government 
departments  and  consist  in  supplementary  appropriations  or  attenuations  of  spending 
constraints enacted in previous budgets. In particular, with an effect valued at €1.5 billion, the 
decree frees the funds that ministries were obliged to set aside in unavailable reserves under 
the Finance Law for 2007. It also appropriates funds to increase low pensions (€0.9 billion), 
for humanitarian aid (€0.3 billion), for current transfers to public enterprises (€0.3 billion), and 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2007
for short-term substitution of school personnel (€0.2 billion). Finally, it allocates €0.5 billion 
and €0.7 billion for the modernization of the road and railway networks, respectively. 
Taking these measures into account, the Planning Document sets the new deficit target for 
2007 at 2.5 per cent of GDP (compared with 2.8 per cent in last year’s Document, which was 
confirmed  in  the  subsequent  budget  documents).  Excluding  one-off  measures  –  among 
which the transfer to INPS of a part of workers’ annual severance pay – the deficit is nearly 3 
per cent. 
The ratio of public debt to GDP is projected to fall from 106.8 to 105.1 per cent. 
The  fiscal  burden  rises  further,  by  half  a  percentage  point,  to  42.8  per  cent  of  GDP. 
Excluding the severance pay referred to above, the increase comes to 0.1 percentage points. 
Primary  expenditure,  excluding  the  two  extraordinary  charges  for  2006  mentioned  earlier, 
rises  from  44  to  44.1  per  cent  of  GDP,  reflecting  the  sharp  increase  of  19.1  per  cent 
expected in direct investment. 
Primary current expenditure increases by 4.3 per cent; its ratio to GDP declines slightly (from 
39.9 to 39.8 per cent). The growth in expenditure is equal to 4.7 per cent for social benefits, 
4.5 per cent for intermediate consumption and 1 per cent for wages and salaries. 
 In  the  last  two  years  Italian  budget  policy  has  operated  to  comply  with  Italy’s  EU 
commitments  to  bring  the  deficit  back  below  3  per  cent  of  GDP  by  2007  and  improve  the 
structural budget balance by at least 1.6 percentage points in the two years 2006-07. The 
groundwork has been laid for ending the excessive deficit procedure against our country. 
However,  the  favourable  phase  of  the  economic  cycle  would  have  made  it  possible  to 
accelerate the adjustment of the public finances by acting on primary current expenditure. 
In  November  2006,  in  section  II  of  its  Forecasting  and  Planning  Report,  the  Government 
planned an increase of 2.4 per cent in primary current expenditure this year. The Planning 
Document  raises  that  to  4.3  per  cent,  only  slightly  less  than  the  projected  expansion  of 
nominal GDP but constituting an increase of 2.4 per cent in real terms. 
If the rate of increase planned in November had been maintained, the incidence of primary 
current expenditure on GDP in the Document’s macroeconomic planning framework would 
have decreased by 0.8 percentage points between 2006 and 2007, reducing the deficit to 1.8 
per cent. 
In the five years from 2001 to 2005, the ratio of primary current expenditure to GDP rose in 
unfavourable  cyclical  conditions  by  2.7  percentage  points,  to  40  per  cent.  In  2006-07,  in 
favourable cyclical conditions, it is to be reduced by just 0.2 points. 
2.  
The plan for 2008-2011 
The overall guidelines 
2.1. 
The  priority  objective  set  by  the  Planning  Document  is  sustaining  economic  growth,  within 
the constraints set by the need not to jeopardize budgetary equilibrium. 
Development policies are designed to raise the economy’s potential growth rate, bringing it 
nearer to the average for the rest of Europe. The actions planned are designed to close the 
gap  in  infrastructure,  improve  the  efficiency  of  government  and  reduce  the  tax  burden  on 
firms and households. A rationalization of the automatic stabilizers to strengthen the system 
of incentives is also planned. 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 3
A  strategic  role  is  assigned  to  measures  to  foster  greater  competition  in  the  markets  for 
goods  and  services  and  combine  environmental  protection  with  a  reduction  in  external 
energy dependency. 
There is a commitment to renovating the school and university system, in the light among 
other things of the relatively poor standing of Italian education in international rankings. The 
Planning Document states the Government’s intention to tackle the serious problems of the 
justice  system,  emphasizing  that  the  shortcomings  in  this  area  seriously  affect  economic 
activity and the welfare of citizens. 
Continuing  along  the  lines  of  last  year’s  Planning  Document,  greater  support  is  to  be 
provided to persons in economic difficulty, in particular to low-income families with dependent 
children, by increasing welfare benefits and renewing housing programmes. 
The Planning Document maintains the objective set in last year’s Document and reaffirmed 
in  the  December  stability  programme  update  of  balancing  the  budget  and  achieving  a 
primary surplus of about 5 per cent of GDP in 2011. 
From 2008 onwards the deficit targets of the Planning Document are the same as those set 
in the stability programme, although the latter was based on much less favourable economic 
projections. The improvement in the baseline projections reduces the corrections necessary 
by an average of 0.3 percentage points of GDP each year in the four years 2008-2011. 
For 2008 and 2009 forecast GDP growth has been revised upwards by comparison with the 
December projections by 0.4 and 0.1 percentage points respectively and the estimates for 
2006 and 2007 by 0.3 and 0.7 points. 
The  financial  adjustment  path  traced  in  the  Planning  Document  envisages  only  a  small 
reduction in net borrowing in 2008. Subsequently the improvement in the budget balance is 
projected to average 0.7 percentage points of GDP per year. 
The ratio of the public debt to GDP is projected to decline by an average of 2.5 percentage 
points a year from 2008 through 2011 (1.9 points in 2008, 3.3 points in 2011). In 2010, for 
the  first  time  since  1991,  the  debt  is  expected  to  fall  below  100  per  cent  of  GDP.  In  the 
December stability programme this result was forecast for 2011. 
The  earlier  achievement  of  this  objective  depends  largely  on  the  faster  growth  of  nominal 
GDP  now  forecast  for  the  three  years  2007-09  (an  average  of  nearly  1  percentage  point 
more per year). 
The downward trend in debt also benefits from the assumption that from 2007 onwards the 
borrowing requirement will be approximately equal to net borrowing. However, excluding the 
two  extraordinary  charges  included  in  net  borrowing,  in  2006  the  gap  between  the  two 
aggregates was equal to 1.2 per cent of GDP. 
The  Planning  Document  estimates  an  increase  of  0.3  percentage  points  in  the  ratio  of 
interest payments to GDP in 2006 and 2007 after it had fallen constantly for a decade. For 
the  subsequent  years,  according  to  the  planning  scenario,  the  ratio  will  hold  stable  at  just 
below 5 per cent, reflecting the expected decline in the debt ratio on the one hand and the 
progressive rise in interest rates on the other. 
Budgetary policy for 2008 
2.2  
According to the Planning Document, in 2008 the deficit will fall by 0.3 percentage points, to 
2.2 per cent of GDP, and the primary surplus rise from 2.3 to 2.7 per cent. 
Achieving this objective does not require corrective measures with respect to the projections 
based  on  the  “current  legislation”  framework  (supplemented  by  the  additional  spending 
provided for by the decree law presented together with the Planning Document). 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2007
Nevertheless,  for  purposes  of  greater  transparency,  the  Planning  Document  observes  that 
the  deficit  on  a  current  legislation  basis  excludes  some  costs  that  do  not  derive  from 
obligations under the law but that are very likely to arise. 
The Planning Document cites three classes of expenditure in decreasing order of obligation: 
those  connected  with  commitments  made  by  the  Government,  those  bound  to  established 
practices  such  as  appropriations  for  future  labour  contracts  and  for  the  National  Road 
Agency and the State Railways, and lastly those in connection with new initiatives. 
The Planning Document puts expenditures for commitments already made at €4.1 billion and 
gives  rough  estimates  of  the  second  and  third  classes  of  respectively  €l7.2  billion  (not 
counting the resources for the renewal of public employment contracts, still to be determined) 
and €10 billion. 
Including the first two classes of outlays for a total of over €11 billion gives an estimate of the 
deficit  projected  on  an  “unchanged  policies”  basis.  This  is  nearly  2.9  per  cent  of  GDP, 
excluding the resources for the renewal of public employment contracts. 
This second method of projection thus highlights the need for corrective measures equal to 
at least 0.7 per cent of GDP, to which must be added the resources for any new initiatives 
the Government decides to undertake. 
The Document stresses that the containment and gradual reduction of the tax burden is a 
priority  commitment.  Consequently,  additional  outlays  must  be  financed  by  expenditure 
savings. The Document does not specify how these will be achieved. 
The Government hopes that the figures indicated for primary expenditure will be a point of 
reference in the discussion on the planning documents. It expressly requests Parliament, in 
its  resolution  on  the  Planning  Document,  to  give  an  indication  of  its  own  on  the  level  of 
primary  expenditure  that  should  serve  as  a  guideline  for  the  Government  in  drafting  the 
Finance Bill and for Parliament in the discussion of the budget. 
According to the projections on a current legislation basis, after growing sharply in 2006 and 
2007 revenue will decline slightly in proportion to GDP, mainly as the result of the phasing in 
of the reduction in the tax wedge on labour enacted with the Finance Law for 2007. 
Some evaluations 
3.  
Progress  has  been  made  in  the  Planning  Document  in  terms  of  the  quantity  and 
transparency of the information provided. Specifically, estimates are given for expenditures 
that are very likely to be made but that are not included in the projections based on “current 
legislation”. These data are essential to the proper evaluation of the present condition of the 
public finances and the outlook. 
Hopefully in the future it will be possible to go beyond the indicative estimation of these costs 
with an explicit and detailed projection of the accounts on an unchanged-policies basis for 
the  entire  planning  period.  In  addition,  specifying  the  planning  targets  for  revenue  and 
expenditure as well as the nature of the corrective measures would permit better evaluation 
of the economic policy guidelines underlying the Planning Document. 
The part of the Planning Document dedicated to economic development policies examines 
all the country’s main problems. Its stress on the need for intervention in respect of justice 
and education, including the university system, is endorsable. Italy would benefit greatly from 
a more efficient civil justice system and a school and university system up to the standards of 
the other developed countries. 
The plans confirm the objective of a balanced budget in the medium term but do not exploit 
the improvement in the projections to hasten its attainment. 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 5
For 2008 the Document does not envisage a correction with respect to the balance projected 
on  a  current  legislation  basis.  Last  December’s  stability  programme  update  planned  a 
correction of 0.7 percentage points of GDP to achieve the same objective (a deficit of 2.2 per 
cent). 
About half the corrective measures needed to balance the budget are put off to the last year 
of the planning horizon. 
Additional  initiatives  reducing  revenue  or  increasing  expenditure  (such  as  revising  the  law 
stiffening  pension  eligibility  requirements  as  of  2008)  would  increase  the  size  of  the 
measures  envisaged  for  the  three  years  from  2009  through  2011,  which  the  Planning 
Document  now  puts  at  1.4  percentage  points  of  GDP.  In  those  years  too,  corrective 
measures  will  also  have  to  offset  spending  commitments  not  included  in  the  current 
legislation estimates, such as future labour contract renewals. 
The experience of the first few years of this decade suggests that the favourable phases of 
the  economic  cycle  should  be  exploited  for  a  resolute  reduction  of  the  deficit.  The  risk  is 
having to correct today’s choices in the future, in possibly more difficult cyclical conditions. 
In the autumn of 2000, after two years in which the public finances had performed better than 
predicted, the budget for 2001 provided for an increase in the deficit, the first after a number 
of years. The impact of the measures, for the most part tax reliefs, was estimated at more 
than 1 percentage point of GDP. The net borrowing target for 2001 was put at 0.8 per cent of 
GDP; a balanced budget was expected in 2003. 
As early as mid-2001 the macroeconomic and financial outlook proved to be less favourable, 
necessitating corrective measures. The budget for 2002 had once again to curb the deficit, 
with  an  impact  slightly  less  pronounced  and  of  opposite  sign  to  that  of  the  year  before. 
Finally, in the summer  of 2002 further significant adjustment became  necessary. The data 
available today indicate that the deficit amounted to about 3 per cent of GDP in both 2001 
and 2002. 
In the past years budget outturns worse than forecast have entailed repeated slippage of the 
timetable for adjusting the public finances. The year for budget balance, originally scheduled 
for  2003  in  the  Economic  and  Financial  Planning  Document  released  in  1999,  has  been 
repeatedly postponed, by nearly a decade now. 
The achievement of structural budget balance is essential for rapid progress in reducing the 
public debt. Thanks in part to the consequent decrease in interest payments, debt reduction 
will make it possible to deal with the problems due to population ageing, increase the amount 
of resources allocated to productive expenditure and reduce the tax burden, and make room 
for manoeuvre during cyclical downturns. 
Belgium  has  reduced  its  public  debt  from  122  per  cent  of  GDP  in  1997  to  89  per  cent  in 
2006, with very considerable savings in interest payments. Major factors in the consolidation 
of the public finances were the introduction of rules making regional and local governments 
accountable  and  the  institution  of  an  independent  authority  (including  representatives  of 
central  and  regional  governments  and  the  central  bank)  that  sets  budgetary  targets  for  all 
levels of government and reports any overshoots in the course of the year. Finally, by law 
any extra revenue with respect to forecasts must go entirely to reducing the debt. 
Other European countries, some with significantly lower public debt than Italy’s, have kept 
their budgets near balance or in surplus since the establishment of Monetary Union, among 
other things so as to be in a position to face the problems deriving from the ageing of the 
population. 
The  Planning  Document  reaffirms  the  importance  of  controlling  the  quality  and  quantity  of 
public spending in order to reconcile the adjustment of the public finances with a lowering of 
the fiscal burden, which is now near the highest levels registered in recent decades. 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2007
According  to  the  Planning  Document’s  macroeconomic  framework,  achieving  a  balanced 
budget in 2011 without increasing taxes or decreasing investment with respect to the budget 
on  a  current  legislation  basis  requires  that  the  ratio  of  primary  expenditure  to  GDP  fall  by 
nearly  3  percentage  points  between  2008  and  2011,  with  an  average  annual  reduction  of 
outlays equal to 0.5 per cent in real terms, in contrast with an average annual increase of 2.3 
per cent over the past decade. 
According to the data provided by the Planning Document, on the basis of current legislation 
the ratio of primary expenditure to GDP is expected to decline by 0.2 percentage points in 
2008. Based on unchanged policies, it would rise by several tenths of a point. 
Other  European  countries  have  managed  to  reduce  their  budget  deficits  in  recent  years 
acting  on  the  level  and  composition  of  spending.  In  Germany,  for  instance,  the  ratio  of 
primary expenditure to GDP decreased from 45.5 per cent in 2003 to 42.9 per cent in 2006, 
lower than in Italy. This made it possible to reduce both the deficit, from 4 to 1.7 per cent of 
GDP,  and  tax  revenue.  Assuming  unchanged  policies,  budget  balance  will  be  achieved  in 
2008.  The  reduction  in  expenditure  has  been  concentrated  in  the  areas  of  social  benefits, 
labour  incomes  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  capital  grants.  It  has  not  involved  forgoing  the 
fundamental goals of the welfare state. 
In the field of pensions, in 2005 Germany introduced a rule limiting the revaluation of pension 
benefits  in  periods  of  a  rising  ratio  of  pension  beneficiaries  to  contributors.  There  is  also 
provision for the gradual raising of the standard retirement age from the current 65 to 67 by 
2029. 
A number of measures have also affected unemployment benefits and active labour market 
policies,  with  the  aim  of  rationalizing  the  assignment  of  benefits  and  strengthening  the 
incentives for the unemployed to accept job offers. The financing of the health system has 
been  reformed  to  redistribute  the  costs  between  the  public  sector  and  patients,  so  as  to 
make users more responsible. Public employment costs have been curbed by reducing the 
number  of  persons  employed  by  an  average  of  1.5  per  cent  per  year,  and  by  even  more 
pronounced  wage  moderation  than  in  the  private  sector.  The  proposal  for  reform  of  the 
federal state is designed to increase the degree of financial autonomy of the various levels of 
government. 
The Planning Document’s proposal that the related parliamentary resolution indicate a ceiling 
for primary expenditure is a step in the right direction. This limit should be lower than or at 
most equal to the level set in the projection on a current legislation basis, and separate caps 
should be set for current and capital expenditure. 
In the future these caps should not apply to spending by local authorities, in whose regard 
the Government last year redrafted the rules of the domestic stability pact, making the crucial 
criterion not a spending limit but a constraint on the final budget balance, so as to combine 
spending autonomy with fiscal accountability. It would be consistent with this approach for 
local  authorities  themselves  to  adopt  rules  on  expenditure.  Compliance  with  budget 
constraints must be based on an appropriate system of incentives and penalties. 
The  limits  set  at  central  level  should  also  cover  transfers  to  local  government.  Special 
attention must be devoted to the healthcare system, which is the principal component of local 
government expenditure and has recorded a sharp increase in recent years. Between 1998 
and  2006  the  ratio  of  health  spending  to  GDP  rose  by  about  1.5  percentage  points, 
accounting  for  about  60  per  cent  of  the  entire  increase  in  general  government  primary 
expenditure. 
The  recent  enabling  bill  for  the  implementation  of  Article  119  of  the  Constitution  lays  the 
basis for the gradual abandonment of past spending as the standard for assigning resources 
to local entities in favour of standardized indicators of costs and requirements. This is the first 
step  towards  designing  a  system  of  incentives  that  by  combining  spending  autonomy  and 
financial  accountability  for  local  authorities  can  take  full  advantage  of  the  efficiency  made 
BIS Review 92/2007 
 7
possible by decentralization. Hopefully the transition to the new legislative framework will be 
made within a reasonable time frame. 
International experience, which the Planning Document analyzes extensively, shows that in 
order  to  be  effective  spending  caps  must  be  based  on  a  redefinition  of  the  objectives  of 
individual public programmes and on verification of efficient use of the resources allocated. 
A contribution to more effective control of spending in the drafting of the Finance Bill and in 
the  budget  session  of  Parliament  can  come  from  the  recently  begun  revision  of  the 
classification  of  the  State  budget  items  and  analysis  and  evaluation  of  the  expenditure  of 
some ministries. 
Making accounting documents and information more readable permits better measurement 
of the costs of public programmes and assessment of how well the distribution of resources 
corresponds to the purposes of public action. In the future, this could enhance the efficiency 
of public spending, overcoming the great budget rigidity produced by use of past spending as 
the main yardstick. 
Choices in the field of pensions are crucial to the lasting consolidation of the public finances 
in a context in which, by Istat’s estimates, the ratio of the population over 60 to the population 
of working age will rise from 42 per cent in 2005 to 53 per cent in 2020 and 83 per cent in 
2040. 
The  State  Accounting  Office  estimates  that  expenditure  reflecting  the  ageing  of  the 
population  will  remain  substantially  constant  in  proportion  to  GDP  until  2020  and  rise 
thereafter.  The  increase  between  2005  and  2040  will  amount  to  2.9  percentage  points. 
Increased outlays on pensions (1.7 points) and on long-term care (1.8 points) will be partly 
offset by savings on education. 
It is likely that in the absence of intervention these spending items will rise more sharply and 
sooner. The forecasts for healthcare spending consider only the effects of the changing age 
structure of the population. They do not take account of other factors such as the rising cost 
of  medical  treatment,  which  has  increased  health  spending  significantly  in  recent  decades 
throughout the industrial world. As for long-term care, the changes in family structure and the 
increase  in  female  employment  could  prompt  greater  demand  for  public  assistance.  The 
estimates  of  pension  spending  take  account  of  the  effects  of  current  legislation,  which 
includes the revision each decade of the coefficients for converting the contribution base into 
the  annual  pension  entitlement  and  the  tightening  as  of  2008  of  the  minimum  pension 
eligibility requirements by Law 243/2004. 
According  to  the  State  Accounting  Office,  with  no  updating  of  the  conversion  coefficients 
(which apply to benefits paid under the defined-contributions scheme introduced in 1995) the 
ratio of expenditure to GDP would be higher by 0.7 percentage points in 2030, 1.5 points in 
2040 and about 2 points in 2050; other conditions being equal, the ratio of the debt to GDP 
would be some 40 points higher. The measures introduced in 2004 raising the requirements 
for seniority pensions (which concern workers under the defined-benefit scheme) will reach a 
maximum restrictive effect on spending equal to 0.7 percentage points of GDP in 2012. This 
effect will remain broadly stable in the subsequent two decades; it will turn negative in the 
period  2040-50,  when  larger  pensions  will  begin  to  be  paid  as  a  consequence  of  workers 
having contributed for more years. All else being equal, if the requirements are not tightened 
the ratio of the debt to GDP in 2050 would be about 20 percentage points higher. 
The increase in the lowest pensions that the Government has just decided aims at alleviating 
the  situation  of  economic  hardship  in  which  a  large  number  of  elderly  people  live.  The 
payment of adequate pension benefits to a growing number of old people is the challenge 
that  needs  to  be  faced  in  the  coming  years.  The  answers,  in  Italy  as  in  all  the  advanced 
countries,  are  basically  two:  gradually  raising  the  age  at  which  people  actually  retire  and 
developing supplementary pension provision. 
8 
 BIS Review 92/2007
An incentive to postpone retirement, in line with the lengthening of life expectancy, will derive 
from full application of the defined-contributions scheme introduced in 1995. Strengthening 
the link between contributions and benefits improves the system of incentives, reduces the 
disparities  between  different  categories  of  workers  and  permits  flexibility  in  deciding 
retirement age. The other countries that face demographic problems similar to ours are also 
moving in this direction. 
The updating of the conversion coefficients makes it possible to take the lengthening of life 
expectancy into account, although with considerable delay, and this is essential for long-term 
equilibrium  between  the  outlays  and  receipts  of  the  pension  system.  When  expected 
longevity  increases,  modification  of  the  coefficients  lowers  the  income  replacement  rate, 
maintaining pension wealth unchanged; workers are entitled to a smaller monthly benefit, but 
receive  it  for  a  greater  number  of  years.  If  the  retirement  age  is  flexible,  this  creates  an 
incentive to prolong one’s working career. 
As is stressed in the Document, it is necessary to lengthen the time horizon of public action. 
Reducing the public debt and, I add, ensuring the sustainability of the pension system must 
constitute  the  State’s  first  investment  in  favour  of  the  country’s  young  people  and  future 
generations. 
  10-year BTPs 
and the euro area 
Figures and Tables 
Figure 1.   Primary surplus and temporary effects 
Figure 2.   General government debt in Italy and Belgium 
Figure 3.  Net borrowing in Italy and the euro area 
Figure 4.   Tax  revenue  and  social  security  contributions  and  primary  expenditure  in  Italy 
 
Figure 5.   Average cost of the debt, average gross interest rate on BOTs and gross yield of 
 
Figure 6.   10-year yield differentials with respect to Italy 
Figure 7.  Primary surplus: objectives and outturns 
Figure 8.  Revenue and expenditure in Germany 
Table 1.   Main public finance indicators for general government 
Table 2.   General government revenue 
Table 3.   General government expenditure 
Table 4.  General government borrowing requirement 
Table 5.  Current legislation forecasts and Government targets in the Economic and  
 
Financial Planning Document (EFPD) for 2008-11 and 2007-11 
 BIS Review 92/2007 
 9
10 
  BIS Review 92/2007
BIS Review 92/2007 
 11
12 
 BIS Review 92/2007
BIS Review 92/2007 
 13
14 
 BIS Review 92/2007
BIS Review 92/2007 
 15
 16 
  BIS Review 92/2007
