Charles C Soludo: Strategic Agenda for the Naira  
Briefing  by  Professor  Charles  C  Soludo,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  on  the 
“Strategic Agenda of the Naira”, Abuja, 14 August 2007. 
 Introduction 
I:  
It is my pleasure to welcome everyone to this important briefing on the “Strategic Agenda for 
the  Naira”.  As  you  may  recall,  it  is  about  three  years  since  we  launched  (in  this  very 
Auditorium on July 6, 2004) the 13-point reform agenda designed to restructure, refocus and 
strengthen the Nigerian banking and financial system. At that meeting, I observed that the 
agenda  constituted  “Phase  One”  of  the  reforms.  We  have  since  introduced  other 
complementary  reforms  designed  to  stabilize  the  exchange  rate,  reduce  inflation,  reform 
microfinance, restructure the lower denominations of our currency and re-introduce coins, as 
well as promote the efficiency of the payments system. We have also launched the design of 
a  comprehensive  long-term  reform  agenda  for  the  financial  system  (the  Financial  System 
Strategy 2020 – FSS 2020). 
All  these  reforms  are  driven  by  our  medium  and  long-term  objectives  to  ensure  economic 
prosperity of Nigeria, and for Nigeria to become the Africa’s financial hub by the year 2020. 
Only  a  sustained  stable  macroeconomic  environment  and  a  sound  and  vibrant  financial 
system  can  propel  the  economy  to  achieve  our  national  desire  to  become  one  of  the  20 
largest economies in the world by the year 2020. 
The Strategic Agenda for the Naira is therefore being launched today as “Phase Two” of our 
reform agenda, and as a necessary complement to the 13-point agenda of Phase One and 
other  reforms.  Phase  Two  of  the  reforms  has  become  all  the  more  imperative  given  the 
progress so far on Phase One, as well as the emphasis of the new Central Bank of Nigeria 
Act on ensuring monetary and price stability. According to the “Central Bank of Nigeria Act, 
2007”, (Section 2) the key objects of the Central Bank shall be to: (a) ensure monetary and 
price  stability;  (b)  issue  legal  tender  currency  in  Nigeria;  (c)  maintain  external  reserves  to 
safeguard the international value of the legal tender currency; (d) promote a sound financial 
system in Nigeria; and (e) act as banker and provide economic and financial advice to the 
Federal  Government.  The  Phase  Two,  by  focusing  on  the  Naira,  means  that  the  Central 
Bank  intends  to  give  greater  emphasis  to  the  most  important  function  of  central  banks 
everywhere  in  the  world  namely,  to  issue  legal  tender  currency  and  to  defend  its  value 
(domestically  by  ensuring  low  inflation  and  externally  by  ensuring  appropriate  and  stable 
exchange rate regime). Our specific objective in Phase Two of the reforms is to make the 
Naira the currency of reference in Africa, and thus a strategic catalyst for achieving the goal 
of  an  international  financial  centre  as  well  as  promoting  Nigeria’s  rapid  economic 
development. We also need the Phase Two to ensure that the results being achieved under 
Phase One are deepened and sustained. 
Overview of the reforms since 2004 and outcomes 
II:  
Before we outline the elements of the Strategic Agenda, it is germane to briefly review our 
progress  so  far.  As  you  are  aware,  most  of  our  reforms  have  focused  on  structural  and 
institutional reforms, and have included the following: 
• 
• 
• 
Strengthened the institutional framework for the conduct of monetary policy 
Bank recapitalization/consolidation  
Programme to possibly eliminate or reduce government ownership of any bank (to 
no more than 10 percent) 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 1
       Improved transparency and corporate governance  
Zero  tolerance  to  misreporting  and  data  rendition,  and  strict  adherence  to  the 
Anti-money laundering regulations 
Implementation of Basel II Principles and Risk-based supervision 
Payments system reforms for efficiency – especially the e-payment 
Reforming  the  Exchange  rate  management  system  –  adoption  of  the  Wholesale 
Dutch  Auction  System  (WDAS)  and  increased  liberalization  of  the  forex  market 
(which since 2006 led to the convergence of the parallel and official exchange rates 
for the first time in 20 years). 
Restructuring the Nigerian Security Printing and Minting, Plc; 
Addressing issues of technology and skills in the banking industry especially in risk 
management and ICT. 
Launching of a new Micro finance policy and regulatory framework to serve the un-
served 65 percent of the bankable public 
Ongoing Pension, Consumer credit, and Mortgage system reforms 
Forging  strategic  alliances  and  partnerships  between  Nigerian  banks  and  foreign 
financial institutions especially in the area of reserve/asset management 
Establishment of Africa Finance Corporation (AFC), as first private-sector led African 
Investment Bank 
Encouragement  of  Nigerian  banks  to  go  global,  leading  to  more  than  doubling  of 
branch network in West Africa since 2004; setting up of subsidiaries in London as 
well  as  Nigerian  banks  successfully  issuing  Eurobonds  and  getting  listed  on  the 
London Stock Exchange. 
Our grand objective in the banking sector reforms was to re-engineer and fast-track a system 
that will engender confidence and power a new economy. So far, the grand objectives of that 
policy are being achieved, and our consolidation programme has been adjudged about the 
most successful and at least cost to the tax payers in the world. The total deposits trapped in 
the  failed  banks  as  percentage  of  GDP  is  about  0.7%  (the  lowest  in  the  world),  and  no 
private  sector  depositor  would  lose  a  kobo  of  his/her  deposit.  The  banking  system  is  the 
safest  and  soundest  it  has  ever  been  in  history.  Deposits  and  credits  have  more  than 
doubled, and non-performing loans as percentage of total loans have gone down from about 
23% before consolidation to about 7% currently. Individual banks now finance big projects 
valued at hundreds of millions of dollars and also operate in the oil and gas sector – a feat 
they  never  could  do  before  now.  Interest  rates  are  gradually  coming  down  (with  average 
lending rate at about 16.9%, down from 25%). Currently,  commercial  bank branches have 
gone up from about 3,200 before reforms to over 4,100, and total employment in the sector 
has  gone  up  from  about  55,000  before  reforms  to  over  61,000  currently.  The  world  is 
celebrating Nigeria’s success, and over $1.5 billion of foreign investment has gone into the 
sector since 2005. By end 2007, there will be about 7 or more banks with shareholders fund 
in excess of $1 billion and over 10 banks with market capitalization of over $2 billion each 
(there was none in 2004). In 2004, there was no Nigerian bank in the top 1000 banks in the 
world. As at the end of 2006, there were 12 banks in the top 1000, with one ranked 355th 
(top 500 in the world). Our banking system is powering the Nigerian Stock Exchange. Today, 
Nigeria has the fastest growing banking system in Africa, and one of the fastest in the world. 
As  seasoned  commentators  have  observed,  it  has  taken  Nigeria  less  than  three  years  to 
achieve  what  it  took  South  Africa  20  years  to  achieve  in  the  area  of  banking.  To  put  it 
succinctly, a new banking system has emerged, and will only get stronger for the benefit of 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2007
the Nigerian economy. We firmly believe that with the sustenance of the reforms as the CBN 
is determined to do, the best is yet to come. 
On  the  macroeconomic  front,  double-digit  and  volatile  inflation  rate  (which  used  to  be  the 
norm)  have  been  subdued  as  inflation  rate  has  remained  at  single-digit  since  last  year. 
However, inflation risks remain high. The Naira/US dollar exchange rate has remained stable 
(with  steady  appreciation  of  Naira  against  the  dollar)  since  2004,  and  the  GDP  has 
maintained a robust growth rate of over 6% per annum since 2003. 
Matters arising and challenges ahead 
III:  
Despite progress on a number of fronts, there are still enormous challenges and unfinished 
business. At the economy-wide level, there are still chronic challenges of insecurity of lives 
and property, infrastructure deficiency (especially power and transportation), education crisis, 
among others.  
At the level of the financial system, we have the huge task of effectively implementing the 
FSS 2020. There is still the risk of fiscal dominance and volatility in the fiscal operations of 
government.  Evolving  Fiscal  Responsibility  arrangements  and  framework  for  managing 
highly volatile oil revenues will be critical. Other unfinished business in the reforms includes: 
• 
• 
• 
Risk-based, consolidated and strengthened banking supervision 
Mortgage, SME, and consumer credit reforms 
Adherence of States and LGs to the requirement under the Micro Finance policy to 
devote at least 1 percent of their annual budget to micro credit 
Continued reform of the payments system, especially the e-payments system and 
enforcement of the Dud cheque offences Act. 
 Efforts will continue to be made to address these unfinished issues. 
The Strategic Agenda 
IV:  
The  thrust  of  the  agenda  focuses  on  the  Naira  as  our  national  currency  –  to  realign  its 
denominations,  ensure  its  stability  and  global  integration.  These  will  help  to  deepen  the 
reforms of the financial system and national economy, and make the Naira the currency of 
reference in Africa thereby facilitating our quest for international financial status. 
The  new  focus  is  an  extension  of  our  previous  currency  redesign  and  re-issuance  of  the 
lower  denominations  and  attempt  to  re-introduce  coins.  Our  goals  were  to  redesign  the 
currencies after 23 years (contrary to the international norm of currency redesign after 6-8 
years), drive down the cost of currency printing and experiment with the polymer substrate. 
Our objectives are largely achieved and we have learnt a lot from the exercise. However, in 
the light of the new mandate by the CBN Act (2007) to “ensure monetary and price stability”, 
as  well  as  the  vision  articulated  under  the  FSS  2020,  it  has  become  imperative  for  us  to 
evolve a more comprehensive strategy for the Naira as a reference currency. 
Currency  redenomination  and  liberalization  are  not  without  risks  especially  for  small  open 
economies such as Nigeria. However, we believe that the time is auspicious for such reforms 
especially in the light of the following enabling conditions: 
• 
Overall commitment of the Federal Government under Alhaji Umaru Musa Yar’Adua 
(GCFR) to sustaining macroeconomic and other structural reforms 
A  robust  external  reserves  to  meet  almost  20  months  of  foreign  exchange 
disbursements and 25 months of imports 
Stronger banking system powering a new economy and capital market 
  BIS Review 91/2007 
 3
   Inflation down to single digit, and robust GDP growth of about 6% and above 
Exchange rate stability and elimination of multiple currency practices that had been 
prevalent before now 
Strong capital inflows (with Central Bank as increasingly marginal player in the forex 
market) 
Debt relief: Nigeria without a debt burden 
Non-oil exports growing strongly (24% in 2006) 
Nigeria de-listed from the FATF list 
New  CBN  Act  not  permitting  CBN  to  grant  ways  and  means  advances  to 
Government  exceeding  5%  of  previous  year’s  revenue  provided  such  financing  is 
retired  before  end  of  the  financial  year.  Indeed,  CBN  is  not  positively  disposed  to 
granting any ways and means advances. 
It is in the view of the foregoing enabling conditions, and our vision for a Naira that is the 
currency of reference in Africa that the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Nigeria has 
approved the following agenda for the Naira: 
Currency re-denomination 
A: 
Here,  we  intend  to  restructure  the  entire  currency  by  dropping  two  zeroes  or  moving  two 
decimal  points  to  the  left  from  the  currency,  and  issuing  more  coin  denominations.  This 
would  entail  a  total  currency  exchange  and  phasing-out  of  all  the  existing  denominations 
from August 1, 2008. Effectively, at the current exchange rate, this policy would mean that 
the Naira/US dollar exchange rate would be around N1.25 to US$1 then. All Naira assets, 
prices and contracts will be re-denominated by dropping two zeroes or two decimal points to 
the left with effect from this date. 
The proposed currency structure is as follows: 
• 
Coins: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Notes: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
1 kobo 
2 kobo 
5 kobo 
10 kobo 
20 kobo 
50 kobo 
1 Naira 
5 Naira 
10 Naira 
20 Naira  
 Effectively, our plan will restore the value of the Naira (in the short-term) close to what it was 
in 1985 before the commencement of the Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) in 1986. 
Re-denomination  and  re-introduction  of  totally  new  currency  structure  (notes  and  coins) 
following the progress so far with other reforms and the enabling conditions in the economy 
today are designed to better anchor inflationary expectations, strengthen public confidence in 
4 
 BIS Review 91/2007
 B:  
the  Naira,  make  for  easier  conversion  to  other  currencies,  reverse  tendency  for  currency 
substitution,  eliminate  higher  denomination  notes  with  lower  value,  reduce  the  cost  of 
production, distribution and processing of currency, promote the usage of coins and thus a 
more efficient pricing and payments system, and lay the foundation for the convertibility of 
the  Naira  as  well  as  make  it  the  “Reference  currency”  in  Africa.  The  African  Union  has 
granted  Nigeria  the  right  to  host  the  Headquarters  of  the  African  Central  Bank  when  the 
common currency in Africa materializes. We must therefore lead the way in terms of properly 
aligned currency structure and sound monetary policy framework. 
Several  countries  in  the  world  have  undertaken  currency  re-denomination  at  various  times 
and  for  different  reasons,  including:  Afghanistan  (2002);  Germany  (1923,  1948);  Argentina 
(1970; 1983; 1985; 1992); Bolivia (1963, 1987); Brazil (1967, 1970, 1986, 1989, 1990, 1993, 
1994); China (1955); South Korea (1962); Mexico (1993, 1996); Ghana (2007); Israel (1948, 
1960,  1980,  1985);  Turkey  (2005);  Angola  (1995,  1999);  and  others.  Evidently,  many 
countries have had to undertake the re-denomination more than once. In the case of Brazil, it 
had  to  do  it  many  times  before  it  got  it  right.  The  major  challenge  is  to  undertake  other 
complementary reforms, particularly macroeconomic reforms that will underpin price stability 
and continuing confidence in the economy. This is where we believe Nigeria’s experience is 
likely to be different from others, having learnt from the experiences of other countries. 
Consequently,  as  necessary  complements  to  the  currency  re-denomination,  we  intend  to 
introduce three additional measures: 
• 
• 
Adoption of Inflation-Targeting Framework for the conduct of monetary policy 
Sharing Part of the Federation Account in US Dollars to deepen the Forex Market 
and for Liquidity Management 
Current Account Liberalization/Convertibility and Accession to Article VIII of the IMF. 
Adoption of inflation-targeting framework for the conduct of monetary policy: 
to commence from January 1, 2009 
In the light of the new mandate as contained in the new CBN Act (2007) urging the CBN to 
“ensure  monetary  and  price  stability”  as  well  as  the  need  to  provide  a  transparent, 
credible framework to lock-in inflationary expectations, the CBN will adopt inflation target 
as the nominal anchor for monetary policy with effect from January 1, 2009. Low and stable 
inflation will be our monetary policy’s primary long-term goal. Focusing on inflation targeting 
does  not  mean  that  the  CBN  will  not  be  interested  in  other  broader  objectives  of 
macroeconomic  policy  –  output  growth,  employment,  exchange  rate,  and  balance  of 
payments.  Rather,  an  inflation-targeting  framework  will  enable  CBN  to  pursue  these 
objectives in a more disciplined and consistent manner rather than the ad-hoc processes of 
the  past.  Locking-in  inflationary  expectations  is  one  effective  way  of  ensuring  that  the 
currency re-denomination will be sustainable. The outcome of this new framework will greatly 
improve the credibility of the CBN as the Monetary Authority, as well as deepen the financial 
markets and promote rapid development of a private sector-led economy. 
We  will  use  the  next  16  months  to  fully  prepare  for  the  introduction  of  this  framework 
especially in the light of the deep technical issues involved. The CBN would collaborate with 
the National Bureau of Statistics in significantly improving the availability of high frequency 
and reliable data especially those of the GDP and more robust measures of the price indices. 
C:  
Sharing part of the federation account allocation in US dollars to deepen the 
forex market and for liquidity management: to commence from September 
2007 
Given the structure and development of the financial system, the underdeveloped nature of 
the Forex markets, as well as the restrictions on foreign exchange transactions, the CBN has 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 5
traditionally fully monetized the foreign currency receipts in the Federation Accounts, to be 
shared by the three tiers of government. Initially, the CBN also maintained the accounts for 
all the tiers of government – as part of the liquidity management framework. Subsequently, 
as the banking system developed, the CBN allowed the share of the states and LGs to be 
deposited with the commercial banks. 
Recently,  following  the  reforms  in  the  banking  sector  and  the  further  liberalization  of  the 
Forex market, both the financial system and the forex market have deepened and become 
increasingly  sophisticated.  Since  2006,  the  CBN  adopted  the  Wholesale  Dutch  Auction 
System  (WDAS)  in  the  forex  market  and  significantly  liberalized  the  forex  market. 
Furthermore, Nigeria has exited the debt trap, built up significant external reserves, and the 
autonomous  inflows into  the  Forex market  are such  that  the  CBN  has become  a marginal 
player in the forex market. The forex market has become so efficient that Nigeria no longer 
has multiple currency practices (as defined by the IMF). In the last two years also, the CBN 
has  consistently  intervened  in  the  forex  market  through  the  increased  sale  of  foreign 
exchange  as  an  instrument  of  liquidity  management  (the  so-called  special  auctions).  In 
December 2006, the CBN introduced the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) with the corridor, and 
this has eliminated the high volatility in the money market interest rates. The money market 
is deepening, and the bond market is also evolving. 
The  above  conditions  indicate  that  the  private  financial  markets  are  getting  deeper  and 
sophisticated  enough  to  warrant  further  steps  on  the  part  of  the  Central  Bank  to  gradually 
withdraw as a dominant player in the forex market. The inter-bank forex market is now the 
dominant segment of the market, and needs to be deepened.  
Consequently, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the CBN has approved the sharing 
of  part  of  the  Federation  Account  allocation  to  the  Federal  Government  and  the  State 
Governments  in  US  dollars.  The  Local  Governments  are  excluded  in  this  phase.  For  the 
Central  Bank,  this  could  also  provide  an  additional  instrument  for  effective  liquidity 
management as we migrate to inflation-targeting framework. 
The proportion of the Federation Account to be distributed in dollars will be determined from 
time  to  time,  but  largely  dependent  on  the  assessment  of  the  forex  market  as  well  as  the 
liquidity management requirements of the CBN. Both the States and Federal Government will 
be  required  to  open  “Special Domiciliary Accounts” with commercial banks of their choice. 
The special account can only be accessed by monetizing the balances into Naira. In other 
words,  the  Governments  cannot  withdraw  dollar  cash  but  may  also  utilize  part  of  their 
domiciliary accounts for settlement of external obligations (e.g. opening of letters of credit). 
From  September  2007,  the  exchange  rate  that  will  be  applied  in  the  monetization  of 
Federation Account as well as the “Special Domiciliary Accounts” will be the inter-bank rate 
on that day. 
As the market deepens, the CBN will gradually withdraw from the WDAS, and only intervene 
in the market (buy or sell forex) as may be required to achieve defined policy objectives.  
This  new  policy  thrust  is  expected  to  deepen  the  forex  market,  promote  financial  market 
development, and improve the degree of integration among the domestic markets and with 
international  markets.  This  policy  will  complement  the  ongoing  programme  of  allowing 
Nigerian banks to manage part of our external reserves in collaboration with foreign asset 
managers. The net effect of these will be to create and deepen capacity within our banks. All 
these will also provide important building blocks for the external current account convertibility 
and attainment of the IMF Article VIII status. The challenge here is that both the CBN and the 
commercial banks would have to manage the risks inherent in foreign exchange trading and 
deploy a sound system of monitoring foreign asset-liability matching. The CBN in particular, 
would need to sharpen its skills to monitor and regulate the use of domiciliary accounts in 
accordance  with  the  international  best  practices  as  well  as  the  rules  and  guidelines 
governing  the  anti-money  laundering  laws  and  regulations.  The  Governments  too  would 
6 
 BIS Review 91/2007
need  to  be  on  top  of  the  risk  management  techniques  for  optimal  management  of  their 
portfolios. 
The CBN is conscious of the risks of dollarization of the economy and will take steps to avoid 
such. Also, we are conscious of the dangers of the Dutch Disease and hence the need to 
avoid the repeat of history in terms of high overvaluation of the Naira in real effective terms 
as happened during the 1970s until early 1980s. Non-oil exports have begun to recover and 
grew by 24% in 2006. Also, capital inflows have been growing rapidly and highly overvalued 
exchange  rate  would  hurt  these  trends.  More  fundamentally,  without  a  currency  re-
denomination/realignment, a significant appreciation of the Naira/dollar exchange rate would 
lead  to  fiscal  crisis  given  that  much  of  the  revenue  is  dollar  denominated,  and  such 
appreciation would also significantly deplete our external reserves. Thus, while we deepen 
the forex market and effectively manage our liquidity, we would not lose focus on ensuring 
appropriate exchange rate regime for macroeconomic balance. 
D:  
Current account liberalization/convertibility and accession to Article VIII of the 
IMF: to commence January 1, 2009 
As  a  necessary  complement  to  the  foregoing  policy  initiatives,  and  to  further  deepen  the 
integration  of  our  financial  system  and  economy  into  the  global  economy,  we  intend  to 
embark upon full current account liberalization/convertibility by January 1, 2009. This would 
entail that Nigeria eliminates all restrictions on current account transactions, and accession 
to Article VIII of the IMF means that the policy is not easily reversible. Out of the 185 member 
countries of the IMF, 167 have acceded to the Article VIII on current account convertibility. It 
is our belief that the conditions are right for Nigeria to now join the world league. The timing 
is proposed to coincide with the commencement of the inflation-targeting framework. 
Conclusion 
V:  
These measures constitute a key component of the FSS 2020 agenda: our quest to become 
an international financial centre and Africa’s financial hub. They will complement and deepen 
the  ongoing  financial  system  reforms.  The  conditions  are  now  right,  and  despite  the 
challenges, we are determined to ensure effective design and implementation. 
Furthermore,  we  are  working  towards  greater  transparency  in  the  formulation  and 
implementation of our monetary policy. A new Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) will soon 
be  reconstituted  in  accordance  with  the  new  CBN  Act,  and  Minutes  of  the  MPC  shall  be 
made public. We also intend to undertake greater public education about what we do and 
why we do them the way we do. 
Are these policies consistent with the drive towards a single currency in West Africa? Yes: 
Nigeria  remains  committed  towards  the  ECOWAS  goal.  Currently,  the  Nigerian  economy 
constitutes  about  70  percent  of  the  entire  ECOWAS  economy  and  accounts  for  about  80 
percent  of  the  total  external  reserves.  It  therefore  goes  without  saying  that  if  the  Naira  is 
properly aligned and can become the “Reference Currency”, the goal of a monetary union 
becomes all the more credible and sustainable. Nigeria has met all the primary convergence 
criteria  and  hopes  that  the  other  countries  will  do  same  on  a  sustained  basis.  In  the 
meantime, Nigeria must continue to make progress. 
I thank you all for listening. 
BIS Review 91/2007 
 7
