Lucas Papademos: Inflation and competitiveness divergences in the 
euro area countries: causes, consequences and policy responses 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference “The ECB and its Watchers IX”, Frankfurt am Main, 7 September 2007. 
 Introduction  
I. 
Thank you for inviting me to participate in this conference and this panel with the challenging 
task of addressing issues relating to the inflation and competitiveness performances of the 
euro area countries. The relative economic performances of euro area countries and the role 
of  national  economic  policies  in  a  monetary  union  have  been  discussed  extensively  both 
before and after the launch of the euro for various reasons. A central question is whether and 
to what extent inflation rates in Member States can diverge significantly and persistently from 
the  euro  area  norms  of  price  stability  with  undesirable  consequences  for  competitiveness 
positions and economic growth. A second, related question is how euro area countries can 
help prevent and/or correct diverging adverse developments in their domestic inflation and 
international competitiveness when they can no longer deploy monetary policy at a national 
level or rely on nominal intra-euro area exchange rate adjustments in order to, respectively, 
control domestic inflation and restore price competitiveness. 
I  will  address  these  two  questions  by  examining  the  role  of  unit  labour  cost  (ULC) 
developments  in  shaping  inflation  dynamics  and  competitiveness  patterns  across  the  euro 
area countries (see slide 2). The evolution of unit labour cost is a key determinant of inflation 
and of changes in competitiveness, as I will show, and this justifies the emphasis placed in 
the analysis that follows – and which is highlighted in the title of this session. At the same 
time,  I  would  like  to  stress  from  the  outset  that  relative  unit  labour  cost  is  not  the  only 
determinant of competitiveness and due attention must also be given to other determining 
factors. International competitiveness is a broader concept that reflects both price and non-
price or quality elements that will not be considered here; moreover, price competitiveness 
can  be  measured  by  several  indicators  based  on  HICP,  producer  prices  or  relative  export 
prices. Nevertheless, the trend growth in relative unit labour costs provides a useful indicator 
of the change in competitiveness of a country in a monetary union that has the merit that it is 
unaffected by changes in indirect taxes or asymmetric external shocks to consumer prices. 
In  my  presentation,  I  will  examine  and  assess  the  facts,  the  causes  and  the  economic 
consequences  of  the  observed  dispersion  in  ULC  growth  across  the  euro  area  countries 
since the launch of the euro, and then I will draw some conclusions about the appropriate 
policy response. 
Some facts about divergences in economic performance in the euro area 
II.  
Let  me  start  by  recalling  some  facts  and  presenting  some  additional  evidence  about  the 
observed  divergences  in  the  economic  performance  of  the  euro  area  countries.  A  first 
important  observation  is  that,  although  inflation  and  growth  differentials  between  the  euro 
area  countries  are  not  insignificant,  since  the  launch  of  the  euro,  they  have  not  been 
unusually large when compared with the corresponding differentials in other large monetary 
unions, notably the United States (see slide 3). Moreover, the dispersion of inflation rates in 
the euro area since the introduction of the single currency is substantially smaller than that 
experienced in the previous decade, while the dispersion of the growth rates across the euro 
area  countries  has  declined  somewhat  over  the  past  twenty  years  (see  slide  4).  There  is, 
however,  a  third  fact  which  differentiates  the  observed  economic  divergences  in  the  euro 
area from those in the United States: the persistence of the inflation and growth performance 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 1
across euro area countries. This feature, which is not characteristic of the United States, may 
suggest  that  the  underlying  adjustment  mechanisms  in  the  euro  area  economies  are  not 
functioning as smoothly and in a timely manner, with potentially undesirable implications for 
the dynamics of economic activity and employment. 
To better understand the causes and consequences of the observed persistence of inflation 
rates across the euro area, we must look more closely at the inter-temporal and cross-border 
developments in the underlying determinants of inflation and growth, and in particular ULC 
and the factors that shape their level and evolution over time. What are the pertinent facts 
about the evolution and dispersion of ULC in the euro area? 
On average, unit labour cost in the euro area has increased at a moderate pace in recent 
years,  largely  thanks  to  subdued  wage  developments  in  Germany.  However,  unit  labour 
costs have grown at significantly different rates across the euro area countries (see slide 5). 
The  cumulative  growth  of  unit  labour  cost  (for  the  total  economy)  in  euro  area  countries 
relative to the euro area average ranged between +15% in Portugal and -10% in Germany 
over the period 1999-2006. 
Nevertheless,  the  dispersion  in  ULC  growth  rates  across  the  euro  area  countries  has 
declined  substantially  over  the  last  fifteen  years  (see  slide  6).  Moreover,  the  size  of 
dispersion,  measured  in  terms  of  the  non-weighted  standard  deviation,  is  in  line  with  that 
observed in other benchmark currency unions, notably the United States, and across regions 
in  Italy  and  Spain,  but  it  is  higher  than  the  recorded  dispersion  across  the  West  German 
Länder.  
If  we  examine  in  greater  detail  ULC  developments  in  individual  European  countries  and 
states in the US, the range of cumulated ULC growth across the euro area countries in the 
period 1999-2005 is roughly similar to that observed across the United States, that is about 
±10% (see slide 7). At one end of the spectrum, Germany, Austria – and to a lesser extent 
Belgium  and  Finland  –  have  experienced  a  decline  in  their  relative  ULC  growth  rates, 
pointing towards an improvement in the cost competitiveness of these countries vis-à-vis the 
euro area. In the US, this is true for most states, but the outcome is most pronounced for 
Louisiana,  Oklahoma,  Indiana  and  Iowa.  At  the  other  side  of  the  spectrum,  we  see  that 
increases in relative ULCs growth rates were particularly strong in Portugal, Ireland, Greece, 
Spain,  Italy  and  Luxembourg.  In  the  US,  we  find  strong  relative  ULC  increases  in  Arizona 
and Florida. A recent study confirms this finding that changes in relative unit labour costs in 
euro area countries (with one exception) are within the same range as in the United States 
over  the  period  1999-2004.1  However,  ULC  growth  in  some  countries  (Italy,  Spain  and 
Portugal) is significantly above their own long-term averages.  
A special feature of ULC developments across the euro area countries is their high degree of 
persistence (see slide 8). In some countries, ULC growth has been consistently either above 
(for  instance,  in  Ireland,  Greece  and  Portugal)  or  below  (for  instance,  in  Germany  and 
Austria) the euro area average ULC growth in each single year since 1999. Indeed, another 
study, using a co-integration framework, has found that deviations of ULC from its long-term 
equilibrium value take longer to adjust in the euro area countries than in the States in the 
US.2  
                                                 
1   See Dullien and Fritsche (2006), How bad is Divergence in the Euro-Zone? Lessons from the United States of 
America  and  Germany.  University  of  Hamburg,  Department  of  Economics  and  Politics  Discussion  Papers, 
Macroeconomics and Finance Series 5/2006. 
2   Dullien and Fritsche (2007).  Does the Dispersion of Unit  Labor Cost Dynamics  in the  EMU Imply Long-run 
divergence?  Results  from  a  Comparison  with  the  United  States  of  America  and  Germany,  University  of 
Hamburg,  Department  of  Economics  and  Politics  Discussion  Paper,  Macroeconomics  and  Finance  Series, 
2/2007. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2007
When interpreting relative ULC developments from a competitiveness perspective, we should 
keep  in  mind  that  they  are  also  other  key  indicators  of  competitiveness.  For  example, 
Eurosystem  staff  have  recently  developed  what  we  call  Harmonised  Competitiveness 
Indictors.  These  indicators,  which  are  based  on  consumer  price  indices,  are  calculated  on 
the basis of weighted averages of the bilateral exchange rates of each euro area country vis-
à-vis  the  currencies  of  its  trading  partners.  They  show  a  broadly  similar  dispersion  of 
competitiveness  developments  across  euro  area  countries,  although  the  extent  to  which 
countries  have  gained  or  lost  competitiveness  over  the  past  eight  years  differs  somewhat 
compared with that implied by relative ULC measures (see slide 9). 
The causes of diverging ULC developments 
III.  
What is behind these diverging developments in relative ULC growth in some countries? To 
better understand their evolution over time we can look at the individual components of ULC: 
high ULC growth can be explained either by particularly strong wage growth, low productivity 
growth  or  both  (see  slide  10).  In  Greece,  for  example,  despite  very  strong  productivity 
growth, increases in compensation per employee have resulted in relatively high ULC growth 
vis-à-vis the euro area average. In Italy compensation per employee has grown in line with 
the euro area average, but productivity growth has been relatively weak.3 In relative terms, 
Portugal  has  experienced  both  strong  growth  in  compensation  per  employee  and  modest 
productivity  gains.  As  regards  the  dispersion  of  ULC  growth  rates  across  all  euro  area 
countries,  the  contribution  of  differences  in  the  growth  of  the  compensation  per  employee 
accounts for the largest part of the differences in ULC growth rates (see slide 11).  
We  can  gain  further  insights  into  the  causes  of  diverging  competitiveness  performances 
across countries by analysing ULC  developments in different sectors. In this context, ULC 
developments  in  the  industrial  sector  may  be  of  particular  interest,  given  that  this  sector 
produces  most  of  the  tradables.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  over  the  period  1999-2005, 
cumulated ULC growth in the industrial sector is considerably lower than in services in most 
euro  area  countries.  [Slide  12]  Developments  in  compensation  per  employee  have  been 
rather similar across the two sectors in most countries, with the exception of Germany. Thus, 
the key factor behind the stronger ULC growth in the services sector compared to industry 
appears to be weak productivity growth in services, which may reflect, among other things, 
the fact that this sector is relatively less exposed to international competition.  
Do we need to worry? 
IV.  
Having  presented  the  facts  about  diverging  ULC  developments  across  the  euro  area 
countries  and  some  preliminary  analysis  of  the  causes  behind  this  evolution,  the  key 
question – not least for policy-makers – is: do we need to be concerned? The answer is not 
necessarily  straightforward,  for  ULC  growth  differentials  may  be  the  outcome  of  various 
factors and processes that are difficult to quantify and hard to disentangle. First, ULC growth 
differences may reflect the effects of catching-up processes, especially in countries such as 
Ireland,  Portugal  and  Greece  where  the  so-called  Balassa-Samuelson  effect4  could  have 
                                                 
3  
It  should  be  added  that  productivity  figures  in  some  countries,  especially  for  Italy,  may  be  subject  to 
“measurement  distortions”  resulting,  for  example,  from  changes  in  employment  following  the  registration  of 
immigrant workers. 
4   The  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  refers  to  inflation  effects  due  to  differences  in  relative  productivity  growth 
between tradable and non-tradable sectors. When productivity growth rises in the tradable sector, wages will 
follow without putting additional pressure on unit labour costs. However, due to labour mobility, wages in the 
non-tradable sector may rise as well and as productivity growth in the non-tradable sector is normally lower 
(and  more  similar  across  countries)  than  in  the  tradable  sector,  wage  increases  in  excess  of  productivity 
growth would tend to put upward pressure on unit labour costs and ultimately inflation. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 3
been significant in previous years. However, the size of this effect on ULC developments is 
difficult  to  identify  with  precision  and  must  have  been  declining  over  time.  Second,  ULC 
growth  differences  may  also  be  due  to  equilibrium  adjustments,  country-specific,  possibly 
persistent, shocks or different cyclical positions across the euro area countries. ULC growth 
differentials as a result of such factors should not be a source for concern.  
However, differences in ULC growth rates may also reflect the effects of structural factors, 
constraining productivity growth, of labour and product market features and conditions or of 
inappropriate  national  policies.  As  we  have  seen,  in  a  number  of  euro  area  countries, 
compensation per employee growth substantially exceeded productivity developments. This 
may  at  least  partially  reflect  labour  market  rigidities,  such  as  the  automatic  indexation  of 
nominal wages to prices, and other forms of nominal rigidities.  
Because these causes of a diverging evolution of ULCs are of a structural nature, and their 
effects on ULC growth and competitiveness positions can persist, we need to monitor and 
assess their implications carefully. Should we be concerned by what we observe in certain 
euro  area  countries?  Yes,  because  persistent  ULC  growth  in  excess  of  the  euro  area 
average  can  be  expected  to  give  rise  to  sustained  inflationary  pressures  and  losses  in 
competitiveness, with adverse effects on the real economy. What does the evidence tell us? 
First, the cumulative change in ULC over a period of time is highly correlated with the HICP 
inflation  over  the  same  period  across  euro  area  countries.  The  close  relationship between 
the cumulative ULC growth and inflation rates is impressive (see slide 13).  
A second unfavourable impact of persistently higher ULC growth is that the resulting effects 
on  competitiveness  are  likely  to  contribute  to  a  worsening  of  trade  and  current  account 
balances.  Indeed,  there  is  some  evidence  that  countries  with  cumulative  losses  in  cost 
competitiveness,  as  measured  by  the  cumulative  relative  ULC  growth,  often  exhibit  large 
current  account  deficits  or  worsening  current  account  balances  (see  slide  14).  What  have 
been the consequences of these effects on economic growth performance? Prior to EMU, 
diverging inflation and competitiveness developments and sizeable current account deficits 
would have heralded, sooner or later, external adjustment via the exchange rate. Within a 
monetary  union,  this  adjustment  channel  does  not  exist  any  longer.  The  effects  on  GDP 
growth of losses in competitiveness as measured by the cumulative relative UCL growth are 
not visible in all countries (see slide 15). 
Why  have  we  not  witnessed,  so  far,  expected  adverse  effects  on  output  growth  and 
employment  in  all  countries  that  have  experienced  strong  ULC  growth?  There  are  several 
reasons. Let mention two: first, the negative effects of persistent above-average ULC growth 
and losses of competitiveness on economic activity and employment may take some time to 
materialise.  Second,  these  adverse  effects  on  the  real  economy  have  been  counteracted, 
and  even  fully  offset,  over  the  past  few  years  by  favourable  effects  of  other,  structural  or 
cyclical, factors. Such factors have included substantial interest rate decreases in the run-up 
to  EMU,  EU  structural  funds  support,  immigration  flows  and  financial  liberalisation.  Their 
positive  impact  on  economic  activity  may  imply  that  the  link  between  adverse  ULC 
developments  and  economic  activity  was  less  visible  and  the  respective  adjustment 
processes may appear not to function. However, such a favourable constellation of factors is 
unlikely  to  persist.  Eventually,  the  impact  of  some  of  these  factors  will  dissipate.  There  is 
therefore  a  clear  need,  in  the  countries  concerned,  to  address  the  fundamental  causes  of 
unfavourable ULC growth divergences.  
Policy responses 
V.  
To sum up, sizeable and protracted ULC growth in a member country above the euro area 
average is very likely to be accompanied by a commensurate higher and persistent inflation 
and  a  loss  of  competitiveness  that  will  eventually  adversely  affect  its  current  account 
position,  economic  activity  and  employment.  The  available  evidence  supports 
this 
conclusion,  although  the  exact  timing  and  the  dynamics  of  the  inevitable  economic 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2007
adjustment to reverse a significant cumulative loss of competitiveness cannot be predicted 
with  precision,  since  other  factors  and  processes  also  influence  the  economy’s  dynamic 
behaviour. 
The observed persistent divergences in ULC growth and inflation in a number of euro area 
countries clearly point to increasing risks of further competitive losses and potentially costly 
real economic adjustment. What are the appropriate policy responses? Needless to say, but I 
will say it anyway to make it abundantly clear, the single monetary policy cannot address the 
ULC  growth  and  inflation  divergences  in  individual  countries.  And  since  it  cannot  do  it,  it 
should not attempt to do it and it will not do it. However, by ensuring the preservation of price 
stability in the euro area as a whole, it can help guide and anchor inflation expectations to 
price  stability  in  all  euro  area  countries  and  thus  help  consumers  and  firms  to  take 
appropriate economic decisions. Having said that, it is evident that structural reforms, wage-
setting processes and budgetary policies must contribute to reverse competitiveness losses 
in individual euro area countries. 
High  on  the  policy  agenda  should  be  structural  reforms  to  boost  productivity  growth, 
especially in the services sector, to improve the functioning of market mechanisms – so that 
markets  respond  more  promptly  and  smoothly  to  the  building  up  of  disequilibria  –  and  to 
strengthen  market  structures  and  institutions  that  foster  competition  and  a  culture  of  price 
stability. An important advantage of this set of policy actions is that they can simultaneously 
contribute  to  higher  sustained  output  growth,  lower  ULC  growth  and  improvements  in 
competitiveness.  Moreover,  they  create  conditions  that  allow  wages  to  increase  without 
putting pressure on prices and reduce the required adjustment of nominal wages in situations 
when competitiveness losses must be restored. 
Wage-setting, however, has a crucial role in preserving and, if necessary, in helping reverse 
a cumulative loss of competitiveness. This is mainly the responsibility of the social partners 
who can see – and should be guided to better recognise – the long-term benefits of wage 
developments that are conducive to price stability, job creation and sustained income growth. 
To this end, nominal wage developments consistent with the objective of price stability – as 
quantitatively defined by the ECB – and the trend productivity growth provide an appropriate 
general guideline for wage-setting, which, however, must be carefully and suitably applied in 
a  differentiated  manner  in  order  to  take  into  account  labour  market  conditions  and 
productivity  developments  in  specific  sectors  or  regions  as  well  as  the  need  to  improve 
competitiveness if this is warranted.  
Labour  market  reforms  also  can  help  eliminate  bottlenecks  resulting  from  matching 
inefficiencies  in  the  labour  market  that  are  often  a  source  of  excessive  unit  labour  cost 
increases. A higher matching efficiency of euro area labour markets accompanied by greater 
wage  flexibility  would  facilitate  the  non-inflationary  adjustment  of  wages  and  support 
sustained employment growth. These objectives can also be fostered by reforms that aim at 
increasing labour mobility (across occupations, sectors and regions) in the euro area and at 
encouraging the increased use of more atypical forms of employment such as flexitime, part-
time  and  self-employment.  This  requires  continuous  investment  in  education,  training  and 
life-long learning as well as improved efficiency of public and private employment services.  
Finally, national fiscal policies can also contribute to preventing and/or reversing inflationary 
ULC developments and improving competitiveness through various means: by avoiding pro-
cyclical  budgetary  policies,  by  enhancing  efficiency  in  the  public  sector  and  by  pursuing 
prudent wage policies in the public sector that can provide an appropriate orientation for non-
inflationary wage-setting in the private sector.  
Conclusion  
VI.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  three  points.  In  the  euro  area  the  observed 
dispersion in ULC growth has declined substantially over the past fifteen years and, although 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 5
it is still appreciable, it is not unusually large and it is broadly in line with that observed in 
other  monetary  unions.  However,  in  a  number  of  euro  area  countries  ULC  growth 
divergences are significant and persistent with unfavourable consequences for their inflation 
and competitiveness performance. If the observed trends persist, they will adversely affect 
growth and employment. So these ULC growth divergences matter, especially in a monetary 
union. The good news is that we have insights and evidence about their causes and their 
consequences, and about what can be done to address them. Take the case of Germany: 
the adjustment to re-unification has been painful and protracted. But over the past years a 
combination of strong productivity growth, wage moderation, corporate restructuring and the 
successful  implementation  of  structural  reforms  has  generated  an  impressive  export 
performance  and  renewed  job  creation  and  has  led  this  country  back  on  the  path  to 
sustained  economic  growth.  It  can  be  done.  And  not  only  in  Germany.  There  are  other 
examples  of  European  countries,  both  within  and  outside  the  euro  area,  that  have  also 
succeeded  in  simultaneously  achieving  higher  productivity  growth  and  non-inflationary 
employment  creation  through  the  implementation  of  appropriate  reforms,  prudent  wage-
setting and sound fiscal policies. The euro area as a whole will emerge as a stronger and 
more  dynamic  economy  if  the  lessons  from  these  success  stories  are  heeded  also 
elsewhere. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
  6 
 BIS Review 99/2007
    BIS Review 99/2007 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 99/2007
    BIS Review 99/2007 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 99/2007
    BIS Review 99/2007 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 99/2007
