Radovan Jelašić: Bringing Serbia closer to Europe 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, on the Promotion 
of Commemorative Coins Issued to Mark the Bicentenary of Dositej Obradović’s Coming to 
Serbia, Belgrade, 17 September 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
200  years  ago  Dositej  Obradovic  came  to  liberated  Serbia  and  wholeheartedly  put  his 
knowledge in the service of the newly-fledged state and revival of the Serbian national being. 
By  advocating  the  setting  up  of  modern  institutions  and  promoting  literacy  and  the  use  of 
language  understood  by  all,  Dositej  imbued  Serbia  with  the  spirit  of  18th  century 
enlightenment  ideas,  thereby  making  the  first  significant  steps  towards  making  Serbia  and 
Europe  closer.  Even  today  his  messages  ring  loud  and  clear,  because  Serbia  is  a  part  of 
Europe and is willing to accept and nurture European values. 
Serbian government declared the year 2007 the YEAR of DOSITEJ, while the National Bank 
of Serbia decided to mark the bicentenary of Dositej’s coming to Serbia by issuing gold and 
silver commemorative coins featuring his portrait. New series of coins consist of 500 finest 
gold  coins  in  denomination  of  5  000  dinars  weighing  3,455  g  each  and  1  000  finest  silver 
coins  in  denomination  of  1  000  dinars  weighing  13  g  each.  As  of  today,  commemorative 
coins  featuring  the  portrait  of  this  great  Serbian  author,  philosopher  and  linguist  will  be 
available  for  sale  in  the  NBS  Head  Office  in  Belgrade  and  in  NBS  branches  in  Novi  Sad, 
Kragujevac, Nis and Uzice. All those who acquire them will be able to read on their reverse 
Dositej’s ever topical message: "Learn and broaden your horizons throughout your life". 
This is exactly what the National Bank of Serbia is doing– building a modern central banking 
institution ready for the time when Serbia will join the European family. For us, this means at 
least three things: 
1. 
Unwavering  pursuit  of  the  principal  objective  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  as 
defined in the law – to achieve and maintain price stability.  
Professional,  responsible  –  or  to  put  it  in  Dositej’s  words  –  modern  and 
“enlightening”  monetary  policy.  This  can  be  nothing  but  a  monetary  policy  that 
ensures low inflation, as today there is not a single country in the region or Europe 
which has high rates of inflation.  
Thirdly,  an  independent  central  bank.  This  most  certainly  does  not  mean  that  the 
National Bank of Serbia should not act in coordination with the Government. To the 
contrary, joint work on achieving and maintaining a low rate of inflation will yield the 
optimal result. But, central bank independence means that the NBS will not directly 
pursue  objectives  relating  to  social  or  quasi-developmental  policies,  employment, 
exports  or  regional  development,  or,  even  less,  to  electoral  timing,  but  that  it  will 
implement a monetary policy that ensures price stability and thereby achieve all of 
the above listed objectives.  
2. 
3. 
As many as two centuries ago, Dositej endeavoured to bring Serbia closer to Europe. Today, 
we have a  duty to continue his efforts – a duty both to the past, but even  more  so to the 
future. Harmonization with European standards must not, however, serve as a disguise for 
“adjustment” to internal daily political needs, especially when it comes to such an important 
institution as the National Bank of Serbia. 
BIS Review 105/2007 
 1
