Rakesh Mohan: Current challenges to monetary policy making in India 
Special lecture by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 9th Global 
Conference of Actuaries, Mumbai, 13 February 2007. 
Assistance of Michael D. Patra in preparing this lecture is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Dr. Kannan, members of the Actuarial Society of India and distinguished delegates. 
I am deeply honoured to be invited to address the 9th Global Conference of Actuaries today. Strong 
winds  of  change  are  sweeping  across  the  Indian  financial  landscape.  We  therefore  have  to  adapt 
ourselves appropriately to update our understanding of these changes. All stakeholders are involved 
in this silent transformation. As actuaries, your stake is significant since you will shape the architecture 
of your part of the financial system that will emerge from these shifts. Fortunately, this time around, we 
are all aware of the changes taking place and considerable work is already underway into fashioning 
our  response  to  the  unfolding  of  the  future.  This  global  conference  bears  testimony  to  this 
preparedness.  On  the  way  forward,  the  role  of  actuaries  will  become  critical  in  defining  the  best 
practices of tomorrow. The road ahead is challenging and will test the best skills in every aspect. It is 
in this context that I thought I would share our perception of some of the challenges that are being 
faced in the conduct of monetary policy. I have chosen to talk to you on the Third Quarter Review of 
monetary policy, which we issued recently, to give you some sense of the thinking that went behind 
this statement. 
In  other  fora,  I  have  drawn  attention  to  the  apparent  puzzles  that  confront  contemporary  monetary 
policy makers (Mohan, 2005; 2006). It is worthwhile  to revisit them, for they seem to have become 
more real than before. We seem to be living in a world of extraordinary developments with several 
remarkable  features  defining  the  surrounding  environment.  First,  financial  markets  are  unperturbed: 
with the flattening of yield curves, the compression of risk spreads and the search for yields continues 
unabated. Second, global imbalances have actually increased with no fears of hard landing, but with 
some  sense  of  readying  for  a  bumpy  soft  landing.  Movements  in  major  exchange  rates  are  not 
reflecting  fundamentals  in  an  environment  of  generalised  elevation  in  asset  prices  and  abundant 
liquidity. Third, strong global economic growth could be accompanied by emerging pressures on core 
inflation.  This  could  eventually  pose  a  major  challenge  to  monetary  policy  makers  in  terms  of  both 
direction  and  magnitude.  By  end-January,  2007  i.e.,  at  the  time  of  formulating  the  Third  Quarter 
Review of monetary policy, these dilemmas had become sharper and more testing than ever before. 
Taken together, global developments seemed in what could be described as a stable disequilibrium, 
and hence did not provide any definitive indication for a policy response. On the other hand, domestic 
developments seemed to dominate the outlook and clearly warranted closer scrutiny.  
A distinctive feature of the Reserve Bank’s communication strategy is to share its analysis with the 
public. Accordingly, I would like to highlight the analytical aspects of our assessment of the evolving 
scenario and the emerging issues that will condition the monetary policy response in the period ahead. 
The rest of my address is organised as follows: I will attempt to set out the environment in which we 
reviewed monetary policy. Against this backdrop, I will try to address the key issues that we had to 
grapple with as we fashioned the policy stance for the period ahead. I will conclude with a summary of 
the monetary policy stance and the measures taken in the Third Quarter Review.  
The backdrop 
Perhaps  the  most  distinguishing  feature  of  recent  domestic  developments  is  the  pace  at  which 
economic activity is expanding. On February 7, 2007 the advance estimates of the Central Statistical 
Organisation (CSO) placed India’s real GDP at 9.2 per cent in 2006-07 on top of 9.0 per cent in 2005-
06  and  reaffirmed  the  robust  optimism  that  has  been  building  around  India’s  macroeconomic 
performance.  In  retrospect,  it  is  evident  that  there  has  been  a  pervasive  sense  of  the  gathering 
momentum of growth, reflected in the direction of revisions in projections by various forecasters during 
the year. For instance, real GDP growth projections of the Reserve Bank were raised from 7.5-8.0 per 
cent in the Annual Policy Statement of April, 2006 to 8.0 per cent in the Mid Term Review of October 
and further to 8.5-9.0 per cent in the Third Quarter Review. Similar revisions have also been made by 
various  international  observers  and  agencies.  But  actual  growth  has  turned  out  to  be  ahead  of  all 
BIS Review 14/2007 
 1
forecasts. Business confidence has been rising in successive rounds of surveys conducted by various 
agencies and there is considerable optimism on the outlook as reflected in order books, employment 
and  profit  margins.  Viewed  in  an  international  perspective,  the  Indian  economy  seems  to  be  well 
ahead of the synchronous global economic cycle that has enabled the world economy to record four 
per cent plus growth in an unprecedented run of five years to 2006.  
There  is  growing  evidence  that  the  step-up  in  India’s  growth  which  set  in  during  2003-04  is 
strengthening  into  an  upward  shift  in  the  underlying  trend.  This  acceleration  of  growth  has  been 
accompanied by a significant moderation of volatility, particularly in the period 2003-07. There are also 
indications of small but important shifts in the composition of growth. The services sector continues to 
be the main stay of the economy, contributing 73 per cent of overall growth; however, services led 
growth is getting reinforced by a sustained resurgence in industrial activity after a long hiatus of slow 
down  and  restructuring  during  the  period  1996-2003.  The  buoyancy  in  industrial  performance  has 
been the most heartening feature of India’s growth story. Accordingly, industry’s contribution to overall 
growth has improved noticeably from the 1990s. While the services sector has been the most stable 
despite high growth, the recent acceleration in industrial growth has also displayed lower volatility than 
in preceding years (Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3).  
   2 
 BIS Review 14/2007
Corporate  balance  sheets  have  strengthened  considerably  in  an  unprecedented  run  spanning 
seventeen  quarters  which  began  in  the  second  half  of  2002-03.  Buoyant  domestic  demand  and 
overseas markets have enabled corporates to scale up production and sales. Accordingly, profitability 
(net profits) has recorded growth consistently in the range of 25-60 per cent on a year-to-year basis. 
Internally generated resources have powered a massive expansion in investments in existing capacity 
as well  as  in  building up new  capacity,  while  economising  on  borrowings  from  the banking  system. 
Accordingly, interest burden (interest to sales ratio) has tended to fall. (Table 4). 
The optimism generated by India’s recent macroeconomic performance has been somewhat marred 
by the setback to agriculture which has suffered substantial deceleration and instability. Shortfalls in 
key crops such as wheat (accompanied by depleting stocks), oilseeds and pulses have emerged and 
the  supply  situation  in  respect  of  these  crops  is  further  endangered  on  account  of  weather  related 
adverse international conditions. The decline in the global production of wheat in 2006 has turned out 
to be the largest in ten years. Apart from poor harvests in key producing countries, their carry over 
stocks  are  declining  and  cereal  acreage  is  losing  out  to  the  fast  growing  demand  for  bio-fuel 
production. Alongside, in the domestic economy, infrastructural bottlenecks are tightening. Managing 
the supply situation is emerging as a formidable challenge. In the current scenario, limitations on the 
supply response to the momentum of growth are showing up as excess demand pressures. 
 Monetary and financial conditions are reflecting these demand supply gaps as well as the onset of a 
durable pick-up in aggregate spending. Banks’ non-food credit is expanding above 30 per cent for the 
fourth year in succession, driving up money supply and squeezing overall liquidity. The growth of bank 
credit  has  favoured  retail  lending,  particularly  housing,  real  estate,  trade  transport  and  professional 
services and non-banking financial companies – sectors which hitherto were not priced into the credit 
market. While banks’ exposures to these new sectors is still relatively small, given the low base, the 
high  rates  of  growth  have  raised  worries  about  the  quality  of  these  assets  and  potential  non-
performance. Default rates in regard to credit card receivables and personal loans have been rising. 
While buoyant deposit growth has, to an extent, alleviated the financial constraints on banks, credit 
deposit ratios remain high and investments in gilts have been drawn down to close to the statutory 
minimum  of  the  SLR.  These  developments  are  likely  to  pose  challenges  to  banks  in  managing 
liquidity.  
Financial markets have, by and large, remained stable. Money markets experienced generally orderly 
conditions  along  with  spells  of  tightening  of  liquidity  in  November  and  again  from  mid-December. 
BIS Review 14/2007 
 3
During  these  episodes,  contrasting  conditions  have  often  been  observed  when  short-term  interest 
rates have firmed up despite LAF absorptions but long-term rates have declined in the Government 
securities  market.  In  December,  there  was  an  inversion  of  the  yield  curve  and  a  narrowing  of  yield 
spreads. Forward premia have firmed up in November and December across the board in concert with 
the hardening of short-term interest rates in the domestic money market segments. On the other hand, 
asset prices, particularly equity prices, have risen to record highs.  
Another significant feature of recent domestic developments is the firming up of inflation through the 
year.  Currently  hovering  above  6  per  cent,  inflation,  in  terms  of  the  wholesale  price  index,  is  ruling 
above indicative projections and represents a key concern in the evolving macroeconomic outlook. In 
terms of consumer prices, inflation is even higher in the range of 7-8 per cent.  
In  crafting  appropriate  monetary  policy  in  these  conditions,  it  is  important  to  undertake  a  careful 
assessment of the manner in which inflation is evolving. Primary articles, unlike in recent years, have 
contributed significantly to WPI during 2006-07. Accounting for a third of headline inflation, they can be 
interpreted to originate from supply side pressures. Furthermore, in 2006, there has been a surge in 
the  international  prices  of  cereals.  International  futures  prices  of  foodgrains  have  climbed  to  record 
levels  due  to  substantial  reductions  in  crop  production  estimates.  At  the  same  time,  prices  of 
manufactured products account for over half of current headline inflation (Table 5). Domestic prices 
are firming up in sympathy with international prices. Metal prices have risen by 53.6 per cent in 2006. 
Low stock levels and continuing demand has kept most metal prices high and elevated levels are likely 
to persist in the near term. In conjunction with emerging strains on capacity, elevated asset prices and 
the surging demand for bank credit, the rising prices of manufactures constitute the demand pressures 
on inflation.  
The  silver  lining  to  the  cloud  is  the  improvement  in  public  finances  and  the  decline  in  international 
crude  prices,  and  consequently  in  domestic  prices  of  petroleum  products.  Excluding  the  beneficial 
effect of this softening of fuel prices results in inflation exceeding the headline in terms of wholesale 
prices.  globally  too,  headline  inflation  has  been  moderating  mainly  on  account  of  the  decline  in 
international  crude  prices,  while  core  inflation  has  generally  remained  firm  and  is  likely  to  shape 
inflation expectations.  
 India’s interface with the global economy has been another distinguishing feature of macroeconomic 
developments.  The  strength  and  resilience  reflected  in  India’s  balance  of  payments  has  to  be 
assessed in the context of global economic and financial developments. Global real GDP growth on a 
purchasing power parity basis is expected to have accelerated to above 5 per cent in 2006 but with a 
shift  away  from  the  US  and  towards  Europe,  Japan  and  the  emerging  world,  all  of  which  have 
distinctive  features.  In  China,  for  instance,  there  are  concerns  that  high  levels  of  growth  might  be 
unsustainable  and  that  some  parts  of  the  economy  are  becoming  overheated.  In  Korea,  there  are 
concerns about a relatively rapid growth in house prices along with a rise in household indebtedness. 
In Thailand, concerted efforts have been taken to stem strong capital inflows into the economy over 
the past few months.  
4 
 BIS Review 14/2007
Global financial markets have been reasonably stable while re-pricing risks. Short-term interest rates 
have  firmed  up  since  October,  but  long-term  bond  yields  have  fallen,  translating  into  a  steeper 
inversion of the yield curve. Foreign exchange markets have been recording lower levels of volatility in 
recent weeks than before. Global equity markets have posted steady gains. In line with developments 
in the major markets, emerging equity markets in Asia and Latin America have continued to recover 
from the May-June sell-off. The markets which suffered the largest losses have more than recouped 
earlier losses.  
Against this backdrop, India’s merchandise export growth has resumed strongly from a dip in October, 
2006. At the same time, imports of POL increased sizeably as in the previous year, but reflecting a 
sharp increase in import volume in the current year. Non-oil import growth, which remained subdued in 
the  early  months  of  2006-07,  has  picked  up  during  the  third  quarter  in  consonance  with  industrial 
activity. There are also reports of a substantial pick up in bullion imports in October-November. While 
the  merchandise  trade  deficit  has  consequently  widened,  the  sustained  surplus  on  account  of 
invisibles is expected to contain the current account deficit at well under two per cent of the GDP. The 
capital  flows  to  India  have  recovered  from  the  moderation  during  May-June  2006.  Accordingly,  the 
current account deficit is expected to be comfortably financed in the remaining part of the year.  
To sum up the assessment, global growth continues to be strong but is exhibiting mixed patterns. In 
the global financial markets, current indications suggest that the risks remain under-priced and more 
diversified. Consequently, there is an increasing discomfort of the possibility of tail risk materialising. 
Geo-political risks remain significant. There is a growing recognition of the need to contain extreme 
volatility in capital flows. More importantly, on the domestic front, demand pressures appear to have 
intensified  alongside  robust  growth  and  there  are  increased  supply  side  pressures  in  evidence. 
Macroeconomic management will be constrained by the lagged response of productive capacity and 
infrastructure to the ongoing expansion in investment.  
The challenges 
The foregoing analysis provides some evidence, though still formative, that a structural change could 
be taking place in the Indian economy. There is a gathering confidence that the economy is possibly 
poised on the threshold of a step-up in the growth trajectory. The central theme of the Third Quarter 
Review is the challenge of managing the transition to higher growth path, accompanied by low and 
stable inflation and well anchored inflation expectations. The objective is to firmly entrench potential 
output and productivity and thereby create the conditions for a further acceleration of growth. The role 
of monetary policy is to continue to maintain stability and so contribute to growth on an enduring basis.  
It is in the context of sensitising the public to the dilemmas and trade-offs involved in managing this 
change  that  the  Mid  Term  Review  of  October,  2006  explained  the  concept  of  overheating  i.e.,  a 
situation in which current output is running above potential output. In the current environment, and in 
the  presence  of  structural  change,  the  task  of  identifying  overheating  becomes  difficult  for  the 
monetary authority. For the conduct of monetary policy, however, it is crucial to monitor all available 
information for signs of overheating with a view to keeping inflation expectations stable and ensuring 
that the gains from high growth are consolidated. Accordingly, sensing how close is the economy to its 
potential growth is the vital judgment that has to be made to set the timing and direction of monetary 
policy.  
What is potential growth is thus the question that holds the key. There is general agreement among 
policy makers that the level and pace of potential growth is becoming increasingly difficult to diagnose. 
Open  trade  has  expanded  the  supply  potential  of  several  economies.  Moreover,  for  a  country 
undergoing  structural  transformation  with  large  unemployment/under  employment  of  resources,  the 
concept  of  potential  growth  becomes  even  more  fuzzy.  For  instance,  the  Economist  (February  3, 
2007) observes: "India is undergoing a paradigm shift and so backward-looking historical data are now 
irrelevant for assessing future growth". Nevertheless, monetary policy decisions have to be made and 
the closest approximation of potential growth must be identified in terms of a rate of growth which is 
associated with non-accelerating inflation.  
At  the  current  juncture,  the  challenge  facing  us  is  to  judge  the  compatibility  of  the  current  pace  of 
growth with non-accelerating inflation. In this context, I would like to draw your attention to the new 
estimates of gross domestic saving and capital formation in India in 2005-06, released on January 31, 
2007,  the  same  day  as  the  Third  Quarter  Review.  Close  analysis  of  these  numbers  reveals  the 
underpinnings of the recent growth experience. The rate of gross domestic saving (GDS), which was 
BIS Review 14/2007 
 5
earlier estimated at 29.1 per cent of GDP in 2004-05, has been revised upwards by a clear 2 per cent 
of GDP. The rate of gross domestic investment (GDI) for that year has also been raised by 1.4 per 
cent of GDP to 31.5 per cent. The significant improvement in GDS in 2004-05 is attributable mainly to 
a  distinct  increase  in  saving  by  the  corporate  sector.  The  revision  is  consistent  with  the  observed 
improvement in corporate profitability and internally generated resources that has been sustained over 
the period 2003-07, and to which we have been drawing attention for some time. Corporate profitability 
has remained strong despite a sharp rise in input costs and in interest payments (Table 6). There is 
some  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  corporate  sector  performance  is  being  powered  by  rising 
productivity. Accordingly, the increase in corporate saving during 2004-05 can be expected to be the 
onset of a longer trend, supporting high rates of GDS on a sustained basis. 
 Household saving remains the predominant component of domestic saving and would increase even 
further  as  incomes  grow  and  social  security  reforms  take  shape.  The  improvement  in  GDS  has 
particularly benefited form the turnaround in public sector saving. After turning negative between 1998-
99 and 2002-03, public sector saving has turned positive from 2003-04 onwards, mainly reflecting the 
ongoing  fiscal  consolidation.  Public  sector  saving  will  continue  to  have  a  significant  role  in  further 
improvement in the GDS. The CSO’s estimates for 2005-06 indicate that these signs are firming up 
with  GDS  placed  above  32  per  cent  of  GDP  and  GDI  close  to  34  per  cent  (Table  7  and  Table  8). 
Against the background of these developments, it is plausible that GDS could rise to a range of 34-35 
per cent of GDP by 2007-08. With a current account deficit of below 2 per cent of GDP, GDI could rise 
to a range of 36-37 per cent. Given an incremental capital output ratio – a summary measure of the 
productivity of capital – of around 3.5 to 4.3, sustaining real GDP growth rates in the range of 8 to 9 
per cent in the medium term appears eminently realisable.  
 6 
 BIS Review 14/2007
 The  Mid  Term  Appraisal  of  the  Tenth  Five  Year  Plan  provides  interesting  estimates  of  assessed 
capacity or potential output in various sectors of the economy. The existence of high excess capacity 
in agriculture and allied activities, registered manufacturing, electricity, storage, public administration 
and other services suggests that the focus needs to shift from an ‘investment only’ approach to a more 
comprehensive  one.  In  all  these  sectors  capacity  utilisation  has  undoubtedly  improved  but  there 
remains ample scope for high growth. Under capitalisation, which has traditionally characterised the 
services sector, is beginning to change with the emergence of more organised service activities.  
Yet another factor that needs to be taken into account in the assessment of potential growth is the 
trends  in  productivity.  While  the  empirical  evidence  remains  somewhat  ambiguous,  there  are 
indications that trade liberalization has had a positive impact on total factor productivity since 1991. At 
the  sectoral  level,  there  is  evidence  of  improved  productivity  for  exporting  sectors  relative  to  non-
exporting  sectors.  Some  studies  also  throw  up  evidence  of  an  increase  in  the  growth  of  labour 
productivity (Goldman Sachs, 2007 and Economic Intelligence Unit, 2007). Thus, it is clear that micro 
structural reforms undertaken over the years have enabled continuing productivity gains, particularly in 
the  manufacturing  sector,  with  enhanced  access  of  Indian  business  to  technology,  increased 
competition, greater attention to research and development and other productivity enhancing activities. 
Widening and deepening of the financial sector, along with improved regulation and supervision, has 
also contributed to improvement in productivity.  
An important challenge for the monetary policy authority is to judge the durability of the recent upsurge 
in growth. While there is some evidence, as documented, that the acceleration of growth has been 
supported by structural factors such as improvement in gross domestic saving and investment rates, 
productivity  gains,  the  demographic  dividend  and  capital  accumulation  including  skill  formation,  it  is 
important to  disentangle the structural and cyclical components underlying the growth process. It is 
necessary to note that a cyclical upswing is also underway in India since 2003-04 after a prolonged 
trough which began in 1996. There is also some sense that this upturn is part of a synchronized global 
economic cycle which has seen five consecutive years of accelerated global growth. In the event of a 
judgment that the current growth momentum is more cyclical than structural, the stance of monetary 
policy  would  need  to  reflect  a  sensitivity  to  the  inevitability  of  a  downturn.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
judgment that structural factors predominate would warrant a different policy stance.  
An overriding concern faced by the Reserve Bank is the persistently high growth of bank credit, with 
attendant  worries  relating  to  the  quality  of  bank  credit.  In  this  context,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
consistently  emphasized  diligent  monitoring  of  the  health  of  credit  portfolios  and  non-performing 
assets, the need for counter-cyclical provisioning and sensitivity to risks. The sharp increase in credit 
to  sectors  such  as  housing,  commercial  real  estate  and  retail  loans  have  also  been  worrisome  on 
account  of  the  vulnerability  of  banks  to  credit  concentration  risks.  The  important  question  however 
relates to the sustainability of the credit expansion and its compatibility with the overall acceleration of 
growth.  Credit  penetration  in  India  remains  low  even  by  emerging  economy  standards  (Table  9). 
Consequently, growing financial intermediation could possible be reflected in high credit growth. The 
Mid Term Review of October 2006 reported empirical evidence of a structural break in the evolution of 
the elasticity of bank credit with respect to output with an upward shift since the end of the 1990s. 
Faster credit growth is also a reflection of the wider dispersal across the economy. Viewed in a holistic 
perspective, it is difficult to arrive at a clear judgment as to what rate of credit growth is too high in 
relation to potential growth.  
BIS Review 14/2007 
 7
 In the presence of the kind of structural changes that I have described above, even when the macro 
availability of resources is adequate to fund the increase in demand arising from both consumption 
and  investment,  there  could  be  micro  imbalances  that  lead  to  observation  of  excess  demand  and 
overheating. It is in this context that monetary management has to also look at imbalances that could 
be  transitional.  The challenge before  us  at  the  present  time  is  to  manage  the  transition  to a  higher 
growth  path,  in  the  presence  of  some  structural  rigidities,  in  such  a  way  that  actual  inflation  and 
inflation expectations are contained and do not become mutually reinforcing. 
Our assessment is that while expansion of capacity is underway, the realisation, particularly in sectors 
like infrastructure could be constrained over the next two years. Indeed, the difficulties with improving 
the supply response are more complex and challenging than aggregate demand management. Supply 
management will need to encompass wide areas including labour markets, land laws and the content 
of regulation in each sector. As long as supply responses are less than elastic, they could show up as 
excess  demand,  causing  inflationary  pressures  and  raising  inflation  expectations.  To  reiterate, 
managing structural change while keeping inflation low without dampening the growth momentum is 
the quintessential challenge to monetary policy in the period ahead. 
Illustratively, given the growth in consumption demand, rising incomes and high growth in sectors such 
as information technology (IT), it is not surprising that there is a huge actual demand for housing, retail 
activity and office space from the burgeoning services sector. It is also not surprising that there would 
be  associated  problems  on  the  supply  side  including  availability  of  land,  zoning  and  other  land 
regulations, and social concerns about the conversion of land from agricultural purposes to other uses. 
Therefore,  monetary  policy  has  to  be  creative  in  addressing  these  problems  in  a  non-disruptive 
manner. It is in this context that prudential and other measures such as provisioning and risk weights 
on bank loans to specific sectors are being used so as to enhance the sensitivity to risks emanating 
from these sectors rather than standard monetary policy responses that address aggregate demand. 
The  task  before  monetary  policy  is  thus  rendered  complex,  requiring  that  both  macro  issues  and 
sectoral problems be addressed in a specific manner.  
The monetary policy response 
It is well known that monetary policy operates cumulatively and with lags that can range between 12 to 
18 months, depending on the specifics of the economy. It is in this context that beginning in mid 2003, 
the  Reserve  Bank  started  a  graduated  withdrawal  of  accommodation.  Since  September,  2004 
repo/reverse repo rates have been increased by 125/150 basis points, the CRR has been raised by 
100 basis points, risk weights have been raised in the case of housing loans (from 50 per cent to 75 
per cent), commercial real estate (from 100 per cent to 150 per cent) and consumer credit (from 100 
per  cent  to  125  per  cent)  and  general  provisioning  requirement  for  standard  advances  in  specific 
sectors has been raised to 1.0 per cent of standard advances.  
At the time of the Third Quarter Review, the combination of macroeconomic developments embodied 
in high growth and firming inflation, escalating asset prices and the enduring strength of capital flows, 
a  three-pronged  approach  was  envisaged.  A  measured  increase in  policy  interest  rates  to assuage 
demand  pressures  was  considered  necessary  in  conjunction  with  some  modulation  of  capital  flows 
8 
 BIS Review 14/2007
and the need to fortify banks’ balance sheets by precautionary provisioning and a greater sensitivity to 
underlying risks. Accordingly, in the Third Quarter Review, it was decided to increase the fixed repo 
rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) of the Reserve Bank by 25 basis points to 7.50 per 
cent.  The  LAF  reverse  repo  rate,  the  Bank  rate  and  the  cash  reserve  ratio  were  kept  unchanged. 
Furthermore,  the  provisioning  requirement  in  respect  of  standard  assets  in  the  real  estate  sector, 
outstanding  credit  card  receivables,  loans  and  advances  qualifying  as  capital  market  exposure, 
personal  loans  and  systemically  important  non-deposit  taking  non-banking  financial  companies 
(NBFCs) was raised to 2 per cent. Risk weights for banks’ exposure to such NBFCs was increased 
from 100 per cent to 125 per cent. Interest rates on non-resident deposit schemes, which have been 
recording sizeable inflows, were reduced by 50 basis points for rupee deposits and by 25 basis points 
for foreign currency deposits. Banks were also restrained from granting fresh loans in excess of Rs.20 
lakhs against non-resident deposits.  
The Reserve Bank has indicated that over the remaining part of the year, liquidity management would 
receive the highest priority. All policy instruments would be deployed to ensure appropriate modulation 
of liquidity. The stance of monetary policy was set out as: 
• 
To  reinforce the  emphasis  on price  stability  and well-anchored  inflation  expectations  while 
ensuring  a  monetary  and  interest  rate  environment  that  supports  export  and  investment 
demand in the economy so as to enable continuation of the growth momentum. 
To  re-emphasise  credit  quality  and  orderly  conditions  in  financial  markets  for  securing 
macroeconomic  and,  in  particular,  financial  stability  while  simultaneously  pursuing  greater 
credit penetration and financial inclusion. 
To  respond  swiftly  with  all  possible  measures  as  appropriate  to  the  evolving  global  and 
domestic situation impinging on inflation expectations and the growth momentum. 
  It is important to note that monetary policy authorities all over the world over are expressing similar 
sentiments in terms of an uncertain outlook, concerns about persistent underlying inflation and some 
nervousness about visitations of financial volatility. Accordingly, several central banks have shown a 
readiness to respond asymmetrically to any signs of price and financial instability. The ECB, the Bank 
of England, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the People’s Bank of China and the Bank of Korea raised 
policy  rates.  In  order  to  contain  financial  market  volatility  arising  from  large  liquidity  flows,  several 
central banks have tended to tighten monetary policy, even at relatively low current inflation rates, as 
in Thailand, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Iceland. On the other hand, some central banks have paused in 
their  policy  cycles,  particularly  the  US  Fed,  the  Bank  of  Canada,  the  Bank  of  Japan,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  and  the  Banco  de  Mexico.  Some  other  central  banks  have  cut  back  their  policy  rates  in 
recent months. 
In India, it is recognised that inflation is a tax on the poor against which there are no hedges available. 
Consequently, ensuring price stability is a societal compulsion to which monetary policy as a arm of 
public policy must be committed. The measures taken in the Third Quarter Review needs to be seen 
as  sustaining  and  supporting  the  growth  process  while  ensuring  a  minimum  social  insurance  by 
delivery of a tolerable rate of inflation. 
References: 
CSO  (2007a):  Quick  Estimates  of  National  Income,  Consumption  Expenditure,  Saving  and  Capital 
Formation, 2005-06, press release dated January 31, 2007.  
CSO (2007b): Advance Estimates of National Income, 2006-07, press release dated February 7, 2007.  
Economic Intelligence Unit (2007). 
Goldman Sachs (2007): India’s Rising Growth Potential, Global Economics Paper No. 152. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2005): Some Apparent Puzzles for Contemporary Monetary Policy, speech delivered 
at  the  Conference  on  China’s  and  India’s  Changing  Economic  Structures:  Domestic  and  Regional 
Implications at Beijing during October 27-28. 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2006):  New  Economic  Geography  and  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Flattening  World, 
observation  as  an  Overview  Panelist  at  a  Symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24-26. 
BIS Review 14/2007 
 9
Mohanty, M.S., Gert Schnabel and Pablo Garcia-Luna (2006): Banks and Aggregate Credit: What is 
New?, BIS Papers No. 28, August.  
RBI (2006): Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy 2005-06, Reserve Bank of India 
RBI (2007a): Macroeconomic and Monetary Developments: Third Quarter Review, 2006-07, Reserve 
Bank of India. 
RBI (2007b): Third Quarter Review of Annual Statement on Monetary Policy for the Year, 2006-07, 
Reserve Bank of India. 
10 
 BIS Review 14/2007
