Rundheersing Bheenick: OTC sales to the public 
Remarks by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the launching 
ceremony  of  the  Over-The-Counter  sale  of  Treasury  Bills/Treasury  Notes  at  the  new 
Headquarters of the Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 24 July 2007. 
 Distinguished Guests of the Financial Community 
Chairman of the Mauritius Bankers Association Ltd 
Our first customers to the OTC sales 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am grateful that you are all here with us this morning to share the launching ceremony of 
the Over-The-Counter (OTC) sales to the public. 
The  reasons  for  which  we  are  re-launching  the  sale  of  Treasury  Bills  and  Treasury  Notes 
directly to the public are manifold. 
As you would already know, the Honourable Rama Krishna Sithanen, Deputy Prime Minister, 
Minister of Finance and Economic Development announced in his 2007/08 budget speech 
that  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  will  re-launch  the  retail  sale  of  Treasury  Bills/Treasury  Notes 
directly to the public. This practice had been stopped for some time. 
You would also have no doubt noted that saving performance of the country has been doing 
downhill. The Saving Rate fell from 22.6 per cent in 2004 to hardly above 16 per cent in 2007 
and this at a time when secondary market sales are open and the Stock Exchange has been 
encouraged  by  the  central  bank  to  offer  Government  papers  directly  to  the  public.  Just  to 
provide you with an indication of this low performance, the sale of Government of Mauritius 
Treasury  Bills  and  Treasury  Notes  through  stock  broking  companies  on  the  stock  market 
have amounted to a grand total of barely above Rs1 Million in July 2007. 
So, we thought we need to do something to stop the decline and encourage our savers to 
invest  in  treasury  instruments.  We  thought  we  have  to  work  on  ways  to  stimulate  the 
development of the secondary market for Government securities and provide an additional 
investment opportunity to individual investors. 
For these reasons, we are offering this morning a whole range of instruments ranging from 
short-dated Treasury Bills to 4-year paper. These instruments will give us a term structure 
and  also  an  indication  of  the  appetite  of  our  savers  for  papers  of  different  maturities. 
Furthermore,  primary  bidders  and  dealers  will  have  a  better  feel  of  where  the  market  is 
heading. 
We are today logging quite a few Firsts. Let me mention a few of them: 
• 
Today, for the First time Members of public are having access to the Banking Hall of 
the new Headquarters Building 
Today, for the First time and we are using our counters; and  
Today, for the First time the Banking Hall of the new Headquarters Building is being 
used.  We  are  today  starting  the  migration  process  of  our  whole  banking  operations 
from the old to the new building. We are hopeful that two to three weeks down the line 
we would have completed the move to the new Headquarters. 
 So, we have three impressive Firsts for a small occasion. 
BIS Review 85/2007 
 1
I am pleased to invite Directors of the Board of the Bank as well as our first customers to 
move forward for the formal launch of the OTC sales. (Unscrolling of Display) 
After the formal launch, we shall move towards the counters. I believe that whenever there is 
something new, there must also be something old. So, to mark the start of transactions at our 
new counters and with a view to coining this momentous occasion, I found it most auspicious 
to strike the gong which was offered to us by the central bank of Kenya at the time of the 
inauguration of our old building in 1972. 
I thank you all for your presence with us this morning. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2007
