Yves Mersch: AMCHAM – principles versus rules 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at a conference 
of ALFI and the American Chamber of Commerce (AMCHAM), Luxembourg, 14 June 2007. 
 Ladies and gentleman,  
I would like to thank ALFI and American Chamber of Commerce (AMCHAM) for inviting me 
to participate in this conference. I am sure that this conference will reveal interesting views 
on the topics regarding principles versus rules-based approach. We will surely return home 
with new insights and suggestions for further research and developments. 
Through my own research, I observed, as underlined by one member of the US Securities 
and Exchange Commission, that there is confusion as to the difference between rules and 
principles.  Principles  are  frequently  defined  as  “accepted  and  professed  rules  of  action  or 
conduct”.  This  confusion  about  rules  and  principles  leads  me  to  approach  this  topic  from 
different angles.  
1. In my view, rules have the benefits of being precise and durable. Further, they are widely 
accepted and adhered to by the industry and they generally achieve the sought objectives. 
Finally a rule reflects the consensus of past situations and can only address circumstances 
known  or  anticipated  by  regulators  at  the  time  of  implementation.  Thus,  rules  become 
outdated as circumstances change.  
While principles are characterized by less preciseness, they remain more durable and widely 
accepted. However, their implementation is weaker and thus leaves more room for judgment. 
The setting of principles may be more appropriate in a rapidly changing environment marked 
by financial innovation and growing cross-border financial activities. Indeed, principles leave 
an open window to adapt judgments in case of changing circumstances and thus, need less 
frequent  changes  which  would  spread  out  confusion.  But  we  have  to  be  conscious  that 
principles  ought  to  lead  to  rules  just  like  a  constitution  needs  laws  to  be  effective.  The 
constitution of the Soviet Union, which was considered as one of the most democratic, went 
unheeded due to the gap in practice between this constitution and laws.  
2. Of course, there are differences between private and public rules, only the latter benefiting 
from  the  monopoly  of  forceful  implementation.  Principles  may  also  have  private  or  public 
sources.  Therefore  the  question  of  rules  versus  principles  is  often  addressed  through  the 
criteria  of  the  degree  of  cooperation  or  responsibility  of  the  private  sector.  But  additional 
criteria  can  be  added  such  as  the  implication  of  the  private  sector  in  the  elaboration  and 
implementation  of  rules  or  principles.  This  conducts  to  reduce  the  potential  conflicts  and 
improve the identification of regulatory objectives, and the effectiveness of regulatory policy. 
From this point of view, reinforcing cooperation between regulators and the industry actors, 
offers greater efficiency and flexibility than does the unilateral top down approach by which 
the regulator imposes the structure and details of rules to the industry. One recent example 
of  a  positive  implication  of  the  private  sector  was  the  response  to  regulatory  concerns 
regarding the transparency issue on hedge funds. It seems that voluntary industry codes can 
facilitate  market-based  solutions  and  thereby  relieve  pressure  on  supervisory  resources. 
Such  an  approach  will  be  probably  more  appropriate  to  solve  problems,  particularly  in  the 
context of increasing market innovation. 
3. Another way looking at the principles versus rules-based approach is the ultimate goal of 
the standards. Indeed, the means needed might vary from a strongly rules-based towards a 
soft-law approach. While if your ultimate goal is consumer or investor protection or market 
abuse, rules may be the right response. For other objectives such as avoidance of systemic 
risks  and  macroeconomic  stability,  it  may  be  more  appropriate  for  the  regulator  to  favor 
BIS Review 79/2007 
 1
principles. In this context, the policy makers have to strike the right balance to reconcile the 
desirable clarity of rules with the idiosyncratic flexibility of the principles-based approach.  
4.  Yet  another  way  to  assess  the  rules  versus  principles  debate  is  the  scope  of  both 
standards  i.e.  what  needs  to  be  covered  by  rules  and  what  can  be  left  to  principles.  This 
scope  can evolve  over  time.  One  of  the  main  points  in  case  is  accounting.  This  topic  has 
been  raised  after  the  collapses  of  some  important  players  combined  with  other  fraudulent 
accounting  practices.  These  collapses  lead  some  to  question  whether  overly  prescriptive 
regulation may conduct to perverse incentives, whereas others argue that the reasons reside 
in the lack of judgment on the level of the audit function, rather than in the non-compliance 
with rules. 
Within  the  European  Union,  the  impetus  for  accounting  reforms  stands  mainly  from  the 
objective  of  creating  a  fully-fledged  single  market.  The  need  to  overcome  differences  in 
accounting  standards  between  member  states  is  a  crucial  step  towards  the  integration  of 
financial markets. In accordance with this process, the goal of the International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) is to develop harmonised accounting standards in order to increase 
comparability  and  transparency  and  facilitate  better  capital  allocation.  The  IFRS/IAS 
standards issued by this Board, which is jointly financed by public and private resources, are 
expected to be endorsed by the European Commission. In this regard, these principle-based 
standards  offer  an  adequate  framework  for  cross-border  convergence  of  accounting 
practices.  However,  their  application  on  the  national  level  may  be  completed  with  more 
specific rules in the course of time. 
5. A last angle of view is what method is most conducive to cross-border activities. In recent 
years a wide range of financial innovations and a growing interdependence among financial 
institutions have drastically modified the international financial landscape. This will require an 
open  and  transparent  discussion  among  the  industry  and  regulators  on  the  international 
level. In Europe, the Lamfalussy framework, based on the concept of comitology, fosters the 
important issue of cooperation among relevant authorities and actors.  
The success of the Lamfalussy process in the securities field prompted EU authorities and 
member  States  to  propose  its  extension  to,  inter  alia,  the  field  of  banking  regulation  and 
supervision.  This  process  should  lead  to  a  more  flexible  regulatory  process  and  more 
consistent implementation of legislations and rules in member states. The success of current 
efforts to develop consistent cross-border banking supervision depends partly on an active 
and  effective  role  of  the  industry  actors.  On  the  one  hand,  supervisory  authorities have  to 
deepen their understanding of the international dimensions of regulatory practices and make 
adjustments  to  national  approaches  in  order  to  enhance  supervisory  convergence.  A 
reinforced cooperation between national regulators is necessary in this process. On the other 
hand,  suggestions  and  commitments  of  market  participants  regarding  risk  management 
principles are necessary for the soundness of the financial system. 
Thus  the  CEBS  (Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors)  is  conducting  public 
consultation with relevant actors before submitting advice to the Commission or publishing 
standards, guidelines and recommendations. This work has significantly contributed to build 
the foundations of the EU supervisory convergence which should be able to promote further 
banking  integration  and  maintain  at  the  same  time  its  effectiveness  in  pursuing  financial 
stability  in  a  more  integrated  financial  system.  Furthermore,  the  discussion  held  under  the 
initiative  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  led  to  several  important 
international agreements, which have been taken to improve capital adequacy, supervisory 
framework and market discipline. The implementation of these international standards should 
strengthen  banks’  capital  worldwide  and  improve  systemic  stability.  We  in  Europe,  remain 
notably  in  favor  of  the  multilateral  approach.  We  would  hope  that  international  principles 
elaborated in international fora will also be timely implemented by all those involved in these 
agreements, unless a purely bilateral approach is considered superior. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2007
6.  To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  effective  rules  and  efficient  principles,  in  my 
view, are both essential to promote financial integration and reinforce financial stability. It is 
delusory  to  think  that  principles  applied  on  a  standalone  basis  can  eliminate  the  need  for 
rules. Further, the rules-based system does not prevent the industry actors from the resort to 
interpretation and judgment. I believe that in a financial environment characterized by a fast 
innovation process, the regulator could grant sufficient time for the industry to develop robust 
practices  and  principles.  If  such  principles  turn  out  to  be  persistent  and  shared  by  all  the 
actors of the industry, the regulator could adopt them as benchmark rules. However, in the 
absence  of  convergence  of  such  market-based  principles,  the  regulator  might  lay  down 
guiding  principles  in  order  to  provide  incentives  rather  than  imposing  prescriptive  and 
detailed rules 
But at this stage we need to develop a strategic view on how progress can be made on a 
cross-border  level  to  reconcile  market  actors’ and  regulators’  objectives.  As  you  know,  full 
harmonisation would neither be feasible nor desirable in light of substantial differences in the 
legal  settings  even  inside  the  European  Union  countries.  However,  a  variety  of  regulatory 
instruments may be employed, ranging from fully market-based solutions to monitored self-
regulation, principles-based public regulation and detailed legal rules. In order to identify the 
appropriate tools, the problem must be approached with due regard on the potential negative 
impact  that  regulatory  and  supervisory  inefficiencies  can  have  on  global  risk  management 
and  liquidity  management  practices  as  well  as  business  structures.  These  issues  need 
further  consideration.  Again  further  cooperation  between  supervisors,  policy  makers  and 
industry actors is desirable for the task of defining legal standards. The success of such a 
process  depends  mainly  on  making  the  best  possible  effort  to  ensure  consistency  and 
reduce complexity in practice. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 79/2007 
 3
