Christian Noyer: From Maastricht to the present and beyond 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  GIC  /  Drexel  Spring  2007 
Conference, Philadelphia, 16 April 2007. 
 We  have  just  passed  the  European  Union  50th  anniversary.  It  is  a  good  time  to  reflect  upon  the 
essence and future of this extraordinary endeavor. Never before, in the whole history of mankind, have 
democratic  nations  pursued  and  reached,  through  peaceful  cooperation,  such  a  close  degree  of 
interdependence,  involving,  in  many  crucial  areas,  deliberate  pooling  of  sovereignty.  Of  course,  the 
process has not been without difficulties and tensions, many of which are still apparent and acute. Of 
course, numerous challenges remain and the future is paved with roadblocks which could still derail 
the  whole  project.  But,  for  the  first  time  in  more  than  a  thousand  years,  Europe  is  at  peace  and 
prosperous,  with  democratic  regimes  everywhere.  This  is,  by  historical  standards,  an  exceptional 
achievement. 
At the start, EU was built on a strong intuition: by sharing the instruments and policies underpinning 
economic prosperity, European nations would create an irreversible situation of interdependence and 
solidarity  where  conflicts  and  wars  of  the  past  would  become  impossible.  This  intuition  led  to  the 
creation of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, then, a few years later, to the European 
Community.  Thus  in  1957  the  signature  of  Treaty  of  Rome  was  the  starting  point  of  this  unique 
experience  of  regional  integration  in  modern  History.  This  was  more  than  a  simple  customs  union 
since,  from  the  beginning,  external  trade  policy  was  a  full  Community  competence.  Even  the  CAP, 
whose image to day is not universally positive, was seen, at the time, as the archetype of a common 
policy, bringing together the shared interests and joint actions of member states. 
The project was further developed and enriched in two directions. A further impetus was provided by 
the adoption of the Single European Act in 1986. This Act set a timeframe for launching the Single 
Market and reaffirmed the need for achieving Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). The Single Act 
created the framework for full economic integration, with total freedom in the flows of goods, services 
and capital between member states. Even today, in some service sectors, the EU is a more integrated 
area, from a legal and prudential viewpoint, than the United States. And second, the intrinsic solidarity 
between European nations was embedded into a policy of “cohesion” through which very important 
financial  transfers  took  place,  over  a  long  period  of  time,  between  the  richest  and  the  poorest 
members. At some stage, some members have benefited for several years from such cohesion flows 
to an order of 5% of their GDP, significantly more than what most poor countries get from the IMF and 
the World Bank. 
Many other developments – both on institutions and policies – took place over the years. And it is clear 
that,  to  day,  the  EU  is  much  more  than  an  economic  project.  But  it  is  my  strong  opinion  that  the 
original  intuition  is  still  valid:  it  is  by  pooling  and  sharing  the  instruments  of  economic  welfare  and 
prosperity  that  European  nations  have  reached  and  will  develop  a  strong  sense  of  their  common 
destiny and a joint vision of their future. 
Today, the EU has reached a diversified but, broadly speaking, very ambitious level of integration: it is 
complex  because  the  degree  of  integration  is  largely  dependent  on  which  areas  are  at  stake,  it  is 
ambitious since, in some areas precisely, the system is completely integrated and relies on one single 
policy. 
The creation of the euro seems to me the natural consequence of the original intuition. It results both 
from a political vision and an economic and financial necessity. The process of monetary cooperation 
was  launched  as  early  as  1975,  as  a  response  to  the  potential  financial  and  economic  instability 
stemming from the collapse the Bretton Woods system. It met with many obstacles and went through 
several crises. At some point, it came close to being abandoned altogether. But today, the euro is alive 
and well: since 2002, it has been the sole currency with legal tender in all countries of the euro area, 
providing more than 300 million of European citizens with a new, practical unifying symbol as well as 
many direct economic benefits. 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 1
What are those benefits? 
The first, and most obvious, is price stability. Over the last five years, inflation has stayed broadly in 
line with the price stability objective set by the European Central Bank, i.e. inflation below but close to 
2%  over  the  medium-term.  Gone  are  the  days  when  European  citizens  had  to  worry  about  the 
purchasing  power  of  their  savings.  This  stability  goes  beyond  the  behaviour  of  prices.  Inflation 
expectations  themselves  have  been  remarkably  stable,  including  during  the  recent  period  when  oil 
prices  jumped  to  levels  no  one  could  have  expected  only  a  year  ago.  This,  by  itself,  illustrates  the 
credibility achieved by the Eurosystem of Central Banks, after only six years of existence. 
Second, European households and companies are reaping the benefits of that credibility. Long term 
interest rates stand at a historically low level, around 100 basis points below the level in the United 
States.  So,  even  after  the  recent  increases  in  short  term  rates,  monetary  and  financial  conditions 
remain  extremely  favourable  for  investment  and  growth.  And  indeed,  we  might  be  witnessing  in 
Europe the start of period of sustained and stable growth, at least if current projections and surveys 
are proven to be right in the coming months. 
A third benefit of the Euro is the boost it gives to financial integration in Europe. In many segments, 
European financial markets have reached the depth and liquidity which, up to now, were the preserve 
of dollar markets. This stimulates productive investment, helps in restructuring (as witnessed by the 
current wave of M&As) and, more generally, allows a better allocation of savings and sharing of risks. 
As  a  consequence,  the  euro  is  becoming  extremely  attractive,  as  a  vehicle,  a  transaction,  an 
investment and a reserve currency. As you may know, as central bankers, we remain neutral as far as 
the  internationalisation  of  the  euro  is  concerned.  We  are  neither  encouraging,  nor  discouraging  the 
process. But, as a citizen, I cannot help and feel proud of having one the two main currencies in the 
world. 
Long term prospects 
Looking  into  the  future,  I  would  like  to  try  and  answer  four  questions:  is  monetary  integration 
sustainable in the long run? What are the prospects for the enlargement of the euro area? Can the 
euro serve as a model for other regions in the world? And finally, is monetary union going to lead to 
further political integration in Europe? 
Solidity of the euro area 
I am aware that there still is, on this side of the Atlantic, a lot of skepticism about the future for the 
euro.  Four  years  ago,  one  of  your  leading  academics,  (Martin  Feldstein)  wrote  a  piece  in  Foreign 
Affairs arguing that monetary union would reignite conflicts and war in Europe. 
This is, of course, the extreme form of a basic argument: that there are too many divergences between 
European states for them to withstand the pressures of monetary unification. Put in simple economic 
terms, it boils down to the argument that the euro is not an optimum currency area. 
In my view, this is less and less true. While European labor markets are not – and will never be – as 
integrated as in the United States, goods, services, and capital markets are now fully unified, in many 
regards to a greater extent than in any other countries. Our studies show that business cycles tend to 
be  more  and  more  synchronized  with  time,  an  evolution  which  allows  for  greater  efficiency  and 
sustainability  for  a  common  monetary  policy.  This  shows  that  monetary  union  is  a  self  sustaining 
process: convergence can be a result, as much as a condition of economic integration. This has been 
termed the "endogeneity of optimum currency area" effects. 
Enlargement of the euro area 
As I said before, in contrast with some gloomy predictions made ten years ago, the euro is a success 
story. Far from being a closed Club, the Euro area is open and has a true calling for covering all the 
EU members, in so far as they fulfil the convergence criteria. Indeed, adopting the Euro can be seen 
as a legal obligation for all EU members once they have fulfilled the Maastricht convergence criteria. 
Monetary union is an on-going process. 
Starting in 1999 with 11 members, the Euro area has regularly expended. On 1 January 2001, Greece 
joined the Euro area. More recently, on 1 January 2007, Slovenia was the first of the 10 New Members 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2007
States entered into the EU in 2004 to adopt the Euro; this brought the current number of members of 
the Euro area to 13. 
At this stage, the relevant question for the new EU member states (NMS) is thus not whether but when 
to  join  the  euro  area.  Entry  is  subordinated  to  the  so  called  Maastricht  criteria  whose  economic 
rationale  is  very  strong.  These  criteria  encompass:  limited  inflation  differential  vis-à-vis  the  best 
performing EU member; stability of the nominal exchange rate with the euro; sound fiscal accounts; 
and  low  long  term  interest  rate  spread  vis-à-vis  the  best  performing  EU  member  states  in  terms  of 
price stability. They must be satisfied simultaneously for the country to be able to join the EMU. 
The  economic  rationale  is  clear:  membership of  a monetary  union  entails  the  absence  of  monetary 
policy  as  a  domestic  adjustment  tool.  Diverging  inflation  rates  become  quickly  unsustainable  both 
because  they  create  strong  real  exchange  rates  movements  and  within  the  area  and  different  real 
interest rates at the national level. In this context more inflation-prone countries would have too low 
real  interest  rates  leading  eventually  to  credit  booms,  domestic  demand  overheating,  and  loss  in 
competitiveness  and  current  account  deficits.  Furthermore,  in  the  absence  of  an  independent 
monetary policy at the national level, fiscal policy becomes the main adjustment tool. In this context, 
fiscal criteria were designed in order to assess the ability of the government to conduct sound fiscal 
policies. 
Is the euro a model of monetary cooperation for other regions in the world? 
What is happening in Europe is triggering a lot of interest in other parts of the world. Many countries to 
day, especially in Asia, are confronted with the same challenges we faced, in Europe, fifteen years 
ago: first, is it possible to reconcile greater economic integration with exchange rate volatility? And, if 
not,  can  fixed  or  pegged  exchange  rates  regimes  be  sustained  in  an  environment  of  full  capital 
mobility? Taken together, these two questions led European countries to forgo monetary autonomy. Is 
this always advisable? 
This  is  a  very  difficult  question.  My  own  answer  would  be  to  progress  towards  closer  monetary 
cooperation  with  determination  and  caution.  A  strong  degree  of  political  determination  is  necessary 
because,  clearly,  full  monetary  autonomy  becomes  more  and  more  problematic  when  economic 
integration has reached a certain stage. With greater economic openness, it is no longer an option, for 
small  and  medium  size  economies,  to  be  indifferent  to  their  exchange  rates.  On  the  other  hand, 
independent management of their exchange rates by countries with close trade and investment links 
can lead to undesirable outcomes. Thus, cooperation is warranted. 
Monetary union, however, is a demanding endeavor. I have alluded earlier to the theory of optimum 
currency areas. While it is debatable in some of its details and developments, the main message is 
clear:  the  exchange  rate  remains  an  essential  adjustment  tool  whenever  economies  are  faced  with 
asymmetric  shocks  and  markets  are  insufficiently  flexible  to  absorb  them  internally.  This  is  still  the 
case in many regions of the world where regional economic integration moves at a rapid pace, but 
between  countries  whose  economic  structures  and  specialization  are  very  different.  In  such 
circumstances,  it  would  be  extremely  penalizing  to  give  up  the  possibility  of  real  exchange  rate 
adjustments. 
This shows that there is no single model of monetary cooperation which could be duplicated around 
the world. It is up to each group of countries to find their own sustainable path to economic integration. 
Will monetary union evolve towards closer political union? 
As  you  well  know,  these  are  difficult  times  for  European  political  integration.  The  Treaty  creating  a 
Constitution for Europe was not ratified by two founding members of the European Community. As a 
consequence,  the  future  of  political  integration  is  fraught  with  uncertainties.  These  raise  several 
important questions for the future. Has the process of political integration stalled or just paused? What 
is the appropriate institutional framework for an enlarged Europe? These are questions best left for the 
historians and political scientists to answer. 
But one question is essential: can monetary union progress and survive without a full fledged political 
union? Can we – to quote, Otmar Issing, my former colleague in the ECB's Executive Board – have "a 
currency without a state"? For me, like for Otmar Issing, the answer is clear: yes, we can. From the 
start, the European project has ventured into unchartered territory. We have created an institutional 
framework  without  any  historical  precedent  and  model.  This  is  especially  true  for  monetary  policy, 
BIS Review 43/2007 
 3
where  we  have  transferred  the  decision  making  powers  to  a  supra  national  entity.  In  that  sense, 
monetary  union  in  itself  has  a  clear  political  dimension.  This  was  only  possible  because  euro  area 
members had achieved a high degree of convergence in attitudes and preferences. 
It also happens that, in all countries in the world, Central Banks have been made independent in the 
last  decades,  and  monetary  policy  has  been,  as a consequence,  depoliticised.  This was seen  as  a 
necessity to ensure price stability. From that point of view, the euro is no exception and the ECB's 
mandate is similar to those of other Central Banks. 
So, monetary union in Europe is well grounded, both on its technical and political pillars. Actually, the 
euro  to  day  seems  to  me  the  main  driver  for  European  integration.  It  exists.  It  is  a  success.  The 
institutional  process  is  working  smoothly.  Sharing  the  same  banknotes  and  currency  has  given 
European citizens a strong sense of common identity and joint destiny. And those who worried that 
monetary union would impede growth in Europe should be comforted by our recent record. Europe's 
growth rate to day is equal – or higher – to the US. In the six years since the creation of the euro, twice 
as  many  jobs  have  been  created  in  Europe  as  compared  to  the  US  economy.  Admittedly,  we  are 
lagging behind in terms of productivity growth, innovation capacity and market flexibility. But there is 
nothing  which  cannot  be  corrected  provided  the  necessary  policies  are  implemented  with 
determination and continuity. 
This  is  why,  looking  beyond  the  current  difficulties,  I  feel  very  optimistic.  And  the  reason  for  this 
optimism is the euro. The single currency has the potential to bring enormous benefits to European 
nations, which they can use to achieve a high degree of stability and prosperity, in the interest of all 
countries in the world. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2007
