Glenn Stevens: Recent economic and financial developments in Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of 
Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public  Administration,  Perth, 
21 February 2007. 
 Mr Chairman, members of the Committee. 
My colleagues and I welcome the opportunity to appear before you today. I  have attended most of 
these  hearings  since  they  started  in  their  current  form  in  May  1997,  and  have  observed  over  that 
decade  the  way  they  have  become  a  very  important  part  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  in 
Australia. I am sure that their importance will continue to grow in the years ahead, and I look forward 
to taking part in them. 
It is fitting that this hearing take place in Western Australia, where the effects of some of the profound 
international  forces  affecting  the  economy  are  perhaps  clearest.  I  refer  of  course  to  the  rise  in  the 
relative price of natural resources, which has increased shareholders’ and employees’ incomes in the 
resource sector, increased the flow of labour and capital into that sector, and had a flow-on effect on a 
range  of  other  industries.  This  has  all  fostered  a  generally  very  expansionary  set  of  conditions  in 
Western Australia in particular, though the effects have spread around the country. 
This change in relative prices is welcome, but such events are rarely uniform in their geographical or 
industry impact, and this one is no exception. In the south-eastern part of the country, where direct 
exposure to the resources sector is smaller, the positive impact is not as strong. In addition, the other 
dimension  of  the  change  in  relative  prices  to  which  I  refer –  the  relative  decline  in  prices  for  many 
manufactured  products  as  a  result  of  the  emergence  of  China  and  other  low-cost  producers –  is 
affecting  local  producers.  Not  surprisingly,  those  parts  of  the  economy,  while  growing,  are 
experiencing less strength than seen here in the west. 
Nonetheless, the rise in Australia’s terms of trade of over 30 per cent over the past three years, taking 
them to their highest level for 50 years, is expansionary overall. The real incomes of Australians are 
higher  and,  other  things  equal,  this  adds  to  demand.  For  macroeconomic  policy,  it  is  a  matter  of 
ensuring that the economy adjusts to the change as smoothly as possible. 
That task is easier today than it once was. A more flexible economic structure, a floating exchange 
rate  and  a  better  macroeconomic  policy  framework  mean  that  the  adjustment  is  proceeding  much 
more smoothly than it did on some other occasions in history when the terms of trade moved by large 
amounts. As a result, such adjustments to monetary policy as have been required have been gradual. 
When we appeared before you in August last year, the economy was in the midst of a mild pick-up in 
inflation. This was something that we had anticipated would occur, and to which monetary policy had 
already begun to respond, with adjustments to interest rates in May and August. As you know, there 
was  a  further  adjustment  in  November,  taking  the  cash  rate  to  6.25 per  cent,  somewhat  above  its 
medium-term average. 
The background to the rise in inflation, and the associated adjustments to policy, is fairly well known. 
After a long period of solid economic growth, we have approached what for practical purposes can be 
called full capacity, at least for the moment. The evidence for this is quite widespread. In the labour 
market,  we  are  as  fully  employed  as  we  have  been  at  any  time  in  the  past  30 years  or  more.  The 
share of the working age population employed is at a record high, the rate of unemployment is at its 
lowest for a generation, and wider measures of ‘underemployment’ are also comparatively low. It may 
well be possible for these trends to go further yet, but a wide array of business enterprises the Bank 
talks to have been saying for some time that it is harder and more costly to find appropriate staff, and 
that the factor most constraining further expansion is not insufficient demand, but insufficient capacity, 
either of labour or capital or both. 
Approaching full employment is, of course, something to be welcomed. It is a goal of macroeconomic 
policy. If full employment is a ‘problem’, it is the one you would rather have than the problem of chronic 
unemployment.  When  we  do  not  have  full  employment,  it  is  appropriate –  inflation  considerations 
permitting – for growth in demand to be faster than normal in order to use the unemployed reserves of 
BIS Review 16/2007 
 1
labour  and  capital.  In  the  recovery  from  a  business  cycle  downturn,  that  is  typically  what 
macroeconomic policies seek to achieve. 
But  by  the  same  token,  once  full  employment  is  more  or  less  achieved,  the  pace  of  expansion  in 
aggregate demand that was earlier desirable will now be too fast. It has to slow a bit, to be more in line 
with the rate of growth of the economy’s productive capacity. Otherwise, we would face the problems 
of  overheating,  inflation  and  eventually  another  downturn.  It  is  that  adjustment  to  more  moderate 
outcomes for spending and output growth which we have been seeking in Australia in recent years. 
That this is necessary is confirmed by the fact that inflation has picked up somewhat. CPI inflation in 
2003 was 2.4 per cent. In 2004 it was 2.6 per cent, and in 2005 2.8 per cent. In mid 2006 it was nearly 
4 per cent. 
To be sure, the Consumer Price Index was affected by the rise in oil prices, and most spectacularly, 
the effects of Cyclone Larry on the Queensland banana crop during March of last year. But the rise in 
prices was more widespread than just those items. Measures of underlying inflation, less influenced by 
specific price shocks, suggested a pick-up, albeit a much more modest one, from about 2½ per cent to 
about 3 per cent by mid 2006. 
A short-lived pick-up of that magnitude is not necessarily a major problem in itself. But in an economy 
with  limited  spare  capacity,  continuing  signs  of  quite  solid  growth  in  demand,  and  experiencing  a 
substantial  external  stimulus,  that  gradual  trend  rise  in  underlying  inflation  was  worrisome.  A 
continuation  of  this  trend  could  have  seen  inflation  exceeding  the  2–3 per  cent  target  over  a  more 
sustained period, even after temporary factors had disappeared. It was this risk – not banana prices or 
petrol prices per se – to which monetary policy had to respond. It was intended that the rise in interest 
rates, by restraining the growth of demand, would allow the supply side of the economy some time to 
catch up, and so act to contain inflationary pressures over time. 
How, then, do we evaluate the current situation and outlook? 
Most indicators suggest the economy expanded at a moderate pace through the second half of 2006. 
While  housing  construction  remained  a  bit  below  average,  engineering  and  non-residential  building 
have been very strong. Consumer demand picked up a little pace, and at present it is being assisted 
further by the decline in petrol prices. At the same time, the very serious drought has strengthened its 
grip on the rural sector, and farm production and incomes will be sharply lower this financial year as a 
result.  The  demand  for  labour  has  remained  very  strong,  with  higher  than  average  increases  in 
employment and some further decline in the rate of unemployment through the turn of the year. Data 
on job vacancies and from business surveys suggest little moderation in this area in the near term. 
Looking abroad, the world economy continues to post a strong performance, led by the US and China. 
Many  commentators  have  for  some  time  pointed  to  the  possibility  of  a  sharper-than-expected 
slowdown  in  the  US  economy,  due  most  likely  to  a  weakening  housing  sector  pulling  down  activity 
elsewhere, as a key downside risk. To date that risk does not seem to have materialised, and recent 
data suggest growth has been close to trend for the US economy, even with a weak housing sector. At 
the same time, recent inflation outcomes in the US show some moderation. There is little sign that 
China’s rapid expansion will end any time soon and recent growth in the euro area has recently been 
the  strongest  this  decade.  So,  while  forecasts  made  by  the  IMF and  other  institutions  for  the  world 
economy  have  for  some  years  been  qualified  by  statements  about  downside  risks,  it  appears  that 
current trends are, once again, at least as strong as the forecasts. 
While prices for some commodities have retreated from their peaks, others have remained very high. 
The prevailing levels of prices will, in all likelihood, continue to prompt high levels of investment in the 
resource sector both in Australia and abroad. No doubt the resulting expansion in supply will, in due 
course,  dampen  prices  for  commodities  to  some  extent.  Even  so,  it  appears  likely  that  Australia’s 
terms of trade will be higher on average over the years ahead than they were through the 1980s and 
1990s. 
International financial markets remain remarkably supportive of growth. Long-term interest rates are 
not far above their 50-year lows of a few years ago, even though short-term rates have risen in most 
countries to be much closer to normal levels, the main exception being Japan. Share prices have been 
rising  steadily,  appetite  for  risk  is  strong,  and  volatility  in  prices  for  financial  instruments  has  been 
remarkably subdued. 
To  some  extent,  these  trends  in  financial  pricing  may  well  reflect  a  genuine  decline  in  some 
dimensions of underlying risk. Variability in economic activity, and in inflation and interest rates, has 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2007
clearly diminished over the past 15 years in a number of countries, including Australia. The associated 
prolonged  period  of  attractive,  steady  returns  on  equity  investment  and  low  cost  of  long-term  debt 
funding  certainly  seems  to  have  set  the  stage  for  a  return  to  somewhat  higher  leverage  in  the 
corporate  sector.  This  is  most  prominent  in  the  rise  in  merger  and  acquisition  activity  and  the 
re-emergence  of  leveraged  buy-outs  around  the  world.  Corporate  leverage  had  been  unusually  low 
after the excesses of the 1980s, so some increase is probably manageable. Nonetheless, after more 
than a decade in which the main action in many countries has been in household balance sheets, this 
trend in corporate leverage will bear watching. For the time being, at any rate, financial conditions are 
providing ample support for both corporate investment and household spending around the world. 
Turning to the outlook for domestic demand, the very high rates of growth of business investment are 
now probably behind us, but the current high levels of investment are adding to the capital stock in a 
way that should, in time, ease capacity constraints. Governments in several states, conscious of the 
need  for  public  infrastructure,  are  also  looking  to  expand  investment.  There  appears  to  be 
considerable competition for the resources needed to complete all these projects. 
A gradual expansion in residential construction activity will probably get under way over the next year. 
We expect household consumption will grow at about trend in the period ahead. In both these areas, 
our expectations take into account the fact that the impact of the monetary policy adjustments made 
last year are still working their way through the household sector. 
All of this should mean that domestic demand will rise at, or slightly below, trend pace over the coming 
year. With some export sectors expanding as additional capacity comes on line, our central forecast is 
for  growth  in  non-farm  GDP  to  pick  up  to  about  trend  during  the  next  couple  of  years.  Total  GDP 
growth  will  be  lower  in  the  near  term  because  of  the  drought’s  effect  on  the  farm  sector.  If  rainfall 
patterns improve in the months ahead, there would presumably be some recovery in farm production 
during 2007/08, though the likelihood of that, let alone its strength, is inevitably highly uncertain at this 
stage. 
So  far  as  the  outlook  for  inflation  is  concerned,  at  the  time  of  our  November  2006  Statement  on 
Monetary Policy, after the three policy adjustments made last year, we believed there were grounds to 
think that the higher inflation outcomes observed up to that time would moderate a little in the period 
ahead. We were, admittedly, a little tentative in that judgement, but based on that assessment, the 
Board elected to leave interest rates unchanged in December. 
At our most recent meeting two weeks ago, we felt we could be a little more confident in that inflation 
forecast. We will, of course, see some large movements in CPI inflation in the next few quarters. It will 
probably fall noticeably below 2 per cent on an annual basis, as falling petrol and banana prices have 
their effect. After that, it will rise again, as those temporary factors fade, and we currently expect that 
CPI inflation will be around 2¾ per cent by early 2008, remaining around that rate thereafter. That is, it 
appears likely to be lower than recent outcomes, but closer to the top than the bottom of the 2-3 per 
cent target range. 
With that outlook, the Board decided in February to maintain the existing setting of cash rates. We will 
be maintaining a close watch on what incoming information tells us about the prospects for inflation. 
The apparent softening in underlying inflation in the December quarter was certainly very welcome, 
but  it  is  not  as  yet  clear  to  what  extent  it  signals  a  persistent,  as  opposed  to  a  temporary, 
phenomenon. Most of the indicators we have available still suggest a very fully employed economy. 
So  there  would  be  some  risk  of  inflation  remaining  uncomfortably  high  were  demand  growth  to  be 
unexpectedly strong in the near term. Hence the outlook for demand, and the extent to which capacity 
constraints are easing in a range of sectors, must be key elements in forming a judgment about the 
outlook for inflation, and the appropriate stance of monetary policy. 
I turn now to payments policy, which I know is of interest to this Committee. You conducted a very 
extensive set of hearings last year into payments issues and we believe that was very useful as a way 
of airing the views of the various participants. 
In  2002,  when  the  Payments  System  Board  announced  the  credit  card  reforms,  it  committed  to 
reviewing the outcomes after five years. We will meet that commitment with a review that will take up 
this year and part of next. The review will be broad in scope and will include all the Bank’s reforms to 
date. 
I  know  that  some  industry  participants  have  expressed  reservations,  including  to  this  Committee, 
about the Bank, rather than another body, conducting the review. I note that the Committee was not 
convinced by their arguments and concluded that the Bank should conduct the review. From our point 
BIS Review 16/2007 
 3
of view, having publicly committed to carry out such a review, we feel we could hardly do otherwise. 
Moreover, it would be very odd indeed for the Payments System Board, which has been charged by 
the Parliament with making payments policy, to ask some other body to review its policy decisions. It 
is, of course, open to the Parliament, including via this Committee, to review the reforms in any way 
that it sees fit and to ask the Payments System Board to account for its decisions. 
In December last year, the Payments System Board announced the outline of the review, after inviting 
input  from  industry  participants.  The  formal  part  of  the  review  will  begin  mid  year,  when  the  Bank 
releases an issues paper, which we hope will form the basis for an initial round of consultations. As 
background to the review, we will also be undertaking some detailed research into costs and usage 
patterns of the various payments methods, including cash. This will update and broaden the study on 
costs carried out seven years ago. 
The  review  will  be  an  open  process,  which  will  include  a  conference  towards  the  end  of  this  year 
bringing together policy-makers, specialist academics and industry practitioners. We plan to release 
our preliminary conclusions in the first part of 2008 and then we would again consult widely before 
making any changes to the current arrangements. We expect the review to be completed in late 2008. 
This is a lengthy process, but it has to be if the discussion is to be based on the facts, everyone with 
something  to  say  heard,  their  views  considered  carefully  and  the  PSB  to  undertake  proper 
deliberation. 
It  is  important  to  add  that  while  the  Payments  System  Board’s  reforms  to  retail  payments  systems 
have attracted a good deal of attention, the Board is concerned with a much broader set of issues, 
including the stability of the payments systems. The Board’s main focus here is the operation of the 
high-value payments systems. These systems continue to operate with a high degree of reliability and 
security, but continued attention and investment on the part of the principal players, including the RBA, 
is needed to ensure that this remains the case over the years ahead. 
Mr Chairman,  that  concludes  my  introductory  remarks.  My colleagues and  I are  here  to  respond  to 
your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2007
