Nout Wellink: Challenges and opportunities for corporate pension fund 
management 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, at Hoofdkantoor Shell, Den Haag, 26 June 2007. 
 The  organizers  have  asked  me  to  contribute  to  this  seminar  in  honour  of  Peter  Bronkhorst,  who  is 
stepping down as Managing Director of the Shell Asset Management Corporation. In view of Peter’s 
outstanding contributions to the Dutch pension business in general, and to that of Shell in particular, I 
decided to agree to this request. An additional reason, of course, is that this is an excellent opportunity 
to  address  a  prominent  group  of  asset  managers.  Although  it  is  tempting  to  resort  to  breezy 
lightheartedness on a festive occasion such as today, I have opted for substance, as Peter Bronkhorst 
is widely known as a man of content and professionalism. 
Given  today’s  theme  –  Challenges  and  Opportunities  for  Corporate  Pension  Fund  Management  –  I 
would  like  to  discuss  some  challenges  that  pension  funds  have  recently  encountered.  More 
specifically, I would like to explore how company pension funds have dealt with these challenges in 
the Netherlands and in the US. In this respect, it is interesting to compare the Dutch corporate pension 
industry with its American equivalent, as they have chosen different routes to cope with the increasing 
burden of aging: whereas the Americans have individualized their pension system to a large extent, 
collectivity was preserved in the Netherlands. 
In evaluating these different routes, I will emphasize four key messages. First, I will argue that a clear 
separation  between  a  sponsor  and  its  pension  fund  is  a  desirable  feature  of  any  pension  system. 
Second, I will point at the added value of collective pension plans over individual ones. Third, I will 
argue  that  this  collective  nature  saddles  pension  fund  asset  managers  with  an  important  social 
mandate.  And  fourth,  I  will  also  point  at  an  opportunity  in  the  pension  delivery  market,  which  I 
challenge you to seize. 
Comparison of the Dutch and American pension system 
Since most of us are more familiar with the Dutch pension system, I will start with a brief overview of 
the  American  system.  The  US  pension  system  is  characterized  by  a  relatively  small  government-
imposed pay-as-you-go system. This benefit constitutes only 45 percent of total retirement income in 
the US. Here, the Netherlands and the US are comparable. Indeed, the Dutch state pension scheme is 
also  fairly  small,  as  it  provides  the  average  employee  with  about  50  percent  of  his  total  pension 
benefit.  At  the  same  time,  about  55  percent  of  total  US  retirement  benefits  is  provided  through  a 
funded  system.  In  the  Netherlands,  too,  funded  pensions  are  fairly  popular,  constituting  about  50 
percent of  total  retirement benefits. Notwithstanding  these  similarities,  there  are  also  differences.  In 
particular, pension benefit replacement rates differ widely between the two countries: whereas the US 
have an average pension replacement rate of 51 percent, this rate amounts close to 84 percent in the 
Netherlands. Also, US pension funds have shifted much more risk towards their participants while the 
Dutch  pension  system  provides  its  participants  with  a  relatively  high  degree  of  certainty  on  the 
expected pension benefits. 
Within the class of funded US pension benefits, we primarily need to distinguish between two cases. 
First,  there  are  the  traditional  company-linked  defined  benefit  pension  schemes,  which  are  losing 
popularity for reasons which I will set out later. The decline of these defined benefit pension schemes 
has been reflected in a rise of the so-called 401(k) plans. These pension plans, which are named after 
a section of the US tax law, are individual saving plans that allow workers to save for their retirement 
under  a  favourable  tax  regime.  The  tax  incentive  is  derived  from  the  deferral  of  taxes  on  pension 
savings  and  returns.  Under  such  a  plan,  the  employee  chooses  to  transfer  a  certain  portion  of  his 
wage to a 401(k) account, from which he can draw after retirement. These 401(k) plans are typically of 
a  defined  contribution  nature  and  at  times  depend  heavily  on  the  investment  capabilities  of  the 
individual concerned. 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 1
The benefits of legal separation between sponsor and pension fund 
Traditional  US  company  pension  plans  clearly  resemble  Dutch  company  pension  plans.  Both  are 
collective in nature, both invest pension assets on their participants’ behalf, and both provide a defined 
pension benefit. 
However, the legal setting in which these company pension funds have to operate, varies between the 
two  countries.  In  the  US,  company  pension  funds  are  rarely  financially  separate  from  the  sponsor 
company, so that pension assets are ill-protected against employer bankruptcy. The Dutch system, on 
the other hand, is characterized by legal separation between the sponsor and the pension fund, so 
that bankruptcy of the sponsor does not necessarily have fatal consequences for the fund. 
To me, this legal separation between sponsor and pension fund has two crucial advantages. First, it 
excludes insidious conflicts of interest. After all, if the sponsor and the pension fund are not separated, 
it is not entirely clear for whose benefit a pension fund is run. For shareholders or participants? In this 
respect, experience in the US has shown that in some cases pension fund surpluses were channelled 
back to the sponsor, while deficits were borne by pension fund participants via premium increases or 
entitlement cuts. This criticism admittedly also applies to the behaviour of some Dutch pension funds 
in the 1990s. But the new Financial Assessment Framework, which became active as of January 1st, 
2007,  has  made  the  situation  more  balanced  by  explicitly  spelling  out  the  modalities  under  which 
contribution holidays can take place. 
Second, a crucial advantage of the legal separation between a sponsor and its pension fund is that not 
all the employees’ eggs are put in a single basket. In the absence of such a separation, the system 
creates concentration risk for employees as it makes both their human and financial capital dependent 
upon  one  and  the  same  firm.  Consequently,  if  a  firm  were  so  unfortunate  as  to  go  bankrupt,  its 
employees  would  lose  not  just  their  jobs,  but  their  pension  entitlements  as  well.  This  concern  is 
increasingly problematic in modern dynamic economies where company lifetimes are decreasing. With 
the  introduction  of  new  accounting  rules,  which  require  companies  explicitly  to  report  their  pension 
liabilities  on  their  balance  sheets,  many  companies  discovered  that  they  had  actually  been 
transformed  into  asset  managers  and  life  insurers,  at  great  distance  from  their  core  business.  For 
example,  with  pension  liabilities  amounting  up  to  $11  billion,  General  Motor’s  pension  obligations 
roughly equalled its market capitalization, which amounted to $12 billion at the end of 2005. In fact, 
some US companies (including some airline companies) had to renege on their pension promises by 
entering into Chapter 11 insolvency protection. Via this route, they were able to transfer their pension 
obligations  to  the  pension  benefit  guarantee  corporation  and  to  continue  their  business,  with  lower 
implied pension benefits for retirees. 
These considerations lead to the first important message I would like to emphasize today, namely that 
the  separation  between  a  sponsor  and  its  pension  fund  should  be  a  key  feature  of  any  pension 
system, to be fervently preserved and promoted. 
By contrast, in the US the aforementioned problems are mitigated in another way. There, companies 
introduced  individual  401(k)  plans,  which  do  not  appear  on  their  balance  sheets  as  a  liability.  This 
switch  has  the  advantage  that  employees’  pension  assets  are  no  longer  exposed  to  employer 
bankruptcy; on the downside, however, benefits are now of a defined contribution nature. The risks are 
then placed squarely on participants’ shoulders. In this respect, a further development of risk-pricing 
would  help  gain  deeper  insight  into  risk  differences  between  pension  systems.  This  brings  me  to  a 
second key issue in the design of corporate pension plans: how to decide on investment policy and 
who should bear the residual risks? 
Investment policy and responsibility 
Let  me  put  this  more  bluntly:  is  a  shift  to  defined  contribution  schemes  the  optimal  way  to  reduce 
pension risks for employers? I doubt it. In 401(k) plans, the individual decides what part of his wage he 
wishes  to  transfer  to  his  401(k)  account.  Moreover,  notwithstanding  recent  initiatives  that  offer 
participants  responsible  investment-packages  as  a  default,  the  majority  of  the  plans  still  give 
contributors  a  substantial  say  in  the  investment  policy.  This  all  means  that  many  401(k)  plans  rely 
heavily  upon  individual  responsibility  as  well  as  financial  literacy.  However,  not  everyone  is  able  to 
understand the complex world of pension finance, as the average employee is not as well educated in 
finance as you all probably are. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2007
Let me clarify this by asking two basic questions, which were also put to a large group of American 
workers: 
• 
Suppose  you  have  €100  in  a  savings account  and the  interest  rate  is  2  percent  per  year. 
After five years, how much do you think that you would have in the account if you left the 
money to grow: more than, less than, or exactly €102?  
Now imagine that the interest rate on your savings account is 1 percent per year and inflation 
2 percent per year. Would you then be able to buy more than, exactly the same as, or less 
than today with the money in the account?  
 It may come as a surprise to you, but research has shown that over 50 percent of US pension plan 
participants could not answer these two simple questions correctly. And add to this, as pension-expert 
David Blake noted more than once, that 50 percent of the individuals does not even know what 50 
percent is! 
Moreover, the man in the street is not an expert on risk diversification: in for example the well-known 
Enron case, employees had invested 60 percent of their 401(k) assets in Enron stock. On average 
about  one-fifth  of  all  401(k)  assets  are  invested  in  own  company  stock.  Although  this  is 
understandable since an employee is always relatively confident of his own firm’s prospect, this again 
leads to the undesirable situation where human and financial capital are tied to the wellbeing of one 
and the same firm. 
Additionally, under 401(k) plans, it is up to participants to decide what amount to reserve for pension 
purposes.  Here,  the  problem  is  that  the  typical  401(k)  participant  seems  to  have  commitment 
problems: estimates indicate that the typical 401(k) participant approaching retirement has saved less 
than $50,000, instead of the $300,000 he would have accumulated under a defined benefit system. 
Procrastination  behaviour  –  based  on  thoughts  such  as  “I  will  start  saving  tomorrow”  –  as  well  as 
limited rationality seem to abound. 
Given these examples, my second main message is that since individuals only seem to be rational up 
to  a  point,  there  is  considerable  value  in  preserving  the  collective  nature  of  our  system.  In  such  a 
system, participants automatically contribute enough towards their old age financing while professional 
asset managers make sure that the contributions are well invested from a risk-return perspective. This 
ensures that every individual is provided with a reasonable pension benefit after retirement. Moreover, 
collective  pension  systems  are  cost  efficient,  as  they  exploit  economies  of  scale,  and  enable 
intergenerational risk-sharing which is welfare-enhancing to risk-averse individuals. 
My third main message, which follows from my second, is that you should all realize that the collective 
nature  of  our  system  brings  important  fiduciary  responsibilities  for  you  as  pension  fund  asset 
managers. Keep in mind that compulsory participation implies that participants are not free to choose 
which pension fund to join, unless they move to another company or industry. In this way, your power 
to raise contributions is very similar to the government’s power of taxation, from which one normally 
also cannot escape. Consequently, you bear an important social responsibility – even more so than 
“ordinary”  companies.  Therefore,  pension  fund  management  requires  good  governance  as  well  as 
transparency to allow pension plan participants to see what is being done with their money on their 
behalf.  In  addition,  the  compulsory  nature  of  participation  implies  that  you  should  not  only  look  at 
private returns, but also try to take social returns into account, as society as a whole has given you the 
mandate  to  raise  your  funds.  In  this  light,  I  applaud  the  recent  initiatives  that  discourage  socially 
irresponsible investments. 
My  final  message  is  more  of  a  provocation  to  you  all.  In  most  western  countries,  pension  systems 
have  already  been  individualized  to  some  degree  as  part  of  the  shift  from  defined  benefit  towards 
defined contribution systems. To a lesser degree, this has also occurred in the Netherlands, with the 
introduction of conditional indexation and life course arrangements. In this context, I foresee market 
opportunities  for  new  pension  products  that  are  tailored  to  individuals,  but  maintain  the  benefits  of 
collectivity.  This  involves  both  assisting  individuals  with  complex  choices  and  making  risk  pooling 
instruments more readily available. 
BIS Review 75/2007 
 3
Peter Bronkhorst 
Having  stated  these  messages,  I  finally  turn  to  today’s  overarching  theme:  Peter  Bronkhorst’s 
retirement.  From  my  story,  one  may  infer  that  I  believe  that  a  good  asset  manager should  be  both 
prudent and astute. 
Peter  Bronkhorst  possesses  both  these  characteristics.  This  is  also  reflected  in  the  performance  of 
Shell’s pension fund. During Peter’s period of office, Shell’s pension fund portfolio out-performed that 
of most other Dutch pension funds: as noted in its yearly report, Shell’s pension portfolio earned an 
average annual rate of return of 6.8 percent over the period from 2001 to 2005, when Peter led the 
predecessor  of  SAMCo,  as  compared  to  4.5  percent  for  the  average  Dutch  pension  fund  over  the 
same period. In Peter’s last year, 2006, I am told that SAMCo even realized a rate of return equal to 
17% – about 7 percentage points higher than the average Dutch pension fund. That is what I would 
call a generous farewell gift! But Peter’s strong track record was not only established in the upswing. 
In fact, Peter guided Shell’s pension portfolio through the perfect storm that hit the financial markets in 
2001. Peter’s investment policy enabled the Shell pension fund to compensate its participants fully for 
inflation in all years he was in charge. 
Besides  this,  Peter  deserves  merits  for  bundling  Shell’s  pension  assets  in  the  Netherlands.  This  is 
favourable  for  the  Shell  pension  fund  itself  as  research  has  shown  that  there  are  substantial 
economies  of  scale  in  pension  fund  provision.  Apparently,  the  Dutch  entity  was  the  better  place  to 
deliver  these  economies  of  scale.  In  this  context,  bundling  these  activities  in  the  Netherlands  also 
brings positive externalities to the Dutch economy as it preserves and creates high-skilled employment 
in our country. In this way, it seems to me that Peter has fulfilled his social mandate in an exemplary 
fashion. 
Finally, one of my colleague-directors at the Dutch  Central Bank – Dirk Witteveen, who as pension 
supervisor  got  to  know  Peter  Bronkhorst  fairly  well  –  praises  Peter  for  the  binding  role  he  fulfilled 
between social partners and pension funds when the sector was in disarray in the wake of the 2001 
financial market storm. During this period, Peter kept a constructive, open attitude that contributed to 
agreement on the necessary adjustment measures. With the recovery of the Dutch pension system 
now well-established, this all seems like long ago, but we wouldn’t be sitting so comfortably now if it 
hadn’t been for the necessary measures taken and for Peter’s contribution to implement them. 
Conclusion 
I  am  coming  to  the  end  of  my  speech.  I  have  stressed  four  important  interconnected  messages, 
relevant  for  the  future  world  of  pension  finance.  First  of  all,  I  believe  that  we  should  preserve  and 
promote a clear separation between a sponsor and its pension fund. Second, I have pointed out the 
added value which collective pension arrangements have over individual ones by protecting pension 
plan participants against their own shortcomings, by exploiting economies of scale, and by enabling 
intergenerational risk-sharing. Third, I have emphasized that asset managers need to realise that their 
fiduciary mandate saddles them with important social responsibilities. Last, I challenge you to come up 
with  pension  products  that  are  tailored  to  individual  preferences,  but  are  also  able  to  maintain  the 
benefits of collectivity. 
I congratulate Peter Bronkhorst on the excellent job he has done in these respects. The flipside is that 
I regret his stepping down from a prominent position in the pension industry. As a real – and therefore 
internationally oriented – Dutchman, Peter was often able to build bridges, even in intense debates. 
Now time has come for you, Peter, to harvest, as a pensioner, the fruits of the seeds you have sown. I 
wish you all the best in the future. 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2007
