Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Lord  Mayor’s  Banquet  for 
Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, London, 20 June 2007. 
 My Lord Mayor, Mr Chancellor, My Lords, Ministers, Aldermen, Mr Recorder, Sheriffs, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Chancellor, this will be your last Mansion House Dinner with the Merchants and Bankers. And I want 
to start by warmly congratulating you on your record-breaking period in office, and on the imminent 
assumption  of  the  leadership  of  your  party  and  country.  It  has  been  a  remarkable  decade  for  the 
British economy. 
Your  decision  to  grant  independence  to  the  Bank  of  England  ten  years  ago  is  widely  and  rightly 
regarded as a fundamental improvement to the conduct of economic policy in this country, and we in 
the  Bank  are  grateful  to  you  for  giving  us  the  opportunity  to  demonstrate  the  benefits  of  an 
independent central bank. Your reform illustrates the key principle that institutions matter. Individuals, 
however talented, cannot consistently perform well if the institutional structure in which they operate is 
badly designed. 
For too long the UK economy lurched between success and failure rather in the way that the national 
cricket team has recently. Getting the institutions right was a crucial part of the 1997 reforms. Perhaps 
there  is  a  lesson  here  for  the  ECB  –  the  England  and  Wales  Cricket  Board.  And  I  welcome  the 
changes  that  you  announced  last  week  to  make  appointments  to  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
subject to a more transparent process with a more systematic timetable. 
Behind  the  design  of our monetary  institutions  is a simple  principle.  I  described  it  last  October  in a 
lecture  at  Kirkcaldy.  It  is  that  the  value  of  paper  money  depends  on  trust.  Trust  that  it  will  hold  its 
value. Trust that others will accept it as a means of payment. 
In particular, our banknotes must be trusted by the public – cash still accounts for over 60% of the 
number  of  transactions.  In  March  the  Bank  launched  a  new  series  of  bank  notes  with  enhanced 
security features. As an economist, I was pleased that a pioneer of the dismal science should appear 
on our bank notes. Adam Smith, who appears on new £20 notes, was a thinker who recognised the 
importance of institutions. 
Imagine my concern, therefore, when, after 3 ½ years as Governor, I read the following report from the 
Wolverhampton Crown Court. “A judge demanded to know why police failed for three and a half years 
to  arrest  a  wanted  Birmingham  man  –  when  all  the  time  he  was  living  at  home.  Adam  Smith, 
suspected  of  passing  forged  £20  notes,  had  a  fixed  address  in  Edgbaston  and  was  picking  up 
benefits”. So I hope the introduction of one Adam Smith will hinder the activities of the other. 
I am proud of the new £20 notes, but I cannot say the same of our £5 notes. There has been much, 
and in my view justified, criticism of their availability and condition. Over the past ten years, the value 
of Bank of England notes in circulation has doubled, from around £20 billion to around £40 billion. But 
none of that is accounted for by the £5 note for which the value in circulation has remained constant 
for fifteen years at some £1 billion. And the average lifetime of the note has doubled. As a result, many 
more notes are noticeably soiled and scruffy. 
ATMs  account  for  over  60%  of  all  cash  obtained  by  the  public.  Few  issue  £5  notes.  It  is  more 
economical for banks to stock ATMs with £10 and £20 notes. The problem is not at the production end 
– we have an ample supply of new £5 notes waiting to be used. We want to see them in circulation. 
There  is  a  need  for  an  adequate  supply  of  low  denomination  notes  that  can  be  used  for  small 
transactions where cash is the predominant means of payment. Such mutual convenience is a public 
good, and may not correspond to the private interest of commercial banks. 
That is why we must not let this situation continue any longer. The public need £5 notes. The solution 
may involve some alteration in the incentives for banks to obtain different denomination notes from the 
Bank  of  England,  new  arrangements  to  increase  the  availability  of  notes  to  retailers,  and  an 
improvement in the durability of the notes that we print. So the Bank will be initiating discussions to 
see what methods might ensure greater access by the public to new £5 notes. 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 1
Your reforms, Chancellor, encompassed not just monetary policy – through the Bank of England Act – 
but  also  financial  regulation  –  through  the  creation  of  the  FSA  and  the  1997  Memorandum  of 
Understanding between the Bank, FSA and Treasury. There was, however, some unfinished business 
in  that  Memorandum.  The  Bank  of  England  was  given  responsibility  for  the  oversight  of  payment 
systems. But it was given no formal powers to discharge that responsibility. Instead it relies heavily on 
the influence afforded by its operational role at the centre of the high-value payment system. But that 
influence extends only so far. 
The time has come to deal with the imbalance between responsibilities and powers. The “plumbing” of 
the financial system represented by payment and settlement systems may not be as glamorous as the 
trading  activity  which  attracts  so  many  bright  young  people  to  work  in  the  financial  sector,  but  it  is 
absolutely crucial to maintaining stability. To have responsibility without power is the misfortune of the 
bureaucrat.  The  solution,  in  my  view,  does  not  mean  more  powers  for  the  Bank,  but  narrower 
responsibilities. Proposals are under active discussion among the tripartite partners, and they give me 
confidence that the imbalance will soon be resolved. 
Financial stability more generally is a topical concern in financial markets. More than one banker and 
merchant  in  the  City  has  said  to  me  recently,  “I  cannot  recall  a  time  when  credit  was  more  easily 
available”. How worried should we be? Let me begin with the implications for the stability of markets 
and institutions before turning to monetary policy. 
Securitisation is transforming banking from the traditional model in which banks originate and retain 
credit risk on their balance sheets into a new model in which credit risk is distributed around a much 
wider  range  of  investors.  As  a  result,  risks  are  no  longer  so  concentrated  in  a  small  number  of 
regulated  institutions  but  are  spread  across  the  financial  system.  That  is  a  positive  development 
because it has reduced the market failure associated with traditional banking – the mismatch between 
illiquid assets and liquid liabilities – that led Henry Thornton and, later, Walter Bagehot to promote the 
role of the Bank of England as the “lender of last resort” in a financial crisis. 
But the historical model is only a partial description of banking today. New and ever more complex 
financial instruments create different risks. Exotic instruments are now issued for which the distribution 
of returns is considerably more complicated than that on the basic loans underlying them. A standard 
collateralised debt obligation divides the risk and return of a portfolio of bonds, or credit default swaps, 
into tranches. But what is known as a CDO-squared instrument invests in tranches of CDOs. It has a 
distribution  of  returns  which  is  highly  sensitive  to  small  changes  in  the  correlations  of  underlying 
returns which we do not understand with any great precision. The risk of the entire return being wiped 
out can be much greater than on simpler instruments. Higher returns come at the expense of higher 
risk. 
Whether in banking, reinsurance or portfolio management, risk assessment is a matter of judgement 
as  much  as  quantitative  analysis.  Ever  more  complex  instruments  are  designed  almost  every  day. 
Some  of  the  important  risks  that  could  affect  all  instruments  –  from  terrorist  attacks,  invasion  of 
computer systems, or even the consequences of a flu pandemic – are almost impossible to quantify, 
and past experience offers little guide. 
Be  cautious  about  how  much  you  borrow  is  not  a  bad  maxim  for  each  and  every  one  of  us  here 
tonight. Ignore the unsolicited emails that rain down on us offering unwanted credit. I received one last 
week that began, “We have the solution, Mervyn, for your bankruptcy”. 
The  development  of  complex  financial  instruments  and  the  spate  of  loan  arrangements  without 
traditional covenants suggest another maxim: be cautious about how much you lend, especially when 
you know rather little about the activities of the borrower. It may say champagne – AAA – on the label 
of an increasing number of structured credit instruments. But by the time investors get to what’s left in 
the  bottle,  it  could  taste  rather  flat.  Assessing  the  effective  degree  of  leverage  in  an  ever-changing 
financial system is far from straightforward, and the liquidity of the markets in complex instruments, 
especially in conditions when many players would be trying to reduce the leverage of their portfolios at 
the same time, is unpredictable. Excessive leverage is the common theme of many financial crises of 
the past. Are we really so much cleverer than the financiers of the past? 
Concerns about the rate at which credit is being created extend to monetary policy. As I said last week 
in Cardiff, it would be optimistic in the extreme to suppose that the rapid growth of money and credit 
could be dismissed solely as a positive shock to the demand for money. The spread between interest 
rates paid by households and businesses and interest rates available in the money market has fallen. 
This has  been  one of  the factors  behind  the  strength  of  demand  in  the  UK economy  over  the  past 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2007
year. Despite greater availability of labour, businesses have not expanded employment sufficiently to 
prevent stronger demand from increasing capacity pressures. Such pressures encourage businesses 
to  raise  prices.  And  that  is  exactly  what  the  business  surveys  suggest  has  been  happening.  That 
underlying upward pressure on inflation has in part been hidden by the volatility of domestic energy 
prices. But it is why we have raised interest rates four times and by 1 percentage point in all over the 
past year. 
Our  central  view  remains  that  inflation  will  fall  back  this  year  as  the  rises  in  domestic  gas  and 
electricity  prices  last  year  drop  out  of  the  annual  comparison,  and  the  recent  cuts  in  prices  feed 
through to household bills. But it is important to look through those temporary effects to the outlook 
further ahead. The discussion within the Monetary Policy Committee is explained in the minutes of our 
June meeting which were published this morning. As ever, there is room for differences of judgement 
as to the appropriate level of Bank Rate – as shown by the differing views within the MPC. But every 
member of the Committee is determined to bring inflation back to target and keep it there – or as close 
to the target as possible – indefinitely. 
In the long run, it is of the utmost importance that the right institutions to secure both monetary and 
financial  stability  are  in  place.  I  believe  they  are.  Chancellor,  you  are  now  moving  on.  Our  country 
continues to benefit from the institutional arrangements you introduced in 1997. As that great political 
commentator Niccolo Machiavelli noted, “nothing brings a man greater honour than the new laws and 
new institutions he establishes”. I encourage you to be equally bold in your next job. 
Institutions outlast us all. Over time, they are adapted as we learn the lessons of the past in the light of 
a changing present to meet our future needs. Lord Mayor, you know the importance of learning, and 
the Chancellor has emphasised again this evening the role of education in shaping Britain’s place in 
the  world  economy.  Both  the  Chancellor  and  I  have  been  enthusiastic  about  the  theme  of  your 
mayoralty: “City of London – City of Learning”. And all of us here tonight would like to pay tribute to 
your work since you became Lord Mayor, and to thank both the Lady Mayoress and yourself for the 
splendid hospitality which you have extended to us all this evening. 
So I invite you all to rise and join me in the traditional toast of good health and prosperity to "The Lord 
Mayor and the Lady Mayoress". 
BIS Review 69/2007 
 3
