Davíð Oddsson: The commercial banks are more resilient 
Opening statement by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of 
Iceland, on behalf of the Board of Governors at a Press Conference on the occasion of the publication 
of the Bank’s Financial Stability 2007, 25 April 2007. 
 In  its  analysis  published  in  Financial  Stability  at  the  beginning  of  May  2006,  the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland’s  finding  was  that the  financial system was broadly  sound,  but  more challenging waters  lay 
ahead.  Two  main  causes  of  concern  were  identified:  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  uncertainty 
about  the  commercial  banks’  refinancing  of  their  foreign  borrowing.  Refinancing  was  successfully 
completed. However, macroeconomic imbalances increased. A year ago the focus was on short-term 
risks on the liabilities side of the financial companies’ balance sheets, but now it has shifted more to 
the long-term asset quality.  
The most pressing economic policy task is to restore stability. The conclusion of large investments in 
the aluminium and power sectors will automatically reduce imbalances, but other adjustment has been 
slower  than  expected.  Increased  foreign  debt  service  has  delayed  the  unwinding  of  the  current 
account  deficit,  which  will  hardly  be  brought  down  to  a  sustainable  level  without  a  substantial 
contraction in demand. The latest forecast in Monetary Bulletin in March 2007 indicates that such a 
contraction lies ahead, as growth of investment and private consumption slows down. As discussed in 
this report, a depreciation of the króna coinciding with a fall in asset prices – possibly originating in 
tighter global financial conditions – could amplify the forecast contraction. 
The necessary reduction of pressures in the economy will squeeze businesses and households, many 
of which are vulnerable due to heavy debt. They could withstand a short-lived reversal, but a lasting 
contraction would be difficult to weather.  
In  late  autumn  2005,  after  a  surge  in  borrowing  by  Icelandic  banks  in  international  bond  markets, 
investors revised their risk assessments of the banks. CDS spreads and secondary market yields on 
their  issues  increased.  The  banks  deferred  further  borrowing  in  the  European  bond  markets,  which 
had  been  their  main  source  of  funding.  Foreign  analysts  and  agencies  published  negative  reports 
about the banks and the state of the Icelandic economy. The climate turned most adverse at the end 
of  February  2006  after  Fitch  Ratings  changed  Iceland’s  sovereign  outlook  from  stable  to  negative, 
claiming inter alia that the banks’ tight financing could have implications for the Treasury. 
This situation and its aftermath squeezed the banks for a while, forcing them to respond firmly to the 
uncomfortable position that had arisen. They made efforts to explain the structure and organisation of 
the Icelandic banks. The banks adjusted certain aspects of their operations and cross-ownership in 
response  to  relevant  criticisms,  and  refuted  what  was  less  relevant  with  both  communication  and 
successful business performance. Temporarily they needed to look beyond their traditional markets for 
funding, with issuance in the US and Japan. The problem that loomed around this time a year ago is a 
thing of the past and terms in the secondary market are more favourable again.  
The Central Bank underlines that global market conditions can take a sudden turn for the worse and it 
is important to be on the alert and prepared for such a contingency.  
The current episode of ample liquidity and lower interest rates which has been ideal for risk-seeking 
investors  may  change  unexpectedly.  Short-term  interest  rates  have  been  rising  in  most  markets 
recently and capital costs are no longer so favourable. The Icelandic banks are better equipped for 
such a reversal than a year ago, because experience has taught them to extend and disperse their 
borrowing, and build up substantial liquid reserves in foreign currency. In 2006 the spotlight was on 
the  banks’  liquidity  risk.  Now  that  this  risk  has  ebbed,  the  focus  has  shifted  to  credit  risk  and  the 
potential impact of higher interest rates and a depreciation of the króna.  
Amidst  the  turbulence  of  2006,  the  banks  slowed  down  their  credit  growth  and  expansion  of  their 
balance  sheets.  No  major  foreign  financial  companies  were  acquired  and  equity  exposures  were 
reduced. Nonetheless, it is natural to consider their credit risk and vulnerability towards a fall in asset 
prices.  
Icelandic households’ debts with credit institutions have soared in recent years, especially average-
income  and  young  households.  Debt  service  has  not  risen  by  the  same  proportion,  due  to  rising 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 1
incomes and easier credit terms, and arrears are at a low. However, some borrowers have stretched 
their  capacity  to  the  limit  and  the  most  indebted  group  has  seen  its  debt  grow  substantially  as  a 
proportion of income and assets in recent years. Conditions will not need to change much to cause 
them serious  difficulties.  The  bulk  of household  debt  is  in  the  form  of CPI-indexed  mortgage  loans, 
making low inflation critical. Household debt in foreign currency was very low, but has been increasing. 
High  levels  of  foreign  currency-denominated  debt  could  prove  questionable  for  households  with  no 
income in foreign currency. Since house prices are currently buoyant, they are likely to rise by less 
than  general  inflation  or  even  fall  in  nominal  terms.  Household  equity  could  shrink  under  such 
conditions.  
Business profitability appears to have been strong in 2006, in spite of a massive increase in financial 
expenses from exchange rate losses on foreign borrowing, higher interest expenses and a substantial 
increase in interest-bearing debt. Debt of listed companies grew as a ratio of equity and the same is 
probably true of other businesses. Higher debt levels leave them more vulnerable to a contraction in 
the economy. 
Equity prices have soared in Iceland in recent years. One explanation for the increase may be that 
Icelandic companies were undervalued by the markets, for example by international comparison, and 
another that bold investment ventures have driven up their value. But risk and high yield often go hand 
in hand and it must be assumed that equity prices can fall just as easily as rise.  
The Central Bank has assessed the banks’ credit portfolio quality on the basis of geographical and 
sectoral  distribution.  It  is  no  longer  enough  to  focus  solely  on  activities  in  Iceland,  because  three-
quarters  of  the  banks’  total  lending  on  a  consolidated  basis  was  to  non-residents,  especially  in  the 
other Nordic countries and the UK. The assessment indicates that the banks’ loss provisioning is more 
than adequate to meet expected losses. However, this view must be tempered by hefty credit growth 
in  recent  years  and  the  large  increase  in  leveraged  buyouts  and  forward  contracts  connected  with 
them.  House  prices  are  at  a  historical  peak  in  real  terms  and  may  unwind.  Equity  prices  reflect 
expectations  of  ongoing  rapid  output  growth,  but  such  sentiment  can  quickly  reverse,  as  recent 
experience has shown. Arrears and impairment are minimal, but both may be expected to increase in 
the coming years.  
One major vulnerability of the Icelandic economy at present is the risk of a rapid and unforeseen rise 
in international interest rates and premia. Short-term rates have already risen widely and may go up 
further. Long-term rates have not changed much but could begin to climb. Premia are prone to change 
at short notice due to shifts in investors’ risk assessments or risk-seeking.  
The  Icelandic  economy  has  never  been  so  sensitive  to  changes  in  global  markets,  which  could 
significantly  affect  it.  It  is  critical  to  achieve  some  redress  of  imbalances  before  external  conditions 
tighten.  
Strange as it may sound, the banks’ efforts to hedge against the effect of a conceivable depreciation 
of the króna on their equity ratios has increased the market risk on their foreign exchange exposures. 
Credit institutions fulfil the Central Bank’s rules on foreign exchange balance, but have been permitted 
to maintain separate additional currency balances. Thus the banks’ capital positions are well hedged 
against  a  conceivable  depreciation  of  the  króna,  but  a  short-term  appreciation  cannot  be  ruled  out. 
The  banks’  customers,  on  the  other  hand,  are  less  protected  against  shocks  from  a  depreciation, 
although data from the banks show that most of their borrowers of foreign currency-denominated loans 
also  have  substantial  currency  earnings  and  thereby  a  natural  hedge  against  exchange  rate 
movements.  
Financial  Stability  2006  reported  on  a  Central  Bank  stress  test  of  the  impact  of  a  serious  shock 
involving a simultaneous large rise in global interest rates, depreciation of the króna and fall in asset 
prices.  This  simulation  has  now  been  repeated  using  new  data  and  assuming  an  even  larger 
depreciation and decrease in house prices. Were all these shocks to coincide, estimates show that the 
contraction in national expenditure could prove considerably greater than in the Central Bank’s most 
recent  macroeconomic  forecast  in  Monetary  Bulletin  in  March  2007.  The  pressure  on  the  financial 
sector will be determined to some extent by the pace of the adjustment and the banks’ own responses 
to it. Although the adjustment would ultimately be greater if it occurred slowly, a very rapid contraction 
would deliver such a jolt to the finances of many households and businesses that loan losses would 
result.  
It  is  likely  that  a  range  of  risks  will  have  to  be  faced,  but  efforts  must  be  made  to  minimise  the 
probability  of  a  financial  crisis  that  could  harm  potential  output  and  living  standards.  In  the  final 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2007
analysis, the critical factor is how strong and well equipped the financial system is to withstand shocks, 
i.e. its resilience.  
The  crucial  factor  behind  the  Central  Bank’s  assessment  that  the  financial  system  is  now  more 
resilient  to  shocks  is  the  banks’  stronger  liquidity  and  equity  positions  than  a  year  ago.  The  major 
commercial banks have a diversified income base that extends to many countries. Another advantage 
is the somewhat different business models they have used in their expansion. Their diversified assets 
give less reason to fear the consequences of an unexpected strain on the financial system.  
Iceland’s strong fiscal position underpins the banks’ international credit ratings. Other important factors 
have  been  the  strengthening  of  Iceland’s  foreign  reserves  and  the  Central  Bank’s  capital.  Both 
measures  represent  natural  responses  to  changes  caused  in  the  Central  Bank’s  operating 
environment by the very rapid expansion of the commercial banks, especially abroad. 
Although  the  main  function  of  a  financial  stability  report  is  to  highlight  risks,  factors  conducive  to 
strengthening  the  long-term  economic  outlook  should  also  be  duly  noted.  Iceland’s  economy  is 
advanced, transparent and dynamic. The population is relatively young, well educated and quick to 
adapt to technological and scientific innovations. A strong fully funded pension system has been built 
up and, unlike other countries, there is no reason to fear for its sustainability. GDP per capita ranks 
with the highest in the world, and the economic and social infrastructure is solid. The openness of the 
economy results in a smaller effect from a contraction in domestic demand on employment than might 
be expected.  
The authorities shape the framework in which businesses and the financial system operate. Through 
its membership of the European Economic Area, Iceland enjoys similar operating conditions to those 
within  the  European  Union.  Nonetheless,  it  retains  various  features  that  influence  economic 
advancement, such as a rather business-friendly tax environment, efficient public administration and 
flexible  labour  market.  Extensive  and  rapid  transformation  of  the  financial  sector  puts  supervisory 
agencies  under  pressure.  The  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (FME)  has  been  granted  an 
increasingly  wide  remit  in  recent  years  and  its  activities  have  been  strengthened.  One  task  is  to 
monitor the banks’ transactions with main shareholders and executives.  
Payment  and  settlement  systems  are  a  key  component  of  an  efficient  and  sound  financial  system. 
Steps  have  recently  been  completed  towards  bringing  their  regulatory  framework  into  line  with 
international  best  practice.  Although  such  work  tends  to  go  relatively  unnoticed,  it  is  crucial  for 
enhancing security of settlements and reducing technical risks. 
The  main  financial  sector  vulnerabilities  are  presented  in  the  table  below.  The  first  three  relate  to 
macroeconomic imbalances that could cause a further widening of the current account deficit, higher 
external debt and a depreciation of the króna. Vulnerability on these counts is no less than a year ago, 
and higher global interest rates and premia could have widespread repercussions. On the other hand, 
much of the uncertainty about the banks’ access to financing has been dispelled and they have built 
up ample liquid reserves. Under such conditions, the focus shifts to asset quality.  
The second table highlights factors that contribute to financial system resilience. The most noteworthy 
development is the banks’ stronger position in the form of ample liquidity and capital adequacy ratios 
which are very acceptable and historically high.  
On the whole, the Central Bank’s finding is that the financial system is broadly sound. It is equipped to 
withstand  shocks  to  the  economy  and  financial  markets,  to  mediate  credit  and  payments,  and  to 
redistribute risks appropriately. In other words, it is capable of performing its function in an orderly and 
efficient way. Iceland’s banking system meets the demands made of it and performs well on stress 
tests conducted by the Central Bank and FME. 
 BIS Review 41/2007 
 3
Table 1 Main vulnerabilities 
Risk 
Exchange rate 
developments 
Explanation 
Macroeconomic imbalances are pronounced. The current account deficit 
poses the risk of a depreciation of the króna. Shifts in carry trades and 
other  exposures  could  catalyse  a  sudden  turnaround.  The  FX  market 
relies on three market makers and is still relatively thin. Some borrowers 
from the commercial banks have little or no hedge against exchange rate 
movements.  
In recent years, interest rates and premia have been at a historical low. 
Interest rates have begun to climb and sooner or later premia will rise 
again, increasing corporate financing costs. 
Export prices could drop and oil prices rise. Unfavourable developments 
could  widen  the  current  account  deficit  and  erode  national  income. 
Economic  and  social  infrastructure  is  sound.  The  Central  Bank’s 
macroeconomic forecast assumes a deterioration in the terms of trade. 
High dependence on market funding and deposits on call makes credit 
ratings  and  global  market  conditions  crucial  for  the  commercial  banks. 
Experience shows that credit assessment can shift suddenly. 
Rapid credit growth often eventually leads to poorer loan quality. Loans 
with  equities  as  collateral  are  substantial.  Prices  of  equities  and  real 
estate are buoyant. Although arrears and impairment are at a low, they 
are unlikely to remain so over the next few years.  
 
Global interest rates and 
premia  
Terms of trade 
International market 
funding 
Asset quality of 
commercial banks 
  Table 2 Resilience 
Explanation 
The  economy  is  flexible  and  in  the  past  has  shown  itself  capable  of 
tackling  cyclical swings through  adjustment  of  imports. Investment  and 
output  growth  have  been  robust.  The  long-term  economic  outlook  is 
favourable. 
The  commercial  banks’  liquidity  and  capital  ratios  have  never  been 
higher.  They  have  built  up  liquidity  in  foreign  currency  and  secured 
refinancing  into  2008.  Profitability  is  strong  from  the  bank’s  diverse 
operations and assets are diversified. 
Iceland’s  framework  is  the  EEA  Agreement  and  its  guidelines  are 
international  best  practice  and  transparency.  Economic  and  social 
infrastructure  is  sound.  Financial  supervision  has  been  boosted  and 
extensive cross-border cooperation is in place. 
Payment  system  infrastructure  is  largely  electronic  and  efficient.  Steps 
have  been  taken to  enhance  security  and  contingency  plans.  Systems 
meet international standards. 
The Treasury’s position is strong with consecutive fiscal surpluses. Net 
external  Treasury  debt,  including  foreign  reserves,  is  virtually  zero.  No 
pension gap is foreseeable. 
 
Resilience 
Economy 
Strength of the 
commercial banks 
Institutional and 
supervisory framework 
Payment and settlement 
systems 
Fiscal position 
  4 
 BIS Review 41/2007
