Ric Battellino: Some observations on financial trends 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to 
Finsia-Melbourne  Centre  for  Financial  Studies,  12th  Banking  and  Finance  Conference, 
Melbourne, 25 September 2007. 
 The  topic  I  would  like  to  talk  about  today  is  credit  provided  by  intermediaries,  or  what  is 
broadly its mirror image, the debt of the household and business sectors. 
In  many  countries  –  including  most  of  the  English-speaking  ones  –  credit  has  been  rising 
strongly relative to GDP for many years now. This has been an ongoing topic of discussion 
among  the  world’s  central  banks  and  financial  commentators,  as  people  try  to  understand 
whether this trend is sustainable, what it means for the performance of economies and what 
it means for financial stability. 
I would like to touch on some of these issues today, particularly as they relate to Australia. 
Some facts 
Let me start with a few facts. 
This first graph shows two statistics for a range of developed economies: 
- 
- 
the orange bars are the annual average growth in credit over the past 30 years; and 
the  purple  bars  are  the  annual  average  growth  in  nominal  GDP  over  the  same 
period. 
In each of the 15 countries shown, credit has grown substantially faster than GDP over the 
past 30 years.  
BIS Review 106/2007 
 1
Graph 1  
 The  gap  between  the  growth  of  credit  and  that  of  GDP  has  been  particularly  large  in 
countries  such  as  Ireland,  Spain,  Australia,  the  United  Kingdom,  New  Zealand  and  the 
Netherlands.  Across  these  six  countries,  credit  has  grown  on  average  about  5 percentage 
points a year faster than nominal GDP over the period covered by this graph. 
It is a matter of arithmetic that if credit is growing faster than GDP, then the ratio of credit 
outstanding  to  GDP  will  rise.  Across  the  15  countries  shown  in  Graph 1,  the  (unweighted) 
average ratio of credit to GDP has risen from about 60 per cent in 1977 to around 135 per 
cent today (Graph 2).  
2 
 BIS Review 106/2007
Graph 2  
   
The  extent  of  the  upward  trend  in  this  ratio,  and  its  persistence  over  such  an  extended 
period, is unusual from an historical perspective, if not unprecedented. 
For Australia, we have data on credit going back 150 years and it is certainly the case that 
there is no domestic precedent for what has happened over the past 30 years (Graph 3).1 
The closest previous experiences were those in the 1880s and 1920s. In the former case, 
credit started to expand much more quickly than GDP in the early 1880s, but this trend lasted 
for less than 15 years, after which it reversed sharply. The surge in credit in the second half 
of the 1920s was less pronounced and shorter; it reversed after about five years.  
                                                 
1   Before 1953, the series shown in the graph relates only to the credit provided by banks; after that it includes 
credit provided by all intermediaries. 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 3
Graph 3  
   
One of the clues as to why the recent episode of credit expansion has lasted longer is that it 
has  been  driven  to  an  important  extent  by  household  borrowing  rather  than  business 
borrowing.  
We have estimates of household and business credit, of varying quality, going back to the 
1920s.  Before  that,  it  is  possible  to  get  some  guide  to  the  split  of  borrowing  between 
businesses  and  households  by  looking  at  which  institutions  were  doing  the  lending.  For 
example, credit extended by trading banks traditionally has mainly gone to businesses, while 
that extended by savings banks has mainly gone to households. 
The next couple of graphs decompose the series for total credit shown in Graph 3 into its 
business and household components. In the case of business credit, Graph 4 shows that the 
ratio of business credit to GDP exhibits big cyclical and secular swings, but these have taken 
place around a flat trend over the 150 years shown on the graph. Periods when the financial 
sector has been relatively unregulated, such as the 1880s and the past couple of decades, 
have  resulted  in  the  ratio  of  business  credit  to  GDP  being  elevated.  The  subdued  credit 
growth  in  the  1950s  and  1960s,  a  period  when  the  financial  sector  was  heavily  regulated, 
also is noticeable.  
4 
 BIS Review 106/2007
Graph 4  
   
I don’t think these outcomes are surprising. In the very long run, however, there are various 
economic relationships at work that tend to tie down the relationship between business credit 
and GDP. Specifically, business profits cannot consistently rise faster or slower than GDP, 
and in the long run the P/E ratio also cycles around a flat trend. The combination of these 
two facts means that growth in the value of business equity must also be tied to GDP growth 
in the long run. In turn, this works to tie down the relationship between business debt and 
GDP, as the gearing of companies (i.e. the ratio of debt to equity) cannot consistently rise or 
fall. 
Let me now turn to household credit, as shown in Graph 5. Here the picture is very different. 
Up until the 1970s, households’ access to credit was very limited. Those of us over 50 years 
of  age  can  remember  when,  in  order  to  qualify  for  a  housing  loan,  people  had  first  to 
establish a long and consistent record of savings with a bank, and even then there was a 
tight  limit  on  how  much  the  bank  would  lend.  Many  borrowers  had  to  resort  to  “cocktail” 
loans, at higher cost, to meet their needs.  
BIS Review 106/2007 
 5
Graph 5  
   
Over  the  past  30 years,  however,  deregulation  and  financial  innovation  have  greatly 
increased the household sector’s access to credit. This has been particularly so over the past 
10-15 years  as  many  banks  focused  their  lending  on  the  household  sector  after  the  credit 
losses on business loans in the early 1990s, and as financial innovations allowed non-bank 
lenders to enter the market for retail finance. The securitisation of loans, the development of 
numerous  new  loan  products  and  the  emergence  of  mortgage  brokers  were  particularly 
important. Economic circumstances have also played an important role, just as they have for 
business credit. The decline in inflation and the resulting fall in interest rates have reduced 
the  cost  of  debt,  while  the  strong  ongoing  performance  of  the  economy  has  made 
households more comfortable in taking on debt. 
These  and  other  factors  contributing  to  the  growth  of  household  credit  were  examined  in 
more detail in a couple of papers presented by some of my colleagues at the Reserve Bank’s 
annual economic conference last month.2  
In  short,  deregulation,  innovation  and  lower  inflation  have  simultaneously  increased  the 
supply,  and  reduced  the  cost,  of  finance  to  households,  and  not  surprisingly  households 
have responded by increasing their use of it. Household credit outstanding rose from 20 per 
cent  of  GDP  in  the  1970s  to  30 per  cent  by  1990,  and  to  around  100 per  cent  today. 
Household credit accounted for the bulk – 85 per cent – of the rise in overall credit to GDP 
over the past 15 years, and household credit now greatly exceeds business credit in terms of 
outstandings. 
While some of the rise in household credit has gone to financing consumption, most of it has 
been  used  to  acquire  assets.  If  we  take  the  past  10 years,  for  example,  households  have 
borrowed  in  total  an  additional  $770 billion  over  the  period.  Of  this,  90 per  cent  was  used 
directly  to  buy  assets,  the  main  components  being  $420 billion  for  houses  to  live  in, 
$240 billion for houses to rent and $40 billion for shares. 
                                                 
2   See  Kent,  C.,  C.  Ossolinski  and  L.  Willard  (2007),  “Household  Indebtedness  –  Sustainability  and  Risk”, 
Reserve Bank of Australia Conference Paper, 20-21 August 2007; Ryan, C. and C. Thompson (2007), “Risk 
and the Transformation of the Australian Financial System”, Reserve Bank of Australia Conference Paper, 20-
21 August 2007. Available at http://www.rba.gov.au/PublicationsAndResearch/Conferences/2007/index.html. 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2007
The  primary  effects  of  this  borrowing  were  therefore  on  asset  values,  the  most  noticeable 
being  the  more  than  doubling  in  house  prices.  While  there  was  also  some  spill-over  into 
consumer spending, the expansion of household credit by and large has been a story about 
asset markets. 
Similar developments have been experienced by many other developed economies over the 
past decade. 
Looking ahead 
Has the expansion of household credit run its course? Will it reverse? 
We cannot know the answer to these questions with any certainty, but my guess is that the 
democratisation of finance which has underpinned this rise in household debt probably has 
not yet run its course. 
In the past, the lack of access to credit had resulted in Australian household sector finances 
being very conservative. Even as recently as the 1960s, the overall gearing of the household 
sector (taking account of all household debt and all household assets) was only about 5 per 
cent – that is, households owned 95 per cent of their assets, including houses, outright. This 
meant that the household sector had significant untapped capacity to service debt and large 
unencumbered  holdings  of  assets  to  use  as collateral  for  borrowings. Financial  institutions 
recognised this and found ways to allow households to utilise this capacity. 
The  increase  in  debt  in  recent  years  has  lifted  the  ratio  of  household  debt  to  assets  to 
17½ per cent (Graph 6)3. I don’t think anybody knows what the sustainable level of gearing is 
for  the  household  sector  in  aggregate,  but  given  that  there  are  still  large  sections  of  the 
household sector with no debt, it is likely to be higher than current levels. 
Graph 6  
  
Cross-sectional  data  show  that  the  rise  in  household  debt  has  been  driven  primarily  by 
middle-aged, and higher-income, households. Thus, while the build up of household debt is 
                                                  
3   Measured on the same basis as corporate gearing (i.e. the ratio of debt to equity, rather than debt to assets) 
household gearing is marginally higher, at 21 per cent. 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 7
often  portrayed  as  being  driven  by  young  couples  trying  to  buy  their  first  home,  a  more 
accurate description is that it is mainly being driven by older, higher-income households that 
are trading up to higher quality or better located houses, buying investment properties and 
taking out margin loans to buy shares. These are all signs of rising affluence, driven by a 
very prolonged economic expansion. 
Over 80 per cent of households in the top half of the income distribution have some type of 
debt,  compared  with  only  30 per  cent  of  those  in  the  lowest  decile  (Graph 7).  Essentially, 
higher-income households are the ones that have the capacity and the financial security to 
take on debt. It seems that debt is one of those products, like education and health, which 
has a high income elasticity of demand – i.e. as income rises, demand for it rises more than 
proportionately.  It  would  be  a  mistake,  therefore,  to  conclude  that  a  rising  ratio  of  debt  to 
income is necessarily a sign of financial stress among households.  
Graph 7  
  
It  is  the  high-income  groups  that  have  had  the  biggest  increase  in  debt  over  recent  years 
(Graph 8 ). About three quarters of the increase in owner-occupier debt over the decade to 
2005/06,  for  example,  was  attributable  to  households  in  the  top  half  of  the  income 
distribution. If comparable figures on debt associated with investment properties and margin 
loans were available, they would almost certainly further skew this distribution of debt. 
 8 
 BIS Review 106/2007
Graph 8  
   
Despite the rise in the debt of this group of households, their debt servicing burdens remain 
relatively low. For those households who are in the top half of the income distribution and 
who  have  an  owner-occupied  housing  loan,  housing  loan  repayments  currently  average  a 
little  less  than  20 per  cent  of  gross  income.  This  has  risen  only  marginally  over  the  past 
decade,  and  it  remains  significantly  lower  than  the  figure  of  around  30 per  cent  for 
households in the bottom half of the income distribution. This suggests that the former group 
still has substantial capacity to service debt. 
At the aggregate level across all households with owner-occupier housing debt, the median 
ratio of housing loan repayments to gross income, at about 21 per cent, is only marginally 
higher than a decade ago (Graph 9). 
Graph 9  
BIS Review 106/2007 
 9
 Another interesting feature emerges when the composition of debt is broken down by age 
group. This shows that a large contribution to the increase in household indebtedness has 
come  from  households  aged  45-65.  This  group  no  doubt  overlaps  considerably  with  the 
high-income household group. Over the 10 years to 2006, the proportion of households aged 
45-64 that are carrying owner-occupier debt increased very noticeably, from 25 per cent to 
38 per  cent  (Graph 10).  This  has  been  encouraged  by  increased  life  expectancy,  and  the 
financial security that comes from a strong economy with low unemployment and the build up 
of substantial holdings of assets through superannuation. 
Graph 10  
   
The trend for households increasingly to carry debt into older age may not yet have come to 
an end. At present, the great bulk of households still pay off all their debts by age 65, but the 
factors that encouraged or allowed 45 to 64-year olds to increase their debt over the past 
10 years  may  in  due  course  change  behaviour  further  up  the  age  scale.  Recent  financial 
innovations,  such  as  so-called  “reverse  mortgages”,  which  allow  older  people  to  access 
equity  in  their  houses  in  order  to  fund  retirement,  could  be  one  vehicle  that  encourages 
higher debt among older households. The pool of housing equity owned by older households 
is very large and drawings against this by even a small proportion of this group could add 
substantially to household debt levels. 
Some implications 
Let me end by drawing out some implications. 
The first is that we may not yet have seen the end of the rise in household debt. The rise to 
date has been overwhelmingly driven by those households that had the greatest capacity to 
service it – the middle-aged, high-income group. It is not surprising, therefore, that this rise in 
debt has exhausted neither the collateral nor the debt servicing capacity of this group, or the 
household sector overall. 
The  factors  that  have  facilitated  the  rise  in  debt  over  the  past  couple  of  decades  –  the 
stability  in  economic  conditions  and  the  continued  flow  of  innovations  coming  from  a 
competitive  and  dynamic  financial  system  –  remain  in  place.  While  ever  this  is  the  case, 
households are likely to continue to take advantage of unused capacity to increase debt. This 
is not to say that there won’t be cycles when credit grows slowly for a time, or even falls, but 
these  cycles  are likely to  take place  around  a rising  trend.  Eventually,  household debt  will 
10 
 BIS Review 106/2007
reach  a  point  where  it  is  in  some  form  of  equilibrium  relative  to  GDP  or  income,  but  the 
evidence suggests that this point is higher than current levels. 
It is interesting to consider what factors might change the behaviour of households. 
One such factor is demographics. It could be that the aging of the baby-boom generation will 
arrest the upward trend in household debt due to the effects of this group running down its 
assets  and  liabilities  as  it  moves  into  old  age.  But  whether  this  demographic  effect  is 
sufficient to offset the effects of other demographic shifts, such as the increase in longevity of 
the population in general, is not clear. 
A second factor is monetary policy. Central banks could stop the rising trend in household 
debt by raising interest rates to levels that exhausted households’ debt servicing capacity. 
But central banks around the world have generally concluded that the level of interest rates 
necessary  to  do  this  is  higher  than  that  needed  to  achieve  monetary  policy  objectives  in 
relation to inflation and economic growth, so this policy option has not been followed. 
The  final  point  I  would  like  to  talk  about  is  the  implications  of  rising  household  debt  for 
financial stability. 
There are two perspectives here.  
The first is from the point of view of the lenders. Has the rise in household debt left lenders 
exposed  to  excessive  risk?  Any  number  of  indicators  –  arrears  rates  on  loans,  exposure 
concentrations, capital ratios and profitability – suggest that the answer to this is “no”. 
This  was  also  the  conclusion  reached  in  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program 
conducted  under  the  auspices  of  the  IMF  last  year.  As  explained  in  the  September  2006 
issue  of  the  Bank’s  Financial  Stability  Review,  even  under  the  very  extreme  assumptions 
made in that stress test, banks remained profitable. 
The second perspective is from the point of view of household finances. As outlined in the 
Financial Stability Review published yesterday, overall household sector finances remain in 
good shape: average real income is rising, even after interest payments; financial net worth 
has increased noticeably; gearing levels are not out of line with international standards; and 
the proportion of households experiencing financial difficulties, though higher than a couple 
of years ago, remains historically very low. There are some pockets of stress, but the low 
numbers involved – less than 20,000 of the 5,300,000 housing loans in Australia are 90 days 
overdue on repayments – mean that this is not a macroeconomic problem, even though it is 
no doubt causing distress among those households and communities directly affected. 
At  the  macro  level,  there  are  two  issues  that  arise  from  the  developments  in  household 
finances over the past decade or two. 
The first is that the rise in household debt has made the household sector more sensitive to 
changes in interest rates. This has meant that central banks have been able to achieve their 
monetary policy objectives with smaller interest rate adjustments. 
Second,  the  household  sector  is  running  a  highly  mismatched  balance  sheet,  with  assets 
consisting  mainly  of  property  and  equities,  and  liabilities  comprised  by  debt.  This  balance 
sheet  structure  is  very  effective  in  generating  wealth  during  good  economic  times,  but 
households need to recognise that it leaves them exposed to economic or financial shocks 
that cause asset values to fall and/or interest rates to rise. 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 11
