Mario Draghi: The prevention and suppression of money laundering 
Testimony of Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Parliamentary Committee 
of Inquiry into Mafia-like Criminal Organizations, Rome, 14 June 2007. 
 The economic aspects of money laundering 
1.  
Money laundering – that is, investing the proceeds of crime in legal economic and financial 
activities – is the more extensive, the greater the scale of criminal organizations. As these 
expand, their need to invest their funds and conceal their origins increases. 
Today,  money  laundering  exploits  the  development  of  financial  markets  and  globalization, 
taking advantage of the same channels that facilitate legitimate transactions, of the greater 
ease of communication, of technological and financial innovations and also of the fact that 
the  reaction  of  the  authorities  is  hindered  by  difficulty  in  acquiring  information  and  by  the 
costs of international coordination. 
The  possibility  of  using  unwitting  intermediaries  for  illicit  transactions  makes  criminal 
organizations  more  dangerous.  Loopholes  in  the  rules  and  blind  spots  in  the  control 
apparatus of various countries enable illegal operators to engage in “regulatory arbitrage” on 
an international scale. Prevention and suppression may be further undermined by the self-
interested tolerance of some States and the opacity of some off-shore financial centres. 
Organized  crime  does  not  just  subvert  public  order.  It  also attacks  economic  and  financial 
stability  by  altering  the  proper  functioning  of  market  mechanisms  to  the  advantage  of 
dishonest operators. 
In line with recent European directives, economic crime must be combated by pursuing both 
the objective of law enforcement and that of economic development. A balanced strategy of 
prevention  and  suppression  must  be  founded  upon  rules  that,  on  the  principle  of 
proportionality to the threat, lay down clearly formulated and easily applied obligations; that 
avoid intrusive instruments and excessively rigid procedures; that do not overburden honest 
businesses;  that  institute  sound  mechanisms  of  enforcement  and  sanctions  that  are  swift, 
effective and proportionate to the seriousness of the infractions; that provide incentives for 
intermediaries  to  collaborate  with  the  structures  that  fight  money  laundering;  and  that 
strengthen domestic and international cooperation among authorities. 
The  States  that  are  most  aware  of  the  problem,  perceiving  that  criminal  organizations  are 
most  vulnerable  when  they  seek  to  funnel  the  proceeds  of  crime  into  legitimate  channels, 
have long concentrated on the financial system. Given the nature of its activity the financial 
system can be exploited to launder the proceeds of crime, but at the same time it has proven 
to be highly effective in cooperating with the law enforcement authorities. 
The Bank of Italy stands ready to step up its own commitment to the fight against crime, both 
organizationally and in terms of resources. We are fully aware that money laundering and the 
financing of terrorism, with their great inherent danger of contagion, now constitute a grave 
threat to the democratic order. 
Today  I  will  briefly  review  the  main  problems  impeding  the  prevention  and  suppression  of 
money laundering and suggest possible remedies. The results of action to date are set out in 
documents annexed to my report. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 1
2.  
The development of the law on money laundering 
The basic guidelines 
the  central  management  of 
2.1  
Italy’s series of legislative measures to coordinate the battle against organized crime began 
in the early 1980s. In 1982, having perceived the extreme danger of criminal attacks on the 
legal economy, Parliament introduced the crime of Mafia criminal conspiracy, characterized 
among  other  things  by  the  aim  of  controlling  business  enterprises  and  reinvesting  the 
proceeds of crime. 
Italy’s current legislation on the prevention of money laundering is thus the product of more 
than  two  decades  of  engagement  on  the  part  of  Parliament  and  the  authorities.  It  has 
adopted, and in a number of instances anticipated, the indications of the various international 
fora. Its development has been consistent with several fundamental choices: the distinction 
between  prevention  and  suppression; 
information  and 
evaluations; and cooperation between intermediaries and law enforcement authorities. 
The  changes  made  in  recent  years  have  incorporated  the  innovations  introduced  by 
international  standards  and,  subsequently,  by  Community  law.  The  revision  of  the  40 
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in 2003, the issue of 9 special 
recommendations to combat the financing of terrorism, and the approval of three Community 
directives, two of them quite recently1, represent the tangible sign of a regulatory framework 
that is attentive to the changes in criminal techniques. 
Legislative  trends  have  followed  two  lines  of  development.  One  –  found  in  the  Second 
Directive on Money Laundering (2001/97/EC) – involves extending to additional professional 
and  commercial  categories  exposed  to  the  risk  of  laundering  the  obligation  to  cooperate 
actively  in  prevention  and  suppression,  previously  limited  to  banks  and  other  financial 
intermediaries.  The  second  –  introduced  by  the  Third  Directive  (2005/60/EC)  –  makes  the 
stringency  of  the  know-your-customer  requirements  commensurate  with  the  risk  of  money 
laundering  as  the  intermediary  infers  it  from  the  nature  of  the  counterparty,  the  type  of 
service requested, and geographical location. This makes the rules more flexible, but it also 
heightens  the  responsibilities  both  for  intermediaries,  who  must  institute  appropriate 
procedures,  instruments  and  controls,  and  for  the  supervisory  and  oversight  authorities  in 
their  duties  of  governing,  promoting  and  verifying  the  proper  application  of  the  new 
provisions. Effective oversight presupposes specific knowledge of the risk factors, enabling 
supervisors to judge the adequacy of intermediaries’ safeguards and, if necessary, to call for 
suitable correctives. 
In 2005 the International Monetary Fund recognized that Italy’s rules for the prevention and 
suppression  of  money  laundering  had  worked  well,  and  in  fact  had  also  served,  after  11 
September,  to  block  the  financing  of  international  terrorism,  even  though  unlike  money 
laundering the latter is defined by the illicit use, not provenance, of the funds. Based on the 
IMF’s indications, the imminent implementation of the Third Directive on money laundering 
will offer an opportunity to enhance the efficacy of a body of law that is crucial to the integrity 
of the national economy. 
The build-up of successive provisions over the years, the lack of clarity in many rules, and 
shortcomings  in  the  set  of  controls  nevertheless  make  a  reordering  of  this  legislation 
necessary.  The  IMF  has  expressly  called  on  Italy  to  produce  a  consolidated  anti-money-
laundering  law,  which  has  been  envisaged  but  never  drafted.  In  response  the  Italian 
Government  has  formed  a  study  committee  at  the  Ministry  for  the  Economy  and  Finance, 
chaired  by  Undersecretary  Antonio  Lettieri  with  Anti-Mafia  Prosecuting  Attorney  Pierluigi 
Vigna as coordinator. 
                                                 
1   Directives 91/308/EEC, 2001/97/EC and 2005/60/EC. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2007
The prevention apparatus 
2.2  
The  Italian  apparatus  to  combat  money  laundering  originally  involved  the  fragmentation  of 
functions  between  different  bodies  and  the  prevalence  of  investigation  over  financial 
analysis.  Reports  of  suspicious  transactions  were  transmitted  directly  to  law  enforcement 
bodies  (the  chief  of  police)  at  province  level.  Only  afterwards  were  they  sent  on  to  the 
Special Foreign Exchange Unit of the Finance Police for further analysis. In 1997, in keeping 
with international experience, which relies on a Financial Intelligence Unit as the heart of the 
system of prevention and suppression of money laundering, Italy centralized the functions of 
reception  and  analysis  of  the  reports  within  a  single  body,  the  Italian  Foreign  Exchange 
Office (Ufficio Italiano Cambi, UIC), assigned to inquire solely into the financial aspects. 
This arrangement was the outcome of a protracted discussion of alternative proposals: the 
constitution of an administrative authority dedicated exclusively to financial analysis or else of 
a mixed agency with investigative duties as well, grouping functions deriving from the bodies 
responsible  for  financial  supervision,  the  police  and  the  courts.  In  Italy  the  latter  solution 
would have been hard to realize and manage, given the high cost of creating and operating 
such an agency and the difficulty of bringing together qualified resources, removing limits on 
access  to  the  confidential  information  held  by  single  administrative  units  for  their  own, 
specific tasks. 
In the span of just a few years three major legislative changes transformed the UIC’s nature 
and  functions  radically:  the  1997  law  separating  the  investigative  from  the  financial  area, 
which  assigned  the  Office  a  key  role  in  combating  money  laundering;  Legislative  Decree 
319/1998, following the introduction of the European single currency, which restructured the 
Office  and  made  it  an  instrumental  entity  of  the  Bank  of  Italy;  and  Law  388/2000, 
implementing  the  principles  of  an  EU  Council  decision  (2000/642/GAI),  which  formally 
instituted Italy’s national Financial Intelligence Unit under the UIC. 
Within the tripartite division of anti-money-laundering functions among the entities assigned 
respectively  to  financial  analysis,  investigation  and  trial,  the  UIC  receives  suspicious 
transaction reports and examines them further from the financial standpoint, serving as filter 
between the persons submitting the reports and the investigative bodies and the courts. 
The FIU receives information not only from the persons subject to the reporting requirement 
but also from internal and external archives, other government departments and agencies, 
and its foreign counterparts. The sources of information also include the database now being 
formed in the framework of the Taxpayers Register (provided for by Decree Law 223/2006, 
ratified by Law 248/2006), which is the equivalent in some respects of the Register of bank 
accounts  and  deposits  contemplated  by  the  law  since  1991  but  never  realized.2  The  new 
rules  require  banks,  other  financial  intermediaries  and  Poste  Italiane  to  report  to  the 
Taxpayers Register all relations with customers, as determined by an instruction issued by 
the Director of the Revenue Agency.3
                                                 
2   Law  413/1991,  Article  20.4,  provided  for  the  establishment  of  a  register  of  all  persons  with  accounts  or 
deposits with banks and other financial intermediaries. The procedures for its constitution were to be specified 
in the implementing regulations, which were issued in 2000 by Treasury Decree 269. The decree assigned the 
operation of the register to the Ministry of the Treasury and also specified the persons allowed access to the 
data (Article 4). 
3   The instruction was issued on 19 January 2007. A circular dated 4 April introduced additional provisions for 
the formation of the Register. It must contain the personal identifying particulars, including tax number, of the 
persons with whom the institution has relations from 2005 on. Data on the amount of funds in the accounts, on 
transactions thereon, or on the amount of assets under management are not to be reported. Access to the 
Register – reserved to the tax administration, the courts and the investigative bodies expressly specified by 
the law and solely for the purposes specified – is open also to the UIC, which can use the data for its further 
inquiry into suspicious transactions. Contacts are under way between the UIC and the tax administration for 
the  prompt  institution  of  a  link,  which  should  become  operational  in  the  next  few  months.  The  tax 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 3
The FIU, then, is a crucial node in a complex web of relations. Domestically, it engages in 
intensive dialogue with the persons submitting the reports, with the supervisory authorities, 
with the investigative bodies and with the courts. Internationally, it forms part of the network 
of cooperation made up of all its counterpart authorities abroad.4
The most significant money laundering activity has supranational implications. For effective 
prevention, therefore, both cooperation between the authorities of the countries involved and 
uniform rules to prevent distortion and regulatory arbitrage are essential. Accordingly, FIUs 
take part in the international bodies assigned to the prevention and suppression of money 
laundering and in bilateral and multilateral initiatives. 
As  the  supervisory  authority  for  the  credit  system,  the  Bank  of  Italy  is  responsible  for 
guaranteeing  the  sound  and  prudent  management  of  the  individual  institutions  under  its 
supervision  and  for  the  overall  stability,  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  the  financial 
system. With a view to these purposes the legislation and regulations in force oppose entry 
into the banking sector of unreliable operators; set integrity and experience requirements for 
top corporate officers and significant shareholders; subject the owners of intermediaries to 
controls on personal qualifications and on conflicts of interest; require adequate organization 
and  in  particular  an  effective  system  of  internal  controls;  and  promote  transparency  and 
fairness  in  relations  with  customers.  These  are  all  provisions  that  help  to  prevent  the 
exploitation of financial mechanisms for money laundering and that testify to the existence of 
complementary  relations  and  convergence  between  the  aims  of  credit  and  financial 
supervision and those of the law against money laundering. 
In order to strengthen the safeguards against the exploitation of intermediaries for purposes 
of money laundering, the Bank of Italy first issued its “Operating Instructions for identifying 
suspicious  transactions”  in  1993.  The  instructions  are  intended  to  assist  intermediaries  by 
specifying indicators of anomaly that point to suspicious transactions. The instructions were 
updated in 2001 to take account of the development of the securities market, the technical 
advances  in  the  payment  system  and  the  spread  of  new  channels  for  the  marketing  of 
financial products.5 A further update will be effected, as the International Monetary Fund has 
recommended, after the transposition of the Third Directive into Italian law. 
Instruments of prevention and suppression 
3.  
The  fight  against  money  laundering  deploys  a  sophisticated  series  of  instruments.  These 
include the legal definition of the crime of money laundering itself, the limits on the use of 
                                                                                                                                                      
administration is allowed access to the Register exclusively for the purposes of “activities in connection with 
enforceable tax collection” and for the execution of banking investigations. 
4   The European FIUs have constituted a “platform” in the framework of the EU Commission for the detection 
and resolution of operational problems and for the exchange of experiences and best practices. 
5   First of all the instructions lay down organizational rules – consistent with the supervisory regulations – under 
which intermediaries must know their customers better, which is a first fundamental safeguard against money 
laundering and the infiltration of criminal organizations into the financial system. Intermediaries are required to 
take  every  appropriate  action  to  improve  their  knowledge  of  customers  and  pick  up  any  contradictions 
between a customer’s economic profile and the services requested. They must procure up-to-date information 
on  the  customer’s  activities,  the  economic  context  in  which  the  customer  operates,  the  financial  services 
requested  and  any  relationships  with  other  intermediaries.  The  instructions  provide  a  series  of  illustrative 
cases  of  indicators  of  anomaly  of  individual  transactions  in  the  presence  of  which  the  intermediary  must 
determine whether or not to make the suspicious transaction report. The general indicators tend to identify the 
techniques used to conceal or split transactions and  to detect unusual or illogical forms of transaction. The 
case examples also consider relations that could indicate usury, which can be inferred from transactions on a 
suspected usurer’s account or the sudden, unexpected appearance of financial resources on the account of 
customers in difficulty. As a complement to these instructions, the UIC has analyzed the transactions reported 
by  banks  for  purported  usury  to  provide  intermediaries  with  specific,  technical  indicators  based  on  the 
similarities of behaviour observed in these financial operations. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2007
cash  for  payments  between  private  parties,  the  identification  of  persons  who  establish 
continuous relationships with intermediaries or who effect transactions larger than the legal 
threshold, the recording of these transactions in special databases, the statistical analysis of 
financial  flows  to  detect  indicators  of  anomaly,  the  requirement  to  report  all  transactions, 
regardless  of  size,  that  arouse  suspicions  of  being  connected  with  illegal  activities.  The 
framework is completed by the application of sanctions and the confiscation of property of 
criminal origin. 
The definition of the crime 
3.1  
Italian penal law has conducted a protracted process of refinement and extension of the legal 
definition  of  the  crime  of  money  laundering,  upon  which  the  detection  of  illegal  conduct 
depends. 
In  1978  the  crime  was  defined  with  reference  to  funds  originating  in  a  small  number  of 
particularly  grave  offences  aimed  at  the  appropriation  of  goods  (robbery,  extortion, 
kidnapping). In 1990, as part of the fight against Mafia-style criminal organizations, Law 55 
extended  the  list  of  “predicate  offences”  to  include  drug  trafficking.  In  1993,  Law  328 
extended predicate offences to all crimes not of negligence, thereby simplifying the job of the 
persons called on to detect and report suspicious transactions.6
Under the present law, “active accomplices in the predicate crime” cannot be charged with 
money  laundering  as  well  (Article  648-bis  of  the  Penal  Code).  The  criminal  law  approach 
taken  here  provides  for  the  illegality  of  money  laundering  to  be  included  in  that  of  the 
predicate  offence.  Consequently,  when  it  is  advantageous  for  the  perpetrators,  skilful  trial 
defence based on false confessions of participation in the predicate crime allows defendants 
to escape conviction for money laundering. 
The IMF has suggested reconsidering this choice, citing the good results attained by laws 
against “self-laundering”, i.e. money laundering by the perpetrator of the predicate crime that 
originates  the  illegal  acquisition  of  financial  resources.7  The  question  is  now  before  the 
Lettieri Committee, which may weigh the need for a better definition of the crime of money 
laundering focusing on acts serving to conceal the illegal origin of the money or property. 
Limits on the use of cash 
3.2 
The rules in Italy prohibiting transfers of significant amounts of funds between private parties 
in  cash  or  with  bearer  instruments  are  aimed  at  impeding  money  laundering  by  obligating 
                                                 
6   Article 648-bis of the Penal Code made punishable “whoever substitutes or transfers money, assets or other 
benefits deriving from a crime not of negligence, or effects in relation to such money, assets or benefits other 
transactions such as to conceal their criminal origins”. Article 648-ter makes “whoever invests money, assets 
or benefits deriving from a crime in economic or financial activities” punishable for illicit use of funds.” 
7   The  assessment  must  take  into  account  relations  with  other  crimes,  such  as  the  reinvestment  of  illegal 
proceeds  (Article  648-ter  of  the  Penal  Code);  criminal  conspiracy  (Article  416),  which  is  a  hallmark  of  the 
Italian legal order; assisting and abetting crime (Article 379); and fraudulent transfer of assets for the purpose 
of facilitating money laundering, under Law 356/1992, Article 12-quinquies. While making “self-laundering” a 
criminal offence in itself could make it easier to get evidence of complex crimes, it must also be considered 
that  where  the  predicate  crimes  are  less  serious,  such  an  approach  could  lead  to  excessively  severe 
punishment. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 5
the  current  rules  and  promotes 
economic agents to use the banking channel for payments.8 Such rules are not common in 
legislation within the Community.9 The number of violations, often involuntary, remains high. 
The consensus opinion in our country is that the limitations on the use of cash constitute a 
fundamental bulwark against money laundering; that it should be confirmed and made more 
efficient by lowering the permitted amount and introducing more stringent monitoring of funds 
transfers by means of so-called money transfers. 
The draft legislative decree for the transposition of the Third Directive, on which the Ministry 
for  the  Economy  opened  a  consultation  in  February,  clarifies  some  points  regarding  the 
application  of 
the  spread  of  registered  payment 
instruments.10 A significant lowering of the ceiling now set on the use of cash in transactions 
between private parties is being examined by the Lettieri Committee. 
Certainly,  the  increasing  integration  of  payment  services  affects  the  efficacy  of  measures 
adopted on a purely national basis. In April the European Parliament unanimously approved 
the Payment Services Directive, which establishes the conditions for providing retail payment 
services in all the members of the Union and defines pan-European payment schemes (for 
credit transfers, payment cards and direct debits) and thus contributes to the realization of 
the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) project developed by European banks to promote 
the  use  of  electronic  payment  instruments.  Measures  to  reduce  costs  and  taxes11  could 
further stimulate the spread of non-cash payment instruments, which are traceable save in 
marginal cases.12
By  European  standards,  Italy  makes  scant  use  of  non-cash  payment  instruments.  In  2006 
there were 62 non-cash payments per inhabitant, compared with the euro-area average of 
150 in 2004.13 Cards are the main instrument that permit consumers to limit their holdings of 
money  for  transaction  purposes.  Although  Italy’s  infrastructure  endowment  is  up  to  the 
European standard, payment card transactions numbered no more than 22 per inhabitant in 
2006, compared with 46 in the euro area as a whole in 2005. 
                                                 
8  
In particular, the rules: a) prohibit transfers between private parties of money and bearer instruments with a 
total  value  of  more  than  €12,500;  b)  require  that  the  personal  or  corporate  name  of  the  beneficiary  be 
indicated and the nontransferability clause be shown on cashier’s cheques and personal cheques larger than 
that amount; and c) set a €12,500 ceiling on the balance of bearer passbook savings accounts. 
9   France alone has provisions comparable to Italy’s. The other member states do not prohibit the use of cash 
even  for  large  payments,  but  require  economic  agents  to  evaluate  the  characteristics  of  the  transaction  to 
detect any anomalies. 
10   Article 51 of the draft legislative decree expressly prohibits the opening and use of anonymous accounts or 
savings books. 
11   Possible measures concerning costs are pricing incentives for the acquisition of more advanced technology 
and  the  reduction  of  interbank  fees,  which  depends  on  both  payment  circuit  operators  and  the  Antitrust 
Authority. As to taxes, the reference is to “stamp tax” on current accounts and the deductibility of the expenses 
incurred by retailers to equip themselves with electronic payment terminals. These matters are addressed in 
the  Government’s  bill,  now  before  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  on  “measures  in  favour  of  consumers  and  to 
facilitate productive and commercial activities and provisions concerning sectors of national importance”. 
12   The  Community  provisions  permit  exempting  non-reloadable  electronic  money  instruments  up  to  €150  and 
reloadable  ones  with  an  annual  ceiling  of  €2,500  from  the  identification  requirements.  Nevertheless, 
identification is mandatory for transactions greater than €1,000. 
13   Factors that help to explain these differences include the lower degree of financial deepening of the economy, 
customers’  concerns  about  the  security,  practicality  and  cost  of  alternative  payment  instruments,  the 
fragmentation of retail trade and the size of the underground economy. 
6 
 BIS Review 84/2007
is  commensurate  with 
Identification and recording requirements 
3.3 
The current legislation requires intermediaries and other specified persons14 to identify their 
clients at the time the business relationship is set up or when they carry out transactions in 
an amount of €12,500 or more.15 Consequently, every transaction potentially linked to money 
laundering leaves a trace and can be reconstructed even after the passage of time. 
As  I  mentioned,  with  the  implementation  of  the  Third  Directive  on  money  laundering  the 
customer  identification  rules  will  have  to  be  calibrated  so  that  the  strictness  of  the 
identification  procedure 
laundering,  as 
independently evaluated by every person subject to the requirement. In many cases this will 
lead to the adoption of less stringent or more stringent procedures than the present ones. 
The  data  gathered  must  be  recorded  by  each  person  in  a  database.  Transposition  of  the 
directive  is  an  opportunity  to  simplify  the  rules  for  keeping  electronic  databases,  so  as  to 
facilitate database management by the persons subject to the requirement and consultation 
during inspections. 
Aggregated  data  derived  from  intermediaries’  archives  are  the  basis  of  the  statistical 
analyses that the Financial Intelligence Unit uses to conduct studies of individual phenomena 
or territories, to supplement the examination of suspicious transaction reports, to check on 
possible  failures  to  transmit  reports,  and  to  develop  models  for  automatic  detection  of 
anomalies.16
the  risk  of  money 
 Reporting of suspicious transactions 
3.4 
The  reporting  of  suspicious  transactions  is  the  linchpin  of  the  legislation  against  money 
laundering. 
On the basis of their knowledge of their customers, intermediaries and other persons subject 
to  the  requirement  identify  suspicious  cases  and  send  reports  to  the  national  FIU.  As  the 
authority  expert  in  financial  matters,  the  FIU  functions  as  a  filter,  analyzing  the  reports, 
probing more deeply and condensing the results of its analysis in a summary report that it 
transmits  to  the  investigative  bodies,  which  evaluate  whether  to  pursue  the  matter  and, 
possibly, open a formal inquiry. 
The effectiveness of the FIU’s work is shown by the outcome of the most important money 
laundering  trial,  which  recently  concluded  at  first  level,  after  ten  years,  before  the  Brindisi 
Court.  As  this  Committee  knows,  the  judgment  not  only  imposed  stiff  sentences,  but  also 
awarded the UIC €3 million in damages, testifying to the important role it performed, as a civil 
party, in reconstructing the banking transactions under investigation. 
Among the different systems adopted in Europe, those of Italy and Spain place the greatest 
burden  of  assessment  on  persons  required  to  make  reports,  who  are  asked  to  make  an 
accurate  prior  evaluation  in  order  to  report  only  truly  suspicious  cases.  In  the  United 
Kingdom,  where  even  simple  anomalies  must  be  reported,  more  than  200,000  transaction 
reports  were  made  in 2006,  aggravating  the  task  of  the UK’s  Financial  Intelligence  Unit in 
sifting  the  transactions  for  further  investigation.  France  and  the  Netherlands  use  more 
composite methods. 
                                                 
14   Notaries, lawyers, members of the Italian accounting profession, auditors and labour consultants and persons 
that engage in activities deemed by Decree 374/1999 to be exposed to money laundering (for example, claims 
recovery, cash handling and transport, gambling casinos, etc.). 
15   The law provides for various ways of identifying customers, both in their presence and at a distance. 
16   There  is  the  so-called  “usury  model”,  developed  together  with  the  Italian  Bankers’  Association,  to  assist 
intermediaries in detecting and evaluating suspicious transactions potentially related to the crime of usury. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 7
The  approach  chosen  in  Italy  seems  preferable,  even  if  it  is  more  onerous  for  operators. 
Using the information in their possession, they are required to evaluate the operations of the 
persons with whom they have relations and to compare transactions’ objective features with 
customers’ subjective characteristics in order to detect any anomalies. Greater selection at 
source reduces the number of transaction reports, making them easier to handle for the FIU, 
which received some 10,000 reports in 2006 and more than 5,400 in the first five months of 
this year.17
Since 2000 the FIU has had the power to dismiss reports that lack significance; this enables 
it to concentrate financial analysis and further inquiry on the cases of real interest.18
The  identity  of  those  who  report  suspicious  transactions  must  remain  confidential  for  the 
mechanism  to  work  properly.  For  some  time  now  the  protection  of  reporting  entities  and 
individuals has received attention from the Italian Parliament and the Community institutions. 
The  Third  Directive  also  requires  member  states  to  adopt  appropriate  and  effective 
measures. Efforts must be intensified in this direction. 
The  involvement  of  individuals  cannot  be  avoided  by  entrusting  the  identification  of 
anomalous  transactions  to  computer  programs  based  on  predetermined  standards.  These 
programs, however sophisticated and technically advanced, can only be an aid; they cannot 
replace the personal evaluation that is essential to the good performance of the system. 
Cooperation  among  all  those  who  are  involved,  in  different  capacities,  in  the  fight  against 
money laundering and the financing of terrorism is of crucial importance. Satisfactory results 
depend on the correct and efficient functioning of the entire chain of actors, each of whom is 
called upon to contribute actively within his competence to the process. Intermediaries are 
showing  that  they  are  willing  to  pitch  in.  Greater  cooperation  must  also  meet  the  need  for 
faster feedback from the investigative bodies on the outcome of reports. This will serve both 
to refine the evaluation process and to preserve business relations with customers who are 
found to be in order. 
Sanctions 
3.5  
Backing Italy’s legislation against money laundering are penal sanctions whose application in 
the courts has been limited and administrative sanctions that have proven ineffective.19
The  draft  legislative  decree  to  implement  the  Third  Directive  reinforces  the  apparatus  of 
sanctions, above all by empowering the competent authorities (the Bank of Italy, Isvap and 
Consob)  to  applying  sanctions  directly  to  the  persons  under  their  supervision  for  non-
compliance  with 
internal  control 
procedures. 
The Government’s legislative mandate does not allow it to decriminalize the penal offence of 
non-compliance  with  the  customer-identification  and  transaction-recording  requirements, 
often  caused  by  mere  procedural  errors,  and  to  replace  it  with  an  administrative  sanction. 
Such a step would be advisable not least to ensure that intermediaries do not abstain from 
exercising the greater discretion that the directive grants them, for fear of committing a crime. 
In any event, gross negligence would remain subject to penal prosecution insofar as it abets 
the perpetration of more serious crimes. 
the  provisions  on  administrative  organization  and 
                                                 
17   A  suspicious  transaction  report  does  not  constitute  the  “report  of  a  crime”  but  a  form  of  due  cooperation 
requested of informed persons who are in a position to assist the ascertainment of possible penal offences. 
18   This  power  was  introduced  by  Article  151.2  of  Law  388/2000.  Reports  that  have  been  dismissed  are 
nonetheless forwarded to the investigative bodies, which could have significant additional information on the 
parties concerned. 
19   Legislative Decree 56/2004, implementing the Second Directive to combat money laundering (2001/97/EC), 
merely introduced some adjustments designed to simplify and rationalize the procedures. 
8 
 BIS Review 84/2007
Another incongruity is the penal sanction for the failure of the control bodies of legal entities 
to report even simple organizational irregularities, given that the analogous provisions of the 
Consolidated Law on Banking and Consolidated Law on Finance provide for administrative 
sanctions. 
Altogether,  I  think  a  comprehensive  reconsideration  of  the  matter  is  advisable  to  obtain  a 
closer correspondence between the severity of the offence and that of sanctions, which must 
be  applied  effectively.  Severe  punishment  of  the  most  serious  violations  should  be 
accompanied by a mitigation of the burden placed on the generality of operators. Appropriate 
remedies  could  be  introduced  during  the  preparation  of  the  Consolidated  Anti-Money-
Laundering Law, either by supplementing the Government’s delegated powers or by direct 
legislative amendment. 
The  decision  to  enhance  the  role  of  the  control  authorities  is  certainly  endorsable.  Their 
specific  competences  and  the  flexibility  of  their  organization  can  make  verification  of 
irregularities and the application of sanctions speedier and more effective. Further steps in 
this direction would be desirable, aimed at giving the FIU the power to propose sanctions for 
failure to report suspicious transactions and simplifying the complex sanction procedure for 
violations of the limits on the use of cash.20
Confiscation of property 
3.6  
There is increasing awareness that the confiscation of property acquired with the proceeds of 
criminal activity must be a prime objective of the State in its action to combat crime. Only by 
attacking  their  economic  power  can  we  stop  criminal  organizations  from  being  self-fueling 
and using the illegal proceeds of crime to penetrate the legal economy. 
“Equivalent  confiscation”  and  “enlarged  confiscation”  are  valid  tools  for  attacking  assets  of 
illegal origin. The former makes it possible to seize property of equivalent value to the profit 
of  crime  even  if  not  originating  from  crime,  while  the  latter,  inverting  the  burden  of  proof, 
requires  the  accused  to  demonstrate  the  provenance  of  his  assets  when  they  are 
disproportionate to his declared income or activity.21
However,  the  provisions  on  seizure  and  confiscation  are  numerous  and  not  always 
coordinated. Moreover, they do not take account of the difficulty that confiscation may involve 
in an advanced economic and financial environment, where it is often necessary to intervene 
on innovative and complex financial instruments. 
Furthermore, seized assets that will be confiscated should be managed in a way that will not 
only preserve them but also generate income and increase their value. The current system 
does not offer adequate solutions on this point. The experience of other countries, such as 
the  United  Kingdom,  shows  that  centralized  administration  of  the  assets  in  ad  hoc 
organizations can ensure economically better results than can be obtained with fragmented 
management. 
The provisions therefore need to be rationalized. 
On  more  than  one  occasion  the  Chairman  of  the  Antimafia  Committee  of  the  Italian 
Parliament,  Francesco  Forgione,  has  denounced  the  shortcomings  of  the  management  of 
                                                 
20   Under the current procedure (Legislative Decree 56/2004), the FIU submits an opinion to the Ministry for the 
Economy,  which  imposes  sanctions  after  consulting  the  Commission  contemplated  by  Article  32  of  the 
Consolidated  Law  on  Foreign  Exchange.  The  draft  decree  implementing  the  Third  Directive  eliminates  the 
opinion of the FIU from the procedure. 
21   Equivalent confiscation is envisaged by Article 322-ter of the Penal Code when direct confiscation of the profit 
of  crime  is  impossible  because  the  proceeds  have  been  lost  or  transferred  irrecoverably.  Enlarged 
confiscation was introduced by Article 12-sexies of Decree Law 306/1992. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 9
seized assets whose confiscation under criminal law is pending.22 A committee set up at the 
Ministry  of  Justice,  on  which  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  UIC  are  represented,  is  currently 
examining this problem, among others. It is necessary to continue on this path of action. 
The planned changes in the apparatus to combat money laundering 
4.  
As I mentioned, in February the Ministry for the Economy and Finance began a consultation 
on a draft legislative decree transposing the Third Directive into Italian law. 
It is certainly right to proceed with a general reordering of the current provisions and to give 
the  competent  supervisory  authorities  a  larger  role  in  issuing  regulations  and  verifying 
compliance. 
Transposition of the directive has also provided the occasion to propose a rationalization of 
the tasks of the authorities involved, in various capacities, in the prevention and suppression 
of  money  laundering.  However,  the  draft  decree,  confirming  provisions  now  de  facto 
outdated, continues to entrust the Ministry with powers of “supervision and direction” of the 
overall  activity  to  prevent  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of  terrorism.  In  addition,  it 
establishes  that  the  Minister  may  avail  himself  of  the  Financial  Security  Committee,  thus 
extending to money laundering the incisive powers with which that Committee was entrusted 
by  law  on  a  temporary  and  exceptional  basis  in  order  to  face  the  emergency  of  the  fight 
against international terrorism. 
The proposed solution raises doubts. 
In particular, the decision to give the Ministry powers of direction over all the authorities and 
administrations concerned cannot be endorsed. It conflicts with the internationally recognized 
autonomy  and  independence  of  financial  intelligence  units.  As  far  back  as  1998,  the 
European Central Bank, reviewing a law on the reorganization of the UIC, observed that in 
light of the need to ensure the UIC’s independence the Ministry’s powers of “supervision” of 
the  fight  against  money  laundering  had  to  be  interpreted  narrowly,  so  as  not  to  imply 
governmental interference in the work of the UIC. 
The draft decree implementing the directive also conflicts with Senate Bill 1366 presented by 
the  Government  on  5  March  2007  concerning,  among  other  matters,  the  reorganization  of 
the tasks of the authorities responsible for supervising the financial markets. In fact, the bill 
envisages the incorporation of the UIC into the Bank of Italy and, in that context, specifically 
regulates the institutional position and the tasks of the organization entrusted with performing 
the  function  of  financial  intelligence  unit,  observing  the  guarantees  of  independence  and 
autonomy  required  by  the  international  provisions.  The  bill  also  takes  account  of  the 
observations of the International Monetary Fund in its recent evaluation of the measures to 
prevent money laundering in Italy. 
The  new  apparatus  contemplated  by  the  Government’s  bill  also  includes  a  committee, 
established at the Ministry for the Economy, in which the competent supervisory authorities 
and the investigative bodies are to coordinate their action on an equal footing. 
The action proposed in the bill is to be judged positively and could constitute the occasion for 
relaunching  the  national  Financial  Intelligence  Unit.  I  trust  that  the  draft  decree  that  the 
Ministry is preparing to submit to the Council of Ministers to implement the Third Decree will 
be brought into line with the approach taken in the bill. 
                                                 
22   In  Polìstena  in  March  and,  most  recently,  in  Bari  at  a  conference  organized  by  the  National  Association  of 
Magistrates and the Association of Criminal Lawyers. 
10 
 BIS Review 84/2007
Conclusions 
5.  
To conclude, with the completion of the long testing period, it appears that the legislation to 
counter money laundering and the financing of terrorism is proving sufficiently effective. The 
assessment  obviously  takes  account  of  the  fact  that  no  instruments  are  capable  of 
definitively  rooting  out  these  pathological  phenomena,  but  only  measures  more  or  less 
capable  of  hindering  criminal  organizations,  reducing  their  profitability,  augmenting  their 
riskiness and increasing their operating costs. 
There  nonetheless  remains  considerable  scope  for  improving  both  rules  and  operating 
procedures. 
In  the  first  place  all  the  measures  required  to  encourage  the  use  of  electronic  means  of 
payment instead of cash and other anonymous instruments must be adopted. At the same 
time  it  will  be  necessary  to  impose  strict  controls  on  all  the  persons  authorized  by  the 
directive approved by the European Parliament at the end of April to provide retail payment 
services in the Internal Market. 
The coordination of the different authorities making up the anti-money-laundering apparatus 
can be made more effective by adopting the organizational changes that – as I have recalled 
– have been proposed by the government as part of the bill on the reform of Italy’s regulatory 
authorities. In particular, the Financial Intelligence Unit could be strengthened by the planned 
merger of the UIC into the Bank of Italy. 
While  respecting  the  separation  of  roles  between  the  supervisory  authority  and  the  unit 
entrusted with the prevention and repression of money laundering, the UIC merger is likely to 
bring major synergies in terms of information and controls. In fact the Bank would come to 
have  the  powers  of  control  over  all  the  financial  intermediaries  entered  in  the  general  list 
referred to in Article 106 of the Consolidated Law on Banking and responsibility for keeping 
the lists of loan and financial brokers. As regards the latter, of which there are about 120,000, 
I draw attention to the need for a thorough revision of the current legislation in view of the 
difficulty  of  cataloguing,  managing  and  controlling  them.  Increasing  the  effectiveness  of 
controls  means  making  intermediaries  accountable,  imposing  stricter  requirements  for 
access to the activity and entrusting responsibility for keeping the lists to special professional 
bodies.23
The  changes  contained  in  the  Government’s  bill  should  be  implemented  as  rapidly  as 
possible to ensure that the uncertainty inevitably present in periods of reorganization does 
not hinder or delay the prevention and repression of money laundering. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  undertakes  to  enhance  the  activity  of  the  Financial  Intelligence Unit  and 
strengthen  its  operational  capacity,  in  terms  not  only  of  human  resources  but  also  of  its 
technical and IT endowments. 
The  first  objectives  to  be  pursued  include  shortening  the  time  needed  for  the  financial 
analysis  of  suspicious  transactions,  enhancing  the  fact-finding  process  before  the  start  of 
subsequent  investigations,  and  identifying  more  streamlined  and  effective  forms  of 
collaboration with judicial and other authorities involved in the fight against crime. 
As  for  sanctions,  it  is  necessary  to  plan  a  comprehensive  reorganization  by  granting  a 
mandate  to  the  Government  with  well-defined  guidelines  for  intervention.  The  Lettieri 
Committee  can  address  this  issue  for  the  purpose  of  preparing  the  Consolidated  Law  on 
Money  Laundering,  which  should  therefore  do  more  than  just  bring  together  the  existing 
provisions. It seems better to rely on severe repressive measures, based on ex post control, 
rather than weigh down all operators indistinctly with excessively onerous obligations. 
                                                 
23   The most common and regulated activity abroad is that of loan brokerage, over which powers of control are 
normally entrusted to supervisory authorities. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 11
These  are  extremely  demanding  objectives  that  all  the  authorities  involved  must  pursue, 
collaborating effectively and making the maximum effort to obtain satisfactory results. 
Annexes 
Action to prevent money laundering: results 
1. Since 1997, in over nine years of activity, the Financial Intelligence Unit has received more 
than  57,000  reports  of  suspicious  transactions,  of  which  nearly  3,000  in  connection  with 
alleged financing of international terrorism; about 2,000 were dismissed directly (see table). 
 
 Nearly 90 per cent of the reports were made by banks. 
In 2003 the Bank of Italy ran a campaign to increase the awareness of the banks that had 
never sent reports. From the responses received, it emerged that the nature of some banks’ 
operations  meant  it  was  unlikely  suspicious  transactions  would  be  intercepted  at  them.  In 
particular, the reference here is to small mutual banks located in areas considered not to be 
at  risk,  to  branches  of  foreign  banks  with  customers  of  high  standing  and  to  banks  with  a 
limited volume of cash transactions. 
In  2005  an  awareness  campaign  was  run  aimed  at  investment  firms,  asset  management 
companies and non-bank financial intermediaries entered in the special register referred to in 
Article 107 of the Consolidated Law on Banking. 
The contribution made by non-financial entities was very small (see table). 
 
12 
 BIS Review 84/2007
   
As for the geographical distribution of the reports received, more than 40 per cent came from 
regions in the North-West; the remainder were almost equally distributed between regions in 
the North-East (about 17 per cent), the Centre (more than 20 per cent) and the South and 
Islands (about 22 per cent) (see table). 
 
 
From  when  it  began  operating  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  has  suspended  70  reported 
transactions  in  view  of  their  seriousness;  the  transactions  in  question  amounted  to  about 
€100  million  in  total.  In  all  these  cases  the  action  taken  by  the  Unit  allowed  the  judicial 
authorities to sequester the sums involved. The suspension of suspicious transactions clearly 
has preventive power; closer coordination between the Unit and the judicial authorities might 
allow this instrument to be used more frequently. 
On  the  basis  of  their  findings,  since  2001  investigative  bodies  have  dismissed  more  than 
9,300 reports and transmitted nearly 1,400 to the competent judicial authorities (see tables). 
 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 13
  14 
   BIS Review 84/2007
2.  Analysis  of  the  reports  of  suspicious  transactions  concerning  organized  crime  shows  a 
conspicuous  use  of  cash  in  the  building  and  scrap  metal  sectors;  reports  on  transactions 
involving waste disposal are on the increase. These are sectors where the risk of exploitation 
for the placement of the proceeds of criminal activities is high (see table). 
 A  considerable  increase  occurred  in  reports  on fraud  at  the  expense  of  the  tax  authorities 
concerning VAT, most frequently in the fields of telephony, information technology, and trade 
in motor vehicles. 
As  regards  swindles  involving  public  subsidies,  signs  have  emerged  of  organized  crime’s 
growing interest in connection with control of the territory. 
Active  collaboration  with  reporting  intermediaries  and  that  with  investigative  bodies  has 
permitted the discovery of IT fraud, carried out by means of identity theft and phishing, which 
can only be carried out systematically on an international scale by criminal organizations with 
cross-border links. 
Usury and the unauthorized provision of financial services, especially the granting of loans, 
are  activities  that  have  traditionally  attracted  large  volumes  of  illegal capital.  The  improper 
use of pawn tickets, in addition to possibly underlying usury, can be an effective mechanism 
for the fencing of valuables of illicit origin. 
The transfer of money abroad is often carried out in an unauthorized manner by persons not 
entered in the list of financial agents. The remittances of emigrants resident in Italy can also 
cover flows of funds deriving from illegal trafficking, not least in connection with clandestine 
immigration. 
 
3.  As  part  of  the  increasingly  intense  relationship  with  the  judicial  authorities,  the  UIC,  in 
response to specific requests, has transmitted more than 1,100 reports. Of these about 500 
were in connection with the activity of the District Antimafia Directorates and the Organized 
Crime  Investigative  Group  of  the  Finance  Police,  and  are  therefore  potentially  linkable  to 
organized crime environments. 
Since  1997  UIC  staff  have  carried  out  more  than  50  technical  advisory  engagements  for 
public prosecutors and District Antimafia Directorates, for the most part concerning money 
laundering and organized crime. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 15
In  the  period  1997-2006  the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  received  2,039  requests  for 
information  from  its  foreign  counterparts  concerning  5,538  persons;  in  turn  it  sent  234 
requests concerning 565 persons. The exchange of information with foreign FIUs takes place 
over special transmission channels. The countries belonging to the Egmont group use the 
EGMONT SECURE WEB; at European level it is also possible to use the FUNET multilateral 
European system. These channels have made it possible to identify a large volume of bank 
balances and financial instruments (in the period 2004-06 more than €270 million and about 
$28 million) that, reported to the investigative bodies, have been sequestered by the judicial 
authorities. 
Between 1997 and the end of 2006 the UIC carried out 430 inspections, which led to 117 
reports  to  the  judicial  authorities  of  violations  of  the  rules  on  intermediaries’  customer 
identification  and  data  recording.  Inspections  are  used  to  verify  the  correctness  of  the 
reporting process established by intermediaries subject to the reporting requirement and their 
compliance with the obligation to identify, record and report suspicious transactions and to 
submit the aggregate data prescribed by anti-money-laundering legislation. 
 
4.  In  the  same  ten  years  1997-2006  the  Bank  of  Italy  also  had  intense  relations  with  the 
judicial  authorities  and  investigative  bodies  in  the  broader  framework  of  activity  to  prevent 
and counter economic crime. The requests for information and documentation received from 
the judicial authorities numbered more than 5,000; Bank of Italy employees carried out more 
than  337  technical  advisory  engagements,  including  in  connection  with  money  laundering, 
and  gave  evidence  in  penal  trials  on  about  780  occasions.  In  the  same  period  about  360 
reports  were  submitted  to  the  judicial  authorities  concerning  possible  penal  offences 
discovered in the performance of the Bank’s supervisory duties. 
As part of its ordinary inspections the Bank of Italy verifies the suitability of intermediaries’ 
organizational  arrangements  and  internal  control  procedures  for  anti-money-laundering 
purposes.  
This activity led between 1997 and 2006 to the finding of anomalies in the performance of 
customer identification and data recording obligations at 317 intermediaries out of the 1,940 
inspected. 
The  agreements  between  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  National  Antimafia  Directorate  are 
especially  important  in  that  they  permit  the  exchange  of  information  that  facilitates  the 
performance  of  their  respective  tasks.  On  the  basis  of  a  memorandum  of  understanding, 
possible cases of failure to report suspicious transactions found during on-site and prudential 
controls are transmitted to the UIC for further examination. 
The Financial Stability Forum’s activity regarding offshore centres 
Since its establishment in 1999 the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) has been concerned with 
promoting  international  financial  stability  through  information  exchange  and  international 
cooperation among authorities operating in the financial sector. 
Because the enormous and rapid shifts in capital flows and the opaqueness of the corporate 
structures of banks and financial companies operating in offshore centres had given rise to 
financial crises in the 1990s, one of the first FSF working groups was devoted to the analysis 
of these jurisdictions. In April 2000 it published a report identifying major shortcomings in the 
regulation of offshore centres and in the cooperation between them and foreign authorities, 
capable of causing instability in the international financial system and as a remedy proposed 
stricter  compliance  by  offshore  centres  with  the  standards  laid  down  by  the  international 
sectoral bodies. The document also proposed that the IMF should launch a procedure for the 
evaluation of compliance with these standards and outlined a system of incentives, including 
provision for the supervisory authorities of the industrial countries to take account of offshore 
16 
 BIS Review 84/2007
centres’  acceptance  of  international  standards  when  authorizing  their  intermediaries  to 
operate in such financial centres. 
Forty-two offshore centres were identified, divided into three groups according to the degree 
of development of their institutional frameworks and domestic prudential regulation. Between 
2000  and  2004  the  IMF  performed  a  systematic  evaluation  in  cooperation  with  the  World 
Bank and other international sectoral bodies (the Basel Committee, the Financial Action Task 
Force, etc.). On the basis of the results of the assessments, technical assistance initiatives 
were organized as necessary. 
In  March  2005,  after  completing  the  assessments  and  judging  the  results  favourably,  the 
Forum decided to consider the list of 42 offshore centres to be obsolete and to concentrate 
its attention on the jurisdictions that still showed shortcomings with regard to the exchange of 
information and the adequacy of supervisory structures, drawing on the cooperation of the 
IMF,  the  international  committees  responsible  for  setting  supervisory  standards,  and  the 
countries’ own authorities. 
At present there are three jurisdictions subject to the activity of the Review Group. 
Money transfer activity 
Money transfer has become increasingly important in the panorama of payment services; it 
consists  in  offsetting  transactions  between  financial  operators  linked  together  in  various 
ways, on a worldwide basis and very rapidly. The business is carried out by way of a series 
of  “virtual  passages”  involving  point-of-sale  operators  (subagents),  agents  operating  at 
national level and an international network. 
Various  actors  are  involved  in  the  business;  they  can  be  classified  from  top  to  bottom  as 
follows: 
• 
• 
the multinationals (or networks) that manage the system; 
their agents operating in each country, which in Italy, due to the reserve on financial 
activity, must be financial intermediaries; 
subagents (or locations), which act as points of sale and in Italy are financial agents 
entered in a register kept by the UIC. 
 More  specifically,  the  general  register  kept  under  Article  106  of  the  Consolidated  Law  on 
Banking  contains  32  financial  intermediaries  that  belong  to  international  circuits,  such  as 
Western  Union  and  Moneygram.  To  engage  in  such  activities  it  is  therefore  necessary  to 
satisfy requirements concerning legal form, minimum capital (€600,000), exclusive corporate 
purpose,  the  integrity  of  shareholders,  and  the  integrity,  experience  and  independence  of 
corporate  officers.  The  UIC  has  limited  powers  of  control.  The  business  is  highly 
concentrated.  The  two  top-ranking  intermediaries  (Finint  and  Angelo  Costa,  which  both 
belong  to  the  Western  Union  circuit)  and  Poste  Italiane  S.p.A.  (for  the  Moneygram  circuit) 
account for 70 per cent of the value of remittances and 80 per cent of their number. Both in 
absolute  terms  and  on  a  per  capita  basis  the  remittances  sent  by  Chinese,  Filipino  and 
Senegalese customers are much larger than the average and more than proportional to their 
share of the total immigrant population. 
The number of financial agents that these intermediaries use is very large owing to the wide 
mesh  of  the  requirements  to  enter  the  market  and  the  possibility  of  combining  the  activity 
with others of a commercial nature (telephony, internet, food shops, supermarkets, etc.). At 
31 December 2006 the register kept by the UIC contained 38,200 financial agents, of which 
50 per cent operated in the money transfer sector. 
The  financial  intermediaries  and  their  agents  are  subject  to  the  anti-money-laundering 
provisions.  They  are  required  to  identify  customers,  record  transactions  in  the  single 
computerized archive (archivio unico informatico 
AUI) and report suspicious transactions. 
BIS Review 84/2007 
 17
Checks  on  unauthorized  money  transfer  activity  and  compliance  with  the  anti-money-
laundering  obligations  are  made  by  the  Finance  Police,  which  carried  out  some  410 
investigations  in  2006.  In  particular,  524  suspected  violations  were  reported  to  the  judicial 
authorities,  of  which  80  per  cent  concerned  unauthorized  agency  activity,  10  per  cent 
unauthorized  financial  activity  and  the  remaining  10  per  cent  suspected  cases  of  omitted 
identification. 
The number of suspicious transactions reported to the UIC was 838 in 2005 and 796 in 2006. 
A total of 1,801 persons were reported in 2005 and 715 in 2006; the total amounts reported 
were €86 million in 2005 and €13 million in 2006. Most of the persons reported were Chinese 
and Senegalese. 
The  total  value  of  emigrants’  remittances  in  2006  was  about  €4,450  million;  China  and 
Romania received more than one third of the remittances. The total number of remittances in 
2006 was 10.3 million and the average value was €400. 
The distribution of remittances by Italian province of origin shows Milan and Rome to be out 
in front with more than 10 per cent each. 
The  statistical  data  do  not  permit  an  analysis  of  the  origins  of  remittances;  a  large  part 
probably comes from activities in the underground economy, which lends itself to evasion of 
tax and labour law and the rules on social security contributions and exchange controls, but 
also  from  illegal  activities.  Some  recent  investigations  by  the  Finance  Police  were  able  to 
find, for three intermediaries, the source activities of funds making up remittances. 
18 
 BIS Review 84/2007
