Su Ning: Spreading financial knowledge to the Chinese people 
Speech by Mr Su Ning, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Financial Knowledge 
Booklet Release and Donation Ceremony, Beijing, 18 January 2007. 
 Deputy Administrator Wu Shulin, Deputy Secretary General Yang Xinli,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good  morning.  On  behalf  of  the  People's  Bank  of  China,  I  warmly  welcome  all  of  you  to  Financial 
Knowledge  Booklet  Release and  Donation  Ceremony.  We would like  to  congratulate  everyone who 
has been directly or indirectly involved in the writing and publishing of the book, and appreciate those 
who have contributed to the book's writing.  
Leaders  of  the  State  Council  have  always  attached  importance  to  education  of  the  general  public. 
Premier Wen Jiabao has on many occasions expressed the hope that financial education should be 
enhanced and popularized, especially through publication of financial knowledge books for the general 
readership. The Financial Knowledge Booklet, written by the central bank, is dedicated to spreading 
financial knowledge to the average people, to promoting their ability in managing financial affairs, and 
to contributing to a harmonious socialist society.  
Finance is at the core of any modern economy. With the improvement of a socialist market economic 
system and deepening of open-up in China, financial activities have permeated social and economic 
activities.  Finance  has  become  increasingly  important  in  adjusting  economic  activities  and  in 
promoting social and economic development, and more closely connected with people's daily life. The 
public  has  gradually  become  consumers  of  financial  products  and  services  and  thus  become  an 
extensive base for financial security and development. Sound performance and healthy growth of the 
financial  sector  has  a  bearing  on  a  country's  economic  security  and  social  stability,  and  on  the 
interests of average people. The public's financial knowledge and confidence in financial system is a 
decisive factor in sound performance and healthy growth of the sector. Therefore, financial education 
to the public, spreading financial knowledge to them, and increasing people's ability in managing their 
own financials, is of great importance to promoting sound performance and development of financial 
sector, to safeguarding people's interests, and to building a harmonious socialist society.  
Since reform and open-up, China's financial sector has made substantial progress, and subsequently 
the  Chinese  people  have  come  to  know  more  about  financial  products  and  services.  However,  as 
financial education for the average people is still underdeveloped, their financial knowledge and ability 
to use financial services has lagged behind compared with the sector's development. For example, in 
general the population does not have much financial knowledge, especially the nature, position, role 
and principles of financial sector in the socialist market economy; they do not easily accept financial 
innovation, which hinders the popularization of some advanced financial products and services; their 
credit  awareness  is  rather  weak,  resulting  in  low  risk  awareness  and  poor  ability  to  identify  risks; 
default  and  irrational  investment  have  frequently  occurred  in  some  regions  and  in  some  sectors; 
financial fraud often get their way, causing incidents to break out on many occasions, and posing a 
threat to financial security and social stability.  
Against the background of economic and financial globalization, and in particular the full open-up of 
China's financial sector, the financial industry faces both rare opportunities and challenges. Whether 
opportunities can be seized and challenges addressed depend a lot on the building of financial eco-
environment  in  the  country,  including  public's  financial  knowledge  and  their  ability  to  use  financial 
services.  
As the central bank of China, the PBC assumes the responsibilities of maintaining renminbi stability, 
safeguarding financial system security and providing the society with financial services, all of which, 
directly or indirectly, relate to the interests of general public. For many years, in carrying out the central 
bank's  functions,  the  PBC  has  been  devoted  to  facilitating  the  general  public  to  get  information  on 
financial knowledge through various channels, such as news media, Internet, and publications, with a 
view to strengthening public capability in managing financial affairs. Since 2005, the PBC has held a 
series  of  large-scale  financial  knowledge  exhibitions  in  major  cities,  all  warmly  welcomed  by  the 
general public. Their strong interests in financial information and knowledge have urged us to improve 
this work. As a try, we have compiled this book. 
BIS Review 14/2007 
 1
This  booklet,  dedicated  to  popularizing  financial  knowledge,  comprises  three  parts.  The  first  part  is 
about basic financial theories and concepts. Beginning with origins of currency and bank, it introduces 
concepts,  functions,  rationale,  products  and  service  of  currency,  bank,  securities,  insurance  and 
wealth management. The second part talks about operations and risks of various financial services 
and products. It gives an introduction on what operational knowledge the general public should know 
when they use financial products, accept financial services and deal with financial institutions, such as 
rules and regulations, operational procedures and know-how, and how to identify, prevent and control 
risks. The third part is about the central bank. It covers central bank's function, responsibility and role, 
and  other  business  knowledge  closely  related  to  average  people's  daily  life  as  well  as  social  and 
economic activities. In terms of style, this booklet uses concise and simple language and illustrations, 
as  well  as  household  stories  and  cases,  to  explain  financial  terminologies  and  concepts,  complex 
economic and financial phenomena, and issues of everyone's interest. 
We have noticed that in recent years relevant agencies and peoples have made much contribution to 
popularizing financial knowledge, and achieved significant results. Yet, so far, there is no publication in 
our country dedicated to spreading financial knowledge to the average people. 
By compiling this booklet, we hope to help the readers gain finance knowledge, understand how the 
finance industry works, and how to use financial knowledge in their daily life, study and work. 
To make this booklet available to more people, the PBC decides to donate free copies to the National 
Project of 10,000 Libraries in 10,000 Counties, colleges and universities, and public libraries for the 
convenience of farmers, students and general public. 
It is a systematic social project to popularize financial knowledge and enhance people's capability in 
managing financial affairs. The PBC will spare no effort to work this front. Also, we hope other parties 
in  the  society  will  pay  greater  attention  to  and  participate  actively  in  this  cause.  Let's  join  hands  to 
contribute  to  the  enhancement  of  people's  capability  in  financial  knowledge  utilization  and  a  bright 
future of the financial industry. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2007
