Timothy F Geithner: Reflections on the changing global economy  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, at the 46th ACI Financial Markets Association World Congress, Montreal, Quebec, 
4 May 2007. 
 Good morning. I am pleased to be able to join you today. And it is a privilege to be here today with 
Canada's accomplished central bank governor, David Dodge. There are few people in central banks or 
in governments around the world today that have presided over as far reaching and successful a set of 
macroeconomic policy reforms as has David Dodge. 
I want to offer some reflections about the challenges managing macroeconomic policy in a more open 
and  integrated  world  economy.  And  I  want  to  say  something  about  how  the  international  monetary 
system, and the current framework of exchange rate regimes, might develop in the coming years. 
For the past century or more, choices about exchange rate regimes have played an important role in 
economic  outcomes  across  countries.  From  the  Gold  Standard  of  the  late  19th  and  early  20th 
centuries through the Bretton Woods system and the episodes of exchange rate cooperation among 
the G5 and the G7 in the 1980s and after, the desire to achieve exchange rate stability was a major 
preoccupation  of  policymakers.  The  economic  damage  inflicted  by  the  disastrous  competitive 
devaluations among the major economies in the 1930s had a profound influence on thinking during 
much  of  the  postwar  period.  And  for  governments  and  enterprises  around  the  world  today,  the 
aversion to large fluctuations in exchange rates remains strong. 
As the world has become more open to trade and more closely integrated, this sensitivity to exchange 
rate  variability  has  intensified.  And  yet,  experience  suggests  that  resisting  variability  makes  the 
adjustment to changing economic conditions more painful. In an increasingly open world economy, the 
ability to cope with change becomes more important, and for a large fraction of the world economic, 
exchange rate flexibility is a necessary condition for sustained favorable economic performance. 
Changes in fundamental factors such as productivity growth and the inevitable shocks to demand and 
supply  require  changes  in  relative prices,  both  domestically  and internationally.  A  flexible  exchange 
rate  regime  makes  it  easier  for  relative  prices  to  move  rapidly  and  effectively  in  the  appropriate 
direction, and this generally eases the cost of that adjustment. 
Even in a fixed rate regime, this adjustment in response to changing circumstances will ultimately have 
to  take  place,  of  course.  But  if  relative  prices  cannot  adjust  through  the  exchange  rate,  domestic 
output and employment will have to bear the brunt of adjustment instead. 
Since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, we have seen the emergence of a diverse range of 
exchange rate arrangements. The large industrial economies have, by and large, decided to let their 
currencies adjust to changing circumstances without official intervention in exchange markets. Japan 
aside, it is now close to seven years since the last episode of concerted intervention among the major 
economies; and there has been no Japanese intervention for two years. 
Among emerging economies, too, we have seen a marked trend toward more flexible exchange rate 
regimes. This is particularly pronounced in parts of Latin America. At the other end of the spectrum, 
some of the newer members of the European Union are gearing up to adopt the euro. Somewhere in 
the middle between these extremes of flexible exchange rate regimes and full monetary integration are 
the emerging market economies, mostly in Asia and among the major oil exporters in the Gulf, that still 
sustain fixed or partially fixed exchange rate regimes. Most of these countries link their currencies to 
the dollar, though we see varying degrees of flexibility in the closeness of that link. 
How  has  the  world  fared  under  this  diverse  mixed  of  flexible  and  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes?  In 
general,  I  think,  the  costs  of  living  with  exchange  rate  volatility  have  been  less  than  feared  and 
attempts to limit volatility have been more damaging and less effective than expected. 
Take the experience of the major economies. Despite periods of very substantial swings in exchange 
rates, and the amplitude of the changes in exchange rates among the major currencies since 1973 
have been exceptionally large, economic growth in the major economies have become more stable, 
not less. Quarterly GDP volatility in the United States, for example, has fallen by more than half since 
the mid 1980s. And average rates of inflation and the variability of inflation outcomes have of course 
BIS Review 44/2007 
 1
declined substantially as well. This is not to say that these swings in exchange rates have not come 
with pain and trauma, only that overall economic performance has fared better than many would have 
expected three decades ago when contemplating life under flexible exchange rates. 
Among emerging markets, experience with exchange rate flexibility has been more limited, and the 
record has been more mixed. Chile probably has one of the longest record of successful performance 
under  a  flexible  regime,  success  due  in  large  part  of  course  to  a  strong  record  of  prudent 
macroeconomic policy management and strong institutions. But there are many more examples today 
– Brazil and Mexico are two – of emerging economies with sustained periods of improved growth and 
inflation outcomes under more flexible exchange rate regimes. 
Emerging  market  economies  face  substantially  greater  challenges  than  the  less  open  major 
economies in adjusting to a more integrated world and to the greater exposure to real and financial 
volatility  that  comes  with  integration.  Large  movements  in  capital  flows  can  complicate  the  task  of 
achieving sustainable growth, low inflation and financial stability. This is obvious for those countries 
experiencing sharp net outflows of capital, but the challenges are formidable even for those countries 
experiencing sustained periods of large inflows. And even those countries with more flexible exchange 
rates can see competitiveness eroded if their major trading partners resist exchange rate appreciation. 
For  most  countries,  though,  these  challenges  would  be  exacerbated  rather  than  eased  by  a  policy 
designed to try to sustain a fixed rate or to narrowly constrain variability in the exchange rate. Although 
it  may  seem  counterintuitive,  small  open  economies,  even  more  than  larger  less  open  economies, 
need the flexibility that floating exchange rates bring. 
Changes in exchange rate regimes were present at the scene of most of the major emerging market 
financial crises of the last decade, and many have argued that the decisions to let the exchange rate 
adjust was a major source of the trauma that followed. But that's not a fair reading of the evidence. In 
general, the crises were the consequence of fundamental economic problems, often manifested in the 
buildup  of  substantial  balance  sheet  problems,  with  excessive  borrowing  in  foreign  currency  by  the 
sovereign, the banking system, or both.  
These  balance  sheet  problems  were  one  reason  many  governments  chose  to  postpone  currency 
adjustment for as long as possible, and these delays ensured that the cost of adjustment, when it was 
forced on these governments, was far higher than if action had been taken earlier. But this is not the 
whole story since the fixed exchange rate regime itself had contributed to the initial currency mismatch 
and associated balance sheet problems. By engineering artificial expectations of stability, the regime 
had  led  market  participants  to  disregard  the  possibility  of  exchange  rate  devaluations,  leading  to 
mispricing of risk, insufficient hedging and ultimately to misallocation of financial and real resources. 
Governments that found themselves in this position had very limited ability to mitigate the economic 
damage that was to come, but the policy choices that accompanied the exchange rate change often 
compounded the problem. 
Japan's experience provides another example, though the context was different. There is a perception 
in parts of Asia that the Japanese government's decision to let the yen appreciate in the late 1980s 
was  principally  responsible  for  Japan's  so-called  “lost  decade”  of  low  growth.  And,  Japan,  viewed 
through  this  prism,  is  cited  as  an  example  of  the  perils  of  letting  an  exchange  rate  move  up  in 
response  to  changing  fundamentals.  The  reality  is  more  complex.  The  problems  of  the  Japanese 
economy in the 1990s were largely due to the aftereffects of the collapse of the real estate and asset 
price boom of the preceding decade, a boom fueled in part by efforts by the monetary authorities to 
limit the appreciation of the yen. 
The size of the negative shock to demand from the collapse of the bubble was very substantial, and 
the capacity of the government and the central bank to mitigate the damage was constrained by the 
weakness  in  the  banking  system.  A  more  forceful  macroeconomic  policy  response,  however,  might 
have brought about a quicker recovery. In any case, the problem with the exchange rate choice was 
not the decision to let the rate adjust, but the decision to resist it and the role that played in magnifying 
the bubble, and thereby the subsequent damage from the fall. 
Given where we are today, and what we know about the relative merits of flexible and fixed exchange 
rate  regimes,  what  is  the  likely  evolution  of  the  current  monetary  system  going  forward?  A  few 
concluding observations. 
First, I think it is unlikely that we will see a substantial move toward monetary integration involving the 
major  emerging  market  economies,  in  Asia  or  in  the  Western  Hemisphere.  As  the  economist  Peter 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2007
Kenen  writes  in  his  latest  book,  it  is  difficult  today  to  envisage  a  substantial  reduction  in  national 
currencies though the emergence of large regional monetary unions where they do not already exist. 
Within  Europe,  we  may  yet  see  a  further  enlargement  of  the  euro  area.  There  may  be  other 
circumstances in which individual economies can derive benefit from a currency board system or from 
dollarization or euroization. Countries trying to emerge from a period of high inflation may in the future, 
as they have in the past, adopt a fixed exchange rate as a nominal external anchor for a disinflation 
strategy.  These  seem  likely  to  be  exceptions,  however,  to  a  general  move  toward  more  flexible 
exchange rate regimes. 
Even as regional economic integration increases in Asia and other parts of the world, these economies 
seem a long way from the point where economic, or political conditions, will make a compelling case 
for  monetary  integration.  In  Europe, of course,  the  political case  for  monetary  integration  to a  large 
extent  preceded  the  economic  case.  And  the  architects  of  the  European  Union  integration  worked 
consciously to induce a level of economic integration in Europe that would induce conditions that more 
closely met the economist's test for an optimal currency area. 
For most of the emerging markets today, in contrast, the challenge is to establish the conditions that 
will enable them to live more comfortably in a world where their exchange rates will adjust more freely 
in response to changing fundamentals. As these economies become more open to capital flows, they 
will necessarily find it more difficult to occupy the tenuous middle ground with an exchange rate regime 
that is neither fully fixed nor flexible, but managed in a way that closely tracks the value of the dollar or 
carefully constrains fluctuations against the dollar. 
This does not mean that these countries can be indifferent to exchange rate movements or that the 
exchange  rate  is  irrelevant  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  For  many  small  open  emerging 
economies, price stability and exchange rate stability are obviously intertwined, and a monetary rule 
that responds effectively to inflation pressure cannot afford to overlook the signals coming from the 
foreign exchange market. But attempts to target a particular level for the exchange rate or the slope of 
the change in the rate in response to different conditions will, as the capital account becomes more 
open, inevitably, come with substantial risks to monetary and financial stability. 
Managing the transition to a more open capital account and a more flexible exchange rate regime is 
not a simple task. These transitions need to be handled with care and attention to the development of 
a  strong  institutional  framework  for  monetary  policy  and  the  financial  system.  The  more  successful 
transitions came in contexts where the monetary authorities were independent of political constraint, 
where balance sheet problems and currency mismatches in the government and the financial system 
were  not  acute,  where  the  prevailing  legal  framework  provided  reasonable  protections  for  property 
rights  and  the  enforcement  of  contract,  and  where  there  was  effective  supervision  of  the  banking 
system. Where these conditions were weaker, the transitions from fixed exchange rate regimes were 
more traumatic. 
These conditions seem exacting, and the understandable need for caution often is invoked in defense 
of protracted and very gradual transitions. A certain degree of caution is wise: there is a great deal of 
risk  in  a  poorly  managed  and  premature  shift  toward  flexibility.  But  there  is  risk  in  gradualism  too. 
Delay magnifies the costs of living with the distortions caused by a managed rate. 
Once  relaxed,  exchange  and  capital  controls  are  both  difficult  and  costly  to  reintroduce,  and  even 
relatively  modest  steps  back  from  an  open  regime  can  be  damaging  to  confidence  and  credibility, 
without buying much in the way of lasting stability. 
The policy responses to the challenges that come with economic and financial integration principally 
involve  choices  for  governments  at  the  national  level.  International  cooperation  can  in  some 
circumstances help provide a more supportive environment, but there are no feasible changes to the 
architecture of  the  international  financial  system  that  offer  the  prospect  of a  durably  stable  external 
economic  and  financial  environment  for  nations,  large  or  small.  Fundamentally,  the  only  realistic 
choice for policymakers is to equip their economies with the flexibility to cope more successfully in this 
increasingly integrated global economy. And this means preparing for a world of more rather than less 
flexibility in exchange rate regimes. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 44/2007 
 3
