Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the Financial Times and the Financial 
Times Deutschland 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  conducted  on 
14 May 2007 by Mr Lionel Barber, Financial Times editor, Mr Ralph Atkins, FT Frankfurt bureau chief, 
and Mr Mark Schieritz, Financial Times Deutschland. 
 FT: It would be interesting to hear your thoughts about the German economy, because it was 
the sick man of Europe, that’s what everybody said, and nobody’s saying that any more. 
JCT:  I  never  said  that  myself.  I  was  struck  by  the  fact  that  Germany  seven,  eight  years  ago,  and 
particularly at the moment of the setting up of the euro, was in the position of having lost a lot of cost 
competitiveness, which was very easily understandable because of reunification. But then during the 
first  seven  years  of  the  euro  you  had,  I  would  say,  hard  work  being  done,  and  certainly  hard  work 
being done on unit labour costs and the cost competitiveness of the economy as a whole. So it seems 
to me that the overall judgement that Germany was the sick man of Europe, for structural reasons, 
was  not  exactly  the  right  diagnosis.  Germany  had  a  lot  of  difficulty  to  grow  again  at  a  pace  which 
would be reasonable and encouraging, essentially because of the loss of cost competitiveness.  
It remains true, of course, that Germany, as well as the full body of the euro area and probably the full 
body of the European Union, has a lot of structural reforms to embark on, to implement. We all agree 
on  that.  We  are  calling  for  that.  We  are  repeatedly  asking  for  those  reforms  to  be  implemented. 
Germany was doing reform in a way which was not negligible, but was not necessarily extraordinarily 
rapid. But the area where Germany did really a very, very good job was again this recovery of cost 
competitiveness  of  the  private  sector,  accompanied  by  restructuring,  reshaping,  internationalising, 
actively. That last remark is also partially true for the rest of Europe, in my opinion. During the last 
years, observers have had a tendency to underestimate the level of restructuring and reshaping of the 
private sector in all the economies in Europe. That was not yet showing up in terms of macro figures, 
and I often told colleagues here and there in various European or international fora, don’t be misled. 
Remember  the  US  in  the  second  part  of  the  eighties  –  the  macro  figures  were  not  necessarily 
flattering, but a lot of good work was being done in terms of reshaping and restructuring the private 
sector. And this is something which is happening in Europe in the present period, much more than you 
suspect. So don’t take it that nothing is being done. It’s, of course, much truer in the private sector 
than in the public sector. 
FT: Are we underestimating potential growth right now, do you think? 
JCT: No. Well, on this particular point, which is very important, I would stick myself to the previous 
range that we had – 2 to 2.5 per cent would be the growth potential of the euro area. Say, 2.25 or 2.3 
per cent would be an appropriate proxy. But we would not say at this stage – and this is the position of 
the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  –  that  we  have  substantiated  and  documented  a  real  significant 
structural increase in productivity, in total factor productivity, or in our growth potential. We consider 
that what we have observed during the last year may be a pickup in productivity that is probably more 
of a cyclical nature. This of course calls for more research, but again we think it would be premature to 
conclude that we have a higher growth potential. It seems to me that other entities, particularly the 
international institutions, are not saying something different from us, and they also have more or less 
the same order of magnitudes for our growth potential. Something which is quite striking is if I compare 
the  US  and  Europe  from  1980  to  1995  and  from  1996  to  2004,  we  have  more  or  less  exchanged 
labour productivity figures with the United States. We were registering or observing, labour productivity 
at the level of 2.4 per cent during the 15 years from 1980 to 1995; they were at 1.2 per cent. We are 
now during the last ten years at 1.1 per cent when they are at 2.3 per cent. They have multiplied by 
two their average yearly labour productivity figure and we have divided ours by two.  
FT: These changes that you alluded to were driven by the private sector almost in the absence 
of clear efforts by the political class… 
JCT: I wouldn’t say “almost nothing”. I mean undoubtedly there is an area where structural reforms 
have been fostered by executive branches, –and by parliaments, where necessary – which has been 
the  transformation  in  the  labour  market,  aiming  at  augmenting  job  creation  in  the  unskilled  labour 
segment of the market. There, undoubtedly, significant structural reforms have been implemented. It 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 1
was overdue because we had a level of unemployment in the unskilled segment of the market which 
was very, abnormal, very high. But I’m impressed to see that it has really played an important role in 
permitting a significant creation of jobs and reduction in unemployment. 
We have created, during the eight years after the setting up of the euro, more than 12 million jobs. We 
had created less than three million in the eight year period before the euro was set up. The number of 
jobs  which  have  been  created  in  Europe  after  the  euro  was  set  up,  1st  January  1999,  has  been 
superior in the euro area to what it has been in the US during the same period. That might surprise 
because public opinion had not heard that before. And we are now at an unemployment level of 7.3 
per cent, and you have to go back twenty-five years ago to find such a low level of unemployment. 
Unfortunately, as you remember, after the first oil shock in 1973 unemployment increased massively 
and remained at levels which were quite high. So we have had, as I said, active job creation during 
those eight years. I don’t pretend that it is the euro that made it, but at least those who were saying 
that the euro is playing against job creation should look at the figures and reflect more. But, that being 
said,  it’s  clear  that  the  structural  reforms  that  were  implemented  in  Italy,  in  Spain,  in  Germany,  in 
France, in the Netherlands and all over Europe, to facilitate job creation in, particularly, the unskilled 
segment of the market, have been operative and have undoubtedly been a success. Now, in a number 
of other areas, clearly, we still have a lot of homework to do and that homework is particularly visible, I 
have  to  say,  in  the  domain  of  the  labour  market  in  general.  It’s  true  that  our  labour  market  is  less 
flexible  in  the  euro  area  than  in  most  advanced  industrials  economies,  including  Commonwealth 
countries. And Denmark demonstrates that it is possible to have a very flexible labour market together 
with social protection. 
FT: Before we talk about France in a minute, why would you be satisfied, though, with 2.5 or 2.3 
per cent [economic growth]? Why not aspire to American growth rates, which are necessary, 
really, to bring down unemployment further? Why not aim higher? 
JCT:  We  certainly  are  aiming  at  that.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  considers  that  our  main 
strategic goal is precisely to elevate the growth potential of the euro area. And we see no reason why 
we would not have a total factor productivity which would be substantially higher, and why we couldn’t 
go back, after all, to the levels of the early labour productivity progress that we observed in the 15 
years before 1995, 1996 and that the US economy is observing since 1996 as an average. So I fully 
agree with you. Our main aim is to elevate growth potential and the way to obtain that seems to us 
clearly to embark, across the board, on structural reforms. The single market is a structural reform of 
the  first  importance.  And  the  single  market  with  a  single  currency  is  an  extremely  natural  way  of 
fostering single market integration. You know that the main problem there is certainly services sector 
integration, achieving the single market in the services sector. And I would say, to respond very clearly 
to your question, we call for elevating the growth potential of Europe. The means to elevate the growth 
potential  of  Europe  is  to  resolutely  embark  into  achieving  the  single  market,  and  delivering  the  so-
called Lisbon agenda, which, again, has been considered as a major structural drive for Europe. We 
all agree on that, all executive branches, the council, the commission. We encourage them all. The 
problem is the delivery! 
FT: But that structural reform does mean a more flexible labour market, doesn’t it? 
JCT: Yes, certainly. 
FT: It does mean dismantling matters like the 35 hour working week in France, does it not? Or 
do you think that, actually, in the private sector, employers found all sorts of ways around the 
35 hour working week…? 
JCT: Firstly, let’s not forget that we are living in very vivid democracies. And that we are in the ECB 
issuing  the  currency  for  all  sensitivities  in  the  euro  area  as  a  multi-partisan  Institution.  And  that  we 
have  full  respect  for  the  decisions  of  our  democracies.  The  normal  duration  of  a  parliament  or 
government is four or five years, say five years. That means that on average, over a period of every 
five years there are 13 elections of importance in the euro area. Since I was appointed ECB president, 
just to give you an example, I remember the general election in Spain, changing the government, the 
general  election  in  Italy,  changing  the  government,  the  general  election  in  Germany,  changing  the 
coalition, the general election in the Netherlands, the general election in France … On 35 hours let me 
say that there is an overwhelming consensus the world over to consider that it was a bad decision. 
FT: You talked about a vivid democracy. Remember 1992-94. These were tough years for you, 
as  governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  and  you  stayed  with  it  despite  all  sorts  of  political 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2007
criticism.  You  must  have  thought  that  that  period  was  over.  And  then  suddenly  the  French 
presidential election, and you’re back in the firing line. 
JCT: I had from time to time to explain tirelessly what we were doing, why we were doing it. You are 
absolutely  right  to  say  that  the  public  debate  in  those  years  was  particularly  vivid.  What  was 
vindicating what we were doing was that we were very much backed by the people. Each survey that 
we did in these years was really giving us around 70 per cent of the population, of our fellow citizens, 
saying, “Okay, we back their activity to deliver price stability”. And it is the way I am explaining myself 
that that strategy came along and was not modified, even after several changes in power.  
I can tell you that today the Governing Council has exactly the same sentiment. We embarked on a 
survey, and I have made those figures public already, saying that 73 per cent of the fellow citizens of 
the  euro  area  approved  the  following  sentence:  “we  approve  the  independence  of  the  ECB  from 
executive branches to deliver price stability”. And there is the same percentage exactly in France – 73 
per cent. The same in France, the same in the euro area, the same for the 318 million people. The 
sentiment  of  the  people  in  a  modern  democracy  is  that  it’s  good  that  there  are  guardians  of  the 
currency that are given the mandate of ensuring price stability and are independent from executive 
branches to do that. 
FT: You’ve got a solid foundation and public support. So how are you going to deal, then, with 
President-elect [Nicolas] Sarkozy? 
JCT:  As  you  know,  President  Sarkozy  has  said  that  he  was  not  calling  himself  to  change  the 
Maastricht Treaty. He was not calling to change the legal foundation for the ECB and I have noted that 
as something which was, of course, very important. 
FT: So what was he trying to do? Can you just ignore what he says, just as the campaign? 
JCT: No. What he, and the French government will say will be examined very carefully through the 
European  institutions.  We  have  13  executive  branches  that  are  discussing  together.  They  have 
themselves  their  own  organisation:  the  euro  group  of  eurozone  finance  ministers  is  a  meeting  that 
certainly is important. And you have the council at the level of heads of state and government 
FT:  The  French  said [in  the  run  up to  the  euro],  “when  the euro  enters force  there will  be a 
serious  political  dialogue  between  the  Eurogroup  and  the  European  Central  Bank”.  But  my 
impression  today  is  it’s  a  bit  sterile,  it’s  a  dialogue  of  the  deaf.  You  want  these  structural 
reforms, that’s what you’re putting on the table, and they want lower interest rates. Obviously 
that’s a crude formulation, it’s simplification, but that’s… 
JCT:  Yes,  I  would  say  it’s  an  over-simplification.  First  of  all,  governments  have  an  immense  stake 
themselves  in  us  ensuring  price  stability.  They  have  an  immense  stake  themselves  in  us  being 
credible in delivering price stability. This is contributing to a financial environment which is, for most of 
the countries of the euro area, exceptionally favourable, because it incorporates inflation expectations 
– over five years, ten years, 20 years – that are in line with our definition of price stability. Several 
countries are issuing securities, issuing bonds, of a duration of 50 years. It is because we are credible 
over the next 50 years that they can obtain the favourable financing which corresponds to that. And 
they  know  that.  Don’t  forget,  also,  that  all  the  national  central  banks  that  are  now  making  up  the 
Eurosystem  were  made  independent  more  or  less  early,  but  Banque  de  France,  for  instance,  was 
made independent by the will of the French democracy as early as 1st January 1994. It was on the 
basis of a bipartisan accord between the left and the right. And it called for a very solemn moment in 
this  active  democracy  that  I  mentioned,  and  particularly  it  called  for  a  change  of  the  constitution  of 
General De Gaulle, the constitution of the Fifth Republic, to permit independence of the Central Bank. 
And that was done five years before having the ECB itself being created. I would also like to mention, 
because you mentioned the relationship between the executive branches and this institution, that we 
have  an  organisation  of  meetings,  of  physical  encounters  which  is  probably  the  most  well  and 
scrupulously  established  in  the  world.  According  to  the  Treaty  I  invite  myself  the  president  of  the 
Eurogroup,  Jean-Claude  Juncker,  every  fortnight  to  ECB’s  Governing  Council  meetings.  He  can 
participate fully, listening to all our arguments, and make his point if he wishes to – of course, in full 
respect of the independence. But the existence of these frequent meetings is important. I am invited 
myself  to  the  meetings  of  the  Eurogroup,  together  with  the  Vice-President,  and  then  again,  this 
meeting with all the ministers, and again the president of the Eurogroup, is organised once a month. 
That  makes  three  meeting  every  month.  Of  course  it  is  also  true  with  the  Commission,  with  the 
Commissioner  Joaquin  Almunia,  the  EU  monetary  affairs  commissioner.  So  we  have  a  scrupulous 
organisation of very frequent meetings. And if there is any sentiment or message of the 13 eurozone 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 3
countries which they would wish to pass on to the ECB, they can do that. On top of that we also have 
the very same scrupulous organisation of the dialogue with the European Parliament. I have meetings 
with the European Parliament at least five times a year – de facto even more frequently because I can 
participate once or twice a year in colloquiums including some which are organised with the MPs of 
the national parliaments. So that makes, perhaps, five, six, meetings a year including – which does not 
happen in the US – a hearing with the plenary session of the European Parliament. 
FT:  You  mentioned  the  Banque  de  France.  There’s  this  rather  interesting  work  being  done, 
which I think Christian Noyer, governor, has alluded to, on the monetary aggregates, and this 
sort of suggestion that they may not be so useful in measuring inflation, or at least giving us a 
guide to inflation. What’s your view on that? 
JCT: I really think that it’s, again, an over-interpretation. The part of your remark on the fact that we 
would be divided amongst us is not the reality. We have very much the same view in the Eurosystem. 
What is to be mentioned is that here and there you have publications, with appropriate disclaimers, 
and to the extent that this is a very, very interesting and stimulating issue, you have a lot of elaboration 
on what is published here and there. I consider myself that we have to be as open and as candid as 
possible in this domain, as we have been since the very beginning. We never said that we would have 
a  mechanistic  approach  to  the  instrumentation  of  the  monetary  pillar.  We  always  said,  and  we 
repeated  it  at  the  time  of  the  clarification  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy  n  2003,  that  we  were 
considering the monetary pillar as giving very important information permitting the cross-checking of 
the economic analysis within a medium to longer term perspective. We also said that we were working 
a lot to broaden and deepen our analysis. And I would say that it is what we are doing. We consider 
that  we  have  to  continue  working  to  understand  better  the  dynamics  of  the  components  of  M3, 
particularly in periods where the yield curve is flat, in a period where we have a lot of observations that 
M1 on the one hand and M3 minus M1 have different dynamics. Equally important are the dynamics of 
the  counterparts.  Each  month  when  I  mention  the  monetary  analysis,  on  behalf  of  the  Governing 
Council,  I  often  mention  explicitly  some  of  the  counterparts  of  M3,  for  instance  the  non-financial 
corporate  increase  in  outstanding  credit,  the  private  sector  credit,  the  outstanding  loans  to  finance 
housing etc. And this deep and broad analysis of components, counterparts, and sectorial breakdown 
of M3 is fully part of the monetary pillar analysis – not in a mechanistic approach, but in an approach 
that has served us very well. Myself and my colleagues of the Executive Board including Jürgen Stark 
and  Lucas  Papademos  we  all  underline  these  points.  I  can  tell  you  that  myself,  I  consider  the 
monetary  pillar  has  been  probably  decisive  when  we  decided  to  increase  rates  in  December  2005, 
against the advice of the OECD, of the IMF and a number of observers. That decision was due to the 
fact that we had our two pillars and were incorporating and assessing the binocular vision that we had 
of  our  situation.  Today  absolutely  everybody  is  vindicating  what  we  had  done  at  the  time.  But 
everybody has forgotten that a number of international institutions were against that move as well as 
ten executive branches out of 12 [then eurozone members]. So all this just to mention that we are very 
much attached to the monetary pillar. Let me finally add that Banque de France had a monetary pillar 
which served it very well in the run-up to the euro. Christian Noyer underlined himself the success of 
eliminating any remaining risk premia with the best other currencies that were in the exchange rate 
mechanism no.1, the Deutschemark or the Guilder or others thanks to the monetary policy concept of 
Banque de France. The judgement of the market is probably a very good judge.  
FT: It’s interesting you use this word “decisive” – that the monetary analysis was decisive in 
December 2005. Could the monetary pillar be decisive in the coming months? When we have a 
look at the other pillar, it seems to suggest everything’s perfect – you have inflation exactly 
within range; the economy’s growing at or around potential. The only alarm signal we have is 
the monetary pillar. Could the monetary pillar be decisive in the coming months when it comes 
to interest rate setting? 
JCT: As I said in Dublin on behalf of the Governing Council, we are in a mode of strong vigilance. As 
you know, I did not want to elaborate in advance what we could do after June in the second half of the 
year. I was very clear on that. As I said what is clear is that we will do what will be necessary to ensure 
price  stability  in  line  with  our  definition.  The  monetary  analysis,  which,  as  I  said,  is  permanently 
enriched, will continue to play the same role in the future in our cross checking exercise. Note also that 
we  are  never  mechanistic  in  our  decision-making  process.  As  far  as  the  economic  analysis  is 
concerned we, for instance, do not underwrite our projections at the level of the Governing Council. 
We consider that staff projections, whether ECB staff or Eurosystem staff, as an important input in our 
decision-making process, but we also consider that we have to make our own judgement on the basis 
of all information and analysis that are available and which we judge pertinent. And I am very happy to 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2007
see  that  a  lot  of  colleagues  are  going  closer  to  our  own  views  on,  I  would  say,  a  concept  of 
judgements  and  decisions  enlightened  by  experience,  and  coming  out  of  a  collegial  meditation  as 
comprehensive as possible as regards the inputs including money and credit. The governor of Bank of 
England looking very carefully at some of the counterparts of the monetary aggregates and at credit in 
particular is to be noted.  
FT: You said that  you’re not mechanistic. Is there any chance of formally getting rid of [M3] 
reference value, which of course is some kind of a mechanistic way to judge the figures? 
JCT: At this stage we consider that it has served us very well, and we consider that what we have said 
since the very beginning and in 2003 suffices, taking into account what I have said on the permanent 
deepening and broadening of our analysis. 
FT: As you know, the market expectations are for an interest rate increase in June, and maybe 
another one by the end of the year. But the question in a lot of people’s minds is, if we are 
approaching a peak, and we might be at a period where rates are likely to stay at the same rate 
for some period of time, would you ever give any indication that we were entering that sort of a 
pause or have reached some sort of a plateau? 
JCT: I have already said what I want to say as regards the second part of the year. As regards our 
own  past  of  course  similar  questions  have  been  asked  several  times,  for  instance:  “You  are  at  the 
level of 2 per cent. Will you remain at the level of 2% for a long period of time, a considerable period of 
time, a short period of time, and so forth?” As you know we refused to respond to those questions. We 
said, “We will do what will be deemed necessary to ensure price stability” and as a matter of fact we 
remained at that level for around two years. But we always said that the market should be fully aware 
of the fact that we could change our interest rates at any time. I called this posture “credible alertness”, 
and this was our constant mode. Other central banks could have at the time a different conception of 
their medium term pre-commitment, saying that ”we will stay at this level for a considerable period of 
time”, which was interpreted by the market as meaning something like more than six months, perhaps 
one  year.  You  also  had  some  central  banks  embarking  on  some  more  or  less  automatic 
instrumentation of their monetary policy, with periodic regular increases. We always refused to do that 
because we trusted it was not appropriate in our case. We always said: we will do what is necessary 
and  we  trust  that  we  are  sufficiently  candid  and  transparent  as  regards  our  primary  mandate,  our 
definition of price stability and our monetary policy concept, for this to function correctly. And the fact is 
that we could function correctly with a correct understanding of the observers of the market.  
FT: Are you concerned about the Spanish property market? 
JCT: The Spanish property market, Irish property market… 
FT: You were going to say the London property market, but we’re not in the euro yet. 
JCT: When you are in. [laughs] It’s clearly an area where we have elements of buoyancy. It’s an area 
that  my  colleagues  of  the  Executive  Board  and  of  the  Governing  Council  and  I  have  mentioned 
regularly  as  calling  for  close  monitoring.  It’s  also  an  area  where  we  have  seen,  and  I  said  this  in 
Ireland,  some  signs  of  cooling  down  in  terms  of  prices  and  in  terms  of  outstanding  credit,  that  are 
observed in the household credit for financing housing. So, clearly, it is something which is important, 
it is something which we have to look at very carefully. We mention it as one of the elements which 
had been taken into account to justify our previous decisions, and we will continue to monitor very, 
very carefully this “cooling down” which is starting to be observed in Spain in Ireland in particular, at a 
moderate pace On the other hand, never forget that we are looking at a vast continental economy of 
318 million people. As I said, in Dublin, from Dublin to Ljubljana and from Lisbon to Helsinki, it’s an 
impressive economy by its dimension and size. And what we expect as a likely evolution is that as you 
have a cooling down in a number of economies, which would be a normal evolution, in the whole real 
estate  cycle,  we  could  have  some  picking  up  from  a  very  low  level,  in  particular  in  Germany, 
corresponding to the expansion of the German economy. And there we would have somewhat of a 
balancing effect. 
FT: Maybe just come back to France, actually, on that point. We talked about Mr Sarkozy and 
possibly a confrontation, but do you also see, perhaps, a chance that France might now follow 
in  Germany’s  footsteps  in  implementing  the  sorts  of  reforms  that  are  necessary  to  restore 
international competitiveness? 
JCT: I think that the ECB has always called all partners, whatever their sensitivity, to go along the way 
which  had  been  decided  by  Europe,  by  the  European  Council,  unanimously,  namely  the  Lisbon 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 5
agenda for reform and we have always said that we were fully supporting reform – all over Europe, all 
over the euro area, as part of what was necessary to elevate our growth potential and I am supporting, 
and  all  my  colleagues  on  the  Governing  Council  are  supporting,  the  reformist  drive  anywhere  in 
Europe, and of course, in this particular moment, in France , certainly. 
FT: But in a way, France hasn’t paid a heavy price for not reforming as fast, say, as Germany. 
There’s been a general recovery and French growth has been a bit uninspiring, but it’s been 
okay. But there’s been no price paid. So why reform if you can just sort of get along? It’s a free 
ride then. 
JCT: First of all, I will not assess myself a hit parade of who is reforming the most rapidly. Again, what 
Germany  has  done  is  to  work  very  effectively  on  its  unit  labour  costs,  on  regaining  cost 
competitiveness.  Both  in  France  and  Germany  and  Italy,  and  a  number  of  other  countries,  a  lot  of 
homework remains to be done in the structural reforms. The price that the full body of Europe has had 
to pay, and of course France in particular, is a growth potential too low, and unemployment too high 
even if significant progress were made as I have said. In France, eight years after the euro, around 
two million jobs were created. Eight years before the euro, around 500,000. So, progress was made 
but the level of unemployment remains much too high all over Europe, and certainly also, of course, in 
France. So a price was paid. If you would increase the rapidity with which you are reforming yourself, 
you would be better off. Everybody would be better off and there would be more growth and more job 
creation, and less unemployment. This is the reason why we support the reforms. 
FT: Surely this is a new chance for France. You have a new political leader, who has talked 
about a culture, maybe shifted back a bit, but he has talked the language of reform.  
JCT: We support the language of reform, and we support the implementation of reform because we 
trust it gives more growth and more job creation. That's absolutely clear. It’s not new, but I repeat it. 
FT: But just for a moment, if you could just be a Frenchman, rather than a European… 
JCT: I am proud to be a Frenchman and proud to be a European… 
FT: …just for a few moments. Sarkozy has been described even as a possible Thatcherite; too 
strong, perhaps, but do you expect some real changes in the first three, four months?  
JCT:  The  French  people  have  chosen.  As  I  said  this  Institution  issues  the  currency  for  318  million 
people of all sensitivities and my colleagues and I fully respect all of them. But I would say all that 
goes  in  the  direction  of  active  reform,  elevated  growth  potential,  and  in  line  with  the  drive  that  has 
been decided in Lisbon is good and we fully support it. 
FT: Within the eurozone there are divergencies. You’ve alluded to the hot periphery, you have a 
laggard Italy, yes, things have looked a little better in the last 12 months or so, but how, from 
your  position  as president,  and  your  colleagues at the  European Central Bank,  how are  you 
managing these divergencies? And how concerned should we be about them? 
JCT: Several observations. The first observation, we are running a 318 million people area. It's very 
vast. It’s the order of magnitude of the US. So we can compare diversity in the US and diversity in 
Europe. We compare diversity in terms of growth and diversity in terms of inflation, only to give you 
two examples. And I have to say we were impressed by the fact that the figures that you have when 
you compute the standard deviations on a cross state or a cross country basis are more or less the 
same. So it seems that it is a normal characteristic of a vast continental economy of the dimension of 
300 million people to have on a state-to-state basis, or country-to-country basis the same magnitude 
of diversity. I have had a number of occasions to elaborate on that. 
FT: Yes….  
JCT: And we all have a number of anecdotes on both sides of the Atlantic. You're in the US, the unit 
labour  costs,  the  levels  of  productivity  are  not  the  same  in  Massachusetts,  South  Carolina  or 
California. It's normal we find, in a very vast economy. Even in the UK diversity is present. If you are in 
London  or  Edinburgh,  you  are  not  necessarily  in  exactly  the  same  economic  environment.  So  it’s 
normal. What is very important is that we central bankers, all call for as much cohesion as possible. 
For us, it’s important to have the various executive branches as lucid as possible, and as aware as 
possible of what's going on, including, in terms of unit labour costs. The Commission has played, and 
is playing an important role in making everybody aware of the various evolutions, for instance of unit 
labour costs, in the various countries. 
FT: It’s benchmarking… 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2007
JCT:  It’s  clear  that  we  have  the  same  diversity  as is  observed  in  the  United  States.  We  have  also 
perhaps more persistence in our diversity. So there is an element of transparency and lucidity at the 
level  of  the  eurogroup,  the  executive  branches,  which  is  certainly  important.  Another  observation  I 
would like to make is that when looking at the United States, we are discovering, and that has been 
done by research, in a very convincing way, that financial integration, and namely the credit channel 
and  the  risk-sharing  channel,  are  playing  a  very  important  role  in  absorbing  asymmetric  shocks. 
Namely around 60 per cent of the asymmetric shocks would be absorbed by the financial integration 
channel  while  perhaps,  and  that  was  a  surprise,  only  an  order  of  magnitude  15  per  cent  would  be 
absorbed by the fiscal channel through the mechanism of the federal budget. For us, the conclusion is 
that  financial  integration  is  not  only  very  important  in  terms  of  appropriate  functioning  of  a  single 
currency area with a single monetary policy, not only important because a single market with a single 
currency is part of the way you are getting higher growth potential, it is also important for the cohesion 
of this area when you have asymmetric shocks. You have through financial integration an efficient way 
to  weather  those  asymmetric  shocks.  By  the  way,  what  is  also  pleasing  is  to  see  is  that  when  our 
research  concentrates  on  better  explaining  the  diversity  in  growth,  on  what  is  the  business  cycle 
component, and what is the long term trend component, we see that the convergence of the business 
cycles is more and more visible in the euro area.  
FT: It's very interesting; you talked about financial integration down the credit channel. Does it 
present any problems that the City of London, which obviously plays a very important part in 
the clearing system, is actually outside the Euro Zone? 
JCT: It’s a very disputed question, of course. We would call ourselves – as you know, we don’t hide 
our position – for UK, to join in. We trust that the UK does not see the advantage of joining in because 
it is benefiting from the reforms that have been implemented in the UK, have been accepted by both 
the left and the right, the New Labour, if I may, and… 
FT: That’s Old Labour now! 
JCT: I don’t know what the appropriate name is! 
FT: It’s the end of New Labour… 
JCT: Well, you will tell me exactly how I should call that! But I am mentioning this sensitivity on the left 
as well as on the right, which has accepted that a flexible economy is paying off in terms of growth and 
job creation. The fact is that previous reforms are giving the UK a competitive edge. But if you look at 
the  figures,  Ireland  is  growing  faster  than  the  UK.  Ireland  has  a  GDP  per  capita,  which  is  higher. 
Fancy, Ireland in the euro area with a GDP per capita over and above the UK one? I mean are you so 
sure that the UK made the best choice! But again, it’s entirely up to the UK, to the UK government and 
to the UK people.  
FT: But it was a Frenchman – it wasn't you – who once said, ten years ago, without the UK, the 
Euro Zone would be like someone without a right arm.  
JCT:  I  don’t  know  which  Frenchman  told  you  that.  He  would  certainly  express  a  view,  which  is 
unanimous: we all call for the UK to get in. And the UK knows that. So it’s a very simple situation. We 
all  call  for  the  UK  to  get  in.  It’s  up  to  the  UK.  That  said,  even  without  the  UK,  we  are  318  million 
people. So even without the UK we are of the order of magnitude of the US. And on top of that, out of 
the 27 EU member states, 25 have no opting-out clause. So 25 have already committed themselves to 
enter when time comes, meaning when the Maastricht criteria are met. And on top of that, out of the 
two that have an opting out clause, one, Denmark, is already de facto in the euro area, and considers 
that the belonging de facto to the euro area is serving its national interest very well, on a bipartisan 
basis. 
FT: Could you just rehearse very briefly, for the British people, what the benefits would be of 
joining the Euro, say, tomorrow or in a years’ time? If we did join, what would be the benefits? 
JCT: I would say the UK has been absolutely instrumental in joining in on the very bold endeavour of 
the single act and the single market in the mid eighties. It was really something that had been decided 
upon by all Europeans at the time, of course, but I would say the UK had been very active, and rightly 
so. It was the start of the rebirth of the European drive. It was something, which has been absolutely 
fundamental in my understanding of the historical evolution of Europe. Then I would tell the UK: “that a 
single  market  to  which  you  are  so  profoundly  attached  is  not  achieved  without  a  single  currency.” 
Make the thought experiment for one second that you are in the US, and that currencies are different 
in Massachusetts, in California, in Florida, and Alaska, and tell me what would be exactly in your eyes, 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 7
the single market of the United States of America? At this stage my argument would be as simple as 
that. I stop there. 
FT: But we are in a single market? 
JCT: We are not in an achieved single market, because you still have, of course, between parts of the 
market this difference of exchange areas, this barrier, which remains. 
FT: But just to make this point clear, again, back in 1992, when Britain was in effect forced out 
of the ERM [European exchange rate mechanism], many people… 
JCT: By the market. 
FT: By the market, not by you, yes exactly, and we know that this was a terrible experience. It 
destroyed the Conservative government, but many people said, Britain would not be able to 
maintain a stable currency... Or Britain would be tempted into competitive devaluations, which 
would undermine a single market. None of this has happened. 
JCT:  Britain  has  made  extraordinary,  impressive  structural  reforms  that  have,  in  my  understanding, 
very profoundly transformed over the last 25 years the British economy for the better. That of course 
has nothing to do with the response to the currency question, but again, it’s up to the British people. 
It’s totally open, we all know that.  
FT: It’s an interesting moment, this is the end of the Blair decade; Gordon Brown has finally 
got his hands on the top prize. You’ve seen him for many years in Ecofin [EU finance ministers 
meetings].  What  do  you  think  his  leadership  will  bring  in  terms  of  the  contribution  to  the 
economic discussion? Might he be a bit more amenable on the euro? 
JCT: No, I will not embark into guessing what he will do on the euro. He certainly knows better than 
anybody that the UK is fully welcome.  
FT: What about enlargement of the Euro Zone? What does that mean for the workability of the 
ECB and the governing council? 
JCT: Firstly it is fantastic to experience this historical transformation. I have known a world where you 
have the north and the south, and the east and the west. We are in a different universe, conceptually. 
We [once] relied upon the balance of terror. I was once, as chairman of the Paris Club, in Moscow with 
colleagues of the G7, discussing the potential rescheduling of the Soviet Union debt. We still had a 
Soviet Union. We went to the Kremlin, and we were discussing with the master of the Soviet Union, 
with  Mr  Gorbachev.  Fancy  that  we  would  be  in  a  universe  where  we  have  now  one  previous 
communist country, Slovenia, which is part of the euro area. It is something, which is extraordinary. 
We are very positive ourselves on the enlargement. We consider it is a chance for Europe, it’s helping 
Europe,  it’s  helping  the  development  of  the  European  Union.  It’s  a  major  contribution  to  our  future 
growth and prosperity. You know that we have already settled in advance what will happen when we 
enlarge the euro area. We were called by the Nice treaty with an enabling clause to reflect on that and 
to propose an appropriate solution, when we are more numerous. We found out a unanimous solution. 
It’s one of the great successes of the ECB; being able to work out a solution and propose that solution 
unanimously. We were criticised by all institutions and partners. The parliament said, “it will not fly; it’s 
no good”. The commission was not on board. A number of economists were not happy with that, a 
number  of  governments  as  well.  But  finally  nobody  found  out  a  better  way,  and  we  have  been 
vindicated, it’s been adopted, and we know now how we will proceed in our decision making, even 
when we are much more numerous. I see now our work in this domain as reminding everybody that 
it’s very serious to enter into the euro area, that you have to converge correctly as required by the 
Maastricht Treaty, in your own interests, that you have to be in line with the criteria, not only in the 
moment that you take a snapshot, but also on a sustainable basis. We said that. I think it’s accepted 
and  well  understood  by  all  partners  as  being  a  condition  for  the  national  success  of  the  country 
concerned. We have also to protect the credibility of the euro area, so there is a joint interest in being 
as efficient and as professional as possible in organising this enlargement. We are not a closed shop. 
We  have  proved  that  with  the  entry  of  Slovenia.  And  again,  historically,  what’s  happening  is  very 
profoundly heartening.  
FT: Aren't you concerned a little bit about one or two examples, where some of the countries 
have clearly politicised the central bank – and interfered, or removed, or put pressure on the 
central bank governor to go?  
8 
 BIS Review 50/2007
JCT:  We  have  permanently  told  them,  we  and  the European  institutions,  including  the Commission 
and the Council that the independence of the central bank was integral part of our rules. I was myself 
public on that. At several moments we had to express our views because you know that in procedure, 
when you change your legislation on any kind of legislation that has to deal with monetary or financial 
matters, we have a say. So we have had several occasions to defend central banks independence. It 
is clear. It is in the Treaty. 
FT:  There  are  some  countries,  particularly  in  the  Baltic  States,  for  example,  which,  while 
they’ve experienced very impressive growth rates, inflation has been perhaps higher there than 
would be tolerable in Europe. Do you make any specific allowances for their stage of economic 
development before assessing whether they're eligible to come in, or does it have to be the 
Maastricht Treaty and nothing else? 
JCT: What we consider essential is: stick to the Maastricht criteria. Slovenia has proved that we could 
stick to the Maastricht criteria and be an open shop. And before, you also had some countries that 
were with a standard of living that was only a fraction of the European Union at the time, and entered 
the European Union, and became a great success. So we are totally sticking to the Maastricht Treaty 
and we will continue to apply those rules 
FT:  In  Davos,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  you  were  quite  prescient  in  your  comments  on 
under-pricing of risk, and during February and March we had quite a lot of turbulence in the 
financial markets. Markets have recovered since then; we're back to where we were before. I 
notice  you’ve  been  talking  again  about  risks  being  under  priced.  What  are  the  lessons  you 
draw from the experience so far, and is there more of a correction to come? Is that a risk that 
financial markets should be taking into consideration at the moment? 
JCT:  Let  me  first  say  that  I  would  not  make  a  prognosis  or  projections.  Obviously  we  are  not  in  a 
market that would be immobile; you have moves in spreads, you have moves in insurance premiums. 
You have moves also in the volatility that is observed, and we have seen corrections, we have seen 
tensions and corrections during the past months. So the market functions well. That being said, the 
appreciation of risks in general that we presently see on the market might be interpreted as signalling 
that  perhaps  all  the  risks  are  not  fully  appreciated,  fully  priced.  Again,  I'm  cautious  and  prudent, 
because  this  is  something  that  market  participants  have,  themselves,  to  judge.  But  we  call  on  all 
responsible entities not to be complacent and to improve as much as possible their risk management 
and to be aware that there are a number of characteristics that might explain the risk assessment in 
the  present  episode  of  global  finance,  but  that  they  might  not  be  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  I'm 
thinking in particular at the level of current account surpluses that you are observing in a number of 
economies in the emerging world, and which might contribute to the ex-ante savings being higher than 
ex-ante investment. Amongst other factors you have also, and perhaps more importantly, the creeping 
oil shock, which has created an additional pot of “forced savings” that is coming from the price of oil 
and commodities, and at the level of global finance, this contributes to create a global environment 
where ex-ante savings are superior to ex-ante investments. And then, perhaps this might contribute to 
explain this sentiment that you have when you discuss with market participants or financial institutions 
in general that they are observing a lot of capital everywhere, a lot of capital “chasing investment”. My 
experience is that the episodes in the global economy where you have “capital chasing investment” 
are  not  necessarily  sustainable  in  the  very  long  run.  You  have  normally  more  investment  chasing 
capital to be financed! So, again, let us look at the full picture. We have the chance of experiencing a 
remarkable growth at the level of the global economy. This is extremely rejoicing. In a large part of the 
world, particularly of course in emerging Asia, or in the emerging world in general, even in Africa, we 
see  sustainable  growth  in  the  real  economy,  which  is  higher  and  more  durable  than  what we  have 
seen in the last 30 years. So this is good. This is a matter for rejoicing. And it is our duty to do all what 
we  can  for  this  situation  to  be  as  sustainable  and  lasting  as  possible.  This  is  why  we  have  to  be 
cautious, encourage appropriate risk management and call for avoiding complacency. 
FT: This situation of excess capital, as you described it, what is the reason for this, and does 
loose  monetary  policy  by  central  banks  play  a  role?  And  should  one  pay  more  attention  to 
global effects of national decisions? 
JCT:  As  you  might  have  seen,  the  call  of  central  bank  governors  for  no  complacency  goes  in  all 
directions,  financial  institutions,  managers,  in  the  private  sector  as  well  as  in  the  public  sector.  As 
regards the central banks, I really trust that we are doing what we judge necessary, to be up to our 
responsibilities on both sides of the Atlantic, and both sides of the channel, of course, and everywhere 
in the world. The major reasons for observing what we are observing today? I mentioned two of them. 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 9
I mentioned the way the number of emerging countries are prudent and cautious. At the moment I'm 
speaking in terms of posting current account surpluses. I have mentioned the fact that we had the oil 
shock of the addition forced savings. I could certainly [also] mention the sophistication in the financial 
markets,  which  has  permitted,  obviously,  to  engage  in  a  remarkable  dissemination  of  risks  through 
sophisticated derivatives which perhaps explains also why you have an appreciation of risk, which is 
different now from what it was before. I would say all this has to be taken into account. Note that I 
don’t pretend to be exhaustive.  
FT: Let me ask about hedge funds, seeing as we're in Germany, where a political class seems 
to have an allergy to hedge funds. Do you think they should be regulated? 
JCT: I think that there is a large level of consensus now that a lot of progress, should continue to be 
made at the level of the prime brokers , in order for them to be as, I would say, aware as possible, of 
the risk that they are taking. And this, of course, is something, which can be checked by the banking 
surveillance  authorities,  so  there  is  a  way  to  improve  the  indirect  approach,  which  would  permit 
ensuring  that  through  those  financial  entities  that  are  regulated,  we  are  dealing  with  appropriate 
behaviour of the hedge funds themselves. You have another area where, I trust a lot of progress was 
made, since the discussion took place, in particular of the G7/G8, which is that we would be able to 
embark  on  what  I  would  call  “principles”  or  “codes  of  appropriate  behaviour  or  conduct”,  or  “good 
practice”  as  has  been  done  in  a  large  number  of  other  areas,  which  would  be  voluntary  code,  and 
which would, perhaps, permit to elaborate more on issues like: What do you expect as regards to the 
optimal  risk  management  inside  the  hedge  fund  itself?  What  do  you  expect  as  the  state  of  the  art 
exchange of appropriate information with your own investors? And what would you expect as regards 
to  your  own,  state  of  the  art  exchange  of  information  with  your  prime  brokers?  So  that  in  these 
different areas, namely the three areas I just mentioned, but not exclusively the industry itself would 
say what one should do when being an active participant in the industry it would behave properly, in a 
state of the art fashion. It seems to me that I trust that in a number of areas, we can proceed very 
much through the way of such voluntary codes. I, myself, was very happy, because in the domain of 
preventing and solving a financial crisis in the domain of sovereign risks, voluntary principles could be 
worked  out  by  issuers  and  lenders.  This  has  been  very  useful.  I  had  launched  this  particular  idea 
myself together with several friends. I was very happy to see that it could fly. 
FT: When was that? 
JCT: I launched it when I was Governor of the Banque de France, and it was at the time when the idea 
of having perhaps new legislation at a global level to run such a crisis was launched. It appeared that 
it didn’t fly for a variety of reasons, and finally the voluntary principles were put into a real existence, 
thanks to very active work done by issuing countries and by the private sector all encouraged by the 
G20. But again in general the avenue of voluntary “principles” or “codes“, seems to me promising. 
FT: The British are a little bit reticent, but interestingly Hank Paulson [US Treasury secretary] 
seems a bit more amenable. 
JCT:  Again,  I'm  cautious  and  prudent,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  there  is  an  emerging  consensus 
provided that we avoid regulatory and administrative measures but that we rely on a purely voluntary 
set of principles. 
FT: More generally, about the role of the eurozone, on the international stage. We were talking 
a  bit  about  the  global  imbalances.  Do  you  think  the  Euro  Zone  pulls  its  weight  in  the 
international  debate?  Should  there  be  more  involvement  in,  for  example  on  exchange  rate 
policy, and these sorts of discussions? Are there structural weaknesses because of the way 
the  eurozone  is  represented  politically  and  numbers  of  different  people  who  speak  from 
various bits of the eurozone, and the EU and…? 
JCT:  Again,  the  eurozone  is  an  entity  that  is  of  course  new,  on  the  other  hand,  in  all  informal 
groupings, it seems to me that the eurozone has found out its place. The President of Euro Group is in 
the G7. I am in the G7. In the IMF, of course the nations themselves legally are the “shareholders” of 
the IMF, but it seems to me that it’s been progressively clear that the Euro area has its place, in the 
IFMC, for instance, as well as in other groupings. In the Executive Board, Lorenzo Bini Smaghi follows 
the domain carefully. 
FT: A criticism made by Mr Sarkozy, for instance, was that the other regions, the United States 
or  Asia,  somehow  managed  to  fix  or  arrange  so  that  the  macro  economic  conditions,  the 
exchange  rate,  or  whatever,  are  more  favourable  for  the  economic  growth,  where  somehow 
Europe fails to create the right conditions on the international stage to boost growth. 
10 
 BIS Review 50/2007
JCT: As you now we are in a freely floating exchange system between major convertible currencies 
since  a  third of  a  century.  From  that  standpoint  the  euro  and  the  sterling  are  in  the  same situation 
together with, in particular the dollar and the yen. We meet regularly in what we call the G7. There you 
have  the  executive  branches  and  the  central  banks.  We  discuss  and  we  sign  a  communiqué  in 
particular on exchange rates. Let me stick to the Washington communiqué which was signed by all 
seven ministers and central bank governors as well as by Jean-Claude Juncker and myself. Le me 
add what I said after the communiqué was published. In three short sentences: 
Excess volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates are undesirable for economic 
growth. 
As the Japanese authorities have said, the Japanese economy is on a sustainable recovery 
path and the exchange rates should reflect these economic fundamentals whilst exchange 
markets should be aware that there are two-way risks in any bet. 
And I noted with interest that the US Secretary of the Treasury has confirmed that a strong 
dollar was in the interest of the US. 
FT: He's also suggested that a slightly stronger renminbi would also be a… 
JCT:  We,  together,  have  called  upon  our  Chinese  partners  to  let  their  currency  appreciate  in  an 
orderly fashion in their own interest. It is a message for, not only the Chinese, but for emerging Asia, 
since a long period of time, since our meeting of Boca Raton in Florida at the beginning of 2004. We 
have shaped that message together, European and American, and Japanese.  
FT: Do you think the Chinese are a little bit more amenable now, to a…? 
JCT:  I  fully  respect  their  responsibilities  and  it  is  their  decision.  They  know  that  we  consider  that  it 
would be in their interest and in the interest of all partners at a global level that we would go in this 
direction.  
FT: Do you think the World Bank is suffering a crisis of leadership at the moment? 
JCT: I have no comment. 
FT: You’re now nearly half way through your tenure as President… 
JCT: I have had the honour of this responsibility together with colleagues of the executive board and 
of the governing council for 3 years and a half. 
FT: But if one was to use a motoring metaphor, you’ve hit cruising speed. So what would you 
like to do as you plan ahead? What things do you have in mind for improving institution, and 
things you’d really like to contribute? 
JCT:  First  of  all,  when  you  have  the  chance  of  participating  in  a  historical  endeavour  of  such 
magnitude, it is difficult to speak of cruising speed. What is absolutely extraordinary is when I compare 
where we are now, after eight years and several months, with what was anticipated nine or ten years 
ago.  I  negotiated  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  together  with  Horst  Köhler  [German  president].  I  was 
explaining in New York and London what we were doing and the reasons we were doing it in, I would 
say, circles that ten years ago were quite sceptical. Even nine years ago! New York convinced itself 
that we would really set up the euro only at the end of the first quarter of 1998. From time to time I 
think that what we are doing is remarkable and that it is not very often in history that something of that 
dimension would be really done, surrounded by such scepticism at the very start of it. So what I would 
say, first of all, we should continue to preserve credibility and to run as well as possible this set up – of 
the  same  order  of  magnitude  of  say,  the  United  States  –  in  a  universe  where,  I  have  to  say,  the 
challenges are impressive. The Fed has its own challenges but we have the same. We have to run our 
monetary policy in a world that is changing so rapidly – India, China growing so fast, the full body of 
emerging  Asia  taking  off  equally  brilliantly,  science  and  technology  multiplying  discoveries.  I  myself 
was first trained as a mathematician and a specialist in physics in the French education system. From 
time  to  time  I  pinch  myself  because  I  have  a  difficulty  in  realizing  that  the  progress of  science and 
technology is so rapid and so overwhelming; it’s amazing. 
So are the challenges of globalisation, the take-off of emerging countries, and all the other structural 
changes that are at stake – change in science and technology, the ageing of our population in our own 
industrialised society. All these are the shared challenge of Mervyn King, and Bank of England, of Ben 
Bernanke, and the US Fed, of the ECB and all my colleagues in the various committees, here in the 
ECB’s Executive Board, and in the Governing Council. But on top of that in our case we have two 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 11
other challenges. And it’s really on top. We have the structural transformation of Europe – to achieve 
the  single  market  with  a single  currency.  And  we  are  far,  of  course,  from  having  achieved  a  single 
market with a single currency, particularly in the area of the services industry. And to enlarge. And we 
know  that  the  European  Union  has  not  finished  enlarging.  We  will  see  what  comes,  what  happens 
then,  but  it’s  really  a  historical  endeavour,  which  is  striking.  And  we  have  to  be  up  to  all  those 
challenges simultaneously. I would say we have five  challenges when other Institutions have three. 
And the three are already fantastic and call upon you to adapt to change rapidly, to explain tirelessly to 
our European fellow citizens that we can make the best out of the new world if we change sufficiently 
rapidly.  It  is  true  that  it  is  not  that  easy  to  change  as  rapidly  as  India  and  China  are  changing 
themselves… 
FT: Do you see the ECB having a specific role on some of those? Obviously price stability and 
credibility is your main goal but when you talk about the creation of a single market, and also 
of eurozone enlargement, does the ECB have a role itself it can actually play as a catalyst? 
JCT: Again, we must be up to those challenges. Clearly we must help achieve the single market. We 
must  help  achieve  the  structural  reforms.  I  already  said  that  we  support  structural  reforms  that  all 
governments  in  Europe  are  implementing  including  the  future  government  of  President  Sarkozy  in 
France.  It’s  clear  that  the  role  of  the  ECB,  the  role  of  the  national  central  banks  members  of  the 
Eurosystem, in this domain, is more of a catalyst nature. Again the Eurosystem has a responsibility to 
explain to 318 million fellow citizens why we would be better off with reform.  
On financial integration, I would say we go further, of course, as you know. We trust that we have a 
catalyst role to play and we have several examples of the role being played. STEP [the short term 
European  paper  initiative],  for  instance,  is  a  good  example,  where  we  helped  the  private  sector 
crystallising  its  own  progress  and  improvement.  Eonia  [the  European  overnight  index  average  –  a 
measure  of  the  overnight  euro  interbank  interest  rate]  is  of  course  is  something  that  we  foster 
ourselves. But we not only play a catalyst role. You know to what extent, of course, Target2 [a new 
generation payments system] has been very important. We will have Target2 running at the end of the 
year and it’s also something that is very striking because it will be a single infrastructure at the level of 
the euro area. At the very beginning we were connecting the various national infrastructures, then the 
second generation is a unique infrastructure. We have the endeavour of Target2Securities [a planned 
eurozone  securities  settlement  system]  –  a  lot  of  areas  where  we  push,  we  say  that  we  are  at  the 
disposal of the private sector. We have of course the SEPA [Single European payments area] project, 
which  is  also  a  very  ambitious  one,  and  where  we  have  played  a  role  as  a  catalyst,  crystallising 
positions.  In  all  these  domains  the  Eurosystem  is  very  active.  In  the  Executive  Board  Gertrude 
Tumpel-Gugerell  and  José  Manuel  González-Páramo  are  devoting  a  lot  of  time  to  foster  financial 
integration together with the Vice-President. 
FT:  Is  there  is  a  danger,  particularly  on  the  structural  reform,  that  you  get  this  political 
backlash because… you hear it from politicians; the ECB lectures us about structural reform, 
but  we’re  not  allowed  to  talk  about  monetary  policy,  or  exchange  rate  policy.  And  you  are 
independent; you’re not an elected…  
JCT: Two or three remarks. Generally I’m told that more in the domain of fiscal position. We haven’t 
spoken too much about fiscal policies. But I have to say that in the domain of structural reforms, what 
we do is to tirelessly explain. A large number of governments, if not all, are absolutely convinced that it 
will be the right direction, but are meeting resistance in their own public opinion or society. So what we 
are trying to do is to help convincing public opinion. I have observed, on the other hand, that in the 
domain  of  fiscal  policies,  there  is  a  slight  difference  of  culture,  if  I  may  very  cautiously  suggest, 
between the UK and continental Europe. It’s always been state of the art in continental Europe that the 
central  bank  makes  an  assessment  on  the  fiscal  policies  and  calls  for  fiscal  soundness.  It  was  the 
case,  even  when  the  national  central  banks  were  not  independent.  Everybody  was  expecting  the 
central  bank  to  express  publicly  such  opinions  –  whether  it  was  in  Germany,  in  Italy,  in  the 
Netherlands, in Belgium, in France etc. Perhaps in the UK it would be considered not exactly part of 
the  division  of  labour  but  I’ll  let  you  judge.  What  is  true  is  that  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  in  the 
Eurosystem there is no new concept, we always have called for fiscal soundness. 
FT: It didn’t seem to have much influence over successive French governments, though. They 
haven’t balanced the budget for how many years? 25? 
JCT: I am speaking of continental Europe as a whole. In each country that depends. You have several 
episodes. At the moment I am speaking a lot of homework has to be done and is being done. And the 
commitment  that  was  taken  in  Berlin  under  the  chairmanship  of  Peer  Steinbrück  for  euro  area 
12 
 BIS Review 50/2007
countries, to achieve their medium term objective of sound budgetary positions as soon as possible 
and by 2010 at the latest, were praised by the Governing Council. 
FT:  Listening  to  you  when  you  talk  about  being  part  of  this  historic  endeavour,  an 
extraordinary  achievement  and  that  Europe  will  be  expand  –  you  sound  so  much  more 
comfortable about this than some of your compatriots. 
JCT: I don’t think that it is disputable, frankly speaking, that in terms of ideas, in terms of reference to 
political democracy and human rights on the one hand and of market economics on the other hand the 
handful  of  countries  that  have  started  European  Union  have  won.  And  all  the  founding  fathers  of 
Europe, in particular my country and the five others which were so happy to see other nations joining 
them progressively and finally rapidly, including the UK, have proved remarkably lucid and visionary in 
historical terms. They were trying to promote peace, liberty and prosperity in their part of Europe, with 
a view to win against the values and the threats which were on the other side of the Iron Curtain.  
I  have  already  said  that we  ourselves  in  Europe  had  all  the normal  challenges  of  the  industrialized 
countries  plus  two  others:  the  deepening  of  the  European  construction  and  enlargement.  Our  main 
task is to face up with the implications of five major successes and paradoxically it is not easy. The 
countries that were the poorest of the world are now growing very fast. We called for that since World 
War Two. It’s a first success. Science and technology are developing extremely rapidly – of course it’s 
a second major success. Life expectancy is rapidly increasing. It’s a third fantastic success associated 
with science and technology applied to human health. The European construction has proved effective 
and efficient in transforming Western Europe. It is a fourth success. And partially as a consequence of 
this economic and structural success the iron curtain fell, a major fifth success. But each and every of 
those  successes  are  making  as  many  new  challenges.  They  call  for  changes  in  the  international 
division  of  labour,  for  changes  in  the  production  process  in  the  production  sector,  for  dramatic 
reviewing of the financing of pensions and for particular structural transformation of our economies in 
Europe associated both with the integration of Europe and with enlargement. If we accept to adopt 
and  engage  in  an  appropriate  pace  of  reforms  the  five  successes/challenges,  turn  out  of  the  real, 
effective chances. And then a virtuous circle can start. I don’t say that it is easy and I think it would be 
very  naïve  to  say  that  it  is  easy.  I  have  the  feeling  that  the  lucidity  of  the  large  public  opinion,  the 
lucidity of our people is key for a successful future. As far as we are concerned we will continue to be 
an  anchor  of  stability  and  to  deliver  price  stability  and  the  confidence  with  goes  with  it  in  our  vast 
continental economy. 
FT: That’s very interesting: what you just said is, “we have won”. If you’re thinking about the 
battle in ideas, the idea is that, yes, the European Union should enlarge. Yes, that there should 
be an embrace of markets. Yes, that the battle in favour of price stability has also been won. Is 
that correct? Would that be a fair summation? 
JCT: I mean, it’s never definitely won. It is no time for complacency. And success in any domain can 
never be taken for granted. But we have won a lot of battles and it is a formidable encouragement for 
the future, in Europe, across the Atlantic and, for the first time since very long, really at a global level. 
But have we made a lot of progress, yes, in these domains – at a global level. 
BIS Review 50/2007 
 13
