Erkki Liikanen: Population ageing, pension savings and the financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  International  Conference  of 
Social Security Actuaries and Statisticians, Helsinki, 23-25 May 2007.  
 Population  ageing has  become  an  integral part of  international debate  on economic  policy  and  has 
attracted a lot of attention in recent years. I joined the Bank of Finland in July 2004. The first major 
international  event  I  participated  in  was  a  symposium  on  global  demographic  change.  This  was 
organised in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, USA. The opening remarks were made by Alan Greenspan. All 
the prominent central bankers from all over the world were present together with leading economists. 
So it became clear to me from my first days as a governor that ageing is a major issue also for the 
financial markets.  
As you all know so well, when we look at current projections of population trends in the future, the 
scale of the problem is staggering. This is an issue that affects every country in the world. In its latest 
population projection, the UN forecast the median age of Europe's population will rise by almost 10 
years  between  2000  and  2050.  In  Asia  and  South  America,  the  increase  will  be  even  faster.  The 
increase will be smallest in North America, only around 6 years. The median age of the world as a 
whole is at present rising by around 8 days every month.  
Everybody understands that this degree of change in population structure must affect the economy in 
many ways. A harder question is to determine precisely what these effects will be. We have very little 
empirical data on changes in the age structure of the population. This means that, when we study this 
issue, we have to rely to a great extent on theoretical analysis and models.  
Today, I'd like to discuss the importance of pension savings as a source of finance on the international 
financial markets. I will also take a look at the impact of changing population structure and pension 
reforms on the determination of real interest rates internationally. In that context, I shall also present 
estimation  results  of  the  Bank  of  Finland  Dynamic  General  Equilibrium  Model,  which  analyses  the 
consequences of ageing for overall economic dynamics.  
Pension savings and the financial markets 
Preparing for old age is one of the most important reasons why people save and is also a key source 
of market finance. The pension funds are major players on the financial markets. Still, this is just one 
of  the  financial  market  impacts  of  ageing.  Besides  the  pension  funds'  own  investments,  a  large 
proportion  of  private  share-ownership,  unit  trust  investment,  bank  deposits  etc.  reflect  people's 
preparation for old age. How large a proportion is impossible to assess. There are many reasons why 
people save, and there is no simple way to quantify their relative shares.  
Financial markets play an important and increasing role in the management of ageing-related risk. But 
it is clear that it is possible to hedge only a certain part of ageing-related risks on the financial markets. 
A little imagination can illustrate the magnitude of savings needed to fully fund pension liabilities. Let's 
first  imagine  a  country  with  a  developed  economy  in  which  the  birth  rate,  retirement  age  and  life 
expectancy  are  such  that  the  elderly  dependency  ratio  (the  ratio  of  over-65s  to  the  working-age 
population) is 23%, the present average for the developed economies. Imagine, next, that all the over-
65s have retired and all those of working age are actually working. Imagine, further, that the country 
has a fully funded pension scheme that provides a pension equal to 60% of the average wage in the 
economy  at  any  given  moment.  If  we  then  add  a  few  typical  assumptions  regarding  productivity 
growth, real interest rates and production technology, we can estimate how large the pension funds 
would  become  in  the  long  term.  The  answer  this  calculation  yields  is  approximately  340%  of  the 
country's  gross  domestic  product!  This  is  an  enormous  amount.  As  a  comparison  we  could  take 
Finland's national assets, which, depending on the definition we choose, are worth 4–5 times the value 
of GDP.  
Next we can add in the effect of population ageing. The UN estimates that the elderly dependency 
ratio  of  the  developed  economies  will  increase  to  44%  by  the  year  2050.  If  we  repeat  the  above 
calculation  with  an  assumed  elderly  dependency  ratio  of  44%  instead  of  23%,  the  result  is  an 
enormous increase in the required value of the pension funds. In the long term, the funds would grow 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 1
to around 640% of GDP! Different assumptions would yield slightly different results, but the general 
magnitude would be similar.  
What do such highly categorised calculations tell us? They do perhaps tell us two things. In the first 
place,  they  tell  us  that  it  is  hard  to  provide  pension  security  of  the  assumed  level  solely  through  a 
funded  pension  scheme.  It  is  not  possible  to  maintain  funds  worth  six  times  the  value  of  GDP,  not 
nationally, and particularly not globally. The supply of productive investments would quite simply run 
out.  An  economy  with  real  assets  worth  more  than  six  times  the  value  of  GDP  would  be  strongly 
overcapitalised, and its return on capital insignificant. Thus, it is clear that a large part of the funds 
needed to pay our future pensions will inevitably have to be covered through pay-as-you-go schemes.  
The  second  thing  we can take  from  these  calculations  is  that,  even  if  pension  provision  is  covered 
primarily  through  pay-as-you-go  schemes  and  only  a  small  proportion  is  funded,  the  volume  of  the 
pension  funds  would  still  be  very  large.  From  this  we  can  conclude  that  the  way  in  which  pension 
provision  is  divided  between  funded  and  pay-as-you-go  schemes  will  be  one  of  the  key  factors 
shaping the future of the financial and capital markets.  
The baby-boomers and financial market meltdown 
A few years ago, a new concept, “financial market meltdown”, began to gain currency in the debate 
over the future of the financial markets. It refers to some calculations on the retirement of the baby-
boom  generation.  When  they  retire,  the  baby-boomers  will  stop  saving  towards  their  pensions  and 
begin  to  consume  the  assets  they  have  already  accrued.  According  to  the  meltdown  concept  this 
would destroy the balance of the financial markets: buyers would disappear when the pension funds 
begin  to  realise  their  assets.  The  price  of  the assets would  then  collapse and  the  value of  pension 
savings be wiped out – or so the argument goes.  
Most  recent  research  paints  a  less  dramatic  picture  of  the  future.  I  already  mentioned  the  Jackson 
Hole  symposium  in  2004.  It  concluded  that  the  change  in  population  structure  is  more  likely  to  be 
reflected on the financial markets as fluctuations in demand for different types of financial instrument 
than  as  a  general  collapse  in  prices.  One  development  that  was  considered  particularly  likely  was 
growth in demand for insurance-type instruments.  
The impact that the retirement of the baby-boomers will have on the financial markets will be softened 
by at least three factors. In the first place, some commentators have drawn attention to the fact that 
pensioners' actual consumption behaviour does not seem to be the same as assumed in the models: 
pensioners do not realise their assets with anything like the speed the theoretical models would lead 
us  to  believe.  Financial  assets  certainly  decline  during  retirement,  but  it's  a  slow  process,  and  a 
considerable proportion remains intact until death. When this is taken into account in the calculations, 
the result is a considerable reduction in the forecast financial market impact of ageing.  
Another factor that will serve to prevent sudden price movements is the fact that the retirement of the 
baby-boomers can be anticipated. Events that can be anticipated are not going to cause a collapse on 
the rationally based financial markets. Thus, if the retirement of the baby-boom generation is seen to 
change the balance of supply and demand for financial instruments, the markets will already take this 
into account in their pricing years before the baby-boomers actually retire.  
The  resistance  of  the  financial  markets  will  also  be  improved  by  a  third  factor.  At  least  in  those 
countries where pension cover is based to a considerable degree on private savings, there will be a 
mutual self-correcting interaction between the retirement of the baby-boomers and asset prices. If the 
approaching retirement of the baby-boom generation began to build up sales pressures on the asset 
markets and push down the prices of stocks, bonds and houses, this would reduce the value of the 
baby-boomers' own assets. Many pension savers would then face a situation in which their pension 
assets  would  no  longer  allow  them  to  maintain  the  standard  of  living  they  had  hoped  for  in  their 
retirement. Some of those who had already planned to retire would then find themselves forced to stay 
on  at  work  longer  than  they  had  intended.  This  would  increase  the  level  of  pension  savings  and 
reduce the number of pensioners, improving the balance on the financial markets and preventing a 
price collapse.  
2 
 BIS Review 53/2007
A  study  at  the  Bank  of Finland  by  Tuomas  Saarenheimo1  on  the financial  market  impact of  ageing 
introduces  another  point  of  view  that  has  received  less  attention  in  international  discussion:  the 
change  in  people's  lifespan.  This  means  higher  life  expectancy  and,  especially,  longer  retirement. 
From  1950  until  the  present  day,  the  additional  life  expectancy  of  a  person  aged  60  has  grown  by 
around  5  years.  It  now  stands  at  22  years.  By  the  year  2050  it  is  forecast  to  grow  again  by 
approximately  another  5  years.  The  trend  is  more  or  less  the  same  everywhere  apart  from  those 
African countries that are suffering most from the AIDS epidemic.  
For the sustainability of public pension schemes it would be good if part of this longer lifespan could be 
devoted to remaining longer at work before retiring. So far, there exists only weak evidence of such a 
trend.  The  most  likely  outcome  is  that,  in  the  future,  most  of  these  extra  years  will  be  spent  in 
retirement. In the next few decades we can expect the time spent in retirement to increase by about a 
quarter.  
It is clear that an increase of this size in life expectancy increases the need to prepare for the funding 
of  retirement  pensions.  Retirement  lasting  over  20  years  costs  more  than  15  years.  Some  of  the 
increased costs will be covered by publicly funded pay-as-you-go schemes (particularly in Continental 
Europe), but the need and desire for private pension savings will also increase.  
According to a study conducted at the Bank of Finland, the increase in savings will be considerable. 
The  study  anticipates  a  large  increase  in  the  saving  ratio  of  a  typical  European  62-year-old 
approaching the end of his working life. According to the model used, the ratio is at present a good 
30%  of  disposable  income.  As  a  result  of  increased  life  expectancy  this  is  anticipated  to  grow  to 
around 40% by the year 2050. This is despite the fact that public pension schemes will cover most of 
the costs of living in retirement. If public pension benefits are cut, the increase in the saving ratio could 
be much stronger.  
Thus, global savings will  in  future be shaped  by  two  opposing  factors.  On  one  hand,  declining  age 
cohorts will reduce the number of pension savers relative to the number of retired persons consuming 
previous savings. On the other hand, lengthening lifespans will make people of working age keener to 
save. The calculations conducted at the Bank of Finland suggest that this latter trend will be stronger, 
at least over the next couple of decades. Only around the year 2030 will the impact of declining age 
cohorts begin to dominate and depress the level of savings. Even then, the impact will be gradual and 
visible mainly as slower growth in new investment funds entering the financial markets, not a collapse 
in investment.  
Of course, we should not see these types of calculations as forecasts. Predicting economic trends for 
decades ahead is not realistic, and that is not the intention. The idea has been to apply a mainstream 
economic research model to analyse the likely economic impact of certain demographic trends that 
can already be relatively well anticipated.  
To  the  list  of  factors  increasing  pension  savings  we  can  add  another,  more  speculative  motive. 
Attitudes towards retirement would appear to be changing. At one time people stopped working when 
their  working  capacity  had  declined  so  much  that  they  could  no  longer  work  productively.  But 
expectations have changed. People can increasingly look forward to many years of healthy life after 
retirement. Many now see their retirement years as an opportunity to enjoy their leisure time in a way 
that  was  impossible  while  they  were  at  work.  There  appear  to  be  rising  expectations  about 
consumption levels during retirement. An increasing readiness to consume in retirement also means 
an increasing need for pension savings. How large an impact this change in attitude will have on the 
financial markets is hard to assess, but the direction of the impact is surely clear.  
We can, then, sum up our discussion with the observation that ageing, and particularly the retirement 
of the baby-boom generation, will slow volume growth of the financial markets, but current estimates 
suggest  growth  will  nevertheless  continue,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  fear  sudden  or  strong  price 
disturbances.  
                                                      
1   See Tuomas Saarenheimo: Ageing, interest rates and financial flows, Bank of Finland Discussion paper 2/2005 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 3
Ageing, real interest rates and public pension schemes 
Although there is no immediate prospect of a collapse in global asset prices, population ageing will still 
impact on the economy and the financial markets in a number of ways. In the developed world, there 
will be slower growth in the labour force, and without large-scale immigration the labour force will in 
fact  begin  to  contract.  The  resulting  contraction  in  labour  supply  will  weaken  the  profitability  of 
investments and hence reduce the overall volume of investment. This will mean slower growth in the 
capital stock. Coupled with the smaller labour force, this, in turn, will produce sluggish growth in GDP.  
All these factors will affect the formation of the equilibrium interest rate – in other words, the level of 
real interest that balances investment and savings and is in harmony with price stability and balanced 
growth.  
The scale of these of interest rate effects has been estimated in a number of studies. Almost every 
one  of  these  studies  has observed  that  ageing  reduces  both willingness  to  save  and  willingness  to 
invest. With regard to the formation of real interest rates the key question is which of the two reacts 
more  strongly,  savings  or  investment.  Generally  speaking,  the  most  comprehensive  calculations 
suggest the change will be more marked in investment, resulting in a decline in the equilibrium interest 
rate. For example, the research literature suggests the results of the Bank of Finland calculations are 
fairly  typical, with  the demographic changes  reducing  global  real interest  rates  –  other  things  being 
equal – by around 0.7 percentage points over the next quarter of a century.  
In these projections, the role of public pension schemes is both central and very interesting. As I said 
at  the  outset,  the  extent  to  which provision  is  made  for  paying  pensions  by  funding  (through  pillars 
one,  two  or  three),  and  the  extent  to  which we  rely  on  public  pay-as-you-go schemes,  is of  central 
importance  to  the  supply  of  finance.  At  the  present  moment,  public  pay-as-you-go  schemes 
predominate,  particularly  in  Europe.  Their  future  is,  however,  uncertain.  What  is  certain  is  that,  if 
pension systems are not radically reformed, there will be a dramatic rise in the scale of the pension 
contributions  levied  to  finance  pay-as-you-go  schemes.  The  Bank  of  Finland's  calculations  indicate 
that pension contributions in Europe would rise from their present level of around 16% of aggregate 
wages to around 28% by the year 2040. Japan, which starts out from a lower base, would end up at 
approximately  the  same  level.  Even  in  the  United  States,  where  population  ageing  is  slower,  the 
pension contribution percentage would rise from 11% to almost 20%.  
Economic policy and macroeconomic consequences of ageing 
The above calculations treat economic growth as exogenous: public pension systems, financed by tax-
like pension contributions, redistribute income but do not affect economic activity. This is, of course, 
unrealistic.  We  know,  on  the  basis  of  both  theoretical  and  empirical  literature,  that  higher  taxes  do 
affect  behaviour,  and  in  a  manner  that  makes  maintaining  fiscal  sustainability  in  an  ageing  society 
even  more  challenging.  When  a  government,  responding  to  the  rising  fiscal  cost  of  ageing,  raises 
taxes or tax-like pension contributions, people will  adapt their behaviour, economic growth will slow 
down,  and  slower  growth  will  generate  less  tax  revenues.  (This  is  a  manifestation  of  the  infamous 
Laffer  curve.)  Hence,  taxes  will  need  to  be  raised  even  more  than  the  calculations  with  the  global 
savings/investment framework would suggest.  
To  quantify  these  effects,  I'd  like  to  refer  to  another  study  conducted  at  the  Bank  of  Finland.  It 
analyses the economic implications of ageing when the economic costs resulting from tax distortions 
are also systematically taken into account. In that study, the economic costs of ageing for the Finnish 
economy were estimated in a general equilibrium macroeconomic model2.  
According to this study, even with retirement age increasing by 2-3 years, income taxes and tax-like 
pension contribution rates would need to rise substantially to bring public finances on to a sustainable 
                                                      
2   This model covers variables of consumption, labour supply and investment decisions defining the dynamics of the economy 
and its long-term equilibrium. Demographic ageing has some direct behavioural implications in the model, as consumers 
take changes in the length of working life and period of retirement into account when making decisions on consumption and 
labour  supply.  In  the  face  of  an  expected  extension  of  the  period  of  retirement,  consumers  of  working  age  will  make 
appropriate  provision  by  increasing  their  savings.  Conversely,  expectations  of  a  longer  working  life  will  boost  the 
consumption of the working-age population in step with higher expected permanent income. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2007
path3. On the other hand, the analysis indicates that if, instead of increasing pension contributions, 
pension  replacement  rates  were  reduced,  households  would  respond  by  increasing  their  labour 
supply, and the loss in economic activity would remain far smaller. The required reduction in pensions 
would, however, be drastic, and so would its social and political costs. 
If it were to materialise, the large global increase in public pension contributions would not only mean 
an intergenerational income transfer, but could also entail losses in employment. At the same time, the 
growing  fiscal  cost  of  elderly  care  would  increase  pressure  to  raise  taxes.  It  is  doubtful  whether 
pension contributions could really rise this much, particularly at a time when the increasing mobility of 
both labour and capital is reducing national governments' room for manoeuvre in taxation.  
The effort to achieve a more sustainable base for our pension systems has in recent years been a key 
plank of economic policy throughout the developed world. The sustainability of pension systems can, 
of  course,  also  be  improved  by  postponing  retirement.  This,  would  increase  the  number  of  people 
paying in and reduce the number of people receiving benefits. Postponing retirement would slow the 
growth in pension expenditure, increase the supply of labour, improve the return on investments and 
accelerate economic growth.  
For the financial markets, the most important feature the various pension reforms all have in common 
has  been  the  attempt  to  reduce  the  role  of  pay-as-you-go  schemes  in  providing  an  income  for  the 
elderly. This does not necessarily mean the increased use of funded schemes within public pension 
systems.  Macroeconomically,  the  same  result  could  be  achieved  simply  by  reducing  or  restricting 
access to the benefits of pay-as-you-go schemes. These types of reform would mean a reduction in 
the transfer of income from future age cohorts to present cohorts. As a result, the present generation's 
expected  income  flow  would  be  reduced,  people would  become  keener  to  take  out  private  pension 
insurance to bridge the gap, and the saving ratio of the economy as a whole would rise. We all know 
how difficult such reforms would be politically.  
It is interesting to note that the impact on financial market balance if the retirement age is raised is 
precisely opposite to the impact of cutting pension benefits. In the end, the fall in real interest would be 
either  small  or  non-existent.  In  this  calculation,  an  extra  four  years  at  the  end  of  working  life 
(worldwide)  would  be  enough  to  neutralise  the  downward  pressure  of  population  ageing  on  real 
interest rates.  
These calculations are essentially a mental exercise and should not be taken literally. It is, however, 
clear that developments in pension savings and public pension systems are among the key factors 
that will shape the macroeconomics, supply of finance and the future of the financial markets.  
Transparency and credibility of pension systems 
Irrespective  of  how  much  future  pensions  end  up  being  funded,  balanced  economic  development 
requires two vital qualities of any pension scheme: transparency and credibility.  
Transparency means that those covered by the scheme understand what sort of security it provides 
them  and  what  it  will  cost  them.  Pension  schemes  should  be  understandable  –  they  should  not 
mislead their customers to over- or under-estimate their pension security. This is, of course, obvious 
from a human and social perspective, but it is also important macroeconomically: misunderstandings 
will sooner or later come to light, and the result then could be sudden changes in people's savings and 
investment behaviour that could destabilise the financial markets.  
Another  important  perspective,  one  regarding  the  credibility  of  the  pension  system,  relates  to  the 
nature of contributions and incentive effects. In a credible, actuarily fair system, pension contributions 
accrue in full to augment the beneficiary's personal pension assets. They are in this respect equivalent 
to  personal  savings.  This  type  of  contribution  does  not  have  the  unfavourable  incentive  effect  of 
taxation.  Pension  contributions  only  begin  to  take  on  the  nature  of  tax  when  the  system  begins  to 
move  away  from  this  ideal.  The  further  a  system  departs  from  the  credible,  actuarily  fair  ideal,  the 
more pension contributions become just another tax.  
                                                      
3   Juha Kilponen – Helvi Kinnunen – Antti Ripatti: Population ageing in a small open economy – some policy experiments with 
a tractable general equilibrium model, Bank of Finland Discussion paper 28/2006 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 5
The message for policymakers preparing the reform of pension systems is clear: the goal has to be a 
clear  and  sustainable  system.  Thus,  on  one  hand  the  reform  must  guarantee  the  long-term 
sustainability of the system, while on the other hand providing people with a clear and unvarnished 
picture of their public pension security so they can plan properly for their personal future needs.  
In conclusion, 
we  can  draw  a  number  of  different  conclusions  from  the  calculations  that  have  been  done  on  the 
effects of population ageing. One thing is, however, clear: the world is facing demographic changes 
that will have considerable implications for the economy and the financial markets. On one hand, the 
end of labour force growth, and in many countries its reversal, will lead to lower investment demand. 
On the other hand, the change in population structure will tend to reduce the flow of savings and the 
supply  of  finance.  At  the  same  time,  lengthening  lifespans,  and  especially  more  years  spent  in 
retirement, will increase the need to finance private pension security.  
Management  of  the  economic  and  social  consequences  of  population  ageing  will  require  three 
mutually supportive elements. In the first place, the volumes needed for financing pensions mean the 
system will always have to be based on a public pay-as-you-go scheme. On top of this there will also 
be  a  need  for  a  solid  funded  element  to  balance  out  disturbances,  spread  the  burden  between 
generations and thus help the economy adapt to the demographic changes. As a third pillar, we will 
also need to provide a clear framework for private pension savings that will provide scope for personal 
planning and fill any gaps that may remain in the public system.  
6 
 BIS Review 53/2007
