Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Developments in the evolution of central banking and 
challenges faced by central bankers 
Inaugural  speech  by  Mr  Ajith  Nivard  Cabraal,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
International  Course  on  Central  Banking  organized  by  the  Centre  for  Banking  Studies,  Colombo, 
22-23 May 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  to  address  you  at  the  opening  ceremony  of  this  international  course  on 
Central Banking. Let me also welcome all the participants to the course and extend to the participants 
from overseas countries and Prof. Sinclair, a very warm welcome to our country. 
The Centre for Banking Studies(CBS) has provided training opportunities for officers in the financial 
sector in Sri Lanka over the last 26 years. It also has past experience in coordinating a number of 
international programmes of the SEACEN Centre, APRACA and World Bank held in Sri Lanka. Also 
several officers of central banks in SARRC countries have participated in the scheduled programmes 
of  the  Centre,  though  they  were  not  specially  designed  for  an  international  audience.  This  Central 
Banking course in fact is the very first international programme designed and conducted by CBS. I am 
glad  that  there  are  14  overseas  participants  at  this  first  programme.  I  congratulate  CBS  for 
successfully organizing it. I am sure that there will be more overseas participants in the forthcoming 
international  programmes.  Our  plan  is  to  invite  eminent  resource  persons  to  conduct  these 
international programmes. I am glad that we were able to have the service of Prof. Peter Sinclair of 
university  of  Birmingham  who  h  as  served  as  Director,  Centre  for  Banking  Studies,  of  the  Bank  of 
England to conduct this programme. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  highlight  some  interesting  developments  in  the  evolution  of  central 
banking and some challenges faced by central bankers. 
The role of central banks has evolved over past several decades. You may recall that the original task 
of  central  banks  was  not  the  conducting  of  monetary  policy  or  supporting  the  banking  system  but 
financing  government  spending.  The  oldest  central  bank  of  the  world,  the  Bank  of  Sweden  was 
established in 1668 largely as means to finance military spending . The Bank of England was said to 
have  been  created  in  1694  to  fund  a  war  with  France.  Even  as  recently  as  late  1940’s  a  labour 
chancellor of the exchequer, Stafford Cripps was said to have described the Bank of England as “ his 
bank”. Today, it is a taboo for most central banks to finance government deficits. 
Most countries have managed their affairs without a central bank for a long time. At the beginning of 
this century there were only 18 central banks. The USA managed without a central bank until 1913. 
Private banks issued their own currency notes and coins and banking crises were fairly frequent. The 
Federal Reserve Bank of USA was established mainly to supervise banks and act as lender of last 
resort. Today, only a few central banks, including Fed Reserve is still responsible for bank supervision. 
Others have handed this job to a separate agency.  
In  the  1960’s  the  conventional  economic  wisdom  was  that  monetary  policy  could  reduce 
unemployment and directly promote economic growth. The theoretical basis for this was provided by 
the famous Phillips curve, which depicted an inverse relationship between inflation and unemployment 
in  Britain;  when  unemployment  was  high  inflation  was  low  and  vice  versa.  This  appeared  to  have 
suggested  that  central  banks  could  permanently  reduce  unemployment  by  tolerating  a  bit  more 
inflation.  In  fact,  many  countries  attempted  to  do  so.  We  all  have  our  experience  in  attempting  to 
directly promote economic activities by releasing high powered money through various credit schemes 
and direct involvement in development activities. However, at the end we had more inflation, either 
visible or hidden, without an appreciable reduction in unemployment or improvement in growth. In fact, 
the rate of inflation associated with a given level of unemployment had risen through the 1970’s and 
policy makers had to abandon the Philip curve. 
This in fact was predicted by Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps who challenged the Phillip curve. 
As they pointed out, the trade off between inflation and unemployment was only short term. As soon 
as people come to expect higher inflation they would demand higher wages, and unemployment would 
rise again . There is no trade off between inflation and unemployment. In the long run, monetary policy 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 1
could influence only inflation. Today most central banks are concentrating their monetary policies on 
maintaining price stability; and maintaining inflation at lower stable levels. 
John Exter, founder Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka emphasized on the very first day of the 
establishment of the Central Bank, “There is no financial wizardry by which the Bank can suddenly pull 
out of a hat a higher standard of living for everybody. The Bank’s contribution must necessarily be a 
long-run contribution. The Bank does not itself produce goods and services, but it should, by creating 
the right monetary conditions enable the country…. to do so ”. 
Central  bankers  would  like  very  much  to  have  the  ability  of  a  captain  or  a  pilot  who  knows  exactly 
where  he  is  heading,  how  his  craft  (i.e.  economy)  works  and  how  his  actions  affect  it  course. 
Unfortunately we do not have that ability and as observed by some, we are more like early navigators 
who operate in a world of huge uncertainty with no reliable maps or compasses. Because of lags in 
the availability of statistics, we cannot know precisely, all the information we need. Policy instruments 
in our possession operate with time lags which are also not entirely precise. Over the years, we have 
acquired powers and independence, but there are limitations in any central bank’s ability to steer its 
economy with precision. Hence, central banking indeed is a challenging task, which requires continued 
efforts to explore how our economies work and how our policy instruments operate. 
There is a school of thought that suggests the sole objective of central banks should be price stability. 
Accordingly many countries have adopted the inflation targeting approach in their conduct of monetary 
policy. Price Stability indeed is essential for sustained economic growth and there is no argument that 
it  should  be  pursued.  Moreover,  the  inflation  targeting  approach  has  the  benefit  of  building  up  the 
credibility  and  commitment  of  a  Central  Bank.  However,  there  is  a  risk  that  central  banks  may 
concentrate  on  achieving  price  stability  as  measured  by  a  consumer  price  index,  which  may  not 
necessarily  guarantee  economic  and  financial  stability.  With  globalization  and  improvement  in 
productivity,  there  has  been  a  general  tendency  for  inflation  to  remain  relatively  low.  Though,  price 
stability in terms of a consumer price index is achieved, there could be other imbalances arising from 
excessive  demand  pressure  which  may  be  reflected  in  assets  price  inflation  and  external  payment 
imbalances.  There  could  also  be  a  danger  of  developing  deflationary  conditions  which  depresses 
growth.  Therefore,  it  is  important  that  central  banks  take  into  account  other  signs  of  economic 
imbalances in designing their policies, even though the sole objective may be defined as price stability. 
The  Central  bank  of  Sri  Lanka  has  defined  its  key  objective,  not  simply  as  price  stability,  but  as 
economic and price stability. This is expected to prevent the Bank from trying to stabilize a price index 
rather than ensuring overall price stability in the economy. 
Though some central banks have delegated the bank supervision function to a separate agency, it is 
vital that financial system stability is also ensured. This, in fact is the other objective of the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka. It is important that the inter dependence of the price stability and financial system 
stability, is well recognized. It would not be possible for a central bank to use its instruments to ensure 
price stability without financial system stability as these instruments operate through a well functioning 
stable financial system. Further, if we failed to restrain excessive credit expansion and maintain price 
stability, it is likely to have a serious impact on maintaining financial system stability. We should also 
be  mindful  of  the  fact  that  an  attempt  to  ensure  financial  system  stability  through  an  injection  of 
high-powered money could greatly endanger the achievement of price stability. 
Mr. Volcker, former chairman of the Fed Reserve Bank of USA has once said that “ The truly unique 
power of a central bank is the power to create money, and ultimately the power to create is the power 
to  destroy”.  Designers  of  central  banks  have  well  recognized  the  danger  of  this  power.  They  have 
ensured  that  this  power  be  exercised  diligently  by  assigning  the  responsibility  of  maintaining  price 
stability to central banks. 
I hope that you will have a chance to deliberate these developments, concerns and challengers during 
your sessions today and tomorrow. I wish all of you a very fruitful learning experience. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2007
