Y V Reddy: India – development and reform experience; and prospects 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bank of Mexico, 
Mexico City, 13 September 2007. 
 Governor Ortiz and Friends, 
I am delighted to be here in Mexico to address this august gathering at the Bank of Mexico. I 
am honoured by the invitation extended to me. Governor Ortiz is among the most respected 
Central  Bank  Governors.  His  perceptions  and  words  of  wisdom,  based  on  sound 
understanding of theory as well as compulsions of public policy making, are eagerly sought. 
In  fact,  Governor  Ortiz  heads  the  Central  Bank  Governance  Group  in  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements of which I am a Member. The talk that he delivered in the Reserve 
Bank  of  India  in  November  2006  on  Mexico’s  experience  with  Financial  Stability  is  vividly 
remembered by all of us. Again, his elucidation of “Growth and Stability in Latin America and 
Asia” in the prestigious Sir Purushothamdas Thakurdas Memorial Lecture in India during the 
same visit is, in my view, a pioneering piece on the subject. 
Mexico  has  successfully  achieved  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  that  fosters 
rapid economic growth. A range of specific reforms implemented in Mexico, which include to 
improvement  in  business  environment  and  corporate  governance;  development  of  human 
capital;  incentive-based  social  assistance  programs;  and  broader  access  for  health 
insurance; have attracted international interest in the Mexican economy. Monetary policy has 
also been able to achieve and maintain a low inflation regime, which is vital for the social 
well-being  in  emerging  economies.  Mexico  provides  an  appealing  development  model  for 
many developing countries. I must compliment the leading lights of public policy in Mexico for 
these impressive outcomes. 
India’s development experience: pre-reform period 
I.  
Some hold the view that India was a poor country for most part of the human history though 
there  were  pockets  of  prosperity  and  islands  of  riches.  However,  accounts  of  others, 
especially global travellers and those who invaded India indicate that India was a prosperous 
country at least till the 17th century. According to an OECD publication, in 1700 AD, broadly 
defined, India’s gross domestic product (GDP) at US $ 90.8 billion was 24.4 per cent of world 
GDP  (Maddison  Angus,  “The  World  Economy:  A  Millennium  Perspective”,  OECD,  2001). 
Lord  Meghnad  Desai,  while  delivering  the  first  P.R.  Brahmananda  Memorial  Lecture  in 
Mumbai in September 2004, noted that the story of the 19th century for India is not one of 
gloom and doom. He added that during the second half of the 19th century, where the data 
are best available, India was an open economy enjoying an export led growth but there was 
a drain of the export surplus to pay Home Charges. During the forty year period from 1860 to 
1900, the per capita income growth was 0.5 to 1 per cent. According to Lord Desai, the first 
fifty years of the 20th century were much less favourable for the Indian economy than the last 
forty years of the 19th century. Further, in a book titled “The National Income of India in the 
Twentieth Century”, Professor Sivasubramonian observed that in the first five decades of the 
20th century (1900-01 to 1946-47), before we got our independence in 1947, the per capita 
GDP in India was stagnant, as the trend growth in GDP during this period was 0.9 per cent 
with  population  growing  by  0.8  per  cent  (Sivasubramonian,  S.,  Oxford  University  Press, 
2000). 
As compared with near stagnant growth in the first 50 years of the 20th century, it could be 
seen from Table 1 (Attached), the annual growth averaging around 3.5 per cent during the 
period 1950 to 1980 was comparatively better, while per capita growth broke out of the long 
period of inertia and averaged 1.1 per cent until around 1980. The average growth rate of 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 1
around 6 per cent since the 1980s, while embarking on a higher average growth path of 8.6 
per cent in the last four years could be a paradigm shift.  
The  Indian  experience  clearly  suggests  that  the  mixed-economy  model  and  planned 
development strategy in the first phase during the 1950s and 1960s, improved growth rate 
dramatically relative to previous decades, and also provided the essential building blocks and 
laid  the  strong  foundations  of  an  indigenous  industrial  base,  vibrant  entrepreneurial  class, 
knowledge  economy,  with  considerable  improvement  in  vertical,  social  and  economic 
mobility. However, the inward looking import substitution strategy pursued during the initial 
decades  of  the  planning  period  resulted  in  declining  productivity  and  high  cost  economy. 
Realizing this, significant changes in policy were initiated in the early 1980s, taking account 
of oil shocks in the 1970s and early 1980s. These policy measures took India into a higher 
growth  trajectory  in  the  1980s  but  in  its  wake  created  some  macroeconomic  imbalances 
leading to a crisis in 1991 that triggered more comprehensive and sustainable reforms. The 
policies  since  1991  provided  ample  opportunities  to  build  on  the  strong  foundations  in 
economic,  political  and  social  sphere,  laid  during  the  pre-reform  period  of  planned 
development. 
II.  
Development experience: post-reform period  
Triggers of reforms  
The  policy  reforms  in  the  1980s  provided  impetus  for  high  growth  and  enhanced 
competitiveness but the growth process turned unsustainable. It manifested in the growing 
macroeconomic imbalances over the decade in the form of high fiscal deficit, high levels of 
current  account  deficit,  and  increasing  levels  of  short  term  external  debt,  besides  a 
repressive and weakened financial system. The immediate provocation for the crisis in 1991 
was also a combination of external events that generated liquidity problems on the external 
front. 
The gulf crisis of 1991 not only affected India’s oil imports due to soaring oil prices but also 
eroded export markets in West Asia, and caused a setback to inward remittances and tourist 
earnings.  The  deterioration  in  exports  to  Eastern  Europe,  with  the  break-up  of  erstwhile 
USSR,  accentuated  the  crisis.  Around  the  same  time,  India’s  credit  rating  was  lowered, 
which restricted its access to commercial borrowings and there was unwillingness on the part 
of normal banking channels to renew short-term credit to Indian banks abroad. Exceptional 
financing  measures  became  inevitable,  and  the  overall  deficit  in  1990-91  was  financed 
almost equally by recourse to IMF and drawdown of reserves. The severity of the balance of 
payments crisis in the early 1990s could be gauged from the fact that India’s foreign currency 
assets depleted rapidly from US $ 3.1 billion in August 1990 to US $ 975 million on July 12, 
1991. 
I  would  now  narrate  the  story  of  our  exciting  journey  from  the  agony  of  1991  to  relative 
comfort in 2007, and conclude by mentioning prospects and challenges ahead of us.  
Reform measures 
During the crisis period, a conscious decision was taken to honor all debt obligations without 
seeking rescheduling and several steps, including some unconventional ones, like pledging 
gold with international institutions, were resorted to tide over the crisis. The immediate steps 
undertaken  included,  among  others,  tightening  of  non-essential  imports  and  availing  credit 
from  the  IMF  and  other  multilateral  and  bilateral  donors.  A  macroeconomic  structural  and 
stabilization  programme  encompassing  trade,  industry,  foreign  investment,  exchange  rate, 
public finance and the financial sector was put in place creating an environment conducive 
for the expansion of trade and investment. It was recognized that trade policies, exchange 
rate policies and industrial policies should form part of an integrated policy framework if the 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2007
aim was to improve the overall productivity, competitiveness and efficiency of the economic 
system, in general, and the external sector, in particular.  
Features of economic reforms  
It  may  be  interesting  to  enumerate  here  some  of  the  important  features  of  the  economic 
reform process undertaken by India since 1991. 
First, the approach towards reforms in India has been cautious with appropriate sequencing 
of  measures,  complementary  reforms  across  sectors  (e.g.,  monetary,  fiscal  and  external 
sector),  and  development  of  financial  institutions  and  markets.  The  objective  has  been  to 
progress with some harmony across sectors. 
Second,  the  pace  and  sequencing  of  liberalization  has  been  responsive  to  domestic 
developments,  especially 
the  evolving 
international  financial  architecture.  The  reforms  were  debated  intensely  and  designed 
essentially indigenously. 
Third, the approach to reform was “gradual but steady” rather than a “big bang” approach. 
The reforms have generally been viewed as a process and not as an event. In this approach, 
the pace and sequencing of liberalization could be tempered keeping in view the degree of 
comfort in moving forward in a credible way.  
Fourth,  the  major  thrust  driving  the  reform  process  was  the  quest  for  higher  growth  and 
efficiency  along  with  macroeconomic  stability.  At  the  same  time,  the  reforms  had  to  be 
“inclusive”  in  the  sense  that  the  benefits  of  reforms  are  to  be  demonstrably  shared  by  all 
sections,  in  particular,  the  vulnerable  sections.  This  has  easily  been  a  very  significant 
electoral issue in both provincial and national elections.  
financial  sectors,  and 
the  monetary  and 
in 
Select economic indicators 
III.  
The  major  macroeconomic  indicators  for  the  last  seven  years  are  given  in  the  Table  2 
(attached) which broadly summarizes the quantitative achievements. 
GDP growth 
Over  the  last  four  years  during  2003-07,  the  Indian  economy  has  entered  a  high-growth 
phase, with the GDP growth averaging 8.6 per cent per annum. The acceleration of growth 
during this period has been accompanied by a significant moderation in volatility, especially 
in  industry  and  services  sectors.  The  structure  of  domestic  output  has  distinctly  shifted  in 
favor  of  the  services  sector,  while  growth  in  industry  is  also  accelerating.  Indian  industry 
appears to have responded well to global competition through restructuring and technological 
upgradation in recent years. India's growth is mainly driven by domestic consumption, which 
contributed, on an average, to almost two-thirds of the overall demand.  
Saving and investment balances 
A noteworthy feature of the ongoing structural transformation of the Indian economy is the 
significant  increase  in  domestic  saving  and  investment  rates.  Domestic  investment  rate 
increased from 24.3 per cent in 2000-01 to 33.8 per cent in 2005-06 and domestic saving 
rate from 23.7 per cent in 2000-01 to 32.4 per cent during 2005-06. The household sector 
continued to be the major contributor to gross domestic saving with its saving rate placed at 
22.3  per  cent  in  2005-06,  while  on  account  of  rise  in  profit,  the  saving  rate  of  private 
corporate  sector  rose  to  8.1  per  cent  in  2005-06.  The  public  sector,  which  started  posting 
positive  saving  beginning  2003-04,  recorded  a  saving  rate  of  2.0  per  cent  in  2005-06  on 
account of continuing fiscal improvement as against a negative saving rate of 1.7 per cent in 
2000-01.  It  may  be  noted  that  over  95  per  cent  of  investment  is  financed  by  domestic 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 3
savings. Given the fact that Indian per capita income is increasing rapidly and policy efforts 
towards  financial  deepening  for  achieving  a  more  inclusive  growth  are  underway,  savings 
rate  in  India  could  even  rise  further  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  The  level  of  saving  rates 
should help continue to finance the investment needs of the economy domestically, without 
undue dependence on foreign savings. 
Productivity and efficiency 
In  tandem  with  acceleration  in  the  rate  of  investment  in  the  economy,  there  has  been 
evidence of a pickup in productivity and efficiency of capital use. Some of the recent studies 
relating to India have indicated an increase in total factor productivity (TFP) growth in recent 
years. For instance, Rodrick and Subramanian, in an IMF working paper of 2004, point out 
that  India  seems  to  have  a  large  amount  of  productivity  growth  from  relatively  modest 
reforms. A more recent paper by Barry Bosworth, Susan Collins, and Arvind Virmani (2007) 
confirms this trend. They find that output per worker grew only 1.3 per cent annually during 
1960-1980,  when  GDP  growth  was  also  at  a  low  of  3.4  per  cent.  TFP  growth  was  barely 
above  zero,  according  to  their  calculations,  indicating  that  growth  in  output  was  almost 
entirely driven by growth in inputs. In contrast, growth in output per worker nearly tripled to 
3.8 per cent during 1980-2004, while TFP increased ten-fold to 2 per cent. The evidence of 
an  increase  in  the  growth  of  labour  productivity  is  also  available  from  other  studies 
(Economic Intelligence Unit, 2007). A Study by Tata Services (2003) found that for the all-
India  manufacturing  sector,  labour  productivity  (output  per  unit  of  labour)  has  increased 
significantly during the post-reform period, compared with the pre-reform period.  
Poverty and employment  
The sustained economic growth since the early 1990s has also been associated with some 
reduction in poverty. Based on uniform recall period consumption distribution, the proportion 
of people living below the poverty line declined from 36 per cent in 1993-94 to 27.8 per cent 
in 2004-05. There is also evidence of pick-up in employment growth from 1.57 per cent per 
annum  (1993-94  to  1999-2000)  to  2.48  per  cent  per  annum  (1999-2000  to  2004-05). 
According  to  some  reports  and  other  anecdotal  evidence,  the  benefits  of  recent  surge  in 
growth rate of GDP are not just restricted to large cities, but people in other urban and semi 
urban areas are also gaining. There is some evidence of reduction in under employment and 
disguised unemployment in the informal sector.  
Money, prices and credit 
The  high  growth  in  GDP  in  recent  years  has  been  accompanied  by  some  moderation  of 
inflation to an average of 4.9 per cent during 2003-07. Historically, India has not seen very 
high inflation. The headline inflation rate, in terms of the wholesale price index, has declined 
from an average of 8.2 per cent during the period 1980-81 to 1990-91 to 6.2 per cent during 
the  post  crisis  period,  i.e.,  1992-93  to  2006-07,  with  a  sharper  moderation  in  the  recent 
period.  
During 2006-07, money supply (M3) increased by 21.3 per cent on a year-on-year basis and 
was  well  above  indicative  projections  for  the  year.  It  largely  reflected  the  surge  in  capital 
flows in the country. Non-food credit extended by the scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) 
increased by 28.4 per cent during 2006-07 on top of 31.8 per cent in the previous year. The 
growth  of  bank  credit  has  favoured  retail  lending,  particularly  housing,  real  estate,  trade, 
transport  and  professional  services  and  non-banking  financial  companies  –  sectors  which 
hitherto were not significant in the credit market. These developments led to a lively debate 
on  the  signs  of  overheating  in  the  economy  but  subsequent  moderation  in  inflation  has 
diffused the attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2007
Monetary policy and regulatory framework 
IV.  
As  regards  the  framework  of  monetary  policy,  the  basic  objectives  of  monetary  policy, 
namely price stability and ensuring credit flow to support growth, have remained unchanged 
in India. Of late, considerations of macroeconomic and financial stability have assumed an 
added importance in view of increasing openness of the Indian economy.  
In India, broad money (M3) emerged as an intermediate target from the mid-1980s based on 
the premise of a stable relationship between money, output and prices. In the late 1990s, in 
view  of  ongoing  financial  openness  and  increasing  evidence  of  changes  in  underlying 
transmission mechanism with interest rates and exchange rates gaining in importance vis-à-
vis quantity variables, the Reserve Bank adopted a multiple indicator approach in April 1998 
whereby interest rates or rates of return in different financial markets along with such data as 
on  currency,  credit,  trade,  capital  flows,  fiscal  position,  inflation,  exchange  rate  etc.  are 
juxtaposed with the output data for drawing policy perspectives. The liquidity management in 
the  system  is  carried  out  through  open  market  operations  (OMO)  in  the  form  of  outright 
purchases/sales of government securities and daily reverse repo and repo operations under 
a  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF)  and  this  has  emerged  as  the  main  instrument  for 
interest  rate  signalling  in  the  Indian  economy.  In  the  context  of  large  capital  flows  and 
sterilisation, the availability of policy instruments to manage liquidity has been strengthened 
further with open market operations through Market Stabilisation Scheme.  
While  the  preferred  instruments  are  indirect,  and  varied,  there  has  been  no  hesitation  in 
taking  recourse  to  direct  instruments  also,  if  circumstances warrant  them.  In  fact, complex 
situations do warrant dynamics of different combinations of direct and indirect instruments, in 
multiple forms, to suit the conditions – especially the transmission mechanism. 
Similarly, while there is considerable merit in maintaining distinction between monetary and 
prudential  policies  of  the  central  bank,  the  Reserve  Bank  did  not  hesitate  to  enhance  the 
provisioning requirements and risk weights for select categories of banking assets, namely 
real estate, housing, consumer finance and capital market exposures. There has also been 
close  monitoring  of  off-balance  sheet  exposures  of  banks.  Detailed  guidelines  have  been 
issued, for consultation, on product, accounting and prudential aspects of credit derivatives. 
A  framework  for  governing  banks’  linkages  with  systemically  important  deposit  taking  and 
non-deposit taking non banking financial companies has also been put in place. 
More generally, Reserve Bank’s approach has been to recognise the positive contributions 
that financial innovations make to enhance efficiency of financial intermediation. At the same 
time,  Reserve  Bank  considers,  in  a  dynamic  setting,  appropriate  safeguards  to  ensure 
stability, taking account of the prevailing governance standards, risk management systems 
and  incentive  frameworks  in  the  foreign,  public,  private  and  cooperative  banks  as  also 
related non-banks. Overall, these progressive but cautious policies have contributed to both 
efficiency and stability of the financial system and enables current growth momentum in an 
environment of macro stability. 
Some of the important factors that shaped the changes in monetary policy framework and 
operating procedures in India during the 1990s were the delinking of budget deficit from its 
automatic  monetization  by 
interest  rates,  and 
development of the financial markets with reduced segmentation through better linkages and 
development  of  appropriate 
trading,  payments  and  settlement  systems  along  with 
technological  infrastructure.  With  the  enactment  of  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget 
Management Act in 2003, the Reserve Bank has withdrawn from participating in the primary 
issues  of  Central  Government  securities  with  effect  from  April  2006.  The  recent  legislative 
amendments enable a flexible use of the cash reserve and statutory liquidity requirements for 
banks,  without  being  constrained  by  a  statutory  floor  or  ceiling  on  the  levels  of  such 
prescriptions by the Reserve Bank.  
the  Reserve  Bank,  deregulation  of 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 5
Fiscal policy reforms and public debt management: centre and States 
V.  
The fiscal system prevalent in the beginning of the 1990s was characterised by a sustained 
high fiscal deficit and mounting debt accumulation giving rise to inflation, financial repression, 
and overall deterioration in the macroeconomic fundamentals of the economy. The average 
gross fiscal deficit of the central government as per cent to GDP during the decade of 1980s 
was 6.8 per cent as against 3.8 per cent in the 1970s. A positive outcome in recent years is 
the marked improvement in the health of Government finances with the adoption of the Fiscal 
Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 by the Central Government and 
Fiscal Responsibility Legislation (FRLs) by several State governments. 
RBI and States 
Under India’s federal system of government, the Constitution allocates the revenue powers 
and  expenditure  functions  between  the  Central  and  State  Governments.  In  general,  the 
functions  required  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability  and  international  relations  are 
assigned  to  the  Centre,  while  provision  of  public  services  such  as  law  and  order,  internal 
security,  public  health,  sanitation,  water  supply  and  agriculture  is  largely  entrusted  to  the 
States. Both government layers share responsibility for education, health and infrastructure, 
though States have a critical role.  
In  India,  borrowing  by  the  State  governments  is  subordinated  to  prior  approval  by  the 
national government. This is embodied in Article 293 of the Indian Constitution, under which, 
any State Government that is indebted to the Central Government, requires prior approval for 
borrowings.  Central  approval  is  embedded  in  the  procedure  for  sale  of  State  Government 
securities,  and  therefore,  cannot  be  violated.  Furthermore,  State  Governments  are  not 
permitted to borrow externally, unlike the Centre.  
The Reserve Bank plays two crucial roles in relation to the Indian fiscal system, namely as 
the banker to and the debt manager of both Central and State Governments. The RBI Act 
allows the RBI by agreement with a State Government to undertake its banking operations 
and management of its public debt. While undertaking the role of banker for both the Central 
and State governments, the RBI also provides temporary support to tide over mismatches in 
their receipts and payments in the form of Ways and Means Advances (WMA).  
The Reserve Bank has been organizing a biannual Conference of State Finance Secretaries 
since November 1997. This Conference, right from its inception, has provided a very useful 
forum for interaction among all the stakeholders (State Governments, Central Government 
and  the  Reserve  Bank)  on  matters  related  to  State  finances  and  arriving  at  consensual 
solutions  for  issues  of  policy  and  operational  significance.  Among  the  areas  that  were 
deliberated, the more important one’s relate to fiscal responsibility legislations at State levels; 
standardisation  of  budgetary,  accounting  and  transparency  practices;  cash  management; 
management of Consolidated Sinking Fund and Natural Calamities Fund; evaluation of fiscal 
guarantees etc. The Reserve Bank is proactive and responds from time to time, to the needs 
of States, as evident from two recent moves. 
Faced with accumulation of large surplus cash balances and a negative spread earned on 
the  investment  of  such  balances,  some  State  Governments  had  approached  the  Reserve 
Bank  to  arrange  for  the  buy-back  of  their  outstanding  State  Development  Loans  (SDLs). 
Accordingly, the Reserve Bank formulated a general scheme for the buy-back of SDLs with 
the concurrence of the Government of India. Following the recommendations of the Twelfth 
Finance Commission, external loans would be passed on to the States (in rupee terms) on a 
back-to-back  basis.  Consequently,  the  State  Governments  would  now  have  to  bear  the 
foreign  exchange  risk  in  the  context  of  such  loans.  Again,  at  the  behest  of  the  State 
Governments,  the  Reserve  Bank  recently  organized  a  workshop  on  the  management  of 
foreign exchange risk, for the benefit of State Government officials. 
6 
 BIS Review 102/2007
The  Reserve  Bank  interacts  with  States  on  several  other  fronts  especially  in  regard  to 
lending  to  agriculture,  small  industries,  weaker  sections,  depositor  protection,  financial 
inclusion, financial literacy, responding to natural calamities etc. mainly through the regional 
offices. 
Management of public debt 
The aggregate stock of public debt of the Centre and States as a percentage of GDP is high, 
currently  at  around  seventy  five  per  cent.  There  are,  however,  several  unique  features  of 
management  of  public  debt  in  India,  which  are  noteworthy.  First,  States  have  no  direct 
exposure  to  external  debt.  Second,  almost  the  whole  of  public  debt  is  local  currency 
denominated  and  held  almost  wholly  by  residents.  Third,  public  debt,  of  both  Centre  and 
States is actively and prudently managed by the Reserve Bank of India ensuring comfort to 
financial markets without any undue volatility. Fourth, the government securities market has 
developed  significantly  in  recent  years  in  terms  of  turnover,  depth  and  participants,  and 
significant further improvements are underway. 
Fifth,  contractual  savings  supplement  marketable  debt  in  financing  deficits.  Finally,  direct 
monetary financing of primary issues of debt has been discontinued since April 2006. Hence, 
the high stock of public debt relative to GDP has not so far been a matter of concern as far 
as stability is concerned, while it is recognised that long term sustainability would call for a 
gradual reduction to prudent levels.  
External sector reforms 
VI.  
Benefiting from a calibrated and sequenced strategy of liberalisation, India’s external sector 
has become more resilient. Exports have been growing at an average rate of around 25 per 
cent during the last three years, while imports have grown by around 35 per cent during the 
same  period.  The  current  account  remained  in  surplus  during  2001-02  to  2003-04,  before 
turning into a modest deficit since then. There was a significant strengthening in the capital 
account resulting in continued accretion to the foreign exchange reserves, which was around 
US$ 228.8 billion as on August 31, 2007. As could be seen from the table 2, there has been 
considerable improvement in liquidity and sustainability indicators of external debt.  
The exchange rate of rupee became market determined from March 1, 1993 and by August 
1994  India  became  current  account  convertible  by  accepting  Article  VIII  of  the  Articles  of 
Agreement  of  the  IMF.  There  was  simultaneously  a  significant  rationalization  of  the  tariff 
structure  in  a  gradual  manner  providing  opportunity  for  domestic  industry  to  equip  itself  to 
face  global  competition.  For  instance,  the  customs  duty  on  non-agricultural  products  has 
come down from 150 per cent in 1991-92 to 10.0 per cent in 2007-08. A qualitative change 
was brought about in the legal framework for liberalization by the enactment of the Foreign 
Exchange  Management  Act  (FEMA)  in  June  2000.  With  this,  the  objectives  of  regulation 
have been redefined as facilitating trade and payments as well as orderly development and 
functioning of foreign exchange market in India.  
The  extent  and  timing  of  capital  account  liberalization  is  properly  sequenced  with  other 
concomitant  developments  such  as  strengthening  of  banking  sector,  fiscal  consolidation, 
market  development  and  integration,  trade  liberalization,  and  the  changing  domestic  and 
external economic environments. It is also recognized that there may be links between the 
current and capital accounts and hence procedures are in place to avoid capital flows in the 
guise of current account transactions. Further, a hierarchy is established in the sources and 
types of capital flows. The priority has been to liberalize inflows relative to outflows, but all 
outflows associated with inflows have been totally freed. Among the types of inflows, foreign 
direct  investment  is  preferred  for  stability  while  excessive  short-term  external  debt  is 
eschewed.  A  differentiation 
individuals,  and  banks. 
Operationally, the process of managing the capital account consists of operating two routes, 
is  made  between  corporates, 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 7
namely automatic and non-automatic. Consistent rebalancing in the desired direction is done 
by expanding the automatic route and by moving most of the prohibited transactions to the 
non-automatic  but  approval  route  and  at  a  later  stage,  to  an  automatic  or  deregulated 
regime. 
There  has  been  a  significant  liberalisation  of  the  policy  framework  with  regard  to  capital 
outflows  over  the  past  few  years.  Each  country  has  to  design  its  policy  regime  for  capital 
outflows  keeping  in  view  the  specific  country  context,  especially  characteristics  of  the  real 
sector, and not merely the contextual level of inflows and extant absorptive capacity of the 
economy.  First,  the  current  regime  of  outflows  in  India  is  characterised  by  liberal  but  not 
incentivised framework for corporates to invest in the real economy outside India, including 
through  the  acquisition  route.  The  regime  has  served  the  country  well  since  Indian 
corporates are increasingly able to establish synergies with overseas units, to make up for 
lack  of  scale  that  has  been  a  legacy  problem  in  India,  and  to  quickly  acquire  domain 
knowledge  through  acquisition.  Second,  significant  liberalisation  of  outflows  by  individual 
households  has  been  implemented  following  recommendation  of  the  Committee  on  Fuller 
Capital  Account  Convertibility  (Chairman:  Shri  S.  S.  Tarapore,  2006).  Further  liberalization 
here would be done in the light of some international experience which shows that resident 
individuals  often  precede  overseas  investors  in  initiating  outflows  when  the  perceptions  in 
regard  to  domestic  economy’s  performance  or  stability  appear  to  turn  adverse.  Third,  as 
regards 
is 
characterised by caution and quantitative stipulations whereby both prudential considerations 
and compulsions of management of capital account are relevant.  
intermediaries, 
the  approach 
for  outflows 
the  regime 
financial 
through 
Financial sector reforms 
VII.  
Major  policy  measures  in  the  financial  sector  relate  to  phased  reductions  in  statutory  pre-
emption  like  cash  reserve  ratio  and  statutory  liquidity  requirements  and  deregulation  of 
interest  rates  on  deposits  and  lending,  except  for  a  select  segment.  The  diversification  of 
ownership  of  banking  institutions  is  yet  another  feature  which  has  enabled  private 
shareholding in the public sector banks, through listing on the stock exchanges, arising from 
dilution of the Government ownership.  
The  banking  sector  reform  combines  a  comprehensive  reorientation  of  competition, 
regulation and ownership in a non-disruptive and cost-effective manner. Indeed our banking 
reform is a good illustration of the dynamism of the public sector in managing the overhang 
problems and the pragmatism of public policy in enabling the domestic and foreign private 
sectors to compete and expand. The regulatory framework in India, in addition to prescribing 
prudential guidelines and encouraging market discipline, is increasingly focusing on ensuring 
good governance through “fit and proper” owners and directors of banks. The Reserve Bank 
has  issues  detailed  guidelines  on  ownership  and  governance  in  private  sector  banks 
emphasizing diversified ownership. The Reserve Bank has also provided a significant thrust 
to implementation of information technology in the banking sector. 
Foreign  direct  investment  in  the  private  sector  banks  is  now  allowed  up  to  74  per  cent, 
subject to the prescribed guidelines. Again, 100 per cent foreign direct investment is allowed 
in 19 activities under the automatic route in Non-Bank Financial Companies (NBFCs). There 
are  minimum  capitalisation  norms  for  such  investments.  Besides,  100  per  cent  NBFC 
subsidiary can also be established subject to clearance by Foreign Investments Promotion 
Board  (FIPB),  Government  of  India.  There  has  been  noticeable  increase  in  the  interest  of 
foreign entities to acquire stakes in NBFCs. Policy initiatives have been taken in recent past 
to ensure that such NBFCs adhere to regulatory prescriptions spelt out for them. 
In the cooperative segment, the urban cooperative banks (UCBs) had been suffering from 
the  problem  of  multiple  supervisory/regulatory  authorities,  as  also  the  challenge  of 
reconciling  the  democratic  character  with  financial  discipline.  Therefore,  several  structural, 
legislative  and  regulatory  measures  have  been  initiated  in  recent  years  for  urban  co-
8 
 BIS Review 102/2007
operative  banks  with  a  view  to  evolving  a  policy  framework  oriented  towards  revival  and 
healthy growth of the sector. A vision document for their healthy growth has been formulated. 
Restructuring  of  the  larger  weak  banks  has  commenced  and  is  well  under  way.  Similarly, 
issues relating to rural co-operative banking structures and regional rural banks (RRBs) have 
been  considered  actively  and  comprehensive  measures  have  been  planned  and  some  of 
them are under implementation.  
Financial markets reforms 
Financial markets in India in the period before the early 1990s were marked by administered 
interest  rates,  quantitative  ceilings,  statutory  pre-emptions,  captive  market  for  government 
securities,  excessive  reliance  on  central  bank  financing  of  fiscal  deficit,  pegged  exchange 
rate, and current and capital account restrictions. A wide range of regulatory and institutional 
reforms  were  introduced  in  a  planned  manner  over  a  period  to  improve  the  efficiency  of 
financial  markets.  These  included  development  of  market  micro  structure,  removal  of 
structural bottlenecks, introduction/ diversification of new players/instruments, free pricing of 
financial assets, relaxation of quantitative restrictions, better regulatory systems, introduction 
of new technology, improvement in trading infrastructure, clearing and settlement practices 
and greater transparency. 
Reforms in financial markets were carefully sequenced ensuring that they were in sync with 
the real sector. The reforms were also important for developing the environment for effective 
monetary  policy  making  and  monetary  transmission  mechanisms.  A  noteworthy  feature  is 
that the government securities and corporate debt market is essentially domestically driven 
since  FII  and  non-resident  participation  in  these  markets  are  limited  and  subjected  to 
ceilings. 
The  linkage  between  the  money,  government  securities  and  forex  markets  has  been 
established and is growing. The price discovery in the primary market is more credible than 
before and secondary markets have acquired greater depth and liquidity. The Reserve Bank 
has also initiated a number of steps – institutional, procedural and operational – for making 
the  payment  systems  safe,  secure  and  efficient.  For  efficiency  enhancements  and  risk 
reduction,  usage  of  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  System  and  other  electronic 
payment mechanisms has been encouraged in a big way.  
Financial inclusion and customer services 
VIII.  
The Reserve Bank has undertaken a number of measures with the objective of attracting the 
financially  excluded  segment  of  the  population  into  the  structured  financial  system.  The 
broad  approach  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  aimed  at  “connecting”  people  with  the  banking 
system. Measures relating to financial inclusion may be summarized as follows: 
First,  banks  were  advised  to  make  available  a  basic  banking  “no-frills”  account  with  nil  or 
minimum  balances  as  well  as  other  charges  to  ensure  outreach  of  such  accounts  to  vast 
sections of the population. As there are many regional languages in India, banks are required 
to  make  available  all  printed  material  used  by  retail  customers  in  the  concerned  regional 
language. 
Second,  banks  have  also  been  permitted  to  utilise  the  services  of  non-governmental 
organizations/self  help  groups  (NGOs/SHGs),  micro-finance  institutions  and  other  civil 
society organizations as intermediaries in providing financial and banking services through 
the use of business facilitator and business correspondent (BC) models.  
Third, banks are also entering into agreements with Indian Postal Authorities for using the 
large and well spread network of post offices as business correspondents, thereby increasing 
their outreach and leveraging on the postman’s intimate knowledge of the local population 
and  trust  reposed  in  him.  Similarly,  banks  in  association  with  insurance  companies,  are 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 9
providing innovative insurance policies at affordable cost, covering life disability and health 
cover. 
Fourth,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  encouraging  the  use  of  ICT  solutions  by  banks  for 
enhancing  their  outreach  with  the  help  of  their  Business  Correspondents  (BCs).  A 
multilingual  website  in  13  Indian  languages  on  all  matters  concerning  banking  and  the 
common person has been launched by the Reserve Bank on 18 June 2007.  
Several  initiatives  were  also  undertaken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  improve  the  delivery  of 
customer services by banks. 
First,  the  recommendations  of  the  Standing  Committee  on  Procedures  and  Performance 
Audit on Public Services set up in November 2003 covering an individual customer's dealing 
with  a  bank  in  the  areas  of  foreign  exchange,  currency  and  government  transactions, 
including  pension,  besides  the  main  relationship  as  an  account  holder  are  being 
implemented.  
Second, in order to bring together all activities relating to customer service in banks and the 
Reserve Bank of India in a single department, the Reserve Bank of India constituted a new 
department called “Customer Service Department” on July 1, 2006. The new department has 
facilitated a sharper focus to customer service issues.  
Third,  the  Banking  Ombudsman  Scheme,  which  was  introduced  in  1995  to  provide  an 
expeditious  and  inexpensive  forum  to  bank  customers  for  resolution  of  their  complaints 
relating  to  deficiency  in  banking  services,  was  last  revised  in  2006.  The  Scheme  has  an 
enlarged  scope  now  and  is  applicable  to  all  commercial  banks,  regional  rural  banks  and 
scheduled  primary  cooperative  banks.  The  complainants  can  file  their  complaints  in  any 
form, including online.  
Fourth, recognising an institutional gap in measuring the performance of the banks against 
codes  and  standards  based  on  established  best  practices,  RBI  set  up  the  Banking  Codes 
and  Standards  Board  of  India  in  2006.  It  is  an  autonomous  and  independent  body,  in  the 
nature  of  a  self-regulatory  organisation.  Banks  register  themselves  with  the  Board  as  its 
members and provide services as per the agreed standards and codes. The Board in turn, 
monitors  and  assesses  the  compliance  with  codes  and  standards  which  the  banks  have 
agreed to. The Code of Banks' Commitment to Customers was released on July 1, 2006. The 
Code covers various aspects of transactions of individuals such as deposit accounts, interest 
rates, fees and charges, remittances, settlement of claims in respect of deceased account 
holders,  loan  products,  safety  locker,  credit  cards,  guarantees,  collection  of  dues  and 
complaints and grievance redressal. The Reserve Bank has also made it obligatory for banks 
to  display  and  update,  in  their  offices/branches  as  also  on  their  websites,  the  details  of 
various service charges in a prescribed format.  
Fifth, as lack of financial education on the part of customers of the bank contribute to rising 
number  of  complaints,  especially  relating  to  credit  card  operations,  the  Reserve  Bank  is 
according top priority for financial education which would ensure that the customers of banks 
take  an  informed  decision.  Individual  banks  have  also  started  taking  various  steps  in  this 
regard such as “financial education posters”, “short films” and websites, etc. 
IX.  
Prospects, challenges and strengths 
Short term prospects 
For monetary policy purposes, the Reserve Bank, in its Annual Policy Statement, placed real 
GDP  growth  for  2007-08  at  around  8.5  per  cent,  assuming  no  further  escalation  in 
international crude prices and barring domestic or external shocks. The policy preference for 
the  period  ahead  is  strongly  in  favour  of  price  stability  and  well-anchored  inflation 
expectations with the endeavour being to contain inflation close to 5.0 per cent in 2007-08 
10 
 BIS Review 102/2007
and  to  the  range  of  4.0–4.5  per  cent  over  the  medium-term.  For  the  purpose  of  monetary 
policy formulation, the Reserve Bank has projected the rate of money supply (M3) growth at 
around 17.0-17.5 per cent and non-food credit at 24-25 per cent for 2007-08 in consonance 
with the outlook on growth and inflation. While retaining the stance of the monetary policy, 
the Reserve Bank has flagged the importance of financial stability in the first quarter review 
of the Annual Policy Statement issued on July 31, 2007.  
Data  on  recent  developments  is  broadly  in  consonance  with  expectations  for  2007-08. 
According to the Central Statistical Organization, during the first quarter of the financial year 
2007-08 (April-June, 2007), the real GDP grew by 9.3 per cent on the back of 9.1 per cent in 
the last quarter of 2006-07 (January-March, 2007) and 9.6 per cent in the first quarter of the 
previous  year  (April-June,  2006).  The  wholesale  price  index,  on  a  year  to  year  basis, 
decreased to 3.79 per cent during the week ended August 25, 2007 as compared with 5.12 
per cent a year ago. As on August 17, 2007, the broad money (M3) supply growth was 20.0 
per cent on a year-on-year basis almost same as in the previous year. Though buoyant and 
broad based, there was a decline in non-food credit growth to 23.6 per cent as on August 17, 
2007 as compared with 32.8 per cent a year ago. Exports continued its momentum, however, 
imports rose sharply, which led to widening of trade deficit to US $ 25.7 billion during the first 
four  months  of  2007-08  (April-July)  as  compared  with  US  $  15.8  billion  during  the  same 
period of the previous year. 
Available information indicates continuation of the growth momentum during 2007-08 so far 
at a strong pace with the impulses of growth getting more broad-based. Steady increases in 
the  rate  of  gross  domestic  saving  and  investment,  consumption  demand,  addition  of  new 
capacity as well as more intensive and efficient utilisation/capitalisation of existing capacity 
are expected to provide support to growth during 2007-08. The recent gains in bringing down 
inflation  and  in  stabilising  inflation  expectations  should  support  the  current  expansionary 
phase  of  growth  cycle.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  continuously  assess  the  risks  to  the 
inflation outlook emanating from high and volatile international crude prices, the continuing 
firmness  in  key  food  prices  and  uncertainties  surrounding  the  evolution  of  demand-supply 
gaps globally, as well as in India.  
Risks  from  global  developments  continue  to  persist,  especially  in  the  form  of  inflationary 
pressures,  re-pricing  of  risks  by  financial  markets  and  danger  of  downturn  in  some  asset 
classes. Excessive leveraging has enhanced the vulnerability of the global financial system. 
Large  changes  in  liquidity  conditions  are  obscuring  assessment  of  risks,  with  attendant 
uncertainty.  Given  the  flux  associated  with  both  financial  markets  and  monetary  policy 
settings globally, India cannot be immune to these developments. The policy challenge for 
Reserve  Bank,  now,  is  to  manage  the  current  transition  to  a  higher  growth  path  while 
containing inflationary pressures and focusing on financial stability. Contextually, we in the 
Reserve  Bank  are,  therefore,  maintaining  enhanced  vigilance  to  be  able  to  respond 
appropriately  to  the  prevailing  heightened  uncertainties  in  global  financial,  as  well  as, 
monetary conditions.  
Medium term challenges  
For  a  large  and  diverse  economy  with  low  per  capita  income  but  undergoing  structural 
transformation  in  a  highly  uncertain  global  environment,  challenges  for  public  policy  are 
manifold. I would focus on a few, which we in the Reserve Bank consider to be crucial for 
enhancing medium term prospects for equitable growth. 
First,  while  over  60  per  cent  of  the  workforce  is  dependent  on  agriculture,  the  sector 
accounts for 20 per cent of the GDP. Further, the GDP growth generated from agriculture is 
only marginally above the rate of growth of the population, which is not adequate to ensure 
rapid  poverty  reduction.  Volatility  in  agricultural  production  has  not  only  implications  for 
overall growth but also, as the experience of 2006-07 amply demonstrated, for maintaining 
low and stable inflation. Enhanced growth of the agricultural sector is vital for ensuring food 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 11
security,  poverty  alleviation,  price  stability,  overall  inclusive  growth  and  sustainability  of 
growth of the overall economy. Recently, our Honourable Prime Minister announced a major 
scheme to double the growth rate of agriculture to 4.0 per cent over the 11th Plan period. A 
time-bound  Food  Security  Mission  was  also  announced  to  counter  rising  prices  of  food 
products and to ensure visible changes in their availability over three years. 
Second, the manufacturing sector has recorded robust growth, despite several infrastructure 
deficiencies.  The  inadequate  availability  of  modern  infrastructure  and  shortage  of  skilled 
manpower  are  the  most  critical  barriers  to  the  growth  of  the  manufacturing  sector.  It  is 
essential to augment the existing infrastructure facilities, particularly roads, ports and power, 
to provide the enabling environment for industry to prosper. The most important issues here 
are regulatory framework and overall investment climate, which are being addressed by the 
Government. One other concern has been the cost recovery, which is expected to improve 
with enlightened public-private partnership.  
Third,  a  salient  feature  of  the  fiscal  consolidation  process  in  recent  years  even  after 
accounting for cyclical elements has been significant reduction in the key deficit indicators. 
Our  studies  on  State  finances  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  give  grounds  for  optimism  in 
regard  to  their  fiscal  health.  We  recognize  two  important  areas  that,  if  addressed,  would 
result in fiscal empowerment.  One is elimination of subsidies, which are inappropriate and 
not directly targeted to the poor, and elimination of most of the tax exemptions, which are 
patently distortionary. Moreover, the delivery of essential public services such as education 
and health to a large section of our population is a major challenge.  
Fourth,  there  is  a  growing  recognition  in  India  that  governance  reforms  are  critical  to 
strengthen state capacity and enable it to perform its core functions. The task of improving 
the  institutions  of  economic  governance  comprise,  among  others,  many  organizations  and 
actions  essential  for  good  functioning  of  markets.  It  must  be  recognized  that  good 
governance  can  co-exist  only  when  public  sector  functions  fairly  and  efficiently,  which  is 
achievable  by  improving  and  not  undermining  it.  The  business  community  has  therefore  a 
vital  stake  in  improving  and  empowering  public  institutions.  I  would  like  to  endorse  what 
Professor  Avinash  K.  Dixit,  President-Elect,  American  Economic  Association  said  in  the 
Second P.R. Brahmananda Memorial Lecture delivered by him in June 2007 in Mumbai. 
“Finally, I think that the process of designing institutional reforms offers a good opportunity 
for fruitful collaboration between academic economists and businesspeople. Many academic 
economists  used  to  dislike  or  disdain  businesspeople  and  prefer  a  statist  solution  to 
economic problems. This is much less true in western countries these days, but the tendency 
may  be  more  persistent  in  India.  I  hope  even  they  will  regard  the  task  of  improving  the 
institutions of economic governance in a favorable light, seeing it as a way of constraining 
the opportunistic behavior of businesspeople. Many of them will also be attracted by the idea 
of  a  bottom-up  rather  than  a  top-down  reform.  There  is  a  wealth  of  academic  studies, 
theoretical and empirical, of the evolution, performance, and limitations of such institutions. 
Businesspeople have a clear perception of the specific governance needs of their industries. 
The two can combine their brains and energies to adapt the lessons of these studies to the 
Indian  situations,  and  contribute  to  creating  a  better  environment  for  continued  rapid 
economic progress of the country.” (Dixit, Avinash K., Second P.R. Brahmananda Memorial 
Lecture, June 2007, Mumbai, pages 17-18)  
Strengths  
The  Indian  economy  has  some  inherent  strength,  both  quantifiable  and  non-quantifiable, 
which would facilitate in meeting the challenges ahead. I have already mentioned extensively 
the  quantifiable  strengths.  Apart  from  these  quantifiable  strengths,  there  are  certain  “not 
easily  quantifiable  strengths”  which  our  economy  possesses  and  I  would  like  to  mention 
some  of  them.  First,  a  vast  pool  of  science  and  technology  graduates  and  the  millions  of 
people who are familiar with English language are sources of strength. The familiarity with 
12 
 BIS Review 102/2007
multiple  languages  in  India  prepares  the  people  to  adapt  better  to  multi-cultural  situations, 
making it easier for them to fit into international systems smoothly. Second, India also enjoys 
the  distinction  of  being  the  biggest  democracy  of  the  world.  The  existence  of  a  free  press 
provides  some  insurance  against  excesses  and  makes  Governments  at  all  levels  more 
accountable  than  otherwise.  Third,  impressive  are  the  initiatives  of  many  States  for 
empowerment of women which defend their rights and help to gain greater self-esteem and 
control over their own personal lives and social relationships. Fourth, the political climate is 
characterised  by  what  may  be  termed  as  political  system  stability,  despite  the  coalition 
cabinets  and  periodic  elections  both  at  the  Centre  and  in  several  States.  Fifth,  India  will 
remain  one  of  the  youngest  countries  in  the  world  in  the  next  few  decades.  This 
"demographic dividend" is seen as an inevitable advantage provided prerequisites such as 
skill-upgradation  and  sound  governance  to  realize  it  are  put  in  place.  Sixth,  in  terms  of 
business  environment,  the  impressive  growth  coupled  with  market  orientation  of  the 
economy has been a bottom-up exercise, with a very broad-based growing entrepreneurial 
class. These tendencies are perhaps reflective of a penchant for innovation among already 
large and growing entrepreneurial class in India, imbued with professionalism and seeking to 
be globally competitive. 
Thank you.  
  13
BIS Review 102/2007 
  14 
 BIS Review 102/2007
 BIS Review 102/2007 
 15
