Timothy F Geithner: Global economic integration – the opportunities and the 
challenges  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  conference  organised  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  “The  euro  and  the  dollar:  pillars  in  global  finance”,  New  York, 
17 April 2007. 
 Let me again welcome you to the New York Fed and to this conference. We are especially pleased to 
have so many of our European colleagues here today. You have spent the morning discussing some 
of  the  important  economic  and  financial  issues  facing  the  United  States  and  Europe.  But  this  is 
essentially  a  conference  on  integration.  I  want  to  step  back  and  make  some  broader  observations 
about the process of global economic integration and the package of policies that need to accompany 
greater openness. 
We are, as the IMF noted last week in its latest World Economic Outlook, in an unusually prolonged 
and widespread global expansion – the strongest in more than three decades. Economic integration 
and technological change have played a crucial part in driving this expansion and sustaining it in the 
face of recent shocks and some daunting longer-term economic policy challenges. 
Yet  there  remains  substantial  ambivalence  about  the  benefits  of  globalization.  To  many,  the  costs 
seem  more  compelling  than  the  benefits.  The  sources  of  this  ambivalence  are  varied.  Some  are 
familiar and some new. 
Concerns about the distributional impact of trade have been given new force by the decline in labor’s 
share of national income; the long-term trend of rising income inequality; the increase in the share of 
goods and services that are tradable, and therefore of the broader scope of the population affected by 
the pressure of competition; and the perceived acceleration in the pace of economic change. 
The greater mobility of financial flows has increased the sense among policymakers in many countries 
that their jobs have become harder, that they are less the masters of their own fate than in the past, 
and that they have a diminished ability to shield their companies and citizens from volatility.  
But do these changes in economic circumstances and in perceptions fundamentally change what we 
know about the broad economic merits of global integration? I do not believe the basic economics of 
that judgment have changed. 
Few  would  argue  that  economic  integration  by  itself  is  sufficient  to  achieve  broad-based  gains  in 
income  growth  both  within  and  across  countries.  The  relative  prosperity  of  nations  reflects  different 
choices made by governments about a range of policies and institutions beyond the realm of trade and 
financial  restrictions.  But  integration  is  an  essential  ingredient  for  achieving  sustained  growth. 
Reasonable people can disagree on the magnitude of gains that can be attributed to trade rather than 
other  economic  policies.  But  the  evidence  in  support  of  the  broad  consensus  that  openness  and 
integration contribute significantly to better growth outcomes remains compelling.  
Just as compelling is the evidence against the proposition that protection in the form of restrictions on 
trade increases growth or reduces inequality. The world has a lot of experience with different policies 
designed to slow the pace of integration or to insulate parts of the economy from its effects, and these 
policies have generally been associated with worse economic outcomes. The poor do not benefit from 
protectionism. 
Although  the  balance  of  economic  evidence  has  not  fundamentally  changed,  the  politics  around 
globalization and integration have become more challenging.  
The  fact  that  the  United  States  is  now  in  the  fifth  consecutive  year  of  expansion  and  that 
unemployment is now at 4.4 percent doesn’t seem to have made trade any more popular. A recent 
Pew poll suggested that that nearly two-thirds of Americans feel less secure about their jobs than in 
earlier generations. And many attribute this increase in anxiety to trade. 
This phenomenon of persistent and perhaps rising ambivalence about integration in the face of solid 
growth in average incomes is not unique to the United States. Here, as in many countries, the political 
consensus in favor of economic openness seems more fragile than it once was.  
BIS Review 37/2007 
 1
The  debate  about  how  to  respond  to  this  challenge  tends  to  see  the  economic  and  political 
imperatives  as  in  conflict.  The  most  appealing  political  response  –  usually  some  form  of  selective 
restriction on trade or investment – is generally the option with the worst economic return. The typical 
political impulse is to try to address directly the source of the competitive pressure and to relieve it, but 
these  measures  cannot  offer  lasting  relief.  The  economic  price  of  protection,  in  terms  of  distorted 
incentives,  reduced  flexibility  and  broader  costs  on  the  economy  as  a  whole,  seem  both  more 
substantial and more enduring than any temporary political benefit. 
The policy strategies that offer a better longer-term return do not try directly to relieve the pressures 
that come from economic and financial integration. Instead, they focus on the broader complement of 
policies  and  institutions  that  improve  the  capacity  of  economies  to  adapt  to  change  and  to  absorb 
shocks.  Those  countries  that  have  experienced  the  greatest  gains  as  the  world  has  become  more 
integrated  have  been  those  with  the  type  of  policy  and  institutional  infrastructure  that  facilitates 
economic flexibility and resilience in the face of change. The policies that offer the most promise in 
terms of broad-based income gains are not those that try to provide insulation from volatility, but those 
that make it easier to live with volatility. 
In the realm of macroeconomic policy, this means further progress toward monetary policy credibility 
and fiscal sustainability, so that central banks and governments have the capacity to react to adverse 
shocks and mitigate the damage they can cause.  
Even with the remarkable improvements in the conduct of monetary policy around the world over the 
past two decades, central banks in many countries do not have institutional independence, in law or in 
practice.  And  many  still  operate  under  policy  regimes  directed  at  limiting  exchange  rate  changes  – 
objectives  that  will  necessarily  conflict  with  their  ability  to  achieve  price  stability,  as  their  capital 
accounts become progressively more open. Economies with flexible exchange rate regimes generally 
fare better in the face of adverse external shocks. And in countries where central bank credibility is 
more firmly established, monetary authorities are better able to react to a sharp fall in asset prices or a 
negative demand shock. 
In  fiscal  policy,  the  same  basic  point  applies.  Where  fiscal  sustainability  is  more  firmly  established, 
governments have more scope to respond to adverse demand shocks by reducing taxes or increasing 
expenditures. Where deficits are high and debt to GDP ratios are high and rising, government have 
less scope for countercyclical fiscal policy. In these cases fiscal stimulus is more likely to be met by a 
rise  in  risk  premia,  reducing,  if  not  fully  offsetting,  the  desired  benefits  to  growth.  Even  in  those 
emerging markets that have seen the most impressive progress toward fiscal sustainability, few have 
reached the point where they have built much of a cushion against future shocks. And in the United 
States  and  many  other  economies,  the  demographic  changes  now  working  their  way  through  the 
economy entail very large future deficits and consequently very limited fiscal room for maneuver. 
The  right  macroeconomic  policy  framework  is  crucial.  But  we  have  come  to  recognize  that  other 
issues,  traditionally  the  province  of  microeconomics,  have  a  vital  role  in  contributing  to  effective 
macroeconomic  policy.  A  critical  factor  distinguishing  long-term  economic  performance  among 
countries with relatively good monetary and fiscal policies is the degree of overall flexibility they exhibit 
in labor, product and financial markets. This is not simply about the presence or absence of regulation. 
It  is  a  function  of  the  incentives  regulation  creates  and  the  extent  to  which  it  gets  in  the  way  of 
competition,  impedes  the  allocation  of  labor  and  capital  to  industries  with  a  higher  return,  favors 
established firms, and creates barriers to new entrants. 
As  the  substantial  body  of  research  on  structural  reforms  by  the  OECD  has  demonstrated,  where 
regulation  is  more  compatible  with  flexibility,  productive  growth  has  generally  been  higher,  as 
technological  advances  have  been  diffused  and  adopted  more  rapidly.  The  IMF’s  latest  World 
Economic Outlook reports that, among the major economies, those with more flexible labor markets 
have seen smaller declines in labor’s share of income. 
Open economies, of course, need strong and resilient financial systems. As financial systems develop 
and capital markets become more open and integrated, savings should be allocated more efficiently 
and risks distributed more broadly, both within and across countries. This process, however, is messy 
and very challenging to manage well. The history of economic crises over the last two decades is a 
history not just of fiscal profligacy and monetary policy mistakes, but of financial system weakness – 
often the result of rapid deregulation and capital account liberalization in a context of weak supervision 
and a broad government guarantee of bank liabilities. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2007
The development of deeper and more resilient financial markets is important for economies to be able 
to cope better with exchange rate flexibility and capital mobility. And financial strength is an important 
part of the arsenal of macro policy tools, for monetary policy is less effective in cushioning the effects 
of asset price and demand shocks in circumstances where the banking sector is impaired. 
A final and critical dimension of the policy framework that is important to the successful management 
of  economic  integration  is  the  design  of  the  public  or  social  infrastructure.  Raising  the  quality  of 
educational  outcomes  is  vital,  as  is  the  design  of  the  network  of  insurance  mechanisms,  from 
unemployment insurance and training support, to health care and pension schemes. As progressively 
larger shares of the population become more exposed to the pressures of competition, as economies 
become more flexible, governments have to do a better job of designing programs of assistance that 
can ease the costs of adjustment. 
These policies and institutional reforms are fundamentally the responsibility of national governments. 
International  institutions  can  help,  with  technical  assistance  and  financial  support,  but  these 
challenges  are  essentially  national  challenges.  The  reforms  of  the  international  institutions  now 
underway to make them more representative of the changing balance of economic activity in the world 
are  laudable.  And  we  share  a  common  interest  in  a  broad  range  of  informal  mechanisms  for 
cooperation on  policies  in  the  financial  arena.  But  ultimately  it  is  the  quality  of  the  choices  national 
governments make that will determine how their economies fare in a more open global economy.  
Global  integration  is  not  the  primary  source  of  the  world’s  economic  problems,  nor  can  it  be  the 
primary  solution  to  them.  But  economic  integration  can  contribute  significantly  to  sustained  growth, 
rising  incomes  and  declining  poverty  rates.  The  most  effective  policy  response  to  the  concerns  of 
those  who  fear  the  consequences  of  further  integration  is  to  direct  more  political  capital  to  the 
challenge of developing the economic and institutional infrastructure that will enable governments and 
their citizens to adapt more readily to change. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 37/2007 
 3
