Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Macroeconomic background and outlook for 2007 
Presentation by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the Sri Lanka 
Development Forum – 2007, Colombo, 29-30 January 2007. 
 Your Excellency President Mahinda Rajapaksa, President of Sri Lanka, Hon Chairman, Hon Ministers, 
Your Excellencies, Development Partners and friends, 
In the next few minutes, I will endeavour to give you a quick update of Sri Lanka’s macroeconomic 
achievements in 2006 and also share with you, some thoughts on the outlook for 2007.  
As we now know, the Sri Lankan economy recorded a growth of 7.8 per cent in the first three quarters 
of  2006  and  according  to  current  available  data,  it  is  very  likely  that  the  economic  growth  in  2006 
would be well over 7 per cent. Unemployment recorded its lowest level of 6.3% during the year. Our 
international  reserves  increased  by  nearly  5  per  cent.  Exports,  imports  and  FDI  grew  significantly. 
Many major infrastructure development projects commenced. A large number of village development 
projects  were  implemented.  Migrant  worker  remittances  reached  the  highest  ever  level  of  over  US 
dollar 2.3 billion.  
These  achievements  by  any  standards,  would  have  been  considered significant.  But,  in  the  light  of 
several major challenges faced by the country during 2006, these achievements could very well be 
even considered quite remarkable. The unprecedented high international oil prices, the unfavourable 
security  situation  due  to  heightened  terrorist  activity,  the  unforeseen  investment  needs  in  the  post 
tsunami  reconstruction,  the  ending  of  the  debt  moratorium  that  was  granted  in  the  wake  of  the 
Tsunami and  the  intense export competition  arising  from  the elimination of  textile  quotas,  all  left  its 
mark on the economy in 2006.  
While each of these challenges were very serious, let me briefly deal with the special challenge arising 
from the uncertain security situation as a result of terrorist attacks launched by the LTTE from early 
January 2006. In face of these attacks, even reluctantly, this threat had to be faced head-on and the 
terrible  attacks  had  to  be  repulsed  by  the  Government.  Such  efforts  obviously  required  the 
appropriation  of  a  significant  amount  of  resources,  a  part  of  which  could  have  been  otherwise 
available  for  more  productive  activity.  Nevertheless,  no  responsible  government  could  ignore 
persistent and delibarate attacks against the country’s integrity, defence, economic centers and public, 
and hence, as has been done in many countries across the world, the key economic centers and the 
public has to be safeguarded from the terrorist attacks through the implementation of the necessary 
anti-terrorism initiatives. In that context, the governmental interventions to protect the interests of the 
country,  and  its  economic  infrastructure  should  be  clearly  recognised  as  a  basic  imperative  in  the 
overall defence as well as macroeconomic plan of the nation.  
The  good  news  however  is  that  despite  this  and  other  serious  challenges,  the  country  was  able  to 
maintain macroeconomic stability at a reasonable level. The balance of payments recorded a surplus; 
the exchange rate, which in the years 2001 to 2004 had depreciated by approximately 5.9 per cent per 
annum, depreciated by only 5.2 per cent during 2006; a comfortable level of reserves was maintained; 
Government revenue and fiscal deficit targets were achieved as planned; the outstanding Government 
debt to GDP ratio declined; investor confidence remained high; a remarkable increase was seen in 
foreign direct investments (FDI) and for the first time, the yearly FDI exceeded US dollars 500 million; 
foreign portfolio inflows into the Stock Market increased substantially; the share indices recorded its 
highest ever levels; the government was able to mobilise around US dollars 1.2 billion in loans and 
grants from bilateral and multilateral donors and commercial sources.  
But we have to admit that not everything was rosy. There were a few down-sides and draw-backs too. 
Inflation began to rise since April due to higher than expected monetary expansion, some revisions to 
administered prices and escalating vegetable prices. In response, a tight monetary policy stance was 
adopted to curtail high growth in monetary and credit aggregates and it is likely that such measures 
would lead to the moderation of the rising inflationary pressures, and reflect a downward trend from 
April 2007 onwards.  
Chairman, Your Excellencies, friends, 
BIS Review 11/2007 
 1
Over  the  next  few  years,  we  are  also  very  keen  to  deal  with  two  key  disparities  prevailing  in  our 
country.  
These  are:  (a)  regional  disparity  in  economic  development,  and  (b)  significant  income  disparity 
between  the  poor  and  rich.  Creating  more  opportunities  within  the  regions  outside  the  Western 
Province  and  encouraging  village  development  and  human  resource  development  at  all  levels, 
hopefully  the  need  to  reduce  poverty  significantly,  and  address  income  inequality.  These  efforts 
therefore  would  need  to  be  pursued  with  renewed  enthusiasm,  as  already  vowed  in  the  Mahinda 
Chinthana, the President’s development plan for the nation.  
We are also deeply conscious that for the country to achieve its macro-economic goals, the monetary 
policy too should play a key role. Towards that end, the monetary policy framework adopted by the 
Central  Bank  has  been  made  consistent  with  the  government’s  macroeconomic  framework. 
Accordingly, the 2007 targets in the monetary programme of the Central Bank have been set, after 
taking into consideration the potential growth and liquidity needs of the economy to move along the 
projected growth path while keeping inflationary pressures in check.  
Your Excellency, In November 2006, the Government of your Excellency announced its medium-term 
macroeconomic  framework  within  a  10-year  development  framework.  This  programme  targets  an  8 
per cent growth for the next six years and 9-10 per cent thereafter. These are tough targets. But these 
are  achievable.  When  striving  towards  such  goals,  we  must  remember  that  our  development  focus 
should always be clear. We must also remember that our external environment may not always and 
necessarily be ideal. But we would do well to remember that ours has been and is a resilient economy. 
We have shown that we can grow even in the face of highly adverse circumstances and scenarios. In 
that context, we would be wise, if we do not develop our economic plans on the overriding assumption 
of  a  totally  terrorism  free  environment.  Of  course,  if  the  peace  process  is  successful  and  a  early 
political solution is found to the on-going conflict, it would be highly desirable. But at the same time, if 
we consciously develop our plans and frameworks on less than perfect conditions, we could still find 
ways and means to succeed and deliver the planned results. We owe that to our people, who cannot 
and should not have to wait until everything falls in to place. Therefore, our future strategies should be 
aimed at moving ahead even in the face of threats of terrorism and other adversities without setting 
out as a pre-condition, the achievement of a permanent peace or ideal conditions to embark on our 
development projects and programmes.  
We  are  also  working  today  on  the  basis  that  all  our  strategies  would  be  of  no  avail,  if  we  are  not 
sufficiently committed to achieving those plans. We know we are serious in our efforts. We also have 
to show we are serious. That is why, at the beginning of 2007, in close consultation with the Secretary 
to the Ministry of Finance, the Monetary Board developed a comprehensive monitoring mechanism of 
key  macroeconomic  variables  in  the  external,  fiscal  and  monetary  sectors.  These  are  based  on  a 
financial programming framework to ensure that key macroeconomic targets are met as announced, 
both  in  the  Budget  and  our  Road  Map.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  these  key  macro  economic 
variables  and  take  appropriate  policy  measures  if and  when  there  are  any  deviations  from  the  pre-
determined targets.  
We  are  therefore  confident  that  we  will  be  able  to  keep  our  economy  and  development  agenda  on 
track and make rapid progress. It is also our hope that our development partners will understand our 
strategies and efforts towards achieving macroeconomic stability and growth and we look forward to 
their close support in our endeavours. 
Finally, I would like to leave a simple message with all of you, our Development partners. The outlook 
for Sri Lanka is bright. We are optimistic about our country. Join us in our endeavours. Now is the 
time.  
2 
 BIS Review 11/2007
