Pierre Duguay: The Bank of Canada’s research agenda and the future of 
inflation targeting 
Remarks by Mr Pierre Duguay, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian 
Association for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 27 August 2007. 
 The last few weeks have been a time of turbulence in financial markets. In times such as 
these, it is common for people to focus on day-by-day or even hour-by-hour events, and to 
lose sight of the future. But tonight, I want to focus on the future; specifically, the future of 
inflation  targeting  in  Canada.  I  want  to  discuss  the  key  issues  facing  us  as  we  consider 
refining our monetary policy framework in the years ahead, and to speak about the Bank of 
Canada's research program in this important area. I will finish with some remarks on recent 
developments in the Canadian economy and in financial markets. 
Inflation targeting – room for improvement? 
It may seem as if the Bank of Canada has been talking about inflation targeting forever. But 
as an approach to monetary policy, inflation targeting is not all that old – less than 20 years. 
In  the  words  of  economics  professor  Ken  Kuttner,  inflation  targeting  is  still  in  its 
adolescence.1 And like many adolescents, it still has a few issues to work out. 
But  let  me  be  clear:  Whatever  issues  there  may  be,  our  policy  framework  of  inflation 
targeting,  supported  by  a  floating  exchange  rate,  remains  the  most  effective  approach  yet 
devised  for  conducting  –  and  explaining  –  monetary  policy  in  a  country  like  Canada.  No 
central bank that has adopted inflation targeting has later abandoned it. Together with sound 
fiscal  policy,  inflation  targeting  has  clearly  made  a  significant  contribution  to  Canada's 
economic welfare. Consumers and businesses have been able to manage their finances with 
greater certainty about the future purchasing power of their savings and income. Economic 
signals  sent  by  movements  in  relative  prices  have  been  clearer,  and  labour  markets  have 
been able to function better. Low and stable inflation has also meant that interest rates, both 
in nominal and real terms, have been lower.  
Inflation targeting has also been quite successful in anchoring inflation expectations and in 
dampening economic fluctuations, owing largely to the transparency of communications that 
the framework encourages. Well-anchored inflation expectations have helped to reduce the 
propagation of price shocks to wages and prices and to dampen the sensitivity of inflation to 
excess demand and supply. This has made the conduct of monetary policy more effective 
and efficient. In effect, we've created a virtuous circle. A better monetary policy framework 
has  led  to  better  inflation  outcomes,  increased  policy  credibility,  and  a  more  stable 
macroeconomic environment. 
Reflecting  the  success  of  the  inflation-targeting  regime,  the  government  and  the  Bank  of 
Canada  renewed  the  inflation-target  agreement  in  November  of  last  year  for  another  five-
year  period.  As  part  of  that  renewal,  we  took  the  opportunity  to  refine  and  clarify  our 
framework, and we reached conclusions in three areas: the use of core inflation measures, 
the role of asset price movements in the conduct of policy, and the appropriate time frame for 
bringing inflation back to target following a shock. We concluded that we should continue to 
look  at  measures  of  core  inflation  as  a  way  to  gauge  the  strength  of  underlying  inflation, 
                                                 
1   K. Kuttner. "A Snapshot of Inflation Targeting in its Adolescence", in The Future of Inflation Targeting, 6-42. 
Proceedings of a conference held by the Reserve Bank of Australia, August 2004, (Sydney: Reserve Bank of 
Australia). 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 1
although  our  target  remains  total  CPI  inflation.  As  for  asset  price  movements,  we  will 
continue  to  take  them  into  account  to  the  extent  that  they  have  implications  for  future 
inflation.  And  we  will  continue,  generally,  to  aim  to  return  inflation  to  the  2  per  cent  target 
over  a  six-  to  eight-quarter  horizon,  unless  faced  with  shocks  where  a  slightly  shorter  or 
slightly  longer  horizon  would  be  more  appropriate.  Should  such  a  case  occur,  we  would 
communicate it transparently. 
While  inflation  control  is  clearly  the  right  assignment  for  monetary  policy,  there  always 
remains the question of whether the specific regime established in the 1990s will deliver the 
greatest contribution to economic performance in the decades ahead. So, when the inflation-
targeting agreement was renewed last year, the Bank published a background document that 
spelled out two basic questions, which we hope to answer: Is 2 per cent the right target? And 
should the Bank express its target in terms of a path for the level of prices, instead of the 
rate of inflation?2 Let me spend a bit of time discussing these two questions. 
Is 2 per cent the right target? 
When the Bank and the Government of Canada first agreed on a series of targets for inflation 
in 1991, a 2 per cent rate of inflation was seen by the Bank as a step towards price stability, 
which had yet to be defined. But it was also seen by most as a very ambitious target. After 
all, it had been decades since the Canadian economy had experienced a sustained period 
with inflation at 2 per cent or less. Indeed, during the 1980s, we had had trouble containing 
inflation to 4 per cent. In addition, there were fears at the time that the introduction of the 
Goods and Services Tax could rekindle inflationary pressures. But inflation quickly fell into 
line following the announcement of the targets, and has averaged very close to 2 per cent 
since the end of 1991. 
Since then, we have seen that the economy functions better at a low rate of inflation. But this 
experience raises the question: Would a lower inflation rate lead to further efficiency gains for 
the Canadian economy? There are a number of reasons to think so. Lower inflation would 
reduce the misallocation of resources by reducing price dispersions and making price signals 
clearer.  It  would  also  reduce  the  costs  of  updating  prices  and  the  economic  distortions 
coming from a non-indexed tax system. 
We  have  been  researching  this  issue  for  some  time.  Back  in  1998,  the  Bank  published  a 
number of papers that examined the theoretical arguments and the empirical evidence on the 
potential benefits of lower inflation, most notably a paper by McGill University's Chris Ragan 
and several papers by Bank researchers.3 But it has proven difficult to quantify the expected 
benefits of lower inflation. In a recent commentary, David Laidler of the C.D. Howe Institute 
expresses lingering pessimism about finding material efficiency gains. He focuses instead on 
the  distributional  benefits  of  lower  inflation,  arguing  that  these  will  take  on  increased 
importance  as  our  population  ages  and  a  growing  number  of  Canadians  rely  on  fixed 
incomes.4  However,  advances  in  modelling  offer  new  ways  of  quantifying  the  expected 
efficiency  gains.  These  have  been  explored  in  two  recent  papers  by  Bank  staff:  one  co-
authored with Steve Ambler – the outgoing Special Adviser at the Bank of Canada5 – the 
                                                 
2   Bank of Canada. Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information (Ottawa: Bank of Canada. 
2006). 
3   See C. Ragan, On the Believable Benefits of Low Inflation, Working Paper 98-15 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 
1998) and D. Coletti and B. O'Reilly, "Lower inflation: Benefits and costs." Bank of Canada Review (Autumn 
1998): 3-21. 
4   D. Laidler, Better Late than Never: Towards a Systematic Review of Canada's Monetary Policy Regime, C.D. 
Howe Institute Commentary. (Toronto: Renouf Publishing, 2007). 
5   R. Amano, S. Ambler, and N. Rebei, The Macroeconomic Effects of Non-Zero Trend Inflation, Working Paper 
2006-34 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2007
other with Laval professor Kevin Moran.6 Their early results suggest that this is an avenue 
worth pursuing further.  
But while there may be benefits to be gained from a lower inflation target, there may also be 
costs involved in getting there. As I mentioned earlier, Canadians' expectations of inflation 
have  now  become  firmly  anchored  on  2  per  cent.  Adjusting  those  expectations  down  to  a 
lower  level,  say  1  per  cent,  may  not  be  easy,  although  the  cost  of  lowering  inflation 
expectations  can  be  expected  to  be  lower  than  when  inflation  targeting  was  first  adopted, 
given the credibility that the Bank – and our inflation-targeting framework – have acquired. 
However,  the  lengthening  of  non-indexed  wage  and  debt  contracts  would  raise  some 
transition costs. 
Two main arguments have traditionally been advanced against the idea of targeting a lower 
inflation rate. The first is the concern about downward wage rigidity: That it is more difficult to 
adjust real wages downwards in an environment of very low inflation because this will likely 
involve  cuts  to  nominal  wages.  The  second  argument  is  that  central  banks  could  have 
problems  implementing  a  stimulative  policy  in  a  very-low-inflation  environment  because 
nominal interest rates cannot go below zero. 
With respect to downward wage rigidities, research described at the time of the 2001 renewal 
of the target,7 as well as labour market developments generally, do not appear to provide a 
compelling  argument  against  a  lower  inflation  target.  But  the  zero-bound  constraint  on 
interest rates remains a critical issue. The adoption of price-level targeting, however, could 
help central banks deal with the zero-bound constraint. So let me now turn to the topic of 
price-level targeting. 
A target for the price-level path? 
The essential difference between a target for the price level (which could rise over time) and 
an inflation target is that under pure inflation targeting, past deviations from the target do not 
have an impact on the future targeted rate of inflation. Movements in the price level that are 
perceived  to  be  "one-off"  events  are  ignored.  Bygones  are  bygones.  But  with  price-level 
targeting, past inflation performance does matter. If inflation had been below trend, causing 
the  price  level  to  fall  below  target,  monetary  policy  would  need  to  generate  above-trend 
inflation for a while in order to return the price level to the target over time. Symmetrically, if 
inflation had been above trend, lifting the price level above its target, the central bank would 
need to bring about temporarily below-trend inflation to return the price level to its target path 
over time.  
Economic theory suggests that targeting a path for the price level would benefit the economy 
by adding certainty about prices over the long term. This should support economic efficiency 
by reducing the risks associated with long-term financial contracts. Providing added certainty 
about future prices would be of particular benefit to people living on fixed incomes. And as I 
mentioned  earlier,  price-level  targeting  might  also  help  central  banks  avoid  some  of  the 
difficulties associated with the "zero-bound" issue. If people anticipate that the central bank 
would  take  the  appropriate  measures  to  achieve  the  target,  expectations  about  the  future 
price level could become very well anchored. In these circumstances, it would take smaller 
moves in nominal interest rates to bring about the needed change in aggregate demand, and 
hence the zero bound is less likely to become a problem. Let me explain. If a shock were to 
bring the price level below the target, the anticipation that prices would return to target over 
                                                 
6   R. Amano, K. Moran, S. Murchison, and A. Rennison, Trend Inflation, Wage and Price Rigidities, and Welfare, 
Working Paper 2007-42 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 2007). 
7   Bank of Canada. Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information (Ottawa: Bank of Canada. 
2001). 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 3
time  would  lower  real  interest  rates  and  help  boost  demand,  thus  requiring  a  smaller 
reduction in nominal interest rates. Put another way, the drop in prices below target would 
induce  buyers  to  take  advantage  of  the  temporarily  low  prices.  This  would  alleviate  the 
problems posed by the zero bound. 
There  is,  however,  concern  about  how  a  central  bank  would  need  to  respond  to  certain 
shocks  under  price-level  targeting.  Under  inflation  targeting  as  it  is  now  practised,  one-off 
relative price movements or changes in indirect taxes would not trigger a monetary response 
as  long  as  inflation  expectations  remain  anchored.  By  focusing  on  the  future  trend  of 
inflation,  an  inflation-targeting  central  bank  accommodates  one-off  shifts  in  the  price  level 
and need not disturb the balance between aggregate demand and supply. But under price-
level  targeting,  persistent  relative  price  shocks  would  require  a  monetary  policy  response 
designed to bring about offsetting changes in other components of the consumer price index, 
which may involve shifts in the balance between aggregate demand and supply. It may be 
possible for a central bank to target the level of a core price index, which is less subject to 
relative price movements, rather than the total index. But this could add significantly to the 
communications challenges posed by price-level targeting. 
These communications challenges are likely to be greater for a central bank that practises 
price-level  targeting  than  for  one  that  practises  inflation  targeting.  The  general  public  can 
easily relate to a well-publicized and straightforward number like the inflation rate, and to an 
inflation target that remains constant over time. It could be more difficult to communicate that 
the central bank's target was a particular level of a price index, which itself could be rising 
over time, and that the path of inflation needed to get to this target number would change, 
depending  on  whether  the  price  level  was  above  or  below  the  target.  Yet,  a  solid  public 
understanding  is  important  if  the  full  benefits  of  increased  certainty  about  the  future  price 
level are to be realized.  
Any debate about the pros and cons of price-level targeting is bound to be based on theory, 
because only one country has had any real experience with it: Sweden in the 1930s. So we 
don't have much empirical evidence. That said, we now have the ability to construct the kinds 
of complex economic models – multi-goods models with relative price movements – that are 
important for conducting research into price-level targeting.  
The Bank of Canada’s research agenda 
Given the nature of the questions we have regarding both a lower inflation target and price-
level targeting, there is a clear need for a lot of research to be done in a short period of time 
if we are to have a thorough discussion of the alternatives before the next renewal in 2011. 
And so the Bank has begun a concerted and ambitious research program for the next three 
years.  
But we know that this task is too large for us to accomplish ourselves. We very much want to 
get others involved in this research agenda, so that we can benefit from their knowledge and 
expertise. The Bank has held special sessions connected with meetings of various economic 
groups, and we will be hosting joint conferences with other central banks, as well as our own 
research conference. 
The Bank has also launched a new website: www.inflationtargeting.ca. This site is intended 
to be a hub where interested researchers can find out what research has been done, and 
what is being planned.  
At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  want  to  be  confident  that  we  have  developed  the  best  policy 
framework  to  deliver  on  our  mandate  of  promoting  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of 
Canadians. Inflation targeting has proven its worth in helping Canada achieve solid economic 
performance. But it is still relatively young, and there is some room for it to grow. Over the 
next  few  years,  we  hope  to  answer  some  of  the  lingering  questions  we  have  had  about 
inflation targeting.  
4 
 BIS Review 94/2007
We are not yet at the end of monetary history. With the Bank's research agenda, we hope to 
write the next chapter of the story. And we hope that many others, including some of you 
here tonight, will join us in that effort. 
Recent economic and financial developments 
Let me now turn to recent developments. I'll start with some words about the events in global 
financial  markets.  Over  the  past  few  weeks,  there  has  been  significant  turmoil  in  financial 
markets around the world, and risk aversion has increased substantially. At the heart of the 
matter  has  been  a  reassessment  of  risk  in  credit  markets  triggered  by  concern  about 
exposures to U.S. sub-prime mortgages. It has been extremely difficult to re-establish market 
prices for certain assets, particularly highly-structured asset-backed instruments. This is due 
in  part  to  insufficient  transparency  –  both  about  the  actual  assets  that  are  backing  these 
securities  and  about  the  distribution  of  exposure  to  these  assets.  The  difficulty  for  market 
participants  to  evaluate  risk  and  price  it  appropriately,  together  with  the  risk  of  an  abrupt 
correction, was highlighted in the June issue of our Financial System Review. For some time 
we  had  been  commenting  that  the  narrow  yield  spreads  on  risky  assets  was  raising 
questions  about  whether  risk  was  being  priced  appropriately,  a  concern  shared  by  other 
central bankers. 
Signs of difficulty within global financial markets have been evident in the market for asset-
backed commercial paper (ABCP) and in the drying up of liquidity in money markets more 
generally.  Yields  on  short-term  government  debt  fell  sharply  as  investors  tried  to  shift  into 
risk-free assets, and demands for liquidity put upward pressure on overnight interest rates. 
Most  major  central  banks  responded  by  providing  liquidity  to  support  the  functioning  of 
markets, conducting operations to reduce the upward pressure on overnight interest rates. 
The Bank of Canada undertook normal open market buyback operations to provide liquidity. 
It  also  temporarily  expanded  the  list  of  collateral  eligible  for  use  by  market  participants  in 
these buyback operations to include all securities already eligible for collateral in the Large 
Value Transfer System. As well, the Bank increased its supply of settlement balances as it 
normally does when it sees increased demand for cash balances. 
Let me emphasize that the Bank of Canada's operations to provide liquidity do not represent 
a  change  in  the  stance  of  monetary  policy,  but  are  meant  to  meet  increased  demand  for 
liquidity to help re-establish well-functioning financial markets. 
Within the private sector, there have been important initiatives to support the functioning of 
markets. Canada's major chartered banks have confirmed that they are supporting their own 
bank-sponsored  asset-backed  commercial  paper  programs.  As  well,  a  number  of  major 
investors and liquidity providers have been pursuing an orderly restructuring for third-party 
structured finance asset-backed commercial paper. These initiatives should help support the 
functioning of financial markets in Canada. 
Now let me conclude by turning to developments in the Canadian economy. I think it would 
be useful to recall what the Bank said in the Monetary Policy Report Update (MPRU) that we 
published in July. In that document, we said that economic growth and inflation in Canada in 
the first half of this year had been stronger than expected, and that the economy was now 
operating  further  above  its  production  potential  than  was  projected  at  the  time  of  the  April 
Report. Our base-case projection was for average annual economic growth of about 2 1/2 
per cent through 2009, slightly below our estimate of the growth rate of potential, allowing the 
economy  to  return  to  its  production  potential  in  2009.  Inflation  was  projected  to  be  slightly 
higher than in the April Report, returning to the 2 per cent target by early 2009. We identified 
both upside and downside risks to our inflation projection, noting that these appeared to be 
roughly balanced. The main upside risk related to the strength of household spending. The 
main  downside  risks  related  to  the  effects  on  the  Canadian  economy  of  the  stronger 
Canadian dollar and of the ongoing adjustment in the U.S. housing sector. We increased our 
BIS Review 94/2007 
 5
key policy interest rate to 4 1/2 per cent on 10 July, and said at that time that in line with our 
outlook, some modest further increase in the policy rate may be required. 
Economic data published since the July MPRU have been roughly in line with expectations. 
Domestic  demand  in  Canada  has  remained  robust,  against  the  backdrop  of  strong  labour 
and housing markets. But given recent events in global credit markets, we need to assess 
the  extent  to  which  the  risks  around  our  July  projection  have  shifted.  Specifically,  we  are 
asking ourselves two questions: First, how much greater is the risk to the Canadian economy 
now posed by developments in the U.S. economy? And second, to what extent would the re-
pricing of credit risk lead to a sustained tightening of credit conditions in Canada?  
We  will  be  considering  these  questions  as  we  prepare  for  our  next  interest  rate 
announcement on 5 September. 
6 
 BIS Review 94/2007
