Toshihiko Fukui: The dynamism of Asian economies and central bank 
cooperation in the region  
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  International 
Symposium  "Ten  Years  After  the  Currency  Crisis:  Future  Challenges  for  the  Asian  Economies  and 
Financial Markets", hosted by the Center for Monetary Cooperation in Asia (CeMCoA), Bank of Japan, 
Tokyo, 22 January 2007. 
 Introduction  
1. 
Good  morning,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Welcome  to  the  first  international  symposium  hosted  by  the 
Center for Monetary Cooperation in Asia, or CeMCoA for short. CeMCoA was established within the 
International Department of the Bank of Japan about a year ago with a view to promoting international 
cooperation among Asian central banks. 
Today, I am very pleased to welcome my close friends from the Asian central banking circle and the 
International Monetary Fund. Governor Zeti from Malaysia, Governor Tarisa from Thailand, Governor 
Abdullah from Indonesia, Governor Tetangco from the Philippines, and Managing Director Rodrigo de 
Rato of the IMF, I would like to thank all of them for joining us as guest speakers. I would also like to 
extend my heartfelt gratitude to all the distinguished audience gathering here. 
This  morning,  we  would  like  to  discuss  the  dynamism  of  Asian  economies  and  the  regional 
cooperation  among  central  banks  as  well  as  the  IMF.  Looking  at  the  Asian  economies,  China  and 
India  often  attract  attention,  but  at  the  same  time  no  one  can  afford  to  overlook  the  importance  of 
ASEAN  countries.  Japanese  industries  and  financial  institutions  have  a  long  history  of  close 
relationship with these economies, and will continue to do so for mutual benefits. Interdependence in 
Asia has come a long way despite the Asian currency crisis a decade ago. As demonstrated by the 
significant  recovery  and  expansion  in  the  last  decade,  the  Asian  economies  are  expected  to  make 
great leaps forward in the next decade. Today's guest speakers are the ones who will support these 
leaps. I believe this is a very good opportunity to discuss a forward-looking view of the Asian countries. 
Economic dynamism in Asia 
2.  
As you may recall, the Asian currency crisis, which started with the sharp decline of the Thai baht in 
July 1997, spread to neighboring countries in a short period of time. Some ASEAN economies at that 
time  suffered  disruptions  in  their  foreign  exchange  and  financial  markets,  the  massive  outflow  of 
capital resulted in the drying up of foreign reserves, the deterioration of banking systems and negative 
economic growth. Ten years later, everything is different: the foreign exchange and financial markets 
are  much  more  stable  and  the  currencies  sometimes  face  upward  rather  than  downward  pressure; 
foreign direct investment and other capital inflow continues to grow with the accumulation of foreign 
reserves; the banking system has been strengthened through restructuring; and the economies have 
grown at a steady and sustainable pace of 5% on average since 2000. While there were indescribable 
difficulties to overcome the adverse effects of the crisis, the present performance clearly demonstrates 
the success of policy efforts and the underlying dynamism of the economies. I hope the speeches by 
the Governors will enlighten us about the changes in economies and dynamism after the crisis. 
Regional cooperation 
3.  
Turning to policy coordination, the crisis became the starting point for various initiatives in the region. 
Exposed  to  the  weakness  in  the  international  financial  architecture,  the  ministries  of  finance  and 
central  banks  became  aware  of  the  importance  of  regional  cooperation  and  began  to  address  the 
source  of  weakness.  The  Chiang  Mai  Initiative,  as  a  complement  to  the  IMF  facilities,  was  agreed 
upon  among ASEAN  +  3  to  build  a  framework  of  emergency  liquidity  support  through  a  network  of 
bilateral foreign exchange swap arrangements.  
Based on the analysis of the crisis, efforts have been made to reduce over-reliance on the banking 
sector  for  financial  intermediation.  The  Asian  Bond  Markets  Initiatives  (ABMI)  is  another  regional 
cooperation by ASEAN + 3 to foster local capital markets. Sharing the same objective with the ABMI, 
BIS Review 9/2007 
 1
the  Executives'  Meetings  of  East  Asia  and  Pacific  Central  Banks,  or  EMEAP,  consisting  of  eleven 
central banks and monetary authorities in the region, started the Asian Bond Fund project. By utilizing 
some  foreign  reserves  of  member  central  banks  collectively,  the  EMEAP  launched  two  investment 
funds; one for investing in US dollar-denominated public bonds issued by the member countries, and 
the  other  for  investing  in  local  currency-denominated  public  bonds,  to  help  not  only  to  provide  a 
convenient  and  low-cost  instrument  for  market  participants  but  also  to  identify  and  remove 
impediments to the respective local markets.  
Future challenges for the Asian economies and financial markets 
4.  
In  line  with  the  good  performance  of  regional  economies  and  the  progress  in  policy  coordination 
among central banks and monetary authorities, economic integration in the region is gradually taking 
root. It is reported that intra-regional trade in East Asia has recently reached around half of the total, 
which is comparable to that of NAFTA and slightly less than that of the EU. Bilateral and regional free 
trade agreements are spreading throughout Asia. In addition, ASEAN is accelerating the process for 
building the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) by 2015. It will be interesting to see how the present 
banking  and  other  financial  services  change  when  a  single  market  for  goods  and  services  is 
formulated  in  ASEAN.  I  hope  the  Governors  can  provide  us  with  insights  into  developments  of  the 
AEC. 
With the globalization of the world's financial markets, large capital flows will continue to have a strong 
impact on open economies. This holds true for most of the Asian economies including the ASEAN. It 
is,  and will  surely  be,  the  most difficult  task  for  any  monetary  authorities  to  maintain  the  stability  of 
foreign  exchange  rates,  the  free  flow  of  capital,  and  the  independence  of  monetary  policy 
simultaneously. The answer to this proposition probably lies in the resilience of markets. In order to 
increase  the  ability  to  absorb  external  shocks  from  massive  capital  flows,  the  priority  seems  to 
strengthen  the  function  of  foreign  exchange  and  financial  markets  in  the  region  as  a  whole.  In  this 
regard, frequent exchange of information, deep analysis and concerted efforts by the EMEAP central 
banks will contribute to addressing risks and vulnerabilities in the markets. Such collaborative actions 
may cover the roles of the IMF, which commits itself to extensive reform to meet new challenges under 
the leadership of Rodrigo. 
Conclusion 
It  is  often  said  that  Asia  is  highly  diverse  in  culture,  social  framework  and  the  stage  of  economic 
development. Since the Asian economies are in many respects very different from the European, we 
will probably follow our own process for economic integration. In that process, the better functioning of 
markets  through  regional  cooperation  will  help  provide  a  better  business  environment  for  industries 
and  financial  institutions,  and  lead  to  more  efficient  resource  allocation.  The  more-than-ten-year 
history  of  EMEAP  itself  proves  that  cooperation  based  on  mutual  understanding  and  respect  is 
possible in any circumstances. 
I  am  sure  the  guest  speakers  have  various  opinions  on  today's  topics,  and  we  will  be  able  to 
appreciate  their  visions  through  our  stimulating  discussions.  I  would  be  delighted  if  this  symposium 
helps you build insights into the dynamism of Asian economies and central bank cooperation in the 
region for the decade to come. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2007
