W A Wijewardena: John Exter – central banker for all times 
Article by Mr W A Wijewardena, Deputy Governor, Central Bank of Sri Lanka, on the first anniversary 
of the death of Mr John Exter (Founder Governor of the Central Bank of Ceylon/Sri Lanka), issued to 
Sri Lankan newspapers, 28 February 2007.  
 The  first  death  anniversary  of  John  Exter,  Founder  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank,  falls  on  28th  of 
February. He died in 2006 after living a very productive life for 95 long years. 
John Exter can be regarded as one of the history makers in modern Sri Lanka. He lent his wisdom, 
intellect and experience, without any reservation, for the establishment of the Central Bank of Ceylon, 
the  name  of  the  Bank  at  that  time.  The  Bank  was  established  in  1950  on  the  basis  of  the 
recommendations made by him as a one man committee, the report of which is now known as the 
Exter  Report.  He  made  history  once  again  by  becoming  the  governor  of  that  maiden  bank  at  the 
young age of 39, an age normally considered as too low for that prestigious and demanding position. 
His task was to establish the bank, staff it and lead it in the first few formative years, so that it could 
eventually  be  taken  over  by  a  Sri  Lankan  management.  His  history  making  did  not  end  there.  As 
undertaken  by  him  at  the  time  of  appointment,  exactly  after  three  years,  he  relinquished  his 
responsibilities as governor to pave way for a Sri Lankan to occupy that high post. 
The  Central  Bank  is,  forever,  deeply  indebted  to  John  Exter.  The  rationale  and  philosophy  of  the 
central bank which he evinced in his report in the late 1940s are equally valid for today as well. His 
report  is  unique  in  that  sense,  because  it  carries  a  justification  of  each  and  every  section  of  the 
Monetary Law, so that the later generations of central bankers would not have any ambiguity of what 
was meant by them. As a result, even today, the Exter Report is used by both central bankers and 
academics as their bible. Hence, by any standard, Exter is a central banker for all times. 
The appointment of John Exter to a one man committee on the establishment of a central bank is also 
marked  by  an  interesting  legend.  Edmund  Eramudugolla,  a  former  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the 
Central  Bank,  has  narrated  this  legend  in  his  Reminiscences  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka. 
According  to  him,  the  government  of  newly  independent  Ceylon  decided  to  replace  the  Currency 
Board System which it had inherited from the British with a more flexible central bank. Accordingly, the 
government decided to seek foreign assistance to prepare a blueprint for a central bank based on the 
country’s specific position and future prospects. However, for reasons not very clear, this assistance 
was sought from USA and not from the UK, the traditional advisor of the country. Thus, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York was approached by the then Minister of Finance, J. R. Jayawardene, to 
obtain the services of a suitable consultant. The Bank, in turn, informed the government that it could 
not  release  its  best  consultant,  namely,  David  L  Gosse,  for  this  purpose,  because  he  had  been 
occupied in some other assignment at that time. Gosse was considered the ideal expert for the job, 
because  he  already  possessed  the  required  experience  for  the  job  at  hand  by  pioneering  the  work 
relating to the establishment of the Central Bank of the Philippines. However, Gosse was kind enough 
to  recommend  his  assistant,  John  Exter,  for  the  job.  Hence,  Exter  was  not  the  first  choice,  but  an 
engagement done by default. Yet, the wisdom, erudition and professionalism shown by Exter in both 
making  the  recommendations  and  subsequent  running  of  the  Bank,  is  a  testimony  that  he  was  the 
correct choice for the job at hand.  
John  Exter  had  an  illustrious  academic  as  well  as  professional  career.  After  graduating  from  the 
College  of  Wooster,  he  completed  post  graduate  work  at  both  the  Fletcher  School  of  Law  and 
Diplomacy and Harvard University. After a brief stint at MIT during World War II, he joined the Federal 
Reserve System as an economist. Then, in 1948, he was on release to serve the Government of the 
Philippines  as  advisor  to  its  Secretary  of  Finance.  It  is  from  there  that  he  came  to  Ceylon  as  the 
consultant on the establishment of a central bank, still on release from the Federal Reserve System. 
After serving his term as Governor of the Central Bank, Exter did not return to the Federal Reserve 
System. Instead, in 1953, he joined the World Bank and was offered the position of the division chief 
for the Middle East. After a year with the World Bank, he came back to the Federal Reserve System 
as its Vice President on international operations at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. His career 
at the Federal Reserve System ended in 1959 when he decided to join the First National City Bank 
which later became the Citibank. From 1960 to 1972, he was the Senior Vice President of the Citibank 
in charge of its relations with foreign central banks and governments. With a huge fortune made on the 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 1
gold  market  by  using  his  own  expertise  on  the  foresight  of  irresponsible  central  banking  and  its 
inevitable  consequences,  Exter  took  an  early  retirement  in  1972  and  went  into  private  consultancy 
work.  
According to his own admission, the prospect for his fortune on gold dawned on him after a friendly 
debate he had in 1962 with his one time Harvard buddy and Nobel Laureate Paul Samuelson. In that 
debate  on  why  the  dollar  was  becoming  weak  and  USA  was  losing  gold,  Exter  gave  his  diagnosis 
which was based on his experience with the Federal Reserve System. “Paul, it is very simple. The 
Fed  is printing  too  many  dollars and  they flow out  of the  country  into  foreign  central  banks 
who demand gold” Exter is reported to have said. But, Paul Samuelson did not accept it and wanted 
to explain the malady in terms of productivity differences between USA and other countries, namely, 
Europe  and  Japan.  Samuelson’s  thesis  was  that  the  latter  category  of  countries  had  a  higher 
productivity than USA and therefore the dollar was becoming weaker. Exter says that he countered 
Samuelson  saying  that  Japan  was  in  more  trouble  than  USA,  because  “the  Bank  of  Japan  was 
running its printing press even faster than the rest of the central banks around the world” Exter 
had  decided  then  and  there  that  the  irresponsible  government  expenditure  by  the  Kennedy 
administration could not keep the dollar stable in the long run and one day, gold would become the 
preferred  asset  by  the  world’s  nations.  Hence,  he  says  that  he  converted  all  his  savings  into  gold 
based assets and waited patiently. He was amply compensated in 1971 when the US government was 
forced to sever dollar’s link with gold under the gold exchange standard and allow the gold prices to be 
determined in the free market. Overnight, gold prices doubled from $35 per ounce to $70 per ounce. 
So did the gold based assets portfolio held by Exter. 
This wisdom which Exter demonstrated in his practical life could be discerned throughout the Exter 
Report and his later writings. He belonged to the old guard of economists who believed that economic 
prosperity cannot be attained by printing money. This was indeed going against the popular tides of 
the  late  1930s  and  1940s.  At  that  time,  Keynesianism  had  been  accepted  by  the  mainstream 
economists on both sides of the Atlantic as a new religion. It explicitly advocated the desirability of 
deficit financing as a strategy for attaining full employment. Exter doubted the validity of this claim both 
in his public speeches and writings. At one stage, even Paul Samuelson had teased him that ‘though 
Exter may be right, he was lonely in his opinion’. The fact that there were no supporters for his view 
did  not  prevent  Exter  from  making  public  what  he  believed  to  be  true.  On  the  very  first  day  of  the 
establishment of the Central Bank of Ceylon, in a press interview he gave as the first Governor of the 
Bank, he warned against the use of the Bank for things which it cannot fulfill.  
“Today, we can only be filled with high hopes for the future. It would be a mistake to expect 
startling results immediately from the establishment of the Central Bank. There is no financial 
wizardry  by  which  the  Bank  can  suddenly  pull  out  of  a  hat  a  higher  standard  of  living  for 
everybody.  The  Bank’s  contribution  must  necessarily  be  a  long-run  contribution.  The  Bank 
does  not  itself  produce  goods  and  services,  but  it  should,  by  creating  the  right  monetary 
conditions enable the country…” to do so. 
What Exter repeatedly maintained was that the Central Bank was only a necessary condition for future 
prosperity.  That  necessary  condition  was  to  be  created  by  maintaining  price  stability  so  that  the 
economic agents could make economic decisions based on long run prospects. Since the central bank 
does  not  produce  goods  and  services,  it  cannot  directly  get  involved  in  economic  activities.  It  is 
therefore the task of the government and the private sector to take appropriate measures to create 
wealth in the society. The Central Bank’s only weapon is to print money and such money, by changing 
the price levels, acts only as an illusion. Hence, Exter thought it necessary to warn those who had 
been  harboring  the  Keynesian  type  of  ideology  to  raise  governmental  expenditure  through  printed 
money. 
In  the  Exter  Report,  he  argued  that  higher  income  created  through  money  creation  would  simply 
stimulate  consumption  of  imported  goods  and  precipitate  serious  balance  of  payments  difficulties. 
Given the underlying domestic production capacity, deficit financing may be an efficacious policy in 
developed countries that are largely dependent on foreign trade. But, it would not be the case with a 
developing economy. Hence, the Exter Report highlighted that, “this should serve as a warning to 
those who might hope that some of the policies growing out of Keynesian economics can be 
uncritically  adapted  to  Ceylon”.  As  a  safeguard,  a  provision  was  included  in  the  Monetary  Law 
prohibiting the Central Bank to engage in trade or otherwise have a direct interest in any commercial, 
industrial  or  other  undertaking.  In  Exter’s  opinion,  such  interests  would  lead  to  money  creation, 
generate conflicts of interest and prevent making investment decisions based on hard-core economic 
principles. As such, Central Bank’s involvement in economic activities would be sub-optimal. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2007
A central bank, by nature, is in a position to acquire assets by creating liabilities. These liabilities take 
the form of new money issued by a central bank. Hence, any asset acquisition by a central bank is 
done at the expense of its main objective, namely, price stability. As such, a central bank should not 
pursue profit making as a goal. Technically, profit seeking has no meaning, because a central bank 
could make any amount of profits by inflating the economy. Hence, profits may arise from the central 
bank’s activities as a side product, but they do not  form the main business of a central bank. As a 
result, a special procedure has to be adopted for the application of the profits of a central bank. Exter 
knew this requirement very well. In the Exter Report, he has argued that the Central Bank’s profits 
deserved special attention because of the inflationary or deflationary effects which their payment or 
non-payment could have on an economy. He has recognized that when such profits are paid out and 
spent by the government, they would find their way into the reserves of commercial banks raising their 
multiple credit creating capability. In order to minimize the ill effects of using a central bank’s profits for 
government  expenditure,  Exter  has  made  special  provisions  in  the  Monetary  Law  regarding  the 
application of profits of the Central Bank. Accordingly, out of the surpluses of the Central Bank, the 
first  charges  should  be  to  build  the  reserves  of  the  Bank  to  support  the  currency  it  issues.  Any 
remaining balance should be utilized to retire the government’s borrowings from the Central Bank or 
paid into the government as a normal profit transfer. However, it has to be done collaboratively by the 
Minister of Finance and the Monetary Board, having taken into account the inflationary impact of each 
such  measure.  As  such,  the  government  does  not  have  the  first  claim  on  the  profits  of  the  Central 
Bank,  though  it  is  owned  by  the  government.  The  profit  criteria  that  are  applicable  to  other 
governmental institutions are, therefore, not applicable to the Central Bank. 
A general concern which has often been raised at numerous public fora has been the existence or the 
absence of the independence of the Central Bank. Many have found fault with Exter for making the 
Secretary  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  a  member  of  the  Monetary  Board.  They  have  argued  that  this 
official member with his own self interest in funding the government expenditure programs would use 
the opportunity to dictate terms to the Monetary Board, thereby permitting the fiscal policy to override 
monetary policy. It has been equated by some critics to the case of permitting a child to put his hand 
into the cookie jar as many times as he wishes. While these criticisms may have some validity, Exter’s 
wisdom has been to create an environment for both the government and the Central Bank to have a 
peaceful and amicable cohabitation. Exter has argued in his report that “...there are, however, many 
important problems of monetary policy, especially those relating to fiscal policy, on which a 
central  bank  should  work  in  close  harmony  with  the  government”.  Accordingly,  a  degree  of 
independence  has  been  afforded  to  the  Central  Bank  unlike  other  governmental  bodies.  This 
independence extends to the budget of the Central Bank, job security of the key central bank officials, 
and power to make monetary policy without consulting the government. The wisdom of Exter was that 
the  central bank should as  far as possible  work  in consultation with  the  government,  rather  than  in 
isolation. He believed that the true independence of the Central Bank could be preserved only through 
that  consultative  method.  In  the  words  of  Exter,  “the  ideal  is  …  one  in  which  there  will  be 
continuous and constructive co-operation between the Monetary Board and the government. 
The principal instrument for achieving this co-operation should be the Permanent Secretary to 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  whose  membership  on  the  Board  will  ensure  at  all  times  that  his 
Minister’s views will be made known to the other members of the Board”. However, Exter did not 
expect  this  arrangement  to  be  effective  at  all  times.  Hence,  he  made  the  proviso  that  “it  would 
depend on the men occupying the key positions” and not on any legal formula. He argued quite 
correctly that such complex and delicate relationships cannot be established full-blown by a piece of 
legislation. It must be the result of years of experience and the slow growth of political conventions.  
The writer has been questioned on this point on many occasions at numerous public fora. The position 
taken by him agrees fully with that of Exter. This position requires the critics to compare central bank’s 
independence with the relationship within a family unit. Both spouses have their personal interests, but 
work together for the well-being of the family unit. There are at times occasions where one spouse 
overrides  the  other.  But,  as  a  normal  rule,  the  family  unit  moves  forward  without  publicizing  those 
internal family debates and sometimes family fights. 
This  is  the  main  lesson  which  Exter  has  left  for  us  in  the  twenty  first  century.  That  is,  both  the 
Governor of the Central Bank and the Secretary to the Ministry of Finance should know their rights and 
responsibilities well and act on an ethical platform in which they continue to appreciate the distinctive 
roles to be played by them for the well being of the country.  
John  Exter,  in  his  wisdom,  firmly  believed  that  when  laws  fail,  human  beings  working  with  moral 
consciousness could do wonders.      
BIS Review 20/2007 
 3
