Radovan Jelašić: Provision of credits to small and medium sized enterprises in 
Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Roundtable organized 
by “Ekonomist” Magazine on Provision of Credits to Small and Medium Sized Enterprises in Serbia, 
held at the National Bank of Serbia, Belgrade, 13 June 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow me to welcome you on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia on the occasion of conference on 
medium and small size enterprise crediting in Serbia. I would like to discuss two related subjects – 
stability  of  prices,  i.e.  inflation,  and  the  role  of  the  NBS  in  providing  credits  to  finance  small  and 
medium sized enterprises. 
Stability of prices and business environment represent one of the key conditions for the success of 
economy  as  a  whole  and particularly  so  for  the  success  of small  and  medium-sized enterprises.  In 
contrast to large enterprises that have “connections”, access to insider information and are more than 
aware of their economic and political power, medium and small sized enterprises are usually treated 
as an ornament, more as a social than economic category – and that serves them no purpose. 
As for stability in prices, it is currently at the level most people do not remember ever having seen 
before because, back than, they were either not yet born or were not really very much interested in 
such matters at all. Inflation today, after 44 years to the day, matches the level recorded in 1963. In 
May  this  year,  year-on-year,  the  rate  of  headline  inflation  equalled  4.4%  and  core  inflation  reached 
3.o%. At the same time, our economy has been growing at the rate of around 7% (first quarter 2007 
over the same period a year earlier) and displaying a greater abundance and variety of cheap credits 
than seen in Serbia in a long time, the exchange rate for the dinar has been floating freely for over 
three months now without any interventions from the NBS, and our foreign exchange reserves have 
grown in excess of US$ 12.2 billion. 
Stability  seems  to  have  brought  about  a  number  of  unexpected  effects  of  “operating  in  a  normal 
business environment”, which almost whole of our economy has kind of grown unaccustomed to in the 
course of these last 44 years, such as the facts that: 
• 
Market implies competition, glorifies success and puts a persistent pressure on increase in 
productivity. One can no longer get by with phrases like: “Here I am, a smart lad, successful, 
good looking ….look at me… it is the exchange rate….it is unrealistic, interest rates are sky 
high,  they  have  put  up  all  these  administrative  barriers  and…..what  happens….  it  is  my 
product that flops in the market.” Of course, it is much easier to build castles in the air and to 
think that we would have been successful if only somebody else, most likely the state, were 
to provide the “right” conditions for us, than to face all the harshness of reality!  
What matters in a market determined environment is not only to offer high quality goods and 
services. You also need to have a good banker, to be aware of all the risks and to hedge 
against them. To keep making progress in your profession, you also need to be kind of a 
visionary!  
 Reality is often harsh and life seems much easier and prettier when engulfed in the haze of inflation 
and instability to which, to tell the truth, majority of us had to get used during the last several decades. 
Such environment was created by the state, and exclusively so, and I am amazed to see that citizens 
and businessmen are still appealing to that very state expecting it to resolve their problems, and not 
only the general operating conditions, but to provide them with incentives, subsidies, price regressing, 
new loans, etc. as well. 
Bearing in mind that the country is undergoing transition, we should be satisfied with the current rate of 
inflation in Serbia. I wish to point out that the NBS has won its first “battle” against inflation, and that it 
shall  win  all  the  rest  of  them.  However,  the  “war”  has  only  begun,  and  both  sides  are,  to  speak 
figuratively, currently mobilizing their forces. The key question is which side shall the budget take in 
this battle – not in declarative terms, but in terms of numbers! Defences put up by the NBS to maintain 
stability in prices managed to hold against a wave of consumption growth in late last and early this 
year  pending  parliamentary  elections.  Let  me  remind  you  of  the  fact  that  when  we  were  setting 
BIS Review 66/2007 
 1
inflation  targets  we  could  not  have  predicted  new  elections,  which  always  imply  increase  in 
expenditures. Now, when the elections are over, both Serbia and the NBS deserve to have a reform-
oriented  and restrictive budget  and a chance  to  take  a deep  breath  in  terms of  monetary policy,  to 
think of what next to do. 
The difference between a successful man and a failure is not in the fact that one knows and the other 
one does not know what it is he should do, but in the fact that one works and the other one just keeps 
talking. There is hardly another issue in Serbia today on which more people agree than the fact that 
public sector wages have been growing way too much and way too fast and that they should be cut 
back  to  a  lower  level.  Let  me  point  out  that  if  anybody  thinks  that  this  cut  should  be  made  at  the 
expense  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  that  is,  inflation,  he  is  very  much  in  the  wrong.  Such 
calculations are totally misplaced. The NBS shall do all it can to prevent such outcome and, let me 
remind you that we have already shown how successful we can be in that respect! Each day that is 
lost in terms of not decreasing the wage bill in the public sector and public enterprises – and I repeat, 
wage bill not individual wages – is a lost day. I guarantee that you are not going to see the return to 
the monetary fairy tale that has lasted for the last four decades and, even if Serbia does not get the 
budget it deserves, there is not going to be an increase in inflation. You may ask, how so? And I say, 
in  the  following  way.  As  has  so  far  been  the  case,  the  NBS  will  be  forced  to  increase  the  level  of 
restrictiveness of the monetary policy (which means higher repo rate, higher reserve requirement, etc.) 
to  compensate  for  the  insufficiently  tight  fiscal  policy.  The  NBS  has  a  clear  task  –  “to  achieve  and 
maintain price stability”. That task is in compliance with the law, and we shall certainly do our best to 
achieve it. 
As far back as in 2001, the NBS gave strong support to provision of credits to small and medium sized 
enterprises in Serbia by acting as an agent for extension of credit lines of the European Agency for 
Reconstruction, European Investment Bank and the Government of Italy. Through these credit lines, 
end-beneficiaries  have  so  far  been  granted  credits  in  the  total  amount  of  almost  RSD  7  billion.  In 
addition, the Governor is a member of the advisory body of the European Fund for South East Europe, 
the largest fund set up for exclusive use by the countries of the Central and East Europe, which has 
almost half a billion euros in its coffers from private investors and the EU tax payers. 
However, in Serbia today, the banking sector is developing so swiftly that the question arises as to the 
competitiveness of the above credit lines from the point of view of their terms and conditions, though 
such terms have been improved several times. We shall continue our efforts to improve terms of these 
credit lines in agreement with the Government of the Republic of Serbia and the donors but, on the 
longer run, our banks should also be finding greater interest in extending credits to small and medium 
sized enterprises. They shall certainly be forced to do so by the competition and long-term business 
interest. 
If small and medium-sized enterprises are important to the state, then they should be given its support, 
and not by political declarations, but by taking concrete steps. Is the general economic environment in 
Serbia today conducive to development of small and medium-sized enterprises? To illustrate, is the 
restructuring and privatization of large public enterprises going at the right speed to enable setting up 
and development of small and medium-sized enterprises around those privatized and their integration 
into successful broader business programs? We can hardly give an affirmative reply to this question. It 
shall take time. 
Special credit lines and funds do represent a welcome initial trigger for the development of small and 
medium-sized enterprises, but they can neither be a permanent nor a systemic solution. It is not the 
role  of  the  state  to  pick  and  choose  from  various  funds  and  grant  funds  selectively  to  help  resolve 
problems of certain categories of employees who were made redundant. The role of the state is to 
create  a  macroeconomic  environment  that  shall  be  conducive  to  the  development  of  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises as an economic, not a social category. The real alternative for the future 
with respect to provision of credits to small and medium-sized enterprises namely, new business and 
new jobs, is to include banks on a broad scale in the process of market evaluation of projects and their 
financing  at  market  determined  terms.  For  its  part,  the  NBS  shall  continue  to  create  necessary 
conditions,  primarily  by  securing  stability  in  prices  and  low  inflation,  liberalization  of  the  foreign 
exchange  market  and  by  further  strengthening  confidence  in  the  dinar.  The  NBS  shall  secure 
conditions to enable everybody to plan their financial needs and business steps on a medium and long 
run without fear of drowning in the inflationary mud. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2007
