Timothy F Geithner: Developments in the global economy and implications for 
the United States  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Council  on  Foreign  Relations'  C  Peter  McColough  Roundtable  Series  on 
International Economics, New York, 11 January 2007. 
 It is a pleasure to be here at the Council on Foreign Relations, and to be here with Jerry Corrigan. 
A few brief remarks about the global economy, both the real and financial dimensions, to provide a 
basis for our discussion. 
2006  marked  the  fourth  successive  year  of  a  global  expansion  that  has  been  remarkable  for  its 
strength,  for  its  breadth,  and  for  its  stability  in  the  face  of  economic  shocks  and  uncertainty  in  the 
geopolitical realm. 
This  period  of  broad-based  growth  in  income  has  been  supported  by  a  number  of  important 
fundamental forces.  
Rapid  technological  innovation  and  greater  economic  integration  have  brought  stronger  growth  and 
higher levels of productivity. The acceleration in productivity growth that occurred in the United States 
in  the  second  half  of  the  last  decade  seems  likely  to  remain  intact.  And  productivity  growth  is 
accelerating outside the United States, most strikingly in some of the large emerging economies.  
Financial  innovation  and  greater  integration  of  national  financial  systems  has  contributed  to  the 
strength  of  real  economic  activity  by  improving  the  allocation  of  resources  within  and  among 
economies.  Improvements  to  risk  management and  to  capital cushions  are  likely  to  have made  the 
financial system more stable and more resilient.  
And macroeconomic policy has improved around the world. The increase in monetary policy credibility 
in  a  broad  range  of  countries  has  produced  lower  rates  of  inflation  and  more  stability  in  inflation 
expectations. Greater public confidence in monetary policy was critical to laying the foundation for the 
improvements  in  real  economic  performance,  by  providing  a  stable  foundation  for  long-term 
investment decisions.  
In  emerging  markets,  better  monetary  policy  has  been  accompanied  by  more  disciplined  and 
conservative  fiscal  policy  and  a  range  of  other  policies  that  have  reduced,  though  not  eliminated, 
vulnerability to changes in confidence, capital flows and exchange rate movements.  
These factors are each fundamentally important, and they are, of course, interrelated. The policies that 
delivered  better  inflation  outcomes,  more  openness  and  competition  and  stronger  financial  systems 
were  critical  to  fostering  an  environment  in  which  improvements  in  productivity  and  growth  could 
occur. 
This expansion has also been notable for the financial conditions that have prevailed over the past 
several years. 
Long-term  interest  rates  have  remained  relatively  low  in  nominal  and  real  terms.  Equity  and  other 
asset prices have moved higher. Credit spreads have declined to quite low levels. Market participants 
report exceptionally high levels of liquidity. And volatility, both realized and expected, has remained 
low across many different types of financial assets, market and economies. 
This general constellation of market conditions and asset prices is unusual, at least in comparison to 
what  we  have  seen  over  the  past  several  decades.  This  has  been  a  distinguishing  feature  of  the 
present  expansion,  but  it  is  not  something  we  fully  understand,  and  we  cannot  be  confident  in 
judgments about how durable it will prove to be. 
To  a  significant  extent,  these  financial  developments  reflect  a  high  degree  of  confidence  in  future 
macroeconomic and financial stability, reinforced by the improvements in inflation performance, growth 
outcomes and financial resilience of the past several years. 
Better  monetary  policy  has  lowered  expectations  of  future  inflation  and  inflation  volatility  and  has 
contributed  to  lower  risk  premiums  in  general.  Changes  in  the  cyclical  behavior  of  financial 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 1
intermediation  and  credit  provision,  coupled  with  the  increased  stability  of  the  real  economy,  seem 
likely to have reinforced the improvements on the monetary policy front. 
And rapid growth in the major emerging market economies, together with the substantial earnings of 
energy-producing and commodity-exporting countries, have produced a substantial increase in wealth 
and  savings  relative  to  perceived  investment  opportunities.  In  a  world  where  capital  can  now  flow 
much  more  freely  across national borders, a  significant  portion  of  these  savings  has  moved  across 
national borders. 
These are powerful and fundamental forces, and they certainly help explain the broad reduction in risk 
premiums and the substantial demand for credit risk and financial assets. 
There are other factors at work as well, however, that have less favorable implications. Part of this 
recent  dynamic  in  financial  markets  is  a  consequence  of  the  present  state  of  the  international 
monetary system, in which a substantial part of the world economy runs exchange rate regimes tied in 
some way to the dollar. This has entailed a sustained period of very substantial official accumulation of 
dollar reserves, putting downward pressure on U.S. interest rates and upward pressure on U.S. asset 
prices. 
These forces are surely transitory, but their impact on capital flows, interest rates and asset prices are 
important, not just in terms of their short-term impact on growth. If they are large enough, they have 
the potential to alter or distort current decisions about investment and consumption in a way that could 
be detrimental to our longer-run growth prospects. And they are important because they work to mask 
or  dampen  the  effects  on  risk  premiums  in  financial  markets  that  we  might  otherwise  expect  to  be 
associated with the expected trajectory of the fiscal and external imbalances in the United States. 
Given  this  broad  context,  I  want  to  touch  briefly  on  some  of  the  policy  issues  that  are  likely  to  be 
important  to  the  prospects  for  economic  performance,  here  and  around  the  world.  Despite  the 
relatively  favorable  performance  of  the  global  economy,  we  face  a  range  of  daunting  longer-term 
economic policy challenges. The improvements in the conduct of monetary policy were critical to the 
improvements  in  productivity  and  growth  that  we  are  now  seeing  on  a  global  scale.  And  monetary 
policy will, of course, continue to be critical, but monetary policy alone cannot provide the elements of 
the framework necessary to provide an environment for innovation and long-term decisions that will be 
so vital for future growth. Economic policy, in general, needs to be more forward looking in providing a 
longer-term framework for stability. 
On  the  fiscal  policy  front,  demographic  changes  confront  governments  around  the  world  with 
exceptionally difficult choices. For the United States, these challenges are less acute than for many of 
the major economies, but they are still formidable in their scale and complexity. Even for the near term 
-  for  the  period  before  the  increase  in  number  of  retirees  starts  to  have  a  major  impact  on  Social 
Security and Medicare expenditures - we are running an unsustainably large fiscal deficit. Despite the 
recent improvements in revenues, the expected trajectory for the fiscal deficit will mean that federal 
government debt will continue to rise as a share of GDP. The restoration of fiscal rules - such as those 
that require new tax cuts or expenditure programs to be funded with offsetting policy measures - will 
help reduce the risk of further deterioration. However, they need to be complemented by a consensus 
on policy changes that will produce smaller future deficits. 
Restoring confidence  in  U.S.  fiscal  management would  be  important  and  necessary  independent of 
the broader context of the global economy today, but it is more important given the size of our external 
imbalance, now running at the unprecedented level of 7 percent of GDP a year. The trade balance in 
real terms has been broadly stable over the past two years, but our net income payments have shifted 
to  deficit,  and  the  size  of  that  component  of  the  current  account  deficit  seems  likely  to  continue  to 
expand.  These  large  global  imbalances,  our  current  account  deficit  and  the  surpluses  that  are  the 
counterpart to our deficit, will have to come down over time. How that process unfolds will depend on a 
complex mix of factors around the world. Confidence that the U.S. political system will act to generate 
a  sustainable  fiscal  trajectory  is  important  to  raising  the  probability  that  this  process  of  adjustment 
unfolds with less risk. 
A  successful  conclusion  of  the  Doha  round  of  trade  negotiations  would  provide  some  insurance 
against the risk that the process of economic integration will be interrupted or reversed. Despite the 
relatively  favorable  average  income  gains  of  the  past  few  years,  a  common  feature  of  the  political 
context in economies around the world is the fragility or weakness of public support for openness and 
economic integration. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2007
The political challenge of sustaining support for the process of integration may be the most important 
economic challenge of our time. To paraphrase Lawrence Summers, it is not enough to explain that 
globalization is inevitable and that policies that look politically attractive as a response to economic 
anxiety will only hurt the economy as a whole. Nor is it a politically effective strategy to state simply 
that  economic  integration  is  a  necessary  and  powerful  force  in  raising  average  incomes,  or  that 
technological change may be more important than trade or immigration as an explanation for slower 
growth in real wages for many Americans. 
Raising the quality of education and exploring ways to improve the safety net are a necessary part of 
the  solution  to  this  challenge.  But  these  reforms  will  have  a  long  fuse  and  they  may  not  yield  the 
hoped-for  increase  in  support.  Trade  does  not  appear  to  be  more  popular  in  countries  with  more 
generous safety nets, universal health care and highly subsidized higher education than it is today in 
the United States. 
The political challenges of sustaining support for global economic integration and fiscal sustainability 
will be more difficult in the United States because of what has happened to the distribution of income 
and economic insecurity. Several broad economic forces substantially complicate an already difficult 
set of political challenges: the long-term increase in income inequality, the slow pace of growth in real 
wages  for  the  middle  quintiles  of  the  population,  the  increase  in  the  volatility  of  income  that  is  a 
reflection of the greater flexibility of the U.S. economy, and the greater exposure of households to the 
risk in financing retirement and the burden of paying for health care. 
More generally, the global financial system and the monetary arrangements that underpin it are in the 
process  of  a  delicate  and  consequential  transition  as  the  major  emerging  market  economies  - 
particularly in Asia - move toward more mature monetary policy frameworks, more flexible exchange 
rate regimes and more open capital markets. This transition will require careful management, and the 
economic  dimensions  of  getting  it  right  would  be  complicated  even  without  the  political  pressures 
those governments face. 
One final note on the financial system. The global financial system is in the process of very dramatic 
change.  The  changes  of  even  just  the  last  five  years  are  extraordinary,  in  terms  of  the  size,  and 
strength, and scope of the major global firms, the role of private leveraged funds, the extent of risk 
transfer and the increase in the size of the derivatives market, the change in the structure of the credit 
market, the increase in and changes in the pattern of cross border financial flows. 
These  changes,  and  others,  seem  likely  to  have  made  the  financial  system  both  more  effective  in 
moving capital to its most productive use and more stable and resilient over time. But they do not, of 
course, mean the end of systemic risk in financial markets. They could in some circumstances work to 
magnify rather than mitigate stress. Central banks, supervisors and those running the major private 
financial  institutions  need  to  continue  to  work  to  ensure  that  what  Jerry  Corrigan  calls  the  “shock 
absorbers”  in  the  financial  system  -  capital  and  liquidity  and  the  operational  infrastructure  -  are 
sufficiently strong and robust to withstand economic and financial conditions more adverse than we 
have seen in the recent past. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 3
