Y V Reddy: What the Reserve Bank of India means to the common person 
Speech  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  Karamchedu  Village,  Ongole 
District, Andhra Pradesh, 18 February 2007. 
The speech was originally delivered in Telugu. 
 Friends, 
I  am  happy  to  be  in  Karamchedu  Village  again.  Many  distinguished  personalities  in  various  fields; 
freedom fighters; shipping magnates; scientists; poets, ministers and medical doctors have hailed from 
this single village. Shri Yarlagadda Ranganayakulu garu, who was an engineer by training, is one such 
fine personality. We met accidentally a little over thirty years ago in Hyderabad. We became friends 
and  we  attempted  to  do  some  socially  useful  work  on  several  fronts  but  succeeded  in  founding 
Hyderabad  Study  Circle.  So,  I  have  a  personal  affection  to  him  and  our  families  have  developed 
affinities  and  affections.  The  ties  extend  to  family  in  a  broader  sense  –  to  include,  for  instance  Dr. 
Y.P.C.S. Rao garu and Shri Laxminarayana garu. When his family members suggested that I should 
associate myself with a worthy social contribution in memory of my friend Shri Ranganayakulu garu, I 
felt it an honour and privilege to visit Karamchedu and be with you all. The formation of a trust devoted 
to rural development and, in particular, safe drinking water, is a noble cause worthy of emulation by 
the younger generation. That young generation which is enjoying the fruits today of the foundation laid 
by Yarlagadda Ranganayakulu's generation. 
In  an  informal  manner,  I  wish  to  say  a  few  words  on  this  occasion  and  the  appropriate  subject  is 
perhaps 'What Reserve Bank of India means to the Common Person'. 
Reserve Bank, above all is a public institution serving the public interest. Though the word 'bank' is 
associated with its name, profit is not its primary motive. Therefore, it is necessary for every common 
person to understand about its role and its functions in improving the welfare of the people at large. 
The Reserve Bank is the 'central bank' of the country and uniquely placed to perform certain specific 
and challenging public responsibilities. It is the monetary authority of the country, and as you know 
Rupee is our currency unit in this country. RBI broadly deals with the quantity of rupee resources that 
should  ideally  be  available  in  the  country  to  promote  economic  growth  and  smooth  transactions  in 
goods and services. Very large money supply could result in inflation or higher prices which affect the 
common person the most. On the other hand, inadequate monetary resources can affect the growth 
and disrupt the payments system. RBI tries to strike a proper balance through its policies. 
Currency management is an important function. For example, the new currency notes are issued by 
the Reserve Bank, old ones are withdrawn and destroyed. Their design, production and distribution 
are managed – to be spread over the entire country.  
The Reserve Bank's currency note contains the words 'I promise to pay the bearer a sum of ….'. That 
is signed by the Governor. So, the Reserve Bank has to ensure that the value of rupee is maintained 
so that faith and trust of people is always present. To maintain the value of the rupee, the amount of 
goods and services that it can buy should not get eroded in a way that confidence in the currency is 
lost. So, the Reserve Bank's most important objective is to maintain price stability, contain inflation and 
anchor inflation expectations. 
Incidentally, you may find in the currency note, the denomination is written in two Central Government 
official  languages  (English  and  Hindi)  and  fifteen  national  languages.  It  shows  the  diversity  of  our 
country and the Reserve Bank's commitment to reach out to one and all. 
Speaking about the value of money, the Reserve Bank is concerned not only with the value of money 
in India, but the related issue of value of our rupee in relation to the currencies of other countries: that 
is  maintaining  the  faith  of  people  outside  our  country  also,  in  our  currency.  This  work  relates  to 
exchange  rate  management.  Rupee  cannot  be  directly  used  in  settling  transactions  with  other 
countries and international currencies like US dollar have to be used. To ensure smooth international 
transactions, it is necessary to maintain the external stability of the Rupee. Incidentally, confidence in 
Rupee outside our country also depends very much upon domestic price stability. Furthermore, RBI 
also maintains and manages foreign exchange reserves to sustain this confidence.  
BIS Review 18/2007 
 1
People would like to borrow and lend money to each other for consumption and production overall, the 
demand and supply for such resources, in aggregate terms, need to be balanced by an appropriate 
level  of  interest rates which provide  incentives  for savers  and  also adequate  returns  to  investors  in 
industry, agriculture, etc. Such a balance is struck by interest rate policies adopted by the RBI. I am 
over simplifying, but the idea is to strike broadly a balance – both within our country and in relation to 
other countries.  
RBI  also  has  been  assigned  with  several  other  responsibilities.  Thus,  the  RBI  manages  the  public 
borrowings of the Central Government and all State Governments; is a banker to the Central and State 
Governments and keeps their accounts; regulates payments and settlements systems, and, of some 
direct concern to many of you, it is a regulator of the banking system. 
I will not spend more time describing all this but we put all information on all these matters in public 
domain  –  through  publications;  press  releases  and  sometimes  speeches  like  this.  Up-to-date 
information is available on the RBI Website in English and Hindi. Why do we explain in detail about our 
work and dilemmas? It is because RBI is a public institution and we explain to you so that you can 
understand, appreciate, criticise and guide us. It is not a publicity drive but it is meant to enhance our 
efficiency and accountability to the common public. 
For today, I will place before you some instances of how the RBI, as a public institution, is answerable 
to  the  Government  and  indeed,  to  the  people  at  large,  and  has  taken  steps  to  get  closer  to  the 
common person in the recent years. 
We have urged the banks to be sensitive to the banking and financial needs of the common person 
and adopt a policy of financial inclusion, that is, to bring possibly every family – rich and poor, rural 
and urban – into the banking fold. 'No frills' accounts with perhaps a small overdraft facility should be 
the  easiest  way  for  financial  inclusion.  We  are  also  looking  at  how  technology  can  increase  the 
banking access to the people. General Credit Cards and Kisan Credit Cards can facilitate disbursal of 
small credits to among farmers without much paper work each time they want to take loans or make 
transactions. We are also exploring alternatives, such as, satellite offices of banks, ATMs and use of 
post offices for extending banking facilities to rural areas. In urban areas, we are trying to give efficient 
and  quick  service  to  bank  customers  by  extending  to  them  facilities  such  as,  mobile  and  internet 
banking, quick – almost minute by minute – and cost effective transfer of funds from one account to 
another  through  electronic  funds  transfer  mechanism.  We  also  encourage  reliable,  prompt  and 
economical means of conducting day-to-day transactions, such as, bills payments, receipts of salaries, 
dividends and pensions directly into the beneficiaries' bank accounts, etc.  
To  ensure  that  you  get  good  quality  banking services  at a  reasonable  cost, we  have  taken  several 
measures. While the banks can decide for themselves what services they will offer to customers and 
at what cost, we have asked each bank to set for itself a measurable standard or benchmark for the 
quality of service it would give to its customers. An independent body set up by the Reserve Bank, 
called the Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI), will then assess the quality of the 
services given by that bank against the promise it has made. Any adverse remark by the Board will 
give us a trigger for taking corrective steps. We have also asked the banks to ensure that account 
holders have detailed information on the availability  and cost of various banking services offered to 
start a banking relationship. It is your right to demand the services promised by the bank.  
And if you do not get the services promised by the bank, you can make a complaint against it – first to 
the higher authority of the bank concerned. If it does not get resolved there within a reasonable time or 
to  your  satisfaction,  you  can  approach  the  Banking  Ombudsman.  The  Banking  Ombudsman  is 
appointed  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  provide  an  easy,  hassle-free  and  less  costly  forum  to  the  bank 
customers to resolve their banking disputes. There is one banking ombudsman in virtually each State, 
who can be approached through mail or even through internet for resolution of complaints against the 
banks.  
The  Reserve  Bank  is  also  in  the  process  of  improving  its  own  processes  so  that  its  major  direct 
customers,  namely  the  Governments  and  the  banks  get  good  service  from  the  central  bank.  Two 
departments of the Reserve Bank are already ISO certified which means that the processes in these 
departments  are  streamlined  for  rendering  better  and  quicker  customer  service  and  are  constantly 
updated. We are in the process of obtaining this certificate for the other departments of the RBI also, 
which deal with the public.  
We have consciously adopted a policy of reaching out to people, common persons so that they know 
what to expect, what choices they have, what rights and obligations they have in relation to banking 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2007
service  etc.  We  already  have  several  publications  through  which  we  reach  out  to  researchers, 
students  and  other  technical  audiences.  Now  our  resolution  for  2007-2008  is  to  reach  out  to  the 
common  person  through  a  special  drive.  We  have,  therefore,  undertaken  a  financial  education  and 
financial literacy drive for the common man. We are doing this through banks and also directly. My 
talking to you like this in regional mother tongue Telugu is a part of this initiative. Very soon, you will 
be able to read about us and our banking policies in our own Telugu language and other regions in 
their own mother tongue on a multi-lingual website. We will also make this information available by 
way of brochures, pamphlets, films, etc.  
We  in  the  RBI  work  as  a  family  and  RBI  attracts  best  talents  as  an  equal  opportunity  employer  to 
perform  the  challenging  tasks.  We  have  offices  in  most  State  capitals  and  a  Board  of  Directors 
representing expertise in diversified fields. Our family journal has won several awards. We constantly 
strive  to  keep  up  the  morale  and  motivation  spirits  high  amongst  ourselves  at  all  levels  of  people 
working with us to meet the challenges of serving the common person with all care and commitment. 
I have said several things about the Reserve Bank so far but I must also say something about our 
relationship with our State of Andhra Pradesh. The RBI has a tradition of excellent relations with the 
Government  of  Andhra  Pradesh  and  all  the  Chief  Ministers.  As  Governor,  I  have  called  on  Shri 
Chandrababu Naidu garu when he was Chief Minister and now I call on Dr Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy 
garu from time to time. Both Reserve Bank and our State benefit from such meetings at several official 
levels. Let me place before you some recent developments in Andhra Pradesh about which Reserve 
Bank is particularly pleased. 
First, as the banker to the State Government, we are happy that in the last three years the State never 
took temporary advances from us to meet any day-to-day deficits between receipts and expenditure. 
This shows a prudent fiscal management. 
Second,  we  find  that  the  financial  position  of  the  State  is  improving  and  hence,  the  government's 
borrowings for developmental purposes could be conducted by the Reserve Bank at relatively lower 
cost.  Financial  markets  continue  to  show  increasing  confidence  in  the  State,  year  after  year, 
particularly all through the new millennium. 
Third, Andhra Pradesh is the first State in the country to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with Reserve Bank to consolidate and improve the urban co-operative banking system and the new 
scheme is working in an excellent manner in a spirit of co-operation and professionalism. 
Fourth, the State has provided strong financial support to rural co-operatives already and is again the 
first  State  in  the  country  among  the  few  who  have  so  far  signed  MoU  with  the  Reserve  Bank  to 
consolidate and develop rural co-operative credit system. This scheme will revive and revitalise the 
rural co-operatives with substantial financial support from the Government of India. 
Fifth, the State has committed to revitalise and expand rural credit. Last week, there was a meeting 
between our Deputy Governor and the State Government officials to work on a medium-term plan to 
expand financial inclusion through strengthening of Regional Rural Banks. 
Sixth, the State has exceeded the national-level targets set in respect of Annual Plan for rural-credit, 
mainly for credit to agriculture, by doubling it in three years. 
Seventh, the State is amongst the pioneers in a programme of financial inclusion – that is, in ensuring 
bank accounts to all families that want it. This is the first step towards reaching the goal of bank credit 
as  a  human  right  advocated  by  Nobel  Laureate  Professor  Mohammed  Yunus  when  he  visited  the 
Reserve  Bank  recently.  One  district,  Srikakulam,  is  reported  to  have  achieved  100%  financial 
inclusion. We agreed with the State Government to get the progress evaluated by an expert body, so 
that  we  learn  lessons  on  its  weaknesses  and  strengths  while  extending  the  programme  to  other 
districts as a mission. We have advised our banks to work vigorously towards this goal of universal 
financial inclusion and co-operation of State Government is critical for success of these efforts. 
Are these achievements of co-operation between Andhra Pradesh and Reserve Bank enough? May 
be yes, but there are lot of areas where, we, the State Government and the RBI, need to move closer, 
faster, deeper and into new areas. We, in RBI, have identified a few new areas for a vigorous drive 
this year, to which the Government of AP has assured full support. These relate to financial literacy 
and credit counselling. Today, the common man is attracted to a lot of choices some times very risky, 
when he acquires some surplus money. Where to deposit the money and for what period and at what 
interest?  How  to  decide  between  mutual  fund,  bank  deposit,  life-insurance,  etc.  against  non-bank 
deposits,  chit  funds?  How  to  sustain  and  improve  the  financial  status  of  the  family,  to  smoothen 
BIS Review 18/2007 
 3
consumption even if incomes come in lump sum, etc.? So, people should be aware so that they do not 
lose by fake promises and propaganda by some greedy financial vultures. The Reserve Bank is in the 
process of preparing reading and visual material and will fund the cost of making such material. But, 
the literacy or education has to reach the masses and for this mass financial-literacy drive, the State 
Government has assured its full support to the RBI.  
A second area, which we want to attempt on a pilot basis and on a small-scale to start with, relates to 
credit counselling. Sometimes, people get into debt out of some ignorance or bad luck. They can be 
advised  by  some  well-trained  people  how  to  get  out  of  the  problem  with  minimal  distress,  by 
renegotiating,  rescheduling  of  liabilities,  etc.  Such  schemes  exist  in  other  countries  and  we  have 
studied them. We are experimenting in this area in Maharashtra in a small way. We intend to launch 
pilot  projects  in  other  regions  also  and  the  AP  State  Government  expressed  strong  interest  in  the 
program. So, in credit counselling also, Andhra Government may be the first in the country to formally 
sign-up for an initiative.  
With these words, let me thank you for giving me an opportunity to talk in my mother tongue, Telugu 
for the first time in a public lecture as Governor. Perhaps this may be the first public lecture in Telugu 
by any Governor and I am happy and grateful to you for the privilege and opportunity. 
I wish the Village and Trust all the best. Let me again congratulate Shri Yarlagadda Ranganayakulu 
Foundation  for  this  excellent  initiative.  I  wish  them  and  families  all  the  best  in  all  their  noble 
endeavours. 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2007
