Savenaca Narube: Financial innovation and monetary policy in Fiji 
Opening address by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, Westpac American 
Express® Credit Cards Launch, Suva, 17 April 2007. 
 Ms. Jane Kittel, Westpac Pacific Banking General Manager 
Ms. Ng Siew Choo, Vice President and Regional Head, Global Network Services, American Express, 
JAPA 
Mr. John Cashmore, Westpac Fiji Chief Manager 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Good evening. 
I  am  pleased  to  participate  in  launching  the  Westpac  American  Express®  Credit  Cards.  I  also 
participated  in  the  launching  of  Westpac’s  MoneyGram®  Worldwide  Money  Transfer  Service  in 
October 2006. A lot has happened since then. This evening, we are celebrating the new partnership 
between  Westpac  and  American  Express.  I  congratulate  Westpac  and  American  Express  on  this 
initiative and wish you all the best with this new facility. 
Westpac American Express® Credit Cards 
Fiji has had a long association with Westpac. It was established in 1901 as the Bank of New South 
Wales  and  is  the  first  Australian  bank  to  open  a  branch  in  Fiji  on  12  August  1901.  Westpac  is 
considered as Fiji’s longest continuing bank. It was the first bank to introduce telephone banking in Fiji. 
No doubt, Westpac has played a valuable role in advancing Fiji’s financial system and its economic 
development.  
I am told that in April 2006, Westpac Pacific Banking signed an independent Operator Agreement with 
American Express (Amex). This agreement gives Westpac exclusive license to issue local currency 
credit cards in the seven locations in the Pacific including Fiji. Fiji dollar credit cards will be issued in 
Fiji. The other Pacific Island countries where Westpac will be launching the same cards are Vanuatu, 
Cook Islands, Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea, Samoa and Tonga. 
This agreement also means that Westpac will be the acquirer for Amex local merchants in the seven 
locations in the Pacific. In Fiji, all Amex transactions will be done through Westpac’s systems including 
transactions made on other banks’ EFTPOS and ATMs. 
I understand that this product is in response to demand by customers who have made known many 
times that they need a Fiji dollar credit card. This new Fiji dollar Amex credit card will give Westpac 
customers a competitive edge against those of other banks that offer Fiji dollar credit cards. 
Financial innovation 
The Reserve Bank always welcomes the introduction of new financial products into the market. These 
products  add  to  the  services  that  are  available  to  the  customers.  I  must  say  that  the  Fiji  has  seen 
many  of  these  products  coming  on  stream  in  the  last  ten  years.  Very  quickly  we  have  seen  the 
introduction of ATMs, phone banking, internet banking and other services. I must acknowledge that 
Westpac has been at the forefront of bringing these new technology and products to Fiji which have 
helped modernise our financial system. 
Later  on  this  year  we  will  launch  a  new  real  time  gross  settlement  system  which  will  make  the 
clearance of cheques between commercial banks more efficient. 
BIS Review 37/2007 
 1
New currency notes 
Let me briefly mention our new currency notes. We put into circulation the new currency notes last 
Tuesday. They have been well received by the people. The visually impaired welcomed the different 
lengths of notes so they can easily identify the denomination. There were comments on the difficulty of 
getting to change the $100 note. These were the same comments that we got when we introduced the 
$50 bill some 13 years ago. Let me say, that even prior to the issue of the new $100 bill, taxi drivers 
and market vendors have difficulty breaking even a $20 bill and that is not in Fiji only. The solution is 
simple. We do what we have been doing all along – make sure that we have smaller change before 
getting into a cab or going to the market. The $100 and the $50 bills are obviously not meant for small 
transactions. They make large transactions much easier. 
I thank the commercial banks for their support and cooperation in the smooth distribution of Fiji’s new 
design currency notes.  
Monetary policy 
Let me say something on the economy and monetary policy. We all know that the economy is going 
through a very difficult time. It is extremely important that everyone understand two things. First, we 
need  to  clearly  understand  the  real  state  of  our  economy.  Only  then  can  we  appreciate  the  urgent 
need  to  execute  adequate  and  lasting  solutions  to  these  problems.  Tinkering  at  the  margin  will  not 
work  for  us  any  longer.  Second,  we  should  also  appreciate  that  the  solutions  that  will  last  are  not 
without  costs.  There  will  always  be  a  cost  to  correcting  economic  imbalances  particularly  of  the 
magnitude that Fiji is facing. 
To  me  the  key  economic  challenge  that  we  face  is  to  correct  our  widening  trade  imbalance.  Our 
exports continue to be dismal. Sugar is earning $100 million less than its peak year. Garment has lost 
even more than that. Gold production has now disappeared and that’s another $60 million. Tourism 
numbers and yields have now dropped. Oil price remains at around US$60 a barrel. The trade deficit 
continues to widen. 
It is therefore essential that the Reserve Bank do all it can to safeguard the external financial position 
of Fiji. Since May 2004, we had progressively raised interest rate and tightened liquidity. We had also 
highlighted back then the need to lift our exports. Unfortunately, exports have yet to respond. In fact, 
with gold production and the sugar reform uncertain, there is still no light in the tunnel. 
We  have  tightened  monetary  policies  progressively.  Some  say  that  we  should  have  moved  more 
aggressively at the start. I do not agree with this view. Introducing harsher measures at the beginning 
would have discouraged growth which was the last thing we need. It would have been an over kill. It 
makes more sense to tighten progressively and as much as possible allow room for investment and 
the economy to grow. 
In December last year, we had to introduce a ceiling on private sector credit. We also reduced the 
delegated limits given to foreign exchange dealers on selected overseas transactions. Recently, we 
announced changes to borrowing guidelines for non-residents individuals and companies. 
There have been some concerns on higher interest rates particularly from individual borrowers and 
investors. We understand these concerns. But again we ask that you appreciate the seriousness of 
our financial situation. When things are tough, we must safeguard the bigger picture. We cannot be 
reactionary. If we do not take care of the bigger picture, the smaller picture will suffer even a lot more 
than what we are facing now. There are lessons from around the world that we should heed. 
When we compare the interest rates in Fiji with countries like Australia and New Zealand as well as 
some of our Pacific Island neighbors it clearly reveals that they are relatively low in Fiji. For example 
the lending rate in New Zealand is 12.25 percent, in Papua New Guinea 10.7 percent and Samoa 11 
percent. This compares with 9.34 percent in Fiji. While these are the weighted average lending rates 
and the rates will obviously differ for individual borrowers they are the best gauge of the general level 
of interest rate between countries. 
This comparison of interest rates throws up two interesting observations. First, all the countries that I 
have  mentioned  are  performing  better  than  Fiji  including  Samoa  and  Papua  New  Guinea.  Yet  their 
lending rates are higher than us. It implies that there are other factors that are important for investment 
and growth than interest rates alone. Second and perhaps more pertinent, these countries do not face 
the degree of economic challenges that we currently face in Fiji. For instance, Papua New Guinea and 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2007
Samoa have better levels of foreign reserves in months of imports than Fiji has. Yet their lending rates 
are higher. 
I wish to take this opportunity to thank the commercial banks for their understanding and support in our 
effort to address the economic challenges before us.  
With the credit ceiling in place, the Reserve Bank has allowed liquidity to rise. Liquidity has risen by 
over $50 million since February this year. In addition, we are reducing the statutory reserve deposits 
by one percentage point from 1st of May which should pump an additional $29 million into the system. 
This should take liquidity to a very comfortable level. 
We are already seeing the impact of this easier liquidity on wholesale deposit rates which have fallen 
sharply  to  5  percent  from  around  15  percent  late  last  year.  With  this  liquidity  condition,  one  would 
expect  commercial  banks  and  other  lending  institutions  to  pass  this  lower  cost  of  funds  through  to 
lending rates. And here I must congratulate Westpac for taking the lead and reducing its lending rates. 
Lower rates will help support growth and investment in this difficult time. 
In support of investment and growth, the Reserve Bank now considers commercial banks’ lending to 
investment, small and medium size businesses and to exporters to be outside the credit ceiling. Since 
December last year, the Reserve Bank has approved over $70 million of loans above the credit ceiling. 
Economic projection 
As you know, we project that the economy will fall by 2.5 percent this year. There are some important 
factors that will determine the final outcome. First, what happens to tourism is important. There are 
mixed signals coming from this important industry. The latest visitor arrival figure shows a decline of 
around 7 percent in January compared to January the previous year. A survey we conducted recently 
of a few major hotels show a low occupancy rate of around 30 percent and not much higher going into 
their forward booking. 
The  second  factor  is  gold.  The  current  forecast  does  not  include  any  gold  production.  But  with  the 
change in ownership of the Vatukoula mine, we hear that production may commence in June. 
The  third  factor  is  the  possible  industrial  action  by  the  trade  unions.  It  appears  to  me  that  all  trade 
unions  are  seeking  strike  mandates.  I  hope  that  the  situation  is  amicably  settled.  The  fourth  is  the 
uncertainty in the European Union’s support for the important sugar industry reform. We all hope that 
the discussion in Brussels this week is fruitful for Fiji. Lastly, the effects of the recent floods on sugar 
and other agricultural products will worsen the economic decline projected for this year but their impact 
is still being assessed.  
Looking ahead, for 2008 the economy is expected to rebound by 2 percent. A similar growth rate is 
expected for 2009. This is encouraging. But we obviously need to grow faster perhaps toward the five 
percent  mark.  We  can  achieve  this.  We  do  not  lack  the  potential.  But  to  realise  those  potential  we 
need to prepare the ground now by accelerating reforms. Some progress has been made. But it is now 
time to re-energise our resolve to address these long standing issues – like sugar, land lease, public 
enterprise, public service and resource based industries. If we take action now, we can look forward to 
a better economic performance than what we currently projecting. 
Concluding remarks 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  Cashmore  for  inviting  me  here  today.  I  congratulate  Westpac  and 
American Express on this joint initiative and wish you both every success.  
Official launching 
I have much pleasure in launching the Westpac American Express® Credit Card. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 37/2007 
 3
