David Dodge: Turbulence in credit markets – causes, effects, and 
lessons to be learned 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Vancouver Board of 
Trade, Vancouver, 25 September 2007. 
 I'm very happy to be back in Vancouver and to have the opportunity to address the Board of 
Trade for the fourth and final time in my capacity as Governor. When considering a topic for 
today, I had planned to use the quiet moments of the summer to organize my thoughts about 
the evolution of the Canadian and global economies since 2001, and offer some ideas about 
the lessons that could be learned from the events of the past seven years.  
Unfortunately,  as  many  of  us  here  well  know,  this  past  summer  was  rather  short  on  quiet 
moments. In August, the attention of policy-makers and the business community in general 
was focused on some fairly serious turbulence in financial markets. And so, rather than using 
my speech today to look back over the past seven years, I will instead look back over the 
past  seven  weeks  and  review  what  has  taken  place  in  global  and  Canadian  financial 
markets. Of course, events are still unfolding and will likely continue to evolve for some time. 
Still,  it's  not  too  early  to  discuss  some  of  the  causes  and  effects  of  the  market  turbulence 
and, along the way, identify some of the lessons to be learned from these events. I will also 
talk about the actions that the Bank of Canada took in response. I'll then have a few words to 
say  about  the  potential  impact  of  the  market  turbulence  on  the  outlook  for  the  Canadian 
economy. 
Turbulence: causes and effects 
To  get  a  grasp  on  the  events  of  the  summer,  it's  important  to  have  some  context.  The 
turbulence  in  financial  markets  did  not  come  about  against  a  backdrop  of  economic 
weakness.  Indeed,  over  the  past  number  of  years,  the  global  economy  has  shown 
remarkable strength. We were also seeing encouraging signs of growth being spread more 
evenly.  At  the  same  time,  there  was  continued  robust  demand  for  Canadian  goods  and 
services,  and  this  led  to  a  significant  improvement  in  Canada's  terms  of  trade,  helping  to 
support the Canadian dollar. 
But  there  were  signs  of  potential  trouble  in  the  global  economy.  To  begin  with,  we  were 
seeing  a  growing  excess  of  desired  global  savings  relative  to  desired  investment.  Quite 
naturally,  this  served  to  drive  down  real  longer-term  interest  rates,  even  as  central  banks 
around the world were in the process of raising short-term policy rates. 
With the decline in longer-term interest rates, investors stepped up their demand for riskier 
assets that would deliver greater returns than investments with a lower risk. This search for 
yield led to a narrowing of spreads between the yields of risky assets, such as lower-rated 
corporate  bonds,  and  the  yields  on  government  bonds.  The  narrowing  of  risky  spreads 
became so pronounced and so persistent that many central banks – including the Bank of 
Canada – began to question whether these spreads adequately reflected the credit risks that 
were involved. A re-pricing of risk was probably necessary, but the real question was how, 
and in what manner, it would take place.  
Besides the need for a re-pricing of risk, other factors contributed to the market turbulence 
this summer. Originators of loans – both bank and non-bank institutions – were increasingly 
opting  to  securitize  the  loans  they  made,  including  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  loans.  By 
"securitize,"  I  mean  to  bundle  loans  together  into  securities  backed  by  the  cash  flows 
generated by the loan repayments. These securities were often sold in tranches that offered 
varying degrees of protection from the default risk involved. These structures allowed higher-
BIS Review 106/2007 
 1
risk assets to take on the qualities of lower-risk assets, and this fuelled the demand for the 
creation of higher-risk assets, which led to a global decline in standards for mortgage loans 
and  the  emergence  of  bonds  with  weaker  covenants.  Further,  some  of  these  assets 
embedded significant leverage. 
The originators of these loans had fewer incentives to carefully assess the creditworthiness 
of borrowers, because once the loan had been securitized and sold, the originator no longer 
faced  the  consequence  if  the  borrower  defaulted.  I'll  return  to  this  point  a  bit  later.  But  for 
now,  suffice  it  to  say  that  this  decline  in  lending  standards,  combined  with  financial 
engineering,  was  helping  to  spur  merger  and  acquisition  activity,  including  private-equity 
takeovers, as well as lending in markets such as the U.S. subprime mortgage market. 
The  process  of  securitization  is  not  new.  Securities  backed  by  mortgages,  credit  card 
receivables, or other types of assets, have been around for years. But increasingly complex 
securities have been developed in response to the demand for higher returns. And as these 
securities have become more complex and opaque, in many cases it has become harder to 
determine the quality of the assets at the root of the security and to assess the counterparty 
risk. 
This  is  not  to  suggest  that  the  evolution  of  these  new,  complex  instruments  has  been  a 
negative  development.  Indeed,  these  instruments  have  allowed  the  separation  of  different 
types  of  risk,  such  as  credit  and  market  risk.  This  has  promoted  better  risk-management 
practices, and has allowed different types of risk to be borne by those best able to do so. 
Securitization has encouraged innovation and enhanced the ability of the banking sector to 
originate new loans while remaining well capitalized. 
The final point to make in terms of the causes of this summer's turbulence has to do with how 
these complex securities are valued. Trading of these securities in the secondary market is 
rare and, if trading does occur, it takes place in the over-the-counter market. As such, prices 
for these securities are not very transparent. Most of these highly structured securities are 
valued  on  a  "marked-to-model"  basis,  meaning  that  statistical  models  are  used  to  provide 
values. But the models typically provide only estimates of values, and these estimates can 
vary widely if there are changes in the assumptions on which they are based. Indeed, many 
of the models assume that the assets underlying these securities can be readily traded in a 
liquid secondary market. In August, it became clear that this assumption would not always 
hold.  
So,  we  can  now  see  many  of  the  factors  that  made  credit  markets  vulnerable  to  this 
summer's  dislocations.  The  re-pricing  of  risk  I  mentioned  earlier  was,  in  fact,  under  way 
before  August.  By  late  spring,  the  spreads  on  lower-rated  corporate  bonds  had  begun  to 
widen to levels that were closer to historical averages. As we moved into summer, however, 
we  saw  rising  delinquency  rates  and  higher  probabilities  of  default  on  U.S.  subprime 
mortgages. And so, there were rising expectations of losses for holders of securities backed 
by these mortgages. But because of the complexity and opacity of some of these securities, 
it  was  extremely  difficult 
the 
creditworthiness  of  the  assets  backing  a  particular  security  and  the  market  value  of  the 
security itself. In these circumstances, uncertainty led to contagion and dislocations in money 
markets  more  generally,  even  those  markets  that  have  nothing  to  do  with  U.S.  subprime 
mortgages. Market liquidity, which was recently thought to be too abundant, became scarce. 
Some  investors  found  that  the  assets  that  they  assumed  were  liquid  were,  in  fact,  frozen. 
Even the market for overnight loans was affected. Investors suddenly became extremely risk 
averse, leading to a surge in demand for the least risky assets, such as government bonds 
and treasury bills. 
The re-pricing of credit risk is an ongoing process, and the events of this summer represent a 
bump  in  the  road.  Unfortunately,  that  bump  means  that  it  may  take  a  while  to  achieve  an 
appropriate pricing of risk. This is because it will take time to unravel some of these complex 
and  opaque  instruments  to  get  to  the  underlying  assets,  and  then  to  find  values  for  the 
to  determine,  with  confidence,  both 
investors 
for 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2007
assets themselves. Over time, market forces can be expected to work this out. But markets 
need information in order to operate efficiently. So, it is in the interest of market participants 
to make sure that parties have access to all the necessary information. 
This is the first lesson to be learned – the importance of transparency in financial markets. 
Two weeks ago in London, I spoke about how the events of the summer helped to make a 
clear case for transparency. Investors should demand greater transparency where it is now 
lacking. Vendors of financial instruments will then need to structure them in such a way that 
market  players  can  clearly  see  what  they  are  buying.  More  fundamentally,  investors  must 
take  on  more  responsibility  for  diligent  research,  so  that  they  can  better  understand  the 
nature of their investments. Put another way, investors must do their own homework instead 
of simply relying on the word of credit-rating agencies. It seems to me that many of these 
desired  outcomes  will be  accomplished  through  natural  market  forces  responding  to  these 
events.  For  example,  when  investors  demand  much  higher  rates  of  return  for  opaque 
products,  there  will  be  a  strong  incentive  for  vendors  to  provide  products  that  are  more 
transparent.  Similarly,  credit-rating  agencies  will  likely  find  it  to  their  advantage  to  explain 
more clearly the rationale for, and limitations of, their ratings for highly structured products. 
They  should  make  it  clear  that  their  ratings  should  not  be  used  with  the  same  degree  of 
certainty as ratings for conventional, single-name issuers, and that the securities involved do 
not trade with the same degree of market liquidity. There will undoubtedly be calls for tighter 
government regulation for credit-rating agencies. But I would caution against any knee-jerk 
regulatory response. Given the events of the summer, it seems likely that those credit-rating 
agencies that do not work harder to ensure that users understand the nature of their ratings 
will soon have fewer clients willing to pay for their services. 
There is one other lesson I want to mention at this point. We need to think about how to get 
the right incentives in place for loan originators, so that credit quality is maintained and credit 
is  appropriately  priced.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  creation  of  loans  for  immediate 
securitization  reduced  the  incentive  for  originators  to  maintain  credit  standards.  This 
indicates a classic principal-agent problem: Since the originators were immune from default 
risk  once  the  loan  was  securitized  and  sold,  they  often  lacked  the  proper  incentives  to 
adequately assess the creditworthiness of the borrower. We need to think hard about how to 
get  the  incentives  right.  It  may  be  that  natural  market  forces  will  go  a  long  way  towards 
rebalancing incentives, but there may also be an active role for policy-makers in this regard. 
Another  issue  related  to  securitization  concerns  the  capitalization  of  banks.  If  banks  are 
moving securitized loans off their balance sheets, but still providing liquidity guarantees for 
these securities, how much capital should they be required to set aside? The authorities at 
the Basel Committee may need to revisit this issue in light of recent experiences.  
This summer's turbulence had an effect on many segments of the money markets, including 
the market for overnight funds. The overnight market is now well on its way back to normal 
operations in Canada, and I'll talk about that in a few minutes when I discuss the role of the 
central  bank.  However,  problems  in  other  areas  of  the  money  markets  have  not  yet  been 
resolved. 
In  terms  of  the  market  for  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP),  about  two-thirds  of 
Canada's roughly $120 billion ABCP market is composed of conduits sponsored by our major 
domestic banks. These banks have agreed to  provide global-style liquidity support to their 
conduits, and investors have every reason to be confident that our banks have the capacity 
to  continue  to  support  their  conduits  as  necessary.  Although  the  spreads  between  bank-
sponsored  ABCP  and  treasury  bills  have  narrowed  a  bit  in  recent  days,  it  is  somewhat 
surprising  that  they  have  not  narrowed  further  and  more  quickly,  given  the  strong balance 
sheets of Canadian banks. 
The remainder of Canada's ABCP is third-party, or non-bank-sponsored, and roughly three-
quarters of this is highly structured. Because liquidity for this paper was guaranteed only in 
the  event  of  a  "general  market  disruption,"  liquidity  providers  –  most  of  whom  are 
BIS Review 106/2007 
 3
international banks – declined to step in as this paper has come due. Thus a fundamental 
work-out, or restructuring, of third-party ABCP is required. Discussions in Montréal between 
investors and liquidity providers as to how to achieve such a restructuring are progressing. I 
would  encourage  the  parties  involved  to  support  this  process  –  all  investors  and  all 
international banks. I remain hopeful that, over time, this process will lead to useful results. 
The role of the central bank 
Now  let  me  talk  about  the  actions  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  over  the  past  seven  weeks. 
Essentially, our actions helped us fulfill two fundamental roles of a central bank – providing 
liquidity to the payments system, and formulating monetary policy. 
In terms of the first role, it is absolutely normal and proper that central banks should provide 
liquidity to the payments system, especially when financial institutions are faced with markets 
that  have  become  illiquid.  This  is  precisely  the  situation  in  which  we  found  ourselves  this 
summer.  With  money  markets  seizing  up,  many  institutions  found  it  difficult  to  obtain 
necessary  liquidity.  So  the  Bank  of  Canada,  like  other  central  banks,  made  it  clear  that 
institutions could  access  our  regular  liquidity  facility  when  required.  The  Bank  of Canada's 
Standing Liquidity Facility can be accessed daily, at a rate 25 basis points above our target 
for the overnight rate, by direct clearers involved in Canada's wholesale payments system. 
To  access  this  liquidity,  institutions  can  pledge  a  range  of  easily  priced  securities  as 
collateral.  
The events in August placed strong upward pressure on the overnight interest rate, moving it 
above our target. And so we carried out open-market buyback operations to inject liquidity, 
with the goal of bringing the actual overnight rate closer to our target. We also temporarily 
expanded  the  list  of  securities  that  market  participants  could  use  as  collateral  in  these 
buyback operations. In addition, we provided liquidity by increasing our supply of settlement 
balances as we normally do when we see an increased demand for cash balances. All told, 
our  actions  were  effective  in  helping  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  overnight  money 
market.  So  we  have  now  restored  our  original  list  of  securities  eligible  for  use  in  buyback 
operations, and we have gradually reduced the level of settlement balances. And while it is 
true  that  many  term  money  market  spreads  remain  abnormally  wide,  the  market  is 
functioning. There have been increasing numbers of transactions in this area and spreads 
are beginning to narrow. In these circumstances, there does not appear to be anything the 
Bank of Canada could usefully do to improve the functioning of this market. 
The  events  of  the  summer  have  also  had  some  important  implications  for  our  role  as  the 
country's monetary policy authority. Before explaining these implications, I should start with 
some background. The Bank's policy rate is our target for the overnight interest rate. This 
rate  is  crucial  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  throughout  the  economy.  When  we 
adjust  our  target  for  the  overnight  rate,  we  set  in  motion  a  chain  of  consequences  that 
influences other interest rates in financial markets and, through the cost of credit, spending, 
production, employment and, ultimately, the rate of inflation. By adjusting our target, we are 
aiming to keep total demand and supply in the economy in balance, thus keeping inflation 
low, stable, and predictable. 
During the summer, however, we saw a widening of the spread between short-term market 
interest rates, such as the rate for commercial paper, and our target for the overnight rate. 
Should these wider spreads persist, it would represent a tightening of credit conditions in the 
economy that would occur independent from any movement in our target for the overnight 
rate.  Thus, any  given  policy  rate  would  be  somewhat  more  restrictive  than  was  previously 
judged. 
This leads me to what is perhaps the most important lesson that central bankers can learn 
from these events. Let me emphasize this by returning to the point I made earlier about how 
the  process  of  securitization  enhanced  the  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  make  loans.  It 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2007
seems to me that in recent years, central bankers may not have fully appreciated just how 
much the increase in securitization represented an easing of credit conditions. Loans were 
being shifted off balance sheets, allowing more loans to be made. If securitization led to the 
creation  of  loans  that  would  not  otherwise  have  been  made,  then  this  was  a  source  of 
demand in the economy that we as central bankers likely did not fully take into account. Any 
given policy rate would thus be less restrictive than was earlier judged, implying that interest 
rates  globally  might  have  been  lower  than  would  have  been  optimal.  However,  since  both 
global  and  domestic  inflation  have  been  largely  contained  over  this  period,  we  should  not 
exaggerate the magnitude of this effect. 
A  reduction  in  securitization  now  seems  likely,  and  we  can  expect  a  degree  of  re-
intermediation by financial institutions. All other things equal, in Canada, this will lead to a 
higher  cost  of  credit  relative  to  the  overnight  interest  rate  than  was  the  case  prior  to  this 
summer. But how much tightening will this lead to in the longer run? And will the process of 
re-intermediation  persist,  and  thus  affect  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  going  forward? 
These are key questions that we at the Bank of Canada need to think about. And it may be 
some time before we have definitive answers.  
The potential impact on the Canadian economy 
Finally, the more immediate question is: What are the implications of the turbulence in money 
markets for Canada's economy? As the Bank noted in its interest rate announcement earlier 
this month, the near-term economic prospects for the United States are weaker than earlier 
expected,  as  events  in  financial  markets  will  likely  exacerbate  the  adjustment  in  the  U.S. 
housing sector, making it more pronounced and more protracted. This implies weaker U.S. 
demand for Canadian exports. However, economic growth in Canada in the first half of this 
year turned out to be stronger than we had projected, and near-term prospects for economic 
growth  outside  North  America  continue  to  be  very  favourable.  And  so  at  our  last  fixed 
announcement  date,  we  said  that  the  Canadian  economy  now  appears  to  be  operating 
further above its production potential than we had estimated at the time of our July Monetary 
Policy Report Update (MPRU). Domestic demand remains robust, buoyed by our continued 
strong labour market, rising wages, and higher-than-expected increases in housing sales and 
prices. But as I mentioned, the turbulence in financial markets has meant some tightening of 
credit  conditions  for  Canadian  borrowers.  This  should  temper  the  growth  of  domestic 
demand, although the extent of this effect is difficult to assess. 
Against  this  background  of  a  likely  weaker  track  for  exports  and  tighter  credit  conditions, 
along with signs of stronger domestic demand, we judged that the current level of our target 
for the overnight interest rate – 4 1/2 per cent – is appropriate. However, there are significant 
upside and downside risks to the outlook for inflation. On the upside, there is a possibility that 
household demand in Canada could be stronger than anticipated, while on the downside, the 
ongoing adjustment in the U.S. housing sector could be more severe and spill over to the 
U.S. economy more broadly. In recent days, the Canadian dollar has moved sharply above 
the  trading  range  assumed  in  the  July  MPRU,  and  we  need  to  look  at  the  causes  of  this 
strengthening, should it persist. And, as always, we need to assess the effect of movements 
in  the  exchange  rate  on  the  balance  of  aggregate  demand  and  supply  in  the  Canadian 
economy. In addition, as I noted, there is uncertainty about the extent and duration of the 
tightening of credit conditions in Canada and, hence, about the tempering effect this will have 
on the growth of domestic demand. Gauging the effects of the financial market turbulence on 
credit conditions, and the implications for the Canadian economy, will be one of the Bank's 
most pressing tasks over the coming months. 
We will provide analysis of these issues in our next Monetary Policy Report, which will be 
published on 18 October.  
BIS Review 106/2007 
 5
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  conclude.  This  was  not  a  very  pleasant  summer  for  many 
people.  Turbulence  in  financial  markets  is  not  easy  to  deal  with,  and  it  is  certainly  not 
welcome. But if we can learn from these events and retain the valuable lessons, then global 
financial markets can emerge from this turbulence stronger and more efficient than before. 
Ultimately, this can be to the benefit of us all. 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2007
