Caleb M Fundanga: Bank of Zambia retirees  
Talking notes by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the luncheon in honour of 
Bank of Zambia retirees, Bank of Zambia, Lusaka, 12 December 2006. 
 • Deputy Governor – Administration 
• Directors 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
• Retirees and Potential Retirees in our midst 
Some people say “retirement is wonderful; it is described by many as doing nothing without worrying 
about getting caught at it”. That is to say, you now become accountable to yourself for your actions! 
Retirement marks an important milestone in one’s life, it is so important that in many cases you have 
to consult, and reflect extensively before you take that very important decision. It is a day one should 
not only anticipate during ones working life, but also plan for. Retirement can occur voluntarily as the 
case  is  with  VESS,  by  attaining  the  age  of  55  as  provided  by  statute  or  prematurely  due  to  a 
misfortune such as failing health. In all circumstances one must plan for the event. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is for this reason that the Bank has found it befitting to host a luncheon in 
your  honor,  by  recognizing  all  the  hard  work  that  you  have  put  in  the  Bank  in  the  many  years  of 
service. Admittedly, relationships between the Bank and ex-members of staff have in certain cases not 
been so good. Looking ahead, I wish to take this opportunity to state that despite the bad experiences 
in the past, the Bank continues to extend an arm of friendship that aims to foster better relationships 
between the exemployees and the Bank. We shall continue to regard you as members of the Bank’s 
extended family. 
As retirees, we consider most of you as persons with vast experience and expertise coupled with a 
huge reservoir of institutional knowledge, which if natured well, can be a great source of information 
for future generations. The Bank will Endeavour to invite you to various functions as retirees whenever 
opportunities arise, especially when we organize historical events. We consider you as an important 
part of the Bank’s history. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, there are many ways of leaving employment including dismissal, discharge, 
resignation or even death. In my view, retirement is the most admirable of them all. It is the ripe way of 
leaving formal employment, and therefore, a goal that every employee strives for. I congratulate you 
for achieving this. 
Retirement should not be viewed as an end but rather as a beginning of a new life. It is my hope that 
you will find life after retirement fulfilling and a fitting reward for many years of hard work. 
It is my earnest appeal to all retirees to utilize all the skills and knowledge you have acquired during 
your  working  life  most  especially  in  the  Bank,  to  use  your  retirement  resources  wisely  by  investing 
prudently. Stories of destitution among retirees is one but many of the sad stories, I would like you to 
avoid. Guard the assets that you have acquired in your working life jealously, because retirement does 
not give you multiple chances to make amends when you make unsound business decisions. It is for 
this  reason  that  the  Bank,  through  Human  Resources  Department,  has  engaged  Future  Search  a 
Consultancy  firm  to  give  you  tips  on  how  to  live  in  retirement,  I  urge  you  to  attend  the  upcoming 
workshop. 
I therefore wish you God’s blessings as your pursue the challenges of life in retirement. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 1
