Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Developing the global Islamic financial markets 
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the 2nd International Islamic Financial Markets Conference, Manama, 18 June 2007. 
 Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen – Good Morning. 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all today, and to help inaugurate the start of this important 
event, the 2nd International Islamic Financial Markets Conference, here in Bahrain. 
I  should  like to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my own  personal  appreciation  for  the  distinguished 
panel of speakers. 
I should also like to commend the IIFM, and the Islamic Research and Training Institute, for putting 
together a stimulating programme of topics for the next two days, and for their active support of the 
development of the Islamic finance industry. 
Thanks are also due to the many corporate sponsors of this event, for making this event possible, and 
to the many attendees, whose participation is also essential to the success of such events. 
The  theme  of  this  conference  –  “Developing  the  Global  Islamic  Financial  Markets”  –  is  particularly 
pertinent.  The  Islamic  finance  sector  continues  to  demonstrate  strong  growth,  and  higher  levels  of 
market penetration. It is also fast internationalizing. 
But it has also reached a stage where it faces some interesting challenges, if it is to really take off as a 
major component of global financial market activities. 
These challenges revolve around the continuing need to achieve greater alignment and convergence, 
without which the vision of deep and liquid global Islamic financial markets risks being compromised. 
By greater alignment and convergence, I am referring specifically to the need for further progress in 
terms of aligning the accounting standards and prudential regulations applied to Islamic finance, as 
well as the development of standardized instruments and market practices. 
Greater harmonization in these areas is critical, in my view, in order to help sustain the rapid growth 
and internationalization of Islamic finance. 
To  state  the  obvious,  such  differences  create  additional  costs  for  internationally-active  firms  and 
competitive distortions, as well as reduce transparency for investors and counter-parties. 
Of  course,  this  is  a  challenge  facing  conventional  finance  as  well.  But  the  relative  newness  of 
modern-day  Islamic  finance  means  that  the  disparities  in  approaches  in  these  areas  are somewhat 
greater in this industry.  
This  issue  has  already  been  widely  aired,  and  efforts  are  of  course  being  made  to  narrow  these 
differences  –  more  on  this  in  a  moment.  But  broadly  speaking  further  progress  continues  to  be 
required,  and  I  therefore  call  on  all  jurisdictions  to  intensify  their  commitment  to  achieving  greater 
alignment. For its part, the Central Bank of Bahrain will continue to provide its own strong support to 
initiatives aimed at narrowing these differences. 
With  respect  to  accounting  standards,  the  policies  set  by  AAOIFI,  the  Accounting  and  Auditing 
Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions,  provide  a  solid  framework  for  Islamic  financial 
institutions.  Bahrain  is  one  of  the  few  jurisdictions  to  have  made  its  standards  mandatory,  although 
others  use  them  as  guidelines.  Further  promulgation  of  these  standards  would  help  increase 
consistency in accounting and sharia standards. 
Similarly,  in  the  field  of  financial  regulation,  we  support  the  work  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Services 
Board  in  developing  various  prudential  standards,  and  would  encourage  other  jurisdictions  to  also 
commit to implementing these standards over time. 
And finally, the third critical pillar under this heading is that of developing standard contract designs 
and associated documentation. Progress here will help address the concerns sometimes expressed 
about the impact of different sharia rulings on the structuring of instruments, and the lack of certain 
types of instruments. It will also be instrumental in encouraging more liquid Islamic capital markets.  
BIS Review 73/2007 
 1
This critical third pillar, of course, is in many ways why we are here today, and I should like to pay 
tribute  to  the  sterling  efforts  now  under  way  within  the  industry,  with  the  leadership  of  the  IIFM,  to 
tackle these issues. I am now hopeful that real progress in this area is now within our grasp. 
You will hear during this conference updates on the initiatives now underway, in conjunction with the 
International Capital Market Association and the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, to 
develop  Sharia  compliant  hedging  instruments,  as  well  as  standardized  repo  and  commodity 
murabaha contracts. These will be important breakthroughs for the industry, and we very much look 
forward to their realization later this year. 
These initiatives have gained good support from the industry, but I would also call on regulators to 
help  support  these  initiatives:  we  too  can  also  play  an  important  role  in  bringing  about  greater 
alignment, by encouraging the use of standardized contracts and documentation, where appropriate. 
On this positive note, I should like wish you a productive conference, and to thank you for your kind 
attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2007
