W A Wijewardena: Services sector growth – an unstable growth component or 
a sustainable wealth creator? The case of Sri Lanka 
Text of the Professor Sirisena Tilakaratna Memorial Lecture - 2006 by Mr W A Wijewardena, Deputy 
Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the  Center  for  Banking  Studies,  Rajagiriya, 
15 December 2006. 
The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and should in no way be construed as those of the Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka. 
 finance, 
international 
international 
trade,  public 
I  consider  it  a  unique  honour  to  be  invited  to  deliver  the  Professor  Sirisena  Tilakaratna  Memorial 
Lecture  2006.  Four  eminent  authorities  did  the  honour  of  delivering  the  same  during  the  last  four 
years.  All  of  them  were  either  his  colleagues  or  his  seniors.  Against  this  background,  a  student  of 
Professor Sirisena Tilakaratna being invited to do the honours this year is a departure from the past 
tradition. It is in this context that I consider it a unique honour bestowed on me. 
Professor Sirisena Tilakaratna comes from the same place as I do. He was schooled in one of the 
leading schools of the day, namely, Taxila Central College at Horana. He belongs to the rare category 
of students who did their studies in English medium, but equally fluent in Sinhala as well. Because of 
my relationship with him, I used to visit his house very often as a kid. What attracted me most at that 
time  was  the  collection  of  journals  he,  as  a  college  student,  was  having  in  different  subjects:  Free 
World from the US Embassy; Commonwealth Today from the British High Commission; Nawa Yugaya 
from the Lake House; Rasawahini from the Times Group etc. I had the habit of leafing through those 
magazines and enjoying the titles and photographs. He did not mind our bothering him. He, in fact, 
encouraged  us  to  write  to  the  respective  Missions  for  complimentary  copies.  When  I  entered  the 
Vidyodaya University (now, the University of Sri Jayawardenapura) to do my undergraduate studies in 
management in late 1960s, Professor Tilakaratna had just returned to the island having completed his 
doctorate  at  the  prestigious  Queen’s  University  in  Canada.  He  took  all  our  courses  in  economics: 
micro,  macro,  welfare  economics, 
finance, 
development economics etc. Hence, we could safely say that our whole undergraduate knowledge of 
economics  was  imparted  to  us  by  him.  He  had  referred  to  all  the  latest  text-books,  meticulously 
prepared his notes and updated them continuously. I still recall that the students were eagerly waiting 
for his lectures. This was because of the comprehensiveness of the lectures and the unique method of 
delivery. He used to explain the technical terms again and again as and when they emerged in his 
lectures, until their meaning was permanently implanted in our minds. We were all benefited by his up 
to date treatment of the subject. When I went to the UK for my post-graduate studies in mid 1970s, it 
was only in the case of subjects he had covered that I did not have the so called knowledge gap. 
Professor Tilakaratna was not only an academic, but also a policy advisor, manager and administrator. 
In early 1970s, he functioned as an advisor to the Ministry of Plantations Industry and was appointed 
as Chairman of the newly established Coconut Marketing Board. Unlike other academics who thought 
that they knew all, he had the modesty and humility to learn from industry. A big magnate in coconut 
industry recently related to me how he once visited a coconut factory and insisted on learning a to z of 
everything there. My frequent visits to him either at the Coconut Marketing Board or at his residence 
were  intellectual  and  academic  journeys  through  all  aspects  of  and  issues  relating  to  the  coconut 
industry. We always returned home being much wiser than before. 
The university authorities too recognized his academic excellence and erudition fairly early. He was 
elevated, by double promotion, to the post of Professor of Economics and Head of Department at such 
a young age as 34. Immediately after that, he re-organized the Department of Economics, introduced 
a Post Graduate Diploma in Applied Social Statistics and strengthened the Department with new staff. 
I was one of the students who completed this Diploma in its first batch.  
Professor  Tilakaratna’s  greatest  contribution  to  economics  was  his  continuous  upgrading  of  the 
standards  of  the  syllabuses  and  examination  papers  in  economics  at  the  GCE  (Advanced  Level) 
Examination to be on par with international standards. New theories, trends and ideas in economics 
were all built into his examination structures with a time gap of only one or two years. This strategy 
forced students, teachers and, above all, tuition masters, to continuously update their knowledge. The 
failure to do so would have meant failure at the examinations. From his side, to help them, he wrote 
text  books,  appeared  on  the  educational  services  of  both  Rupavahini  and  the  Broadcasting 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 1
Corporation and attended frequent public and teachers’ seminars. When the Central Bank broadened 
the definition of money supply and introduced the concept of high powered money, it took only less 
than two years for these new subjects to be a part of the examination paper. He confessed to us that 
he had to learn these concepts anew in order to handle them safely as examination material.  
He was also an administrator par excellence as the Chairman of the University Grants Commission. In 
this position, he was able to perform his duty without fear or favour. He had the remarkable ability of 
effectively managing politicians, friends and even relatives who made unreasonable demands which 
were against the approved rules and regulations. His contributions to the nation were suddenly halted 
by his untimely death at the prime age of 63, an age which is relatively low for an academic. When a 
person dies, he is normally missed only by his family members and close relatives. But in the case of 
Professor  Tilakaratna,  he  is  missed  by  all,  his  colleagues,  students,  academics  and  the  rest  of  the 
people in the country.  
I choose an appropriate topic for my lecture, based on Professor Tilakaratna’s long conviction that Sri 
Lanka’s  economy  should  move  forward  on  the  basis  of  its  comparative  advantage.  Being  a  trade 
specialist, he always believed that any other mixture of economic policy would lead to a sub-optimal 
solution. He cautioned that economic policies, not supported by solid economic principles, but merely 
guided by narrow emotion-driven ideologies, would be non-sustainable. This led me to examine the 
current controversy surrounding the services sector as a viable and sustainable wealth creator for Sri 
Lanka. 
The services sector is often quoted as a sector that does not or cannot create real wealth. This view is 
sometimes expressed by even mainstream economists. According to them, real wealth in a society is 
created  only  by  visible  products  that  are  generated  by  agriculture  or  industry.  On  the  contrary,  the 
services sector which produces invisibles does not lead to any improvement of wealth on a long-term 
basis. Hence, any preponderant growth in the services sector over the real-good producing sectors is 
considered  as  a  risk.  The  skepticism  about  the  services  sector  would  have  been  spawned  by  the 
inability to store the products of the sector for future use which could be considered as a symbol of 
wealth of  a  nation.  Hence,  its  growth over  and above  the  growth  of  storable product sectors would 
make  a  country  dependent  on  the  rest  of  the  world,  specifically  in  times  of  wars,  disturbances  to 
international free movement of goods etc. The underlying argument is that, if a country is self-sufficient 
in  all  its  requirements,  it can  manage  its  affairs even  in  the  worst  conditions. In  contrast,  a  country 
dependent on others, will have to follow a complaisant foreign policy so as not to antagonize them. It 
does not enjoy the freedom which self-sufficient countries have in charting their domestic and foreign 
policies based on national ideologies. Raymond Lim, Singapore’s Minister for Transport and Second 
Minister for Foreign Affairs, referred to this limitation in the context of a country dependent on global 
trade, as “……. not having the luxury of pursuing a foreign policy of abstract ideals”.1 It is, however, to 
be noted that such freedoms should not necessarily imply higher welfare. This is because the level of 
welfare of a country is dependent on the quantum of wealth created and the level of real consumption 
and quality of life of its people. Yet, the critiques of the services sector based growth have often voiced 
these concerns and labeled such growth as illusive. 
The  examination  of  the  economic  history  of  countries  shows  that  there  is  a  set  pattern  of  the 
transformation of the structure of economies. The pattern has been from agriculture to industry and 
then to services. This trend has been equally observed in both developed and developing economies 
alike. In the first stage, which covers the pre-industrial era, the almost entirety of the economic value 
was created by agriculture. With fast industrialization, the source of a country’s economic value got 
shifted to industry. The wide-spread development of markets, first internally and then globally, led to 
the  creation  of  a  new  growth  sector  in  the  form  of  services.  This  is  because,  the  existence  of  an 
efficient services sector was necessary for further growth in both the agriculture and industry. When 
the natural resource endowment of countries set an effective limit on further expansion of agriculture 
or industry, the vacuum was filled by a sudden boom in services. Good examples of this phenomenal 
development from  the modern  era  are Hong  Kong  and  Singapore.  Both  these countries  have  been 
able  to  create  wealth  through  rapid  industrialization  supported  by  a  strong  and  dynamic  services 
sector. 
                                                      
1  
“Staying Relevant in the Midst of Globalisation”, Experience Singapore, July, 2006. p.12 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2007
Throughout its history, Sri Lanka has been a beneficiary of being an active partner in global trade. In 
addition  to  be  located  on  a  very  convenient  naval  route,  conducive  policies  adopted  by  successive 
rulers have been a booster to international trade, and through it, to wealth creation. The pinnacle of 
country’s trade performance was recorded during the reign of the King Parakramabahu, the Great, in 
the late 12th century. The evidence suggests that it was a complete free market economy policy that 
was followed during this whole period. According to the Great Chronicle of Sri Lanka, Mahavansa, the 
king  is  recorded  to  have  set-up  the  first  ever  export  processing  zone  called  Antharaanga  Dhuura, 
bordering the present Kalu Ganga, Bentara Ganga and Sinharaja forest. In this zone, elephants, ivory, 
timber, gems, pearls and spices were processed for export to India, China and the Middle East2. In 
order to facilitate trading with many different nations, the King Parakramabahu made it mandatory for 
state  officials  to  be  fluent  in  foreign  languages.  During  this  period,  Sri  Lanka  is  reported  to  have 
functioned  as  a  vibrant  entrepot  trade  centre,  the  role  played  by  Singapore  in  the  modern  world. 
According  to  some  authors,  Sri  Lanka  had  simultaneously  imported  and  exported  the  same 
commodity, such as textiles and fabrics3. This is considered as a very advanced form of trading known 
as intra-industry trade by modern economists. The same high profile of the country in foreign trade 
was continued unabated in the period afterwards. According to Dr S Arsaratnam4, both the Sinhala 
kings and the Dutch used Arabic traders to export elephants, gems, areca nuts and spices, and import 
rice, textiles and other requirements in the 16th to early 18th centuries. The British period that followed 
the Dutch rule is marked by a continuation of the open-economy policy pursued by ancient Sinhala 
kings.  During  this  period,  the  country  continued  to  rely  on  foreign  trade  for  wealth  creation  and 
maintaining high standards of living. Hence, the reliance on services, especially commercial services, 
for wealth creation was not a new policy paradigm for Sri Lanka.  
Around  the  time  Sri  Lanka  gained  independence  from  the  British  rule,  the  country’s  GDP  was 
distributed in the proportion of 46 percent for agriculture, 20 percent for industry and the balance 34 
percent for services. The high share of both agriculture and industry amounting to about a two-third of 
GDP  indicated  the  prevalence  of  a  limit  for  their  continued  growth  devoid  of  a  vibrant  and  efficient 
services sector. This anomaly was to be gradually, and in a slow pace, corrected in the subsequent 
five decades. In 1960, a slight improvement in the respective shares was observed with agriculture 
falling  to  38  percent  and  services  rising  to  45  percent.  The  period  since  then  recorded  a  virtual 
stagnation of services till early 1980s when the country moved to an open economy regime. During the 
period  from  1980  –  2005,  the  agriculture  sector  further  declined  in  relative  terms  from  around  28 
percent  to  17  percent,  while  the  industry  remained  unchanged  at  around  25  –  26  percent.  But  the 
services sector increased its share from 43 percent in 1980 to 56 percent in 2005. In the recent past, 
services have been the main and the significant contributor to economic growth in Sri Lanka, pushing 
industry and agriculture to the second and third places, respectively. It is this phenomenal growth in 
the share and the contribution of services which has caused concerns for and attracted criticism by 
some quarters. 
                                                      
2   Mahavansa, Part II, Sinhala Translation by Rev. H Siri Sumangala & Batuwantudawa, (1912). Ch. 69 – p.125  
3   H Ellawala, The Social History of Ancient Ceylon, (Sinhala Translation) Chapter 7 (1969) 
4   Dutch Power in Ceylon, Chapters 6 and 7 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 3
Sri  Lanka’s  current  stage  of  the  development  of  the  services  sector  can  be  contrasted  with  some 
selected developed countries and countries in the region. According to the World Bank data5, between 
1960 and 2004, the share of the services sector in some selected countries was as follows: 
The share of the services sector 
 Percent of GDP 
UK 
Australia 
France 
Japan 
USA 
Singapore 
Hong Kong 
China 
India 
Sri Lanka 
1960 
53 
51 
52 
42 
58 
78 
62 
20 
30 
48 
1980 
54 
58 
62 
54 
64 
61 
67 
21 
36 
43 
1995 
66 
70 
71 
60 
72 
64 
83 
31 
41 
52 
2004 
72 
71 
73 
68 
75 
65 
88 
35 
52 
58 
 
The  statistics  show  that  the  current  level  of  services  in  Sri  Lanka  is  more  or  less  equivalent  to  the 
status which the services enjoyed in developed countries in 1960s. While Sri Lanka is far ahead of the 
two giant growth machines in the region, viz., China and India, it would not be too long for these two 
countries to overtake it, given their current services promoting policies. 
It is also observed that the services sector has been growing in importance in all the countries during 
the past five decades or so. Some countries have now attained the optimal level of services above 70 
percent. This indicates that the countries which are still below that level have an enormous potential 
for further growth. But the question posed has been whether such growth would be sustainable or not 
in the long run. In other words, whether it could continue to create wealth and improve the standard of 
living of the people. 
It has also been observed that countries which generate a share of 60 percent and above from the 
services  sector  have  been  able  to  record  a  sustainable  GDP  expansion  over  the  years.  The  larger 
share of services, as claimed by critiques, has in no way contributed to retard their growth. In fact, the 
preponderant  growth  in  the  services  sector  has  helped  them  to  improve  both  agriculture  and  the 
industry sectors on efficiency grounds, infusing sustainability to those two sectors as well. Hence, it 
can be safely concluded that a share of about 65 to 70 percent in the services sector would provide a 
country  with  immense  prospects  for  wealth  creation,  provided  it gains  competitive  advantage  in  the 
production  of  such  services.  In  this  context,  the  future  growth  prospects  available  to  China  are 
enormous, since its services sector still accounts for only 35 percent of its GDP. Both India and Sri 
Lanka  too  stand  to  gain  on  account  of  the  leeway  available  for  them  to  push  the  services  sector’s 
contribution to above 65 percent. Hence, it is important that they should exploit this growth potential 
without further delay. 
Let’s now turn to why Sri Lanka should exploit its growth opportunities in the services sector. 
First, the widely held view that Sri Lanka is an agricultural economy and it should continue to be so in 
the  future  as  well  has  entailed  certain  limitations  on  its  future  growth.  This  belief  would  have  been 
nurtured by the historical experience of high prosperity which the country attained through agriculture, 
specifically through subsistence paddy farming, in both Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa eras. In these 
                                                      
5   World Bank’s World Development Reports for various years 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2007
periods, when the country was subject to frequent foreign invasions, it would not have been unusual to 
regard food security as the number one priority of the nation. Hence, a larger share of growth, output 
and employment was occupied by agriculture. But today, these issues are not of grave concern to a 
nation  open  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  This  is  because  international  markets  have  developed  both 
intensively and extensively to cater to the every possible demand of consumers. Hence, countries in 
the  present  era  could  easily  replenish  food  shortages,  provided  they  have  the  required  purchasing 
power.  Agriculture  faces  a  serious  man-power  shortage  too,  because  it  is  not  the  most  preferred 
occupation by many. This is because, Sri Lanka’s universal free educational system, an enviable pride 
among other  developing nations,  has  been  instrumental  in  creating  a  generation  of  educated  youth 
with an urban ideology, based on a marked preference for white-collar jobs. Even in the predominantly 
agricultural areas, the trend has been the same. Consequently, it has become a nearly impossible task 
to keep the rural youth occupied in agricultural activities. This has made it necessary for opening new 
employment avenues for such youth. An additional factor has been the natural limitation for growth of 
agriculture due both to the slow growth in demand for agricultural products and the supply constraints 
of  land  for  further  extensive  cultivation  practices.  Hence,  in  the  beginning,  agriculture  may  be  the 
growth  promoter,  but  later,  its  growth  would  slow  down  due  to  the  above  limitations.  The  global 
experience has been that the average rate of growth in agriculture has been less than 2 percent per 
annum during the last 100 years. With higher and higher numbers being added to the job market every 
year, agriculture has, therefore, a limitation for providing jobs for all. 
Sri Lanka’s agriculture sector has made its utmost contribution to create wealth and employment in the 
past. Its current ability to do so has been a matter for debate. With employment in agriculture being 
seasonal and the concentration of a large farm-based work-force on a limited extent of cultivable land, 
underemployment  has  been  the  natural  corollary  in  Sri  Lanka.  The  new  evidence  shows  that  the 
under-employment  in  agriculture  in  Sri  Lanka  is  not  only  the  highest  but  also  on  the  increase. 
According  to  the  Consumer  Finances  and  Socio-economic  Survey  of  the  Central  Bank6,  the 
underemployment in the agriculture sector in 1996/97 stood at 31 percent of the employed. This rose 
to 36 percent by 2003/04. In contrast, the underemployment in the services sector fell from 20 percent 
to 18 percent between the two reference periods, while that in the industry remained unchanged at 20 
percent. The message conveyed by this unfavorable development is clear: remove a greater part of 
those employed in the agriculture sector in order to raise its efficiency and future sustainability. Hence, 
the appropriate policy strategy should be to raise productivity in agriculture through intensification of 
farming with high-yielding varieties by employing a lesser number of work-force. 
Agriculture has a further limitation in the form of low productivity and low contribution to GDP. Since 
about a one third of the labor force is engaged in agriculture, its total output is distributed among a 
large  number  of  workers.  According  to  the  World  Bank  data7,  the  agricultural  value  added  per 
agricultural worker in Sri Lanka, measured in 2000 dollars, has been $ 696 for 1989 – 91. This rose 
marginally to $ 737 in 2001 – 03. The comparable figures for other countries have been much higher 
than this: USA $ 26,105 and $ 47,566; Australia $ 26,601 and 26,957; Sweden $ 20,416 and $ 30,469; 
Malaysia $ 3694 and $4,571. As a result, the income of agricultural workers in Sri Lanka has been 
very low, keeping them below the poverty line. This has been further exacerbated by the low value 
addition of the agriculture sector in the economy. While the contribution of the crop sector amounts 
only to 14 percent of GDP, the individual contribution by the sub-crops has been negligible with tea 
contributing 1 percent, rubber 0.4 percent, coconut 1 percent and paddy 3 percent. Hence, even if the 
output  of  agriculture  is  doubled,  it  would  not  make  a  significant  contribution  to  country’s  wealth 
creation.  
If agriculture has its limited capacity for an accelerated growth, why not concentrate on industry? This 
may be a pertinent issue to be addressed at this stage. Certainly, unlike the agriculture, which is faced 
with  the  limitation  of  land,  industry  does  not  have  any  capacity  or  demand  limitations.  The  non-
availability of raw materials or essential inputs or even the domestic demand for the output does no 
longer  inhibit  industrial  growth.  With  globalization  of  trade  and  services  and  the  advancements  in 
information and communication technology (ICT), the previous bottlenecks for industrial growth have 
been efficiently sorted out. In today’s context, industrial outputs do not belong to a particular nation or 
country.  They  are  jointly  held  products  to  which many  nations or  countries would  have  contributed. 
Countries  with  cost-advantages,  driven  by  technology  and  innovation,  have  been  able  to  attain 
                                                      
6   The Consumer Finances and Socio-economic Survey Report 2003/04 – Part I, Central Bank of Sri Lanka p. 66 
7   World Development Report, 2006, Table 3, pp 296-7 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 5
specialization  in  sub-components  of  given  final  industrial  products  which  are  assembled  in  global 
factories. As reported by the World Bank8 , the Ford Escort Motor Car which is finally assembled in the 
UK  or  Germany,  had  main  components  manufactured  in  15  different  countries.  In  the  modern 
production processes, it has been observed that product development relating to personal computers 
takes place in USA. The components for them are manufactured in Taiwan. The final assembly takes 
place in Malaysia. The marketing is undertaken in Singapore. The inquiries relating to the products are 
handled by call centers in India. It, therefore, behooves developing countries like Sri Lanka to be a 
part of this ‘global factory process’ in order to raise their industrial production capacity and wealth. But 
the prime pre-requisite for that is the existence of a vibrant and dynamic services sector equipped with 
a  free  flow  of  information  and  capacity  to  impart  knowledge  on  time.  In  other  words,  the  modern 
industry  cannot  survive  or  sustain  without  services.  Hence,  any  attempt  at  developing  industry  in 
isolation would drain it of a vital requirement for growth and sustenance, viz., competitive advantage. 
The importance of the services sector for both industry and agriculture can be identified by examining 
the  full-range  of  modern  production  flows.  In  fact,  this  is  something  which  many  have  tended  to 
disregard  and  therefore  assign  a  lower  value  to  services  than  real  productions  like  agriculture  and 
industry. Such a flow which should come one stage after the other in the order given, is presented in 
the following tabular exposition: 
Modern production flows 
Stage  Process 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Basic Research 
Applied Research 
Incubation and Testing 
Commercial Development 
Planning and Financing 
Manufacturing 
Warehousing, Transporting and Marketing 
Financing 
After-sale services and maintenance 
Continued  Research  and  Development  for 
Next Generation Products 
Identity 
Service 
Service 
Service 
Service 
Service 
Industry 
Service 
Service 
Service 
Service 
 
It is apparent that only one out of the 10 different production stages constitutes industry (or agriculture) 
and all others are services. If one is concerned about developing agriculture or industry, he cannot 
ignore all the essential service ingredients that should precede and follow the actual act of production. 
Since people see only the visible output, they fail to observe the full range of other services that have 
contributed to its creation as well as subsequent continuation. Many industrial outputs of developing 
countries  have  failed  to  make  a  mark  in  the  international  markets  because  of  the  absence  of  well-
developed after sale and maintenance services. The Indian auto-maker, Maruti, failed to sell its fuel 
economy  car  until  Suzuki  of  Japan  stepped  in  with  technology  and  after-sale  services.  Therefore, 
without the attendant services, it is not possible for either industry or agriculture to sustain itself. 
Sri Lanka which is devoid of a sufficient natural resource base would find it difficult to enhance growth 
through industry or agriculture alone. The country’s available land is limited and its population density 
at 293 persons per square kilometer is one of the highest. In comparison, Canada has a density of 3, 
USA  31,  New  Zealand  14,  Australia  3  and  Russia  9.  While  the  latter  group  of  countries  could 
                                                      
8   World Development Report 1987, p.39 
6 
 BIS Review 4/2007
conveniently move into extensive farming, Sri Lanka’s choice is limited only to improved productivity 
through intensive cultivation. That again is through innovation which comes from services.  
The second factor that would drive Sri Lanka to the services sector is the ever rising globalization of 
services. In the past, services which, by nature, cannot be stored, were non-tradable. Hence, there 
was no any prospect of selling, services beyond the borders of a country limiting its clientele to its own 
citizens. If any foreigner desired to avail himself of any services, he should necessarily have traveled 
to the country of services at great costs in terms of both time and money. This is why cross-border 
services were limited only to areas where foreigners could have them relatively at a low transaction 
cost. In this context, the services which played a prominent role in the global arena were shipping and 
insurance  services  where  the  service  provider  visited  the  buyer  and  travel,  education  and  health 
services where the buyer visited the service provider. In all these areas, Sri Lanka had an upstart over 
other competitive  countries.  Sri  Lanka’s  university  system  at  the  time  of  gaining  independence  was 
one of the best in the world. It also had a very reliable and high quality curative health system. For 
shipping services, it had the best comparative advantage by being located on a very important naval 
route. Its ports in Colombo and Trincomalee had the best cost-advantage. Its highly literate work-force 
with  professional  qualifications  from  the  UK  and  other  advanced  countries  could  have  provided  the 
best insurance and banking services to the rest of the world. But, due to the inward orientation of the 
policies  adopted  since  independence,  these  comparative  advantages  got  shifted  to  other  countries 
such  as  Singapore,  Hong  Kong  and  Australia.  For  Sri  Lanka,  it  is,  therefore,  a  story  of  missed 
opportunities. 
It is too late now to lament over the failed past. What the country should do is to plan for the future, so 
that Sri Lanka could conveniently get itself integrated to the globalised services industry. As argued by 
Thomas  L  Friedman9,  the  world  has  become  flat  and  the  world  nations,  including  USA,  should 
recognize the flattening process of the world. If a country stubbornly and arrogantly refuses to accept 
this fact, it stands to lose, while others continue to move forward on an accelerated high gear. India, 
being one such country, has identified many areas which were previously non-tradable and took action 
to promote them actively. The advancements in ICT through a wired globe have enabled India to do so 
at  a  rapid pace.  As  indicated  by  Friedman,  business  process outsourcing  (BPO) coupled with  such 
personal services  as secretarial services,  provision of  tuition,  accounting  and  tax  advisory  services, 
on-line medical consultancy etc. are booming in the southern part of the Indian sub-continent, creating 
wealth and opening new opportunities to otherwise unemployed educated youth. Though India started 
its ICT much later than Sri Lanka, its export of software now amounts to US $10 billion per annum. 
India’s present plan is to raise it US $20 billion by 2010. This indicates the tremendous capacity which 
ICT  alone  would  have  for  a  country  to  create  new  wealth  for  its  citizens.  Ireland  and  Israel  have 
exploited this opportunity profitably. 
India’s  ascent  to  a  formidable  global  ICT  power  has  been  mainly  driven  by  economic  reforms, 
establishment of a free market democracy, perseverance of some unbeatable private entrepreneurs 
and above all, continuous human capital development in engineering and electronic fields.10 The last 
development came from the high educational standards maintained by a web of reputed state owned 
Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) and permission given to private sector to set up higher learning 
institutes. This is definitely an eye opener for Sri Lanka. Even in the midst of growing evidence from 
India  and  elsewhere  that  privately  owned  institutes  of  higher  learning  could  make  a  significant 
contribution to the globalization of education and training, Sri Lanka still keeps education as a closely-
guarded relic in the public sector. As a result, its capacity to meet the demand for higher education is 
woefully low with one place being offered to satisfy about 16 aspirants. This has led aspiring youth to 
seek higher education in other countries at a high personal investment cost. Since every investment 
should  yield  commensurate  returns,  it  also  has  compelled  them  to  seek  employment  elsewhere. 
Whatever the intention, the closely protected public university education system has become a waste 
of scarce public resources, since only a fraction of the total registered students is reported to be in 
attendance in classes.11 Hence, to gain reputation as a global centre of learning, it is necessary that 
the Sri Lanka’s university education system should undergo a complete overhaul and reform. 
                                                      
9   The World Is Flat, Penguin Books, 2006 
10   For a detailed exposition, see Gurcharan Das, India Unbound, Penguin Books, 2002 
11   The personal experience of the author has been that university students normally tend to give priority to paid professional 
courses over tuition fee-free university courses. In the third and fourth years, only about a one tenth of registered students 
attend classes, though public money is spent on all of them. 
BIS Review 4/2007 
 7
A further benefit which Sri Lanka could gain by promoting a global market based services sector is the 
possibility  of  narrowing  the  current  account  deficit  of  the  balance  of  payments  through  enhanced 
service income. Historically, Sri Lanka is having an ever ballooning deficit in the merchandise account. 
With high international oil prices and rising intermediate and investment goods imports, this deficit has 
risen to a very high and unsustainable level of about 13 percent of GDP by 2006. Countries with such 
large trade deficits should perforce attempt to generate an equivalent surplus in the services account 
so as to finance the same. However, the surplus being generated by Sri Lanka in its services account 
has not been sufficient to fully off-set the trade deficit. As a result, Sri Lanka normally runs a current 
account deficit of 5-6 percent of GDP which has to be financed through capital flows. This level of a 
current  account  deficit,  occurring  year  after  year,  is  not  sustainable.  Given  this  scenario,  the 
enhancement of the income from services by promoting the services sector would definitely help the 
country to have a stable balance of payments position. 
What should the country do to attain the goal of having a vibrant and efficient services sector? First of 
all,  it  should  invest  heavily  in  infrastructure  so  as  to  facilitate  the  production  of  services.  In  this 
connection,  the  proposed  international  airport  and  the  port  in  Hambantota  and  the  attendant  road-
network  would  make  a  significant  contribution  to  facilitate  the  promotion  of  global  services.  But  the 
country should not stop there. As a top-most priority, the road network should be improved to be on 
par with global standards. Roads would create access to markets and reduce transaction costs. Since 
the services, like the visibles, should be produced at the cheapest costs to attract global customers, 
the maintenance of efficiency at all levels of the economy is a must. For this purpose, the country need 
be  wired  electronically  covered  by  a  reliable  road  network.  The  most  important  requirement  for  a 
sustainable services sector is the continuation of the development and supply of the needed human 
resources. The plan made by Singapore at the turn of the new millennium in this regard is a guidance 
for other countries. The Singaporean Ministry of Education is reported to have instructed, in 1999, all 
the tertiary educational institutions and universities to concentrate on courses on genetic engineering, 
ICT, nano-technology and entertainment so as to provide the skilled human resources needed for the 
future. This type of forward looking planning by country’s educational institutions is also needed for the 
development of a vibrant services sector in Sri Lanka.  
The conclusion to be drawn from the discussion so far is that Sri Lanka has missed opportunities in 
the past, but it need not continue to suffer in the future. It is still not too late to re-orient the economy 
towards the establishment of a vibrant services sector catering to the needs of the globalised industry, 
trade and commerce. The country’s highly literate and easily trainable work-force, investments in ICT 
infrastructure and conducive economic reforms will pave the way for its entry to the newly emerging 
globalised services industry. If Sri Lanka does not acquire its position in this newly emerging global 
trend,  as  it  did  during  the  Anuradhapura  and  Polonnaruwa  periods,  it  cannot  be  avoided  to  be 
relegated to yet another episode of missed opportunities. 
8 
 BIS Review 4/2007
