Rakesh Mohan: Statement at the IMF – the global economy and financial 
market issues 
Statement  by  Dr  Rakesh  Mohan,  Honourable  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and 
Leader of the Indian Delegation to the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington 
DC, 14 April 2007.  
Representing the constituency consisting of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Sri Lanka. 
Mr. Chairman, 
 The global economy and financial markets 
The continued expansion in world GDP in 2006, with growth crossing the 5 percent mark, points to the 
emergence of a new phase – one that is more diversified with most regions posting higher growth than 
in the previous year. It is heartening to note that the new robust phase is driven by emerging market 
economies with China and India continuing to contribute substantially to the global growth momentum. 
Growth rate in the Euro area accelerated and the recovery in Japan was sustained.  
The initial assessment in the latest World Economic Outlook (WEO) that global growth could moderate 
somewhat  from  5.4  percent  in  2006  to  4.9  percent  during  2007  may  be  all  right  at  the  current 
conjecture. While in the recent past WEO growth forecasts have normally got revised upwards from 
one round to another, there is little room for complacency as the nature of the risks to the favorable 
growth outlook during 2007 has not changed, though they appear muted at this stage. At the same 
time, downside risks to global financial stability have increased and the risks in the US housing market 
have started to manifest themselves. 
The most important factor that has contributed to the reduction of risks is the moderation of oil prices 
from their peak levels in August 2006. However, with the recent firming up of oil prices again, it is not 
clear  at  what  level,  if  at  all,  oil  prices  would  stabilize.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  a  fundamental 
improvement  in  the  supply-demand  balance  in  the  oil  market.  The  geopolitical  risk  has  also  not 
diminished.  If  oil  prices  continue  to  remain  volatile,  they  would  impart  considerable  uncertainties  to 
growth prospects, particularly for oil-importing developing countries. 
Nonetheless, the reduction in oil prices from their peak levels has had an immediate impact on the 
inflation  outlook.  The  headline  inflation  in  advanced  countries  has  decreased,  and  with  this,  the 
immediate  prospect  of  monetary  tightening  has  diminished.  This  has  imparted  some  stability  to 
financial markets. It would, however, be premature to draw firm conclusions about the direction and 
pace  at  which  monetary  policy  would  move  in  advanced  countries,  as  core  inflation  remains  at  an 
elevated  level.  With  reported  slackening  of  productivity  growth  and  closing  of  the  output  gap, 
inflationary  concerns  might  still  persist  in  advanced  countries.  Many  emerging  markets  continue  to 
experience  inflationary  pressures  and  have  tightened  monetary  policy.  If  oil  prices  turn  volatile, 
inflation concerns may resurface. 
Another  area  of  concern  is  the  impact  of  the  US  slowdown  on  the  global  economy.  The  current 
slowdown has been triggered by the adverse development in the subprime segment of the housing 
sector. Looking at the recent stock market response, it does not seem unlikely that the trouble in the 
subprime  sector  could  permeate  into  other  segments  of  the  housing  sector.  In  such  a  scenario, 
consumption demand, which has been steady thus far, could get affected.  
The persistence of global imbalances continues to cause concern. Slowing US growth, coupled with 
dollar  depreciation,  is  expected  to  keep  the  deterioration  of  current  account  deficit  under  check. 
However, even under the most favourable scenario, the net foreign liabilities position of the US would 
continue to deteriorate further, raising the prospects of an eventual adjustment. 
The  increasing  integration  of  China  and  India  into  the  global  production  stream  has  significantly 
altered the efficiency of the global production process. While exchange rate changes are a part of the 
process of adjustment, a larger part of adjustment would have to occur through changes in domestic 
policies  of  the  key  global  players  in  such  imbalances.  This  would  involve  a  rebalancing  of  saving-
investment behavior between the US and economies with large surpluses. If the adjustments were to 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 1
occur mainly through exchange rate adjustment, it would have wider ramification for global financial 
stability. The emerging market countries would be particularly vulnerable, as the major share of their 
external liabilities is in US dollars. While a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances remains a low 
probability event, concerted efforts by key stakeholders are required to avoid such an occurrence.  
While the US growth is expected to slow, stronger fiscal performance should improve the resilience of 
the economy. In the event of a sharper slowdown, it is important that the slack is taken up by the Euro 
area and Japan, so that global growth remains buoyant. Growth projections indicate that Euro area 
growth  would  revert  to  its  potential  level,  which  remains  comparatively  low.  In  order  to  sustain  the 
current level of performance, the region needs to close the productivity gap with the US by increasing 
competition and removing labour market distortions. While growth momentum has clearly picked up in 
Japan, fiscal reforms and supply-side structural reforms are needed to enhance the productivity of the 
non-tradable sector. 
The persistence of terms of trade shock arising out of high fuel and non-fuel commodity prices has 
benefited  a  number  of  countries.  While  commodity  prices  are  expected  to  remain  buoyant,  a  faster 
than  anticipated  slowdown  of  the  global  economy  would  increase  the  vulnerabilities,  particularly  for 
low-income  countries  in  Africa.  Africa  has  also  benefited  from  debt  relief  and  ongoing  efforts  at 
strengthening  macroeconomic  stability.  Growth 
in  emerging  Europe  has  accelerated,  but 
vulnerabilities have increased on account of deteriorating current account balances. While the Middle 
East  enjoys  strong  growth,  expenditure  management  would  be  a  major  challenge  as  the  level  of 
current account surplus for the region is expected to come down with the moderation of oil prices. 
In  recent  years,  the  benign  financial  market  conditions  have  been  supportive  of  global  growth.  The 
underlying  risks  in  the  financial  markets  have,  however,  gone  up.  The  markets  have  also  become 
more discerning. The leveraged position of market entities has increased as reflected in a sharp pick 
up  in  leveraged  buyouts  (LBOs).  The  activities  of  hedge  funds  have  also  increased.  However,  with 
lack of transparency in the operations of hedge funds, a proper assessment of risks becomes arduous. 
The persistence of carry trade has further accentuated risks in the financial markets. 
With  financial  globalisation,  the  exposure  of  emerging  markets  to  risky  financial  assets  in  mature 
markets  has  increased.  Similarly,  the  risk  appetite  of  institutional  investors  has  also  increased  in 
search of higher yields. This is reflected in the compression of spreads for emerging market financing 
which  cannot  be  fully  justified  by  improved  fundamentals.  Overall,  as  highlighted  in  the  Global 
Financial Stability Report, the financial risks have increased. In the event of a loss of risk appetite and 
consequent  unwinding  of  leveraged  positions,  there  could  be  serious  adverse  effects  in  emerging 
markets. 
With financial globalisation, international financial markets have become more exposed to risks arising 
from large cross border inflows by foreign institutional investors seeking to benefit from higher yield in 
emerging  market  economies.  With  strong  capital  flows,  many  emerging  market  and  developing 
countries  face  the  challenge  of  sustaining  stable  macroeconomic  and  financial  conditions.  The 
authorities have to engage in activities such as sterilisation and tightening of policy to contain volatility 
in financial markets arising from large capital flows. However, the experience in this regard raises its 
own difficulties. For instance, monetary tightening through a rise in interest rates could lead to further 
capital inflows, requiring larger sterilised operations. Thus, the authorities in their countries are facing 
challenges that are arising from large cross border flows and financial market volatility that is related to 
possible inappropriate risk pricing by international investors. 
In sum, while I see good prospects for the global economy, there are a number of risks emanating 
from  the  behaviour  of  oil  prices,  adverse  developments  in  the  US  housing  market,  persistence  of 
global  imbalances,  large  leveraged  positions  in  financial  markets,  and  possible  emergence  of 
inflationary  pressures.  In  addition,  there  is  also  the  threat  of  protectionist  pressures  with  adverse 
consequences  on  global  growth.  The  evolving  situation  needs  to  be  carefully  watched  and  policy 
makers should be ready to respond to emerging challenges promptly and effectively. 
Reshaping of surveillance 
Surveillance is the key responsibility of the Fund. We have noted the ongoing work in this important 
area. We would be supportive of efforts that would enhance the relevance of surveillance and increase 
its  effectiveness.  The  basic  approach and principles  for  moving ahead  have been  laid  down by  the 
Managing Director clearly and succinctly: (i) the revised Decision should muster the broadest possible 
support; (ii) it should not in any manner, overt or covert, introduce new obligations; and (iii) it should 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2007
not move towards a more compliance-based approach. I am confident that, if we approach the issue 
with these principles in mind, it would assuage many apprehensions of members.  
In the context of the review of the 1977 Decision, my understanding is that the Decision derives its 
legal basis from Article IV Section 3(b) on surveillance over members’ exchange arrangements. The 
adoption of new principles that are being currently debated must be limited to the subject matter of 
surveillance over exchange rates. We would be uneasy to see the insertion of any new principles that 
qualify  domestic  policies  with  peripheral  consequences  on  exchange  rate  management.  While  it  is 
open to the Fund to suggest “factors” or “points for consideration” relating to what constitutes sound 
monetary, fiscal or financial sector policies, it must be clearly understood that such guidelines qualify 
the Fund’s oversight over members’ domestic policies under Article IV Section 3(a). They cannot and 
should not be regarded as principles qualifying firm surveillance over exchange rates under Article IV 
Section 3(b). 
As  regards  exchange  rate  surveillance,  the  proposed  draft  new  principles  seem  to  go  beyond  the 
intent of Article IV in so far as formally taking on board the concept of "fundamental exchange rate 
misalignment". In view of conceptual and methodological uncertainties, it would not be appropriate to 
embed  the  term,  "exchange  rate  misalignment"  in  a  formal  Decision.  The  fact  that  alternative 
approaches  produce  widely  divergent  estimates  of  "exchange  rate  misalignment",  it  would  not  be 
appropriate  to  anchor  policy  advice  on  such  exchange  rate  assessments.  Moreover,  given  the 
sensitivity of exchange rates for emerging markets, it would be desirable in the spirit of the Fund’s role 
as a confidential advisor to keep the exchange rate assessment internal. 
The discussion on remit, independence and accountability framework has two important elements: (i) 
to  improve  focus  of  surveillance  with  greater  prioritization,  and  (ii)  to  improve  the  methodology  to 
assess  the  effectiveness  of  surveillance.  We  are  very  much  for  strengthening  the  methodological 
aspects  of  surveillance  reviews  and  prioritization.  However,  it  needs  careful  consideration  whether 
there would be any value addition in introducing a new policy statement devoted to this purpose alone. 
Another  approach  could  be  to  prioritise  surveillance  objectives  through  the  triennial  surveillance 
reviews. I am sure the Board would consider the pros and cons of both approaches and come up with 
proposals, with wider acceptance. 
I  welcome  the  emphasis  on  the  core  areas  of  the  Fund’s  mandate  in  bilateral  surveillance.  It  is 
important  to  aim  at  better  integration  between  multilateral  and  bilateral  surveillance  with  a  greater 
focus on cross-country spillovers. There is also a need for an evenhanded approach in order to build 
confidence among both borrowers and lenders, which is critical for the effectiveness of surveillance.  
Quotas and voice  
I note the discussions in the Board on this most critical area of governance of the Fund. After the first 
round of ad hoc quota increases, it is important that the international community shows the resolve to 
move  forward  with  the  second  round  in  a  time-bound  manner.  The  commitment  in  this  regard  is 
embedded unambiguously in the Singapore Resolution. The main objective should be to realign the 
quota formula to meet the current global reality. The fundamental reform has to come by giving greater 
share to the under-represented countries while that of the over-represented countries would need to 
come down. 
The  challenge  today  is  to  achieve  this  reform  through  a  new,  simple,  transparent  and  linear  quota 
formula. We believe that this is possible if we work towards a new quota formula that seeks to achieve 
two outcomes. First, such a formula must result in the rebalancing of quota shares in keeping with the 
economic changes that have taken place globally. Second, and equally important, is the objective that 
quota shares of low-income countries are protected to the fullest extent possible. We find that these 
twin  outcomes  can  only  be  met  if,  in  the  hypothetical  new  formula,  GDP  is  computed  entirely  on 
purchasing power parity (PPP) basis. No halfway house of blending GDP at market exchange rates 
with  GDP  on  PPP  would  meet  these  twin  objectives.  Furthermore,  the  “openness”  variable  in  the 
calculation of quotas needs a close scrutiny in the context of countries having a common currency. We 
are of the view that our proposal for comprehensive reforms alone will result in adequate, equitable 
and  appropriate  representation  for  developing  countries.  Such  a  broader  representation  of  the 
developing  countries  would  enhance  the  acceptability,  ownership  and  effectiveness  of  the  Fund’s 
programmes and policies.  
This twin outcome approach requires a sense of pragmatism and spirit of compromise on the part of 
all member countries. However, we are dismayed that, contrary to this approach, some proposals are 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 3
being made that detract from the spirit and purpose of the reform process. It is being proposed that the 
reform objectives could be met in a number of ways. In our view, the promise of a number of ways is a 
teasing illusion. There is only one way and that is to construct a formula that realigns actual quotas in 
line with current global economic realities. Another suggestion has been to benchmark the revision to 
the  current  calculated  quotas  rather  than  the  actual  quotas.  What  the  outside  world  and  we 
understand by IMF reforms is an outcome that seeks to realign actual quotas in line with current global 
economic realities. We need to resist all attempts to obfuscate this intent. 
Emerging market economies and crisis prevention 
The resilience of emerging market economies has increased with sustained reforms and strong policy 
frameworks.  Most  of  the  emerging  market  economies  have  built  self-insurance  and  enjoy  greater 
market  confidence.  At  the same  time,  these  economies  face several  policy challenges  from time  to 
time,  emanating  from  exogenous  changes  in  global  capital  flows.  The  Fund,  therefore,  needs  to 
reorient its interface with these countries to suit their specific requirements and strengthen its toolkit to 
address typical financing needs of emerging markets. 
In  this  context,  I  note  the  ongoing  discussions  on  the  design  of a  new  liquidity  instrument.  We  see 
merit  in  a  new  liquidity  instrument  of  a  contingent  nature  that  could  strengthen  the  Fund’s  crisis 
prevention  efforts.  It  is  important  that  the  new  instrument  is  created  after  careful  analysis  of  the 
proposed  qualification  criteria  and  other  modalities  so  that  potential  member  countries  become 
convinced about its possible usage.  
Role in low income countries 
The  Fund  should  continue  to  remain  fully  engaged  in  the  multilateral  effort  to  help  its  low-income 
member  countries  achieve  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs)  and  address  the  issues  of 
ensuring  debt  sustainability  with  supportive  policies.  The  recommendations  of  the  Report  of  the 
Independent  Evaluation  Office  on 
the 
recommendations  of  the  Malan  Committee  Report  on  Fund-Bank  Collaboration  provide  scope  for  a 
more effective role of the Fund in low-income countries. 
in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  and 
the  role  of 
the  Fund 
Managing an effective institution 
I welcome the Report by the Committee of Eminent Persons on the Sustainable Financing of the Fund. 
The Report is timely and provides a robust framework for addressing the weaknesses in the current 
financing  model.  Further  deliberations  on  the  Report  need  to  be  conducted  in  conjunction  with  the 
expenditure framework. Some of the recommendations of the Committee, including the proposals to 
invest out of quotas and the part sale of gold are far reaching, and would require careful consideration. 
The  proposal  for  charging  for  Technical  Assistance  would  discourage  its  use  in  several  needy 
countries and we therefore, do not support it. We look forward to working toward an efficient, equitable 
and sustainable income model for the Fund that aligns with its medium-term strategy.  
Developments in the constituency 
Let me now turn briefly to some key aspects of developments in my constituency. In India, the growth 
rate of GDP has exceeded 9 percent during the last two years, and the prospects for 2007-08 continue 
to be favorable. The savings and investment rates have risen significantly, reinforcing the prospects of 
sustained high growth. Business confidence remains high. Some inflationary pressures have emerged, 
reflecting  both  demand  factors  and  supply  side  constraints.  We  have  already  taken  a  number  of 
measures on the fiscal, monetary and supply sides, which are expected to keep the inflation rate at 
around  the  acceptable  range  of  around  5.5  percent  for  2006-07.  The  current  account  situation  is 
manageable,  underpinned  by  robust  exports  and  invisible  receipts,  and  capital  flows.  The  fiscal 
performance  for  2006-07  improved  over  the  previous  year  and  the  Budget  for  2007-08  aims  to 
continue  on  the  path  of  fiscal  consolidation  consistent  with  the  objective  of  Fiscal  Responsibility 
legislation. We remain committed to economic reforms, fiscal prudence and monetary stability.  
The Bangladesh economy continues to maintain steady growth and moderate inflation while making 
significant  progress  in  reducing  poverty  and  meeting  the  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs). 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2007
Bangladesh can be singled out as one of the Fund’s success stories under the Poverty Reduction and 
Growth  Facility  (PRGF)  program.  There  has  been  discernible  improvement  in  the  business 
environment  as  reflected  in  the  sustained  flow  of  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI).  The  authorities' 
stewardship of fiscal and monetary policies has been broadly appropriate, as reflected in the falling 
overall fiscal deficit as well as the size of the current account deficit.  
Sri Lanka’s economy registered a GDP growth of over 7 percent in 2006, on top of the 6 per cent 
growth  in  2005.  The  outlook  for  2007 remains  strong.  Unemployment  has  declined  to  6.5  per cent. 
Monetary policy has been tightened to curb inflationary pressures. Despite expenditure on Tsunami 
reconstruction, the fiscal deficit has been contained. The balance of payments remain in surplus. The 
government has spelled out its economic policy framework in "Mahinda Chintana – Vision for a New 
Sri Lanka – A Ten Year Horizon 2006-2016", designed to create a vibrant and stable economy, with 
broad based participation and equitable distribution of benefits to all segments of the population. 
The Bhutanese economy is poised to take off on a more sustainable basis with the commissioning of 
the Tala hydroelectric project. As Tala came on stream in July 2006, GDP is expected to increase by 
nearly 14 percent in 2006-07. The current account is expected to improve further and public debt is 
likely  to  drop  significantly.  Monetary  policy  remains  appropriate  to  contain  potential  inflationary 
pressures. 
BIS Review 36/2007 
 5
