Hamad Al-Sayari: Financial planning and wealth management in Saudi Arabia 
Speech by His Excellency Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, on the 
occasion  of  the  graduation  of  the  7th  and  8th  Batches  of  the  Financial  Planning  Program  and  the 
2nd and 3rd Batches of the Wealth Management Program, Riyadh, 17 January 2007. 
 Personal Financial Planning Program. 
Wealth Management Program. 
Dear Audience, 
I am really glad on this blessed day to be with you in this happy occasion to celebrate the graduation 
of the 7th and 8th Batches of the Personal Financial Planning Program, and the 2nd and 3rd batches 
of the Wealth Management Program. 
In pursuance of its key role in developing the banking and financial sector, SAMA has been very keen 
to develop human resources in all financial and banking specializations. To this end, SAMA has made 
many initiatives. It has instructed the IOB to conduct a comprehensive study on the investment sector 
to determine the professional and educational criteria that must be satisfied by personnel involved in 
the  various  areas  of  investment.  The  findings  of  the  study  have  showed  that  all  staff  working  in 
investment and financial intermediation should have certain basic knowledge and skills in these fields. 
To  meet  these  needs,  the  IOB  designed  scientific subjects and standardized tests  on  the basics  of 
investment and stock trading. 
Moreover,  the  findings  have  indicated  that  banks’  customers  are  in  need  of  persons  specialized  in 
offering  financial  advisory  services.  Therefore,  the  IOB  has  worked  on  developing  two  programs, 
namely, 
• 
• 
These  two  programs  have  been  designed  according  to  the  latest  international  scientific  standards. 
They  have  been  designed  after  the  model  of  capabilities  required  in  a  successful  and  professional 
financial  planner and wealth  manager. A  number  of members  of  the  training staff  in  the  Institute  of 
Banking  have  participated  in  this  process,  and  experts  have  also  been  hired  from  prestigious 
universities and educational institutions outside the Kingdom. As a result of this model, more than ten 
programs in financial planning and four programs in wealth management have been carried out. The 
programs have been commended by Saudi banks.  
Dear Attendance, 
Management  of  investment  operations  requires  specialists  enjoying  necessary  knowledge,  required 
skills, and professional conduct. The role of a financial advisor has gained more importance, and it 
should  be  practiced  by  qualified  professionals  who  care,  in  the  first  place,  for  the  interests  of  their 
customers who have put their confidence in them, and they should comply with the application of the 
policies of the supervisory authorities and financial institutions to which they belong. The importance of 
transparency and responsibility increases with the increase in investment awareness and competition 
among  financial  institutions.  Here  arises  the  evident  need  to  develop  standards  and  ethics  of  the 
profession and to implement such standards in a very professional and scientific integrity. 
Dear Graduates,  
The responsibility entrusted to you must be borne with professional enthusiasm and competence. The 
knowledge you have acquired through your training here is only part of the cherished objective. The 
more  important  requirement  is  to  conduct  yourselves  in  a  sound  professional  manner,  comply  with 
regulations, and invest your capabilities and knowledge to attain real professionalism. 
May Allah render your knowledge useful to you and your country. I wish you all success, and may God 
bless you. 
BIS Review 14/2007 
 1
