Donald L Kohn: Asset-pricing puzzles, credit risk, and credit derivatives  
Remarks by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at the Conference on Credit Risk and Credit Derivatives, Washington DC, 22 March 2007. 
 Good  afternoon.  I  am  pleased  to  participate  in  the  Board’s  conference  on  credit  risk  and  credit 
derivatives. Song Han, Matt Pritsker, and Hao Zhou have worked hard to put together a stimulating 
program  of  cutting-edge  research  in  this  area.1 Your  conference  focuses  on  improving  our 
understanding of credit risk and credit derivatives, but I will begin my talk by taking a step back and 
discussing  a  wider  range  of  asset  markets,  in  which  our  understanding  is  also  limited.  Then  I  will 
examine  how  the  research  in  this  conference  can  help  sharpen  our  focus  on  this  broader  range  of 
asset markets. 
At the Federal Reserve, we have considerable interest in credit risk and credit derivatives. As these 
markets develop and become more complete, they facilitate risk transfer and diversification, thereby 
increasing  the  resilience  of  our  financial  system.  With  participants  coming  to  rely  more  on  these 
markets to manage risk, we have focused increasingly on their liquidity and structure. We have worked 
closely  with  the  private  sector  to  strengthen  the  clearing  and  settlement  infrastructure  and  to 
understand how these markets will function under stress. 
But  my  emphasis  today  will  be  not  the  structure  or  mechanics  of  credit  markets  but  rather  the 
information contained in the prices we observe in these markets. We at the Federal Reserve use this 
information in nearly every area of our responsibility. For example, in our roles as bank supervisors 
and  protectors  of  financial  stability,  we  monitor  the  credit  spreads  of  financial  institutions  as  early 
warning  signs  of  possible  financial  stress.  In  our  role  as  monetary  policy  makers,  we  analyze 
information  from  credit-risk  markets  to  get  readings  on  the  cost  of  capital  to  businesses  and  on 
forward-looking indicators of the health of the corporate sector that can have implications for future 
macroeconomic developments.  
Extracting information from asset prices  
As a consequence, the staff at the Federal Reserve puts considerable effort into research on asset 
prices and into reporting the results of that research to policymakers. One reason we do so is to try to 
understand  the  expectations  that  households,  businesses,  and  market  participants  have  about  the 
future.  Expectations  are  critical  to  understanding  the  economy  and  developments  in  the  financial 
system. Of course, we look at a great deal of data from the nonfinancial side of the economy, such as 
gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and changes in the prices of goods 
and services. These data certainly reflect expectations but not always in a transparent way. And, these 
data take some time to compile and so are never available in real time.  
Because  financial  asset  prices  embody  expectations  about  the  future,  they  also  contain  forward-
looking  information  about  prospective  developments,  and  many  are  available  continuously  and 
instantaneously. We pay attention to an extensive range of asset prices, including those of Treasury 
securities (both nominal and real), corporate debt and equities, and derivatives. Although it is not easy, 
we use these asset prices to tease out information about expectations that help us to interpret and 
predict the pace of economic activity and prices. 
The price of an asset reflects the future cash flows that investors expect to receive from owning that 
asset. The price also reflects a risk premium, which is the excess expected return over the risk-free 
rate  that  investors  require  for  holding  risky  assets  in  their  portfolios.  Each  asset’s  risk  premium 
depends  on  the  asset’s  risk  –  as  measured  by  the  possible  variability  of  its  cash  flows  from  their 
expected level – and on investors' risk aversion, which represents the extent of investors’ appetite for 
risk.  And  we  try  to  measure  and  understand  the  elements  of  the  risk  premium,  in  addition  to  the 
embedded expectations.  
                                                      
1   Mike Gibson, Song Han, Matt Pritsker, and Hao Zhou, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks. 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 1
In  equity  markets,  corporate  earnings  are  the  future  cash  flows  that  affect  equity  prices.  Given  the 
market’s  outlook  for  corporate  earnings  –  as  embodied,  for  example,  in  the  predictions  of  market 
analysts – we make a crude estimate of the risk premium on equities as the difference between the 
ratio of trend earnings to price and a real long-term Treasury yield. On occasion, we go further and 
use structural economic models to decompose the risk premium into components related to risk and to 
investors’ risk appetite. 
In  the  credit  market,  the  relevant  future  cash  flows  are  the  coupons  on  corporate  debt,  less  an 
allowance for expected losses from future defaults. In one exercise, we forecast future defaults with a 
simple  regression  model  and  estimate  the  credit-risk  premium  as  the  difference  between  corporate 
yields and Treasury yields that is in excess of what would be required to compensate investors for 
their estimates of expected credit losses. We also estimate a term structure of credit-risk premiums by 
repeating  this  analysis  using  debt  that  has  different  maturities.  To  judge  what  market  prices  of  risk 
might be telling us, we try to understand how the resulting credit-risk premiums relate to other sources 
of information, such as the strength of business balance sheets, historical levels of risk premiums, and 
premiums  observed  in  related  markets,  like  that  for  equities.  This  approach  helps  us  to  assess  the 
current attitudes and expectations of market participants as well as possible future movements in risk 
premiums under alternative scenarios. 
We  look  to  prices  in  Treasury  markets  and  in  markets  for  interest  rate  options  and  futures  to  infer 
investors’ expected future path of monetary policy and their uncertainty about that path. To do so, we 
need to model term premiums to tease out the links between long-term interest rates and investors’ 
expectations of future short-term rates. We also compare the Treasury yield curve with the prices on 
Treasury inflation-protected securities to infer expected inflation, a key variable tracked by monetary 
policy makers. 
Although  we  use  a  variety  of  techniques  for  extracting  information  from  asset  prices,  what  we  can 
learn  has  limits.  First,  asset  prices  are  tough  to  work  with.  They  change  rapidly  and  are  subject  to 
short-run technical factors – swings in prices that are not related to fundamental and persistent shifts 
in supply and demand. Second, and perhaps even more important, how asset prices embody risk and 
investors’  risk  attitudes  is  complicated  and  varies  over  time.  We  must  use  models  to  extract 
information  on  risk  and  risk  preferences  from  prices,  and  because  all  models  are  simplifications  of 
reality, we have to recognize that the results are only approximations of the underlying attitudes and 
circumstances and thus are subject to error. 
Asset-pricing puzzles 
Researchers  are  well  aware  of  the  difficulties  of  decomposing  an  asset’s  required  return  into 
components  that  are  related  to  expected  future  cash  flows,  risk  aversion,  and  risk.  Moreover,  risk 
preferences that should be related in a predictable way across markets often do not appear to be so. 
For  example,  the  risk  preferences  required  to  fit  consumption  data  from  the  goods  market  are 
inconsistent with the risk preferences implied by prices in the equity market. 
This  problem  is  well  known  to  most  economists  and  to  everyone  in  this  room  and  is  known  as  the 
"equity-premium puzzle." The equity premium is defined as the return that an investor expects to earn 
on a broad equity index in excess of the return on a U.S. Treasury security. Although theory suggests 
that the equity premium should be related to investors’ risk preferences as well as the fundamental 
volatility of the corporate sector, it is difficult to find plausible risk preferences that can rationalize the 
high level of the historical equity premium. Also, we observe that required returns appear to vary over 
time, but we do not understand all the reasons for the fluctuation. Both of these problems complicate 
our  interpretation  of  what  implications,  if  any,  movements  in  equity  markets  have  for  the 
macroeconomy. 
The  equity-premium  puzzle  is  not  the  only  aspect  of  the  behavior  of  financial  asset  prices  that  is 
difficult  to  reconcile with  economic  theory  or  experience  in  related  markets.  A  second  puzzle  is  the 
"credit-spread puzzle." The spread between a corporate bond and a similar-maturity Treasury bond 
compensates an investor for the risk that the bond’s issuer will default and recoveries on the defaulted 
bond will be low. Credit-risk spreads vary substantially over the cycle, and right now they are on the 
low side of historical experience. However, over long periods, actual percentage losses on corporate 
bonds have been well below historical averages of credit spreads at all maturities, especially in the 
high-grade, short-maturity segment of the market. Again, it is difficult to reconcile this observation with 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2007
standard models of investor preferences. Other explanatory factors, such as the different tax treatment 
of corporate and Treasury bonds, appear to explain only part of the puzzle. 
A third puzzle concerns the behavior of financial market volatility. Volatility and measures of expected 
volatility derived from options prices vary over time but not in ways that are easy to link to economic 
fundamentals  or  to  the  variation  of  expected  returns  in  asset  markets.  Moreover,  the  relationship 
between financial market volatility and the volatility of macroeconomic variables such as GDP is not 
well understood. 
A  fourth  puzzle  related  to  the  pricing  of  risk  concerns  the  term  premium,  which  is  the  additional 
compensation  that  investors  require  to  hold  longer-term  securities.  We  estimate  from  the  Treasury 
market that the term premium has declined substantially in recent years to unusually low levels, which 
has contributed to the inversion of the yield curve. But we do not understand why, and consequently 
we do not know to what extent we are seeing a permanent decline in the term premium – perhaps due 
to a general reduction in the volatility of economic activity and inflation over the past twenty-five years. 
Or we may be seeing a temporary decline due to the influence of recent macroeconomic conditions or 
special factors affecting the demand for long-term bonds. 
In addition to these well-known puzzles, are also a large number of puzzles across all asset markets 
that I will group under the common theme of risk harmonization. Risk-harmonization puzzles concern 
whether a given risk is priced the same way in all markets in which that risk is traded. In the absence 
of transaction costs, broadly defined, the law of one price should hold – there should be no risk-free 
arbitrage – and all risks should be priced the same way in all markets. 
In  fact,  risk  harmonization  is  limited  because  transaction  costs,  viewed  in  a  broad  way,  are  quite 
material in many markets. A broad notion of transaction costs includes not only the direct fees paid 
when transacting and trading but also the full set of risks that are involved when arbitraging among 
markets.  These  include  various  types  of  basis  risk,  which  is  the  risk  that  long  and  short  positions 
exposed to the same risk in different markets might not offset each other. Another important risk is 
model risk, which is the risk of misjudging an apparent price anomaly when trading owing to not having 
the  correct  model.  Some  of  the  conference  papers  focus  on  markets  in  which  risk  harmonization 
appears to be incomplete. 
How the common lens of credit risk improves our understanding 
Papers in this conference contribute to our overall understanding of how credit risk, as well as other 
risks such as those associated with volatility and liquidity, are priced in financial markets. One of the 
contributions of the conference is that it views many of the asset-pricing puzzles through the common 
lens  of  credit  risk.  This  approach  holds  the  hope  of  addressing  the  various  puzzles  in  an  internally 
consistent way that helps us to understand how the puzzles may be related. 
One  strand  of  the  literature  on  the  equity-premium  puzzle  attempts  to  explain  the  puzzle  with  a 
somewhat  controversial  refinement  of  standard  risk  preferences.  The  first  paper  in  the  conference 
examines the plausibility of these preferences by analyzing whether they can also explain the average 
pattern of credit spreads in the bond market. The results are mixed. Part of the credit-spread puzzle is 
explained, lending some credence to these preferences, and suggesting the two puzzles are related, 
but a part remains unexplained. And the paper identifies better modeling of the situation in which firms 
are forced into default as one research direction that may help to explain the remaining part of the 
credit-spread puzzle. This research direction is pursued in a separate paper in the conference. 
A second paper at the conference also studies the relationship between equity prices and credit risk 
but does so from a different perspective by asking whether credit risk is appropriately priced in the 
stock  markets.  To  address  this  question,  it  focuses  on  companies  that  are  heavily  exposed  to 
systematic risk of financial distress – that is, they are relatively likely to experience financial distress 
during future downturns – and then studies whether the stocks earn a positive premium for this risk. 
The main finding is that investors in those companies do not earn a premium for distress risk in the 
stock market. This result suggests a possible failure of risk harmonization in the stock market, which in 
turn raises the deeper question of identifying why this failure in risk harmonization is not arbitraged 
away. 
In short, papers in the conference deepen our knowledge of some of the asset-pricing puzzles, but 
they also highlight new aspects of the puzzles that remain to be explained. 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 3
How credit derivatives markets can improve our understanding  
This leads to my last topic, which is how credit derivatives markets provide new ways for us to uncover 
market perceptions of risk. Like all derivatives (such as options and swaps), credit derivatives allow for 
credit risk to be unbundled and traded independently from other types of risk, which makes it easier to 
price and measure the different types of risk. Here I will focus on two examples. 
The first involves our ability to infer the market's perception of default risk. In the bad old days, about 
ten years ago, the best way to infer credit risk was from the prices of corporate bonds, but bond prices 
are  contaminated  by  differences  in  coupons,  taxes,  option-like  features,  bond  covenants,  and  the 
illiquidity  of  the  corporate  bond  market  itself.  All  of  these  features  meant  that  the  modeling  error 
involved in the process resulted in credit-risk measures that were noisy and potentially biased. 
Now, instead of looking to the bond market to measure default risk, we are increasingly turning to the 
market for credit default swaps, or CDS. CDS are more standardized than corporate bonds, and, over 
time,  they  have  also  become  more  liquid.  They  therefore  provide  us  with  new,  and  in  many  cases 
more  precise,  measures  of  credit  risk.  These  measures  in  turn  can  sharpen  our  measures  of  the 
pricing puzzles. In addition, because the CDS market helps us to strip out the credit-risk component 
from  bond  prices,  that  market  also  gives  us  a  clearer  picture  of  how  important  non-credit-risk 
components of bond prices, such as liquidity, are priced. 
The  second  example  involves  the  pricing  of  default  correlation.  Default  correlation  measures  the 
tendency of firms to default at the same time. Suppose a bank makes a set of loans that appear to be 
safe when looked at individually. Whether the loans are likely to default at nearly the same time can 
represent the difference between whether the bank remains healthy or has the potential to become 
insolvent.  For  this  reason,  the  modeling  of  default  correlations,  and  how  correlations  change  with 
economic conditions, is one of the most important inputs into measures of portfolio credit risk at banks. 
Default correlations and how they are modeled are also important to bank regulators and are heavily 
emphasized within the Basel II capital standards. 
Collateralized debt obligations, or CDOs, are one of a number of financial instruments whose prices 
are sensitive to the pattern of default correlations. As a result, the prices of these instruments provide 
us with a forward-looking picture of the market’s perception of default correlations and an indication of 
how the risks of changes in correlation are priced. Of course, as some of the papers in the conference 
demonstrate, the pricing of correlation-sensitive instruments is, putting it generously, somewhat less 
than  straightforward.  For  that  reason,  there  is  substantial  model  risk  involved  in  making  inferences 
from  these  prices.  Nevertheless,  the  prices  of  these  instruments  provide  a  blurry  view  of  default 
correlations that I expect will improve through time as credit derivatives markets continue to grow and 
mature. 
Credit derivatives, like all derivatives, are in zero net supply, and, abstracting from the very important 
issue of counterparty credit risk, they neither add to nor subtract from the stock of financial risk in the 
economy. They do, however, provide new and more-efficient ways for sharing and hedging the risks 
that do exist, and they facilitate the transfer of those risks to those who are most willing to evaluate 
and bear them.  
As a consequence, as the credit derivatives market continues to develop and deepen, my guess, and 
it is just a guess, is that cleaner measures of credit risk will, all else being equal, reduce the costs of 
arbitraging between markets and will improve the harmonization of risk across markets – one of the 
asset-pricing puzzles I highlighted. 
Two of the other puzzles I described earlier are the credit-spread and equity-premium puzzles. At least 
a part of these puzzles may be due to imperfect risk sharing among active market participants. If this is 
indeed  part  of  the  puzzle,  then  financial  innovations  such  as  credit  derivatives  may,  again,  all  else 
being equal, reduce long-run average risk premiums in both the equity and credit markets, over time, 
by  facilitating  risk  sharing  among  currently  active  market  participants,  provided  that  participants 
adequately  understand  and  manage  the  risk  of  these  products.  That  said,  time  will  tell  whether  my 
speculations on this point are correct. 
Conclusion 
My  message  to  you  today  has  been  that  the  Federal  Reserve  places  a  lot  of  emphasis  on 
understanding financial asset prices to help it meet its public policy objectives. But in doing so, we are 
handicapped by the extent to which we do not understand important aspects of how financial assets 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2007
are priced. Your work as researchers in this field – a portion of which is show-cased at this conference 
– has been helpful in beginning to explain some of the puzzles, and more recent techniques and ideas 
together with the data series being generated in new markets hold the promise of more progress in the 
future. 
So,  I  will  not  keep  you  from  your  work  any  longer.  Your  contributions  are  important  to  the  nation’s 
central bank. Please, go solve some puzzles.  
BIS Review 28/2007 
 5
