Njuguna Ndung’u: Banking sector developments in Kenya 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  official 
opening of the Nakuru Branch of Fina Bank Limited, Nakuru, 26 July 2007. 
 The Chairman, Members of the Board of Directors; 
Mr. Frank Griffiths, Group Chief Executive, Fina Bank; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I wish to begin by thanking the Board and Management of Fina Bank Limited for extending 
an invitation to the Governor of the Central Bank to preside over the official opening of the 
Nakuru Branch of Fina Bank. Due to prior engagements, the Governor regrets that he could 
not attend this function, and has requested me to represent him today. I therefore wish to 
now turn to the Governor’s remarks intended for this gathering. 
1. 
Mr.  Chairman,  this  invitation  is  indeed  a  great  honour  for  the  Central  Bank,  and  I 
wish to thank you most sincerely for this gesture. As the regulatory authority for the 
banking sector, we are pleased to be associated with the achievements of the banks 
we  regulate,  particularly  where  these  developments  lead  to  increased  access  to 
banking services for the Kenyan public. 
In the case of FINA Bank, it is evident that this event is part of a long journey in the 
bank’s program of expansion and growth. I have been reliably informed that FINA 
Bank  started  its  operations  as  a  non-bank  financial  institution  and  later  converted 
into  a  commercial  bank.  I  note  that  the  bank  has  embarked  on  an  ambitious 
expansion strategy to solidify its position not just in the country but also in the East 
African region. Our presence here today is a testimony of this strategy. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Kenya’s  economy  has  experienced  tremendous  growth  in 
recent  years,  with  real  GDP  growing  at  6.1%  in  2006.  This  achievement  is 
collaborated  by  the  improved  performance  of  the  Banking  Sector  in  Kenya.  The 
Sector  remained  stable  in  2006  with  positive  developments  recorded  in  all  key 
financial  indicators.  Total  assets  expanded  by  19.5%  from  Kshs.  640  billion  as  at 
December  2005  to  Kshs.  760  billion  as  at  December  2006.  As  a  result  of  the 
improved  performance,  the  level  of  non-performing  advances  declined  from  the 
previous year’s level of 99 billion to 95 billion as at end of December 2006. 
Kenyan’s long term vision, dubbed the Vision 2030, targets a sustained economic 
growth of over 10 percent per annum over the next 25 years. In order to contribute 
to  the  achievement  of  these  aspirations,  the  financial  sector  has  to  play  a  clearly 
defined role, particularly in mobilising resources required to finance the 20 flagship 
projects worth Ksh 500 billion that will be required over the next five years. This is a 
significant budget, equivalent to Kenya’s annual budget and hence the need for a 
strong and vibrant financial sector that will help channelling these savings into the 
required investments. It is with this in mind that the Government is requiring banks 
to double their efforts in building a solid capital base capable of supporting product 
innovation,  savings  mobilisation  and  expanded  access  of  financial  services  to  the 
Kenyan public. Let me add that the heavy infusion of public investment to attract and 
enhance  private  sector  investment  will  be  important  to  continue  the  economic 
growth acceleration. 
Although  physical  bank  branch  expansion  programs  play  an  important  role  in 
expanding access, it will be important for the banking sector to complement these 
programs with increased product innovation. The real challenge for all of us is how 
to  enhance  savings  mobilisation,  and  effectively  channel  society’s  savings  to  its 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS Review 90/2007 
 1
most productive use. We, at the Central Bank would like to encourage banks to offer 
an  expanded  range  of  banking  products  in  order  to  mobilise  savings  to  support 
financing  of  economic  activities  in  the  country.  This  will  also  provide  acceptable 
options to the investing public who are currently falling prey to schemes being touted 
by  unscrupulous  business  people  in  the  form  of  pyramid  schemes.  We  need  to 
guard  our  successes  from  these  pyramid  schemes  menace.  We  will  rely  on  the 
screening and monitoring roles of the commercial banks like yours to eradicate this 
menace and with the appropriate savings and investment products in place. 
The banking sector in this country has, over the last few years, witnessed significant 
growth in consumer lending. This is evidenced by the growth in real private sector 
credit of 17.7 % in the twelve months to May 2007. The resultant credit expansion 
has brought significant benefits to the economy, but the information asymmetry that 
is prevailing in the lending environment poses a real challenge in the form of credit 
risk for the banking sector in Kenya. 
In  order  to  mitigate  this  risk  and  promote  effective  credit  provision,  consumer 
protection  and  strong  institutions  for  these  aspects,  the  Central  Bank  has  been 
working  towards  the  development  of  a  credit  information  sharing  mechanism  in 
Kenya.  The  Banking  Act  has  recently  been  amended  to  make  it  mandatory  for 
institutions  licensed  under  the  Banking  Act  to  share  credit  information  on 
nonperforming loans. In this regard, the Central Bank has, in consultation with the 
Kenya  Bankers  Association,  prepared  relevant  regulations,  which  will  soon  be 
gazetted  in  order  to  provide  a  framework  for  the  licensing  and  operation  of  credit 
reference bureaus under the Banking Act. We will expect banks to make effective 
use of this mechanism as a credit analysis tool before extending any credit. 
The Central Bank recognises the need to bring the legal framework for regulating 
the banking sector up to speed with international developments. In consultation with 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association,  the  Central  has 
undertaken a comprehensive review of the Banking Act in order to align it to the best 
international  practices  and  address  some  of  the  weaknesses  which  have  been 
identified  over  time.  We  anticipate  that  once  enacted,  the  legal  framework  will 
provide a conducive environment for a more robust banking sector. 
Allow  me  to  conclude  my  remarks  by  appealing  to  banks  to  explore  ways  of 
enhancing  the  efficiency  in  service  delivery.  By  enhancing  efficiency  banks  are 
capable  of  offering  more  affordable  banking  services.  This  has  the  potential  of 
drawing  a  larger  number  of  Kenyans  to  the  financial  system  resulting  in  an 
expanded banking clientele. Following the recent study on cost of banking services, 
the Central Bank will soon be launching the results of the survey and a sensitisation 
program to educate the public for more effective market discipline. We believe that 
these  measures  will  encourage  efficiency  in  the  banking  sector  and  resultant 
lowering of bank costs for the benefit of both the banks and the economy. 
Finally,  let me  extend  my  gratitude  to  the  Board  of  Directors  for inviting  me  to  be 
with you on this auspicious occasion of the opening of the Nakuru Branch of FINA 
Bank. 
It now gives me great pleasure and honour to declare the Nakuru Branch of FINA 
Bank officially open. Thank you all for your attention. 
BIS Review 90/2007
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
2 
 