Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Overview of financial and economic developments in Sri 
Lanka  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ajith  Nivard  Cabraal,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
Opening  of  the  Financial  Services  Academy  at  the  Centre  for  Banking  Studies,  Rajagiriya, 
5 March 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Today  we  all  have  gathered  here  to  witness  an important  step  towards the  development  of  the 
financial  landscape  and  knowledge  pool  of  the  country,  the  establishment  of  the  Financial 
Services Academy, a landmark organization that we hope, would shape the future of our financial 
services industry. 
As we know, the Sri Lankan economy recorded a growth of 7.8 per cent in the first three quarters of 
2006 and according to current available data, it is very likely that the economic growth in 2006 would 
be well over 7 per cent. This will be the highest since 1978. Towards such growth, the contribution of 
the  services  sector  was  easily  the  highest  and  of  such  high  growth  sector,  the  growth  in  financial 
services was highly significant. 
It  is  therefore  widely  acknowledged  that  the  contribution  of  the  financial  sector  for  the 
achievement  of  growth  of  the  country  is  enormous,  and whatever we  do  in  that  connection, 
would be of overall immense value.  
The  developments  in  the  financial  sector  also  helps  the  economic  growth  through  several  other 
channels  as  well:  It  improves  the  efficiency  of  business  processes,  attracts  investment,  reduces 
unemployment and enhances access to finance, to name a few. 
We are happy that during the recent years, our financial sector has also improved in every respect. 
This  is  clearly  evident  when  we  look  around  the  financial  institutions,  financial  markets  and  the 
developments in financial infrastructure.  
Within the last five years, assets of the licensed banks in the country doubled. Altogether, there has 
been an addition of over 400 branches of these banks. Other financial institutions including Registered 
Finance  Companies,  Leasing  Companies,  Insurance  Companies,  Merchant  banks,  Venture  capital 
firms and Unit Trusts have also grown in sympathy with the banking sector. 
At the same time, we have also progressed rapidly in the financial infrastructure developments as well. 
This is particularly visible with the leap forward in the Payment System development as evidenced by 
the implementation of a Real Time Gross Settlement System in 2003. Now, 84 per cent of the value of 
country’s payments are settled through the RTGS system. In 2006, we completed the Cheque Image 
Truncation project, reducing the maximum cheque clearance time to 2 working days, which is another 
significant  achievement.  The  Colombo  Stocks  Exchange  remains  one  of  the  most  technically 
advanced stock exchanges of the world. Soon, we will also have a SWIFT Service Bureau in Sri Lanka 
and that will help to reduce cost of financial transactions. 
Together with these infrastructure developments, our banking system has expanded their horizons by 
introducing several innovative infrastructure facilities and complex financial products as well. The ATM 
network of the country has doubled during the last five years and the number of credit cards in use 
have more than tripled. Improvements in Internet banking, tele-banking and mobile banking facilities 
are very significant and the progress is mind-boggling.  
There  have  been  significant  improvements  in  financial  markets  too.  With  the  introduction  of 
LankaSecure,  the  Scripless  Securities  Settlement  System,  in  2004,  government  securities  are 
transacted on Delivery versus Payments (DvP) basis and now nearly 27,000 beneficiary accounts are 
maintained  at  the  LankaSecure.  Recently  we  also  allowed  foreigners  to  own  5%  of  government 
securities through a new TIERA account that we introduced, and so far, foreigners have purchased 
US$ 55 million worth of Treasury bonds. This is a new instrument that has enhanced liquidity in the 
capital market 
Developments in the foreign exchange market are also immense. Helped by the continuous growth in 
imports  and  exports,  and  specially  with  the  recorded  improvement  in  migrant  earnings,  values  and 
BIS Review 24/2007 
 1
volumes  of  forex  transactions  through  formal  channels  have  improved  significantly  during  recent 
years.  The  initiatives  we  are  taking  will  also  improve  this  sector  further  in  the  years  to  come.  In 
conjunction with these improvements, banks have now stepped forward to introduce new derivative 
instruments  to  the  market.  As  you  all  know,  CPC  has  now  started  to  use  hedging  mechanisms  to 
minimize the exchange rate exposure, which we expect that would be followed soon by other large 
public and private sector organizations. 
Performance of the Share Market has of course been spectacular. The Colombo Stock Market has 
gained by 35% on average during the past 5 years. The growth during the last year was over 50% and 
the trend has continued so far during the year. With the expansion of CSE to regional cities such as 
Matara and Kandy, the contribution of outstation customers in stock market activities have increased 
significantly and this trend should be encouraged. 
However in comparison to other regional countries, our Insurance penetration rate is still low, although 
the developments in the industry during recent years have been impressive. 
As  the  country  observes  these  developments  in  the financial  sector,  the  regulatory  mechanism  has 
strengthened  as  it  should  be.  The  Central  Bank  continues  to  supervise  the  banking  sector,  finance 
companies,  leasing  companies,  and  money  changers.  Stock  exchanges  and  stock  brokers  are 
regulated by the SEC. IBSL has the role of regulating the Insurance Industry. 
All these developments have necessitated more and more people who are skilled, knowledgeable and 
trained on financial services. As stated in the bestseller of Robert Kiyosaki, the reason as to why most 
of  the  poor  and  middle  class  people  financially  struggle,  while  the  rich  continue  to  remain  rich  for 
generations,  is  mainly  because  of  the  lack  of  financial  intelligence  and  insight,  as  the  real  financial 
education is usually conveyed by parents to their children and not taught formally at schools. Perhaps, 
this applies not only to individuals but to countries as well. May be, one of the reasons as to why we 
remain under-developed while developed countries progress faster, may be because of our shortage 
of human capital, with specific and adequate financial insights and awareness. If this situation is to be 
rectified,  we  need  to  develop  well  financially-educated  people  to  operate  financial  institutions.  We 
need well trained people to regulate these institutions.  
We need the investors to master the art of investment. All in all, we need our future generations to 
acquire sufficient financial knowledge.  
At the same time, I hope the knowledge that would be disseminated by this newly formed FSA would, 
also be valuable to change the attitudes of our financial journalists as well. In that regard, I hope that 
some of these courses may provide opportunities for our journalists too, to better understand financial 
service related subjects so that they will be able to provide a more meaningful interpretation of such 
matters. That too would, hopefully, enhance the general public’s understanding of financial operations 
and I look forward to such an outcome as well. 
As we all know there is today a vast majority of people who lack the knowledge to take advantage of 
the enormous opportunities that may be actually right in front of them. I think we have now taken the 
initiative  to  rectify  that  situation.  The  Financial  Services  Academy,  established  today,  jointly  by  the 
SEC  and  the  IBSL  is  a  great  move  in  that  direction,  and  I  hope  that  the  FSA  would  grow  to  be  a 
leading institution in financial education not only in Sri Lanka but also in the region.  
2 
 BIS Review 24/2007
