Rundheersing Bheenick: Consolidating the overall supervision of the financial 
sector in Mauritius 
Speech by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on the occasion 
of the Signature of a Protocole D’Accord and Launching Ceremony of the Joint BOM/FSC 
Coordination Committee, Port Louis, 12 July 2007. 
 Members of the Board of Directors of the Bank of Mauritius and of the Financial Services 
Commission 
The Chief Executive of the Financial Services Commission 
Chairman of the Mauritius Bankers Association 
Operators in the Non-bank Sector 
Staff of the FSC and Bank of Mauritius 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great honour and indeed a pleasure for me to welcome you all to the signature of a 
Protocole  D’Accord  and  the  launching  ceremony  of  a  Joint  Bank  of  Mauritius/Financial 
Services Commission Coordination Committee in an effort to promote a more structured and 
active collaboration and coordination between the two regulatory and supervisory authorities. 
You  will  appreciate  that,  as  financial  institutions  increasingly  operate  globally  and  diversify 
their businesses, it has become important in the interest of financial stability for supervisory 
bodies  to  oversee  the  safety  and  soundness  of  these  institutions  on  a  consolidated  basis. 
While the Bank of Mauritius has the lead supervisory responsibility for the banking and non-
bank deposit-taking sectors, there is an urgent need to conduct consolidated supervision to 
complement the supervision of licensed entities on a solo basis. This will contribute to a more 
accurate assessment of the risks to which a financial institution may be exposed. 
Responding to the changes in the financial services industry, the Bank of Mauritius and the 
Financial  Services  Commission  have  agreed  to  collaborate  more  closely  with  a  view  to 
consolidating  the  overall  supervision  of  the  financial sector.  As  consolidated  supervision  is 
undoubtedly  an  essential  element  of  effective  financial  sector  supervision,  we  are  today 
formalizing this process of collaboration and co-operation between the Bank of Mauritius and 
the Financial Services Commission through the signature of a Protocole D’Accord and the 
setting up of a Joint BOM/FSC Coordination Committee. The main purpose of the Protocole 
D’Accord  will  be  to  expand  on  the  scope  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MOU) 
signed between the two regulatory and supervisory bodies in December 2002. The Protocole 
D’Accord  makes  further  provision  for  the  parties  to  agree  on  the  extent  of  their 
responsibilities  and  harmonization  of  their  procedures  with  respect  to  financial  institutions 
which  are  regulated  by  both  institutions.  The  Memorandum  of  Understanding  sets  out  a 
framework  of  co-operation  between  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the  Financial  Services 
Commission in their common pursuit to maintain a safe, efficient and stable financial system 
in  Mauritius.  Both  supervisory  bodies  will,  under  the  terms  of  the  MOU,  work  in  close 
collaboration to ensure the setting up of appropriate arrangements to respond to threats to 
financial stability, to coordinate information sharing and avoid duplication. 
Financial stability remains a major concern to both the Bank of Mauritius and the Financial 
Services  Commission,  given  their  statutory  responsibilities  to  supervise  and  regulate  the 
financial markets. Achieving financial stability is not a destination but rather a journey. It is an 
on-going concern for both regulators given the continuous developments and challenge s in 
the  economic  environment.  Presently,  our  financial  sector  is  under  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory purview of these two bodies. Currently, the asymmetry of information makes it 
difficult to evaluate the state of financial stability. As the final resting place of risk is hard to 
observe, as regulators, we can at least try, through this collaboration, to track its passage 
through  the  markets.  There  are,  therefore,  compelling  reasons  for  both  authorities  to 
BIS Review 81/2007 
 1
strengthen collaboration with a view to improving the sharing of information relevant to their 
respective responsibilities. 
The process of effective consolidated supervision involves qualitative as well as quantitative 
dimensions.  Supervisors  must  therefore  be  aware  of  the  ownership  structure,  the  overall 
organizational  structure,  the  corporate  governance  and  risk  management  systems  and  all 
material risks within a conglomerate. As regulators, we must have knowledge of the entire 
group to properly assess risks which may emanate either from the licensee’s core activities 
or from its affiliation with entities that may or may not be directly regulated. As conglomerates 
are showing increasing interest in banking business, we regulators have the duty to evaluate 
the risks that would spill over directly or indirectly from the non-bank or non-regulated entities 
of the groups. We must by all means avoid supervisory grey areas. Enhancing information 
sharing between regulatory authorities right from the licensing stage helps to minimize the 
risks arising from supervisory gaps. 
As you are aware, Mauritius had undergone two Financial Sector Assessment Programmes 
(FSAP)  by  a  Joint  IMF-World  Bank  Mission  in  recent  years.  The  launching  of  this  Joint 
Coordination  Committee  shows  the  commitment  of  the  regulators  to  promote  best 
international  practices  that  meet  the  expectations  of  international  organizations  and  of  the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision which also advocates that banking groups should 
be supervised on a consolidated basis. 
I now have the pleasure of announcing to you the names of the representatives of the Bank 
of  Mauritius  on  the  Joint  Committee.  Mr.  H.O.  Jankee,  Chief  Economist,  Mrs  N.  Sajadah 
Aujayeb, Legal Officer and Mr G. Gonpot, Senior Bank Officer will represent the Bank on this 
Committee. The Bank of Mauritius and the Financial Services Commission have also agreed 
to the principle of rotating Chairmanship, with the Committee being chaired alternately by the 
Chief Economist of the Bank and the Acting Deputy Chief Executive of the Financial Services 
Commission. 
Let me add that while we are a dynamic sector, we have observed that quite some poaching 
of  staff  goes  around  in  our  sector.  We  do  not  want  this  to  happen  between  our  two 
institutions. Quite a few employees of the FSC have applied for posts at the Bank. 
On this note, I would like to thank you for your presence at the Bank today and look forward 
to your support and collaboration in enabling this Joint Committee achieve its objectives. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2007
