Njuguna Ndung’u: The role of the Central Bank of Kenya in Kenya’s economic 
transformation  
Talking  notes  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
NESC Workshop on the Role of Central Bank in Economic Transformation, Kenya School of 
Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 29 May 2007. 
 Hon. Amos Kimunya, Minister for Finance, Republic of Kenya  
Amb. Francis Muthaura, Permanent Secretary, Head of Civil Service and Secretary to the 
Cabinet,  
Permanent Secretaries,  
Mr. Byung Hwa Kim, Deputy Governor, Bank of Korea,  
Mr. Muhammad Ibrahim, Assistant Governor, Bank Negara Malaysia,  
Mr. Hemraz Oopuddye Jankee, Director of Research, Central Bank of Mauritius,  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I take this opportunity to warmly welcome you all to the Kenya School of Monetary Studies.  
It is also a pleasure to specifically welcome our esteemed visitors from Korea, Malaysia and 
Mauritius who have joined us on this occasion.  
I also wish to thank the National Economic and Social Council (NESC) for their effort so far in 
developing the Vision 2030 that provides a roadmap for Kenya to attain middle income status 
by the year 2030. The Vision, as we have witnessed presented is well thought out. But there 
are still some building blocks required and this forum is one of those. The importance and 
significance of it is to situate the role of Central Bank into the Vision.  
The Central Bank of Kenya is a key institution in this vision and like other key institutions, 
should learn from other successful countries.  
Central  Banks  in  the  Eastern  African  region  seem  to  face  similar  challenges  –  but  the 
important role the CBK is expected to play in the vision 2030 is critical but some challenges 
are evident:  
• 
• 
• 
Effectiveness of monetary policy instruments and fighting inflation.  
Thin markets; foreign exchange and financial markets.  
Problems  of  exogenous  shock  particularly  those  arising  from  bad  weather  and 
volatility in oil prices complicates for price stability.  
Financial sector stability in a global setting.  
• 
This workshop is timely and provides an opportunity for the CBK to re-evaluate its role in the 
Kenyan economic transformation in the context of the Vision 2030. I will come back towards 
the  end  to  tie  up  what  experiences  the  CBK  will  learn  and  adopt  from  the  experiences  of 
those successful cases.  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me wish you productive deliberations and hope that we will find 
the workshop fruitful and informative.  
Please feel free to bring to our attention the kind of facilitation that you may need to make 
this workshop successful.  
Thank you very much.  
BIS Review 78/2007 
 1
