Durmuş Yilmaz: Economic outlook for Turkey 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the Bursa 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Bursa, 11 January 2007. 
 Distinguished industrialists, businessmen, dear guests and members of the press, 
This is the first of the series of meetings planned for 2007, which has become a traditional platform 
aiming at bringing the representatives of the real sector together directly. Firstly, I wish to thank Dünya 
Newspaper and Bursa Chamber of Commerce and Industry for organizing this meeting and thereby 
giving  me  the  opportunity  to  exchange  information  and  views  about  the  economic  outlook  with  the 
distinguished industrialists and businessmen like you. 
In  the  first  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  present  a  general  evaluation  of  the  year  2006  with  a 
special emphasis on inflation, and to explain our policy implementations and to share our forecasts 
regarding  2007  in  the  light  of  the  current  data  available.  Then,  I  would  like, once  more,  to  mention 
about growth, employment and current account deficit that we have shared with the public many times, 
constituting the major items on the economic agenda. I will then elaborate on what should be done in 
this regard in the medium and long term.  
Distinguished Guests, 
The primary objective of the Bank is to achieve and maintain price stability, as laid down in the Central 
Bank law. The Central Bank pursues and will continue to pursue its monetary policy objectives with 
determination  within  the  context  of  its  historical  mission  and  responsibility,  as  stated  in  the  legal 
framework and the guidelines that were determined in 2001. 
In this framework, inflation targets are determined jointly with the government; while the choice of the 
monetary policy tools and their implementation principles are determined by the Central Bank. In other 
words, the Central Bank was provided with the instrumental independence by its law. The instrumental 
independence enables the Central Bank to design and implement its monetary policies with a medium 
term perspective. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Following  the  establishment  of  the  institutional  and  legal  framework  of  the  monetary  policy  in 
accordance with the modern central banking principles, significant steps were taken in the fight against 
inflation.  Thus,  a  rapid  disinflation  process  was  experienced  and  all  of  the  inflation  targets  were 
attained for four consecutive years due to the macroeconomic policies, especially the fiscal policy that 
were implemented consistently with the inflation targets. The inflation rate of 7.7 percent realized at 
the end of 2005 was the lowest figure, which was recorded in the last thirty-five years. 
However, price stability could not have been achieved yet despite all these favorable developments 
and achievements. Our fight against inflation still continues. It should not be forgotten that this is a 
long and challenging process as confirmed by the inflation figures of 2006. 
When we consider the deterioration that inflation brought about both in economic and social life, we 
see that this fight is indispensable and significant; that it is one of the determinant factors in shaping 
the future of an economy, a society, a country on solid foundations. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Now,  let  me  briefly  mention  the  developments  in  inflation  in  2006,  the  basic  reasons  leading  to 
divergence from the target and the applications of the monetary policy within this process. 
2006  has  been  a  year  during  which  supply  shocks,  seasonal  conditions  and  external  factors  were 
determinant on inflation. 
As of the beginning of 2006, an upward trend in inflation was observed especially in the first seven 
months and the annual inflation went up to 11.7 percent in July. 
The  leading  factor  driving  the  inflation  upwards  in  this  period  was  the  soaring  unprocessed  food 
product  prices  as  of  the  end  of  2005  due  to  the  unfavorable  weather  conditions.  Annual  rate  of 
increase in the prices of this group became 21.8 percent in July. 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 1
Fluctuations in the markets and depreciation of the Turkish Lira due to the negativities in the global 
liquidity conditions and the increase in uncertainty perceptions regarding our country during the May-
June  period  led  to  an  increase  in  the  prices  of  commodities  priced  in  foreign  currency  besides 
imported goods and affected inflation figures unfavorably. 
Another important factor that was influential in the first half of 2006 was an accelerated increase in the 
prices  of  crude  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  in  the  international  markets.  This  increase, 
accompanied by the depreciation of the Turkish Lira led to a rise in domestic energy prices and so 
played a key role in increasing the inflation figures. 
A slow-down in price increases has been observed as of August due to the decrease in the prices of 
gold and oil in the international markets, stabilization in the financial markets with the re-appreciation 
of the Turkish Lira and the effect of the decisiveness in the fight against inflation over expectations. 
Nevertheless,  inflation  remained  high  due  to  the  sustained  upward  trend  in  the  unprocessed  food 
products, Ramadan-based effects and the belated reflections of the depreciation experienced in the 
Turkish Lira following that date. 
Looking  at  the  end-year  inflation  in  the  main  expenditures  groups,  we  see  that  the  annual  inflation 
remains below the target in clothing, footwear and communications groups, whereas it goes beyond 
the target in all other groups. 
In this respect, rigidity of inflation in the services group constituted an important handicap against the 
fight against inflation in 2006 as it did in the previous years. End-year inflation became 12.2 percent in 
this  group.  Rents  in  the  services group  showed a great  increase and an annual  inflation  rate  of  20 
percent  remained  above  the  general  consumer  inflation.  Inflation  figure  of  12.9  percent  in 
transportation  services  is  another  important  factor  that  determines  the  inflation  rate  in  the  services 
group. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Consumer prices increased by 0.23 percent on monthly basis and remained below the expectations in 
the last month of 2006 and the year 2006 ended with an annual inflation of single digit as 9.65 percent. 
This  figure  is  well  above  our  end-year  target  of  5  percent.  Although  divergence  from  the  inflation 
targets is experienced in the countries implementing this regime, it is very upsetting for us to observe 
such  a  great  divergence  from  this  target  in  the  first  year  that  we  embarked  on  full-fledged  inflation 
targeting regime. 
As a requisite of the principle of accountability, the detailed “Open Letter” elaborating the reasons of 
this divergence together with the policy measures to be taken will be sent to the government as soon 
as possible and be made public. 
Dear Guests, 
Due  to  the  rapid  increase  in  inflation  in  the  first  seven  months  of  2006,  its  being  quite  higher  than 
expectations  especially  in  April  and  May,  fluctuations  experienced  in  the  financial  markets  and  the 
uncertainty  perceptions  created  by  political  developments,  inflation  expectations  diverged  from  the 
inflation target. Inflation expectations of 12-months increased to 8.1 percent in July from 5.5 percent in 
April; while that of 24 months increased to 6.1 percent in July from 4.7 percent in April. 
Upon the emergence of the possibility of a permanent deterioration in expectations causing inflation to 
diverge from the targets in the medium term, the Monetary Policy Committee made effective use of the 
short-term  interest  rates  as  the  basic  policy  instrument.  Within  this  context,  the  Committee 
implemented a strong tightening policy and increased the policy rates by 425 bps to 17.5 percent in 
the  June-July  period  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  the  deterioration  in  medium  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations and also to render the inflation targets attainable in the medium term. 
Following this strong monetary tightening of the Monetary Policy Committee and the measures taken 
for financial stability, fluctuations in financial markets gradually decreased and medium and long-term 
inflation  expectations  partially  improved.  In  this  regard,  inflation  expectations  of  12  and  24  months 
decreased to 7.1 percent and 5.6 percent respectively, as of the end-2006. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  kept  the  policy  rates  unchanged  in  the  period  between  August- 
December  in  2006  due  to  this  improvement  observed  in  inflation  expectations,  mild  progress  in 
international  liquidity  conditions  and  a  gradually  favorable  outlook  of  the  future  course  of  inflation 
compared to the first half of the year. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2007
Dear Guests, 
I would like to draw your attention to two rather important factors about our decisions regarding short-
term policy rates. 
Firstly,  the  decisions  that  the  Central  Bank  took  regarding  the  short-term  policy  rates  affect  the 
economic activities with a certain lag, as is the case with the other economies. That is why the Bank 
considers  the  course  of  inflation  in  the  medium  term  rather  than  the  current  course  while  taking 
decisions about policy rates. The Bank also pays attention to the consistency of the course of inflation 
in  the  medium  term  with  the  targets.  However,  settlement  of  such  a  medium-term  approach  in  the 
countries  having  experienced  chronic  inflation  for  a  long  time  like  ours  takes  time  and  this  is  an 
important handicap for the fight against inflation. Therefore, recognition and adoption of the medium-
term approach by all units within the economy bears great importance so that policy decisions can be 
interpreted accurately and implemented effectively. Thus, we put special emphasis on this subject in 
all reports and announcements made by the Bank. 
Secondly, the Bank makes use of a wide set of data in order to foresee the medium-term course of 
inflation. The Bank publishes an “Inflation Report” quarterly. This report announces to the public the 
numerical  inflation  forecasts  with  a  medium-term  approach  together  with  the  consistent  policy 
response. However, all the new information we obtain and all the new developments can change our 
projections and numerical inflation forecasts regarding the course of inflation. The forecasts published 
by the Bank should be evaluated within this framework and it should be noted that they can change 
when the conditions regarding economic environment change. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Now I would like to briefly talk about the significant factors, which may affect the outlook of inflation. 
First  of  all,  the  support  of  the  private  consumption  demand  for  inflation  in  a  downward  direction, 
caused by the tight monetary policy stance, is expected to continue in forthcoming period. 
Although the developments in the crude oil prices which have strong repercussions on the course of 
inflation  has  indicated  a  positive  outlook  recently,  oil  and  energy  prices  still  constitute  a  major  risk 
factor that can affect inflation targets. 
Unprocessed food prices, which have a remarkable weight within the inflation basket, is another factor 
of uncertainty for the future course of inflation due to the fluctuations in its course by showing sharp 
moves owing to the seasonal conditions. 
Elimination  of  price  rigidities  in  the  services  sector  also  bears  great  importance  in  the  fight  against 
inflation. Practices to increase supply and competition in this sector are needed. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  see  that  the  unfavorable  effects  of  the  fluctuation  period  on  inflation  are 
eliminated thanks to the completion of the primary effects of the depreciation of the Turkish Lira on 
inflation as of the end of 2006. Nevertheless, rapid changes in the global risk perceptions, international 
liquidity conditions and the resulting fluctuations that can be experienced in domestic financial markets 
are other risk factors that may cause the inflation go beyond the figures that we temporarily foresee. 
Considering from the viewpoint of fiscal policies, we should note that one of the factors ensuring the 
maintenance  of  the  downward  trend  of  inflation  in  the  medium-term  is  the  sustainability  of  fiscal 
discipline and the revenues policy consistent with the targets without hesitations. Within this context, 
we  closely  monitor  the  effects  of  the  adjustments  in  the  revenues  policy  and  the  primary  public 
expenditures on inflation and inflation expectations. 
The  achievements  in  structural  reforms  support  the  increase  in  efficiency  via  the  improvements  in 
competition  and  investment  environments,  contributing  to  the  downward  trend  of  inflation.  The 
structural reform process has a determining effect also on the expectations. Unceasing maintenance 
of the steps in this area are important for the permanency of the downward trend in inflation. 
Even if a considerable improvement is observed today in comparison with the first half of the year, 
medium-term inflation expectations that are higher than targets are the other risk factors regarding the 
inflation outlook. This is due to the possibility of these expectations to bring about deteriorations in the 
pricing behaviors. 
Dear Guests, 
Although some political developments regarding the negotiations with the European Union may come 
to  the  forefront,  and  some  interruptions  and  delays  may  occur,  this  process  itself  does  mean 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 3
convergence to the developed economies in economic terms. Together with the IMF, it also functions 
as an important anchor for the domestic and foreign economic units. This perspective, which is very 
influential on expectations, should be preserved.  
When all these developments are evaluated altogether, we see that the Monetary Policy Committee 
preserves  its  cautious  stance.  The  Bank  implements  its  policies  with  aim  of  achieving  the  inflation 
target that is determined as 4 percent for the years 2007, 2008 and 2009. Currently, we foresee that 
the inflation targets can be achieved as long as the cautious stance of the monetary policy and fiscal 
discipline  are  maintained  and  the  incomes  policy  is  implemented  in  accordance  with  the  inflation 
targets and the expectations are managed effectively. 
Distinguished Guests, 
The  floating  exchange  rate  regime  is  the  basic  element  of  the  inflation  targeting  regime  that  we 
currently implement. The exchange rate regime is determined with the government. The Central Bank 
is responsible for the design and implementation of the exchange rate policy under this regime. Level 
of the rates under the floating rate regime is determined by the foreign exchange supply and demand 
under  the  market  conditions.  The  short-term  value  of  the  Turkish  Lira  is  determined  by  the 
developments in the foreign exchange supply and demand, behaviors of the market players and short-
term expectations; whereas that of the long term is determined by the economic fundamentals, course 
of the structural reforms and medium and long-term expectations. 
The  basic  policy  instrument  of  the  Central  Bank  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime  is  the  short-term 
interest  rates.  Both  the  economic  literature  and  the  experiences  of  the  countries  show  that,  it  is 
impossible for central banks to keep both the interest rates and foreign exchange rates under control 
at the same time in the economies where international capital movements are free as in ours. 
Therefore, the Central Bank does not and will not have an implicit commitment regarding the level of 
the foreign exchange rate, or a policy towards rendering the Turkish Lira valuable. 
When  we  look  at  the  period  starting  from  2001  in  which  the  floating  exchange  rate  regime  was 
embarked  on  up  to  now,  we  see  a  number  of  fluctuations  in  the  foreign  exchange  rates,  the  most 
recent of which was observed in the May-June period. Similar fluctuations may be experienced in the 
future.  The  course  of  conduct  of  the  Central  Bank  regarding  the  foreign  exchange  markets  is  quite 
clear.  The  risk  of  foreign  currency  is  borne  by  the  market  players.  The  fluctuations  that  are 
experienced  clearly  display  that  these  types  of  risks  may  arise  any  time  and  that  they  should  be 
managed effectively. Economic units should ensure the required protection against the risks regarding 
their  balance  sheets  in  the  modern  sense  within  the  scope  of  the  risk  management  principles. 
Remarkable attainments were obtained in the banking sector within this context. The private sector 
also should need to adopt a similar approach in this respect. 
The  reason  why  I  attach  such  a  special  importance  to  this  subject  and  put  emphasis  on  this  with 
similar  expressions  in  almost  all  my  speeches  is  to  draw  attention  to  the  possible  risks  that  the 
economic units may confront under the floating rate regime and increase awareness. Otherwise, the 
deterioration brought about by the mis-management of risk affects the economy as a whole. 
Dear Guests, 
When  the  course  of  the  value  of  Turkish  currency  versus  foreign  currency  from  2002  up  to  now  is 
taken into account, it is observed that as long as tight monetary and fiscal policies are maintained; 
structural  reforms  are  implemented,  political  stability  is  maintained  and  the  decisiveness  for 
macroeconomic  stability  is  sustained;  the  basic  tendency  will  be  in  favor  of  the  appreciation  of  the 
Turkish currency. 
This is a process in which the Turkish currency is increasingly preferred for investment as in every 
robust economy although it is subject to occasional interruptions. Therefore, the value of the Turkish 
currency  emerges  as  a  clear  consequence.  Determination  of  the  foreign  exchange  rates  under  the 
market  conditions as a  requisite  of  the  floating  exchange rate  regime  does not  imply  that  the  Bank 
shall  not  undertake  any  transactions  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets.  As  it  was  also  explained  in 
detail in our announcement called “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2007”, the Central Bank 
undertakes transactions in the foreign exchange markets for two objectives. 
The  first  one  of  these  transactions  is  the  daily  foreign  exchange  purchasing  auctions  that  are 
implemented transparently and under methods in accordance with certain rules to serve the Bank’s 
purpose of reserve accumulation. The Central Bank purchases foreign exchange from the market via 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2007
these auctions when the supply of foreign exchange is abundant under a moderate reserve-increasing 
strategy. 
The second situation in which the Bank undertakes transactions is the direct interventions in order to 
prevent existing or possible excessive volatilities in the foreign exchange rates. These interventions 
are  neither  mechanic  nor  symmetric.  The  Bank  evaluates  all  the  changes  occurring  in  the  foreign 
exchange rates with regard to its own conditions and takes the decision for intervention accordingly. 
As  a  result  of  the  foreign  exchange  purchasing  auctions  and  the  direct  interventions  implemented 
within the scope of the foreign exchange policy, net purchase of 44.8 billion USD from the market has 
been made in a period of five years as of 9 January 2007. Following the foreign exchange purchases 
embarked on as of April 2002, reserves of the Bank increased by 199 percent and reached 60.8 billion 
USD on 29 December 2006. 
Dear Guests, 
Now I would like to mention the growth performance of the Turkish economy and the things to be done 
in this respect. The Turkish economy has been growing consecutively for the last 19 quarters. Gross 
National Product grew by 8.8 percent in real terms in the second quarter of 2006; and the growth rate 
decreased to 3 percent in the third quarter due to the monetary tightening and the fluctuations in the 
financial markets in June and July. Therefore, accumulated real growth has been 41 percent and the 
average growth rate has been 7.6 percent as of 2001. 
Looking at the possible short-term outlook of growth before moving on to the evaluation of the process 
of structural change in the dynamics of the growth in the Turkish economy, I wish to emphasize that 
the  slowdown  observed  in  the  economic  activities  in  the  third  quarter  of  2006  does  not  necessarily 
mean that a stagnation will be experienced in the last quarter of 2006 or after that. Considering these, 
we foresee that the growth rate in the last quarter of 2006 may remain at a low level due to the basis 
effect  created  by  high  growth  rate  in  2005.  However,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  2006  may  realize 
around 5 percent in accordance with the program. In the light of the current information, we foresee 
that the annual growth rates will start increasing again as of the second half of 2007. 
The  Turkish  economy  has  recorded  remarkable  improvements  towards  overcoming  the  period  of 
fluctuating growth rates thanks to the macroeconomic stability environment established in the last five 
years.  The  determining  factors  in  growth  rates  have  been  the  private  sector  consumption  and 
investments.  Private  sector’s  consumption  expenditures  rose  by  36.4  percent  in  real  terms  in  the 
period  from  2001  to  third  quarter  of  2006,  while  public  expenditures  rose  by  15.5  percent  with  the 
acceleration especially in the last two quarters. Looking at the investment side, we see that the private 
sector’s  investment  spending  increased  by  134.3  percent  in  real  terms  while  the  public  investment 
spending went up by 14.1 percent. The high increases observed in investment spending also indicate 
that the investment-oriented basis of growth is widening and so the production capacity is increasing. 
Another  resource  for  growth  is  the  high  increase  in  efficiency.  Accumulated  efficiency  increased  by 
39.3  percent  in  the  last  five  years.  The  high  efficiency  rates  support  the  growth  process  without 
inflation on the one hand and they contribute to the sustainability of growth on the other. 
The exports have had great contributions in growth in recent years and this contribution keeps growing 
gradually.  The  Turkish  economy  is  opening  its  doors.  Accumulated  annual  exports  rose  by  167.5 
percent  as  of  November  2006  compared  to  the  year  2001.  The  total  trade  volume  in  the  last  year 
reached 220.8 billion USD and it constitutes 57 percent of the national income. 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 5
Dear Guests, 
The  new  structure  of  the  growing  process  in  our  country  is  an  indicator  of  the  significance  of 
macroeconomic stability, which lies on the basis of price stability for growth and competition. 
According  to  the  Global  Competition  Index,  Turkey  became  one  of  the  countries  that  increased  its 
competitive  power  at  the  most  in  2006  and  drawing  ahead  by  12  rows,  ranked  59  within  125 
countries1. 
Maintenance  of  this  growth  and  establishment  of  a  sustainable  growth  process  are  indispensable 
requirements  for  an  increase  in  social  wealth,  which  is  the  final  objective  of  all  economic  policies. 
Therefore, today everyone should focus on the things to be done for the sustainability of the growth 
process in our economy rather than the daily market transactions. 
When successful country samples regarding growth and development processes are considered, we 
see that there are certain phases in the growth process. These phases are growth based on factor 
accumulation; increase in efficiency; research and development activities and innovations respectively. 
Turkey  is  currently  going  through  a  process  of  growth  based  on  increase  in  efficiency.  However, 
ensuring  the  permanency  of  growth  in  the  medium  and  long-term  necessitates  focusing  on  the 
research and development activities besides increases in efficiency and going through a process of 
growth based on innovations. 
Dear Guests, 
It is obligatory for the private sector to establish medium and long-term strategies rather than short-
term  ones,  in  order  to  last  long  within  the  domestic  and  foreign  competition  environment  that  is 
gradually  becoming  more  challenging  owing  to  both  the  changing  domestic  dynamics  and  the 
increasing  openness.  Elimination  of  the  unfavorable  conditions  in  bureaucracy,  politics  and  taxing 
regulations  that  are  the  primary  items  of  the  list  of  the  factors  affecting  competition  negatively  in 
Turkey bear great importance in this respect.2
The key factor for this is ensuring development in the principles3 of governance both for the public and 
the private sector. A great improvement is recorded in terms of the principles of governance as of the 
year 2000 and improvements in almost all of the indicators are observed. It is not a coincidence that 
the improvement in the principles of good governance and the one in macroeconomic performance to 
intersect. However, it is clear that there is too much to achieve compared to the European countries. 
Good governance has a key role in ensuring the macroeconomic stability and rendering this process 
permanent. Therefore, it is one of the pre-requisites of a sustainable growth process. 
Structural reforms bear great importance in this regard. The research carried out with respect to the 
OECD  countries4  reveals  that  the  economic  growth  rates  of  the  countries  engaging  in  rapid  and 
comprehensive  structural  reforms  increase  in  vast  amounts.  Additionally,  structural  reforms  are 
complementary.  Halt  of  the  progress  of  structural  reforms  in  one  field  prevents  the  attainment  of 
favorable outcomes of the reforms made in other fields. 
Reforms  to  remove  the  defects  in  the  social  security  system;  to  prevent  unregistered  economic 
activities; to provide the labor market with a more flexible structure via education; to restructure the 
taxing  system;  to  continue  with  the  reforms  in  the  financial  sector  incessantly  and  to  increase 
efficiency in the agricultural sector should be given priority in our country. 
On the other hand, considering that growth is a dynamic process, it is very important to strengthen the 
macro reforms with micro measures and being in a search for a strategic approach in accordance with 
the changing needs and newly emerging structures. The public and private sector should engage in 
cooperation in this field. 
                                                      
1   Global Competitiveness Report 2006-2007, World Economic Forum. 
2   Global Competitiveness Report 2006-2007, World Economic Forum. 
3  
Indicators  of  good  governance  are  prevention  of  corruption,  the  rule  of  law,  efficiency  of  the  legislation  and  regulations, 
quality of the state services, political stability and transparency and accountability. 
4  Macedo, J.B. ve Martins, J.O. (2006). “Growth, Reform Indicators and Policy Complementaries”. 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2007
The public sector should assume a supervisory and regulatory role within the scope of the principles of 
good governance and work towards creating an atmosphere in which the private sector can compete 
within  the  international  markets  under  the  market  conditions  and  should  absolutely  prevent  the 
unregistered economic activities. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  private  sector  should  continue  taking  precautions  to  increase  efficiency; 
establish  strong  and  transparent  balance  sheets;  shift  towards  capital  markets;  pay  attention  to  the 
principles  of  risk  management  and  pay  effort  for  the  allocation  of  resources  to  the  research  and 
development activities. Parallel to this, banks should increase their contributions to the sustainability of 
growth through diversification of credits they offer to the private sector.  
Dear Guests, 
Upon mentioning the growth process in our country, now I would like to dwell on another important 
item on the agenda, which is employment. 
Looking at the data about the labor market, we see that the number of the employed has been on the 
increase as of 2002. This increase is more apparent especially in the sectors other than agriculture. 
660  thousand  new  jobs  were  created  in  the  last  year  in  the  sectors  other  than  agriculture  as  of 
September 2006. 
A  comparative  improvement  in  the  unemployment  figures  was  recorded  parallel  to  the  increase  in 
employment.  When  compared  to  the  same  period  of  the  last  year,  decreasing  by  0.6  points,  the 
unemployment rate became 9.1 percent in September 2006. 
Nevertheless, these favorable developments in the labor market have not yet arrived at a satisfactory 
level. The main reason for the delay and weakness of the improvement in the labor market despite the 
results taken in the other fields of economy are the structural problems in the labor market. 
Agricultural sector leads the list of these structural problems. A rapid transition process is experienced 
from the agricultural sector to the sectors other than agriculture as a result of the structural change 
that the economy goes through. The share of the agricultural sector in total employment decreased 
from 38 percent in 2001 to 28 percent in September 2006. It is expected that the transition from the 
agricultural sector to the sectors other than agriculture within the process of structural change in our 
country will continue in the coming years 
Additionally, high employment taxes observed in the sectoral structure of employment restricts the rise 
in  employment  on  the  one  hand;  and  causes  employment  to  shift  to  unregistered  activities  on  the 
other.  The  increase  in  the  unregistered  employment  prevents  the  increases  in  employment  to  be 
permanent and increases volatility. 
Working age population keeps growing due to the high rate of population growth in our country. The 
limited educational facilities to meet the labor power having the demanded qualifications vis-a-vis the 
increasing working age population and the lack of labor possessing the qualifications compatible with 
the structural change in the economy are the other problems detaining the possible improvements in 
the labor market. 
All  these  problems  prevent  the  unemployment  rates  to  fall  in  a  speed  parallel  to  the  increase  in 
employment. However, the problem of unemployment having social consequences besides economic 
ones renders the solution of this problem inevitable. 
Therefore, long-term supply-side policies should be put into effect in order to find a permanent solution 
to the problem of unemployment. In this respect, via ensuring the implementation of active policies to 
create employment and providing resources for new investments, the investment atmosphere should 
be improved by strengthening the relationship between the real and the financial sector. Additionally, 
educational  policies  oriented  towards  increasing  the  labor  power  compatible  with  the  labor  demand 
should be put into effect. Besides, having the unregistered employment registered, should be given 
priority  because  it  leads  to  unfair  competition and  this  necessitates  decreasing  the  taxes  and  other 
burdens on employment gradually. 
Dear Guests, 
Finally, I wish to briefly mention current account deficit, which frequently occupies the agenda. 
Current account deficit is one of the sensitive points of the Turkish economy. With a retrospective look, 
we see that current account deficit grew faster in the periods when growth rate accelerated due to the 
structural  peculiarities  of  the  Turkish  economy.  The  periods  when  the  current  account  deficit 
BIS Review 28/2007 
 7
decreased or surpluses were experienced have been the years in which the growth rate decreased or 
crises  broke  out.  This  structure  shows  us  that  the  current  account  deficit  bears  a  structural  quality 
rather than a cyclical one. 
This  process  can  be  identified  as  followings:  improvements  recorded  with  respect  to  the 
macroeconomic  stability  decrease  the  general  level  of  interest  rates.  This  decline  in  interest  rates 
increase  consumption  and  investment  demand  and  so  the  credit  demand  accordingly  on  the  one 
hand;  while  leading  to  a  decrease  in  domestic  savings  on  the  other.  The  rising  expenditures, 
especially  the  investment  spending  increase  the  demand  for  machinery  and  equipment;  and  this 
demand can be met by imports due to the structural peculiarities of the Turkish economy. This process 
leads to the enlargement of the difference between the domestic savings and investments, which is an 
indicator of the current account deficit and causes the need for foreign resources to arise. With the 
help of the macroeconomic stability and the inflow of foreign capital, Turkish currency is appreciated 
and  the  process  is  reiterated  giving  way  to  an  increase  in  the  current  account  deficit  in  the 
environments where this resource can be provided and foreign borrowing becomes an option. 
A similar process was experienced due to the improvements recorded in the macroeconomic stability 
in the last five years and remarkable increases were observed in the current account deficit owing to 
the effect of high speed of growth. 
The current account deficit reached 34.4 billion USD in October per annum and the ratio of the current 
account deficit to national income in the third quarter of 2006 became 8.5 percent. 
However,  the  reasons  besides  the  financing  method  should  be  examined  in order  to  determine  the 
extent of the risk that the current account deficit poses with regard to the macroeconomic balances. 
Current  account  deficit  today  basically  originates  from  the  faster  increase  of  investments  in 
comparison with the savings. 
Additionally, high increases observed in energy prices and especially crude oil prices influenced the 
increase in current account deficit in a vast amount. The calculations point that in the case that energy 
prices remain fixed at their level of the year 2002, the ratio of the current account deficit to national 
income will be 3.6 points lower in the third quarter of 2006 compared to its current level. 
As a result of the process of the structural change and the progress obtained in the macroeconomic 
conditions in recent years, the quality of financing for the current account deficit improved. Long-term 
capital has been the prevalent resource of capital inflows as of October 2006 with an annual level of 
25.3  billion  USD.  This  figure  alone  meets  3.4  percent  of  the  current  account  deficit.  Foreign  direct 
investment inflow to our country for the same period was in record levels with 21.4 billion USD per 
annum. 
What  is  worth  paying  attention  here  is  the  lack  of  an  interruption  in  the  foreign  direct  investments 
flowing  in  our  country  even  during  the  fluctuations  experienced  in  the  May-June  period.  This  is  an 
indicator of the improvements recorded in the macroeconomic stability and also the confidence for the 
future of our economy by the foreign investors. 
Long-term capital inflows and foreign direct investments finance a vast amount of our current account 
deficit currently. This financing structure is expected to continue parallel to the implementation of the 
current program decisively. 
While analyzing the sustainability of the high current account deficits in our country, it should be noted 
that  the  structure  of  our  economy  is  different  from  the  past.  In  this  context,  strengthening  of  the 
macroeconomic foundations in the Turkish economy and the gradually increasing financial integration 
with  the  world  economy  facilitates  the  sustainability  of  higher  current  account  deficits.  Floating  rate 
regime and a strong financial system also alleviates the negative consequences of the current account 
deficit during a possible capital outflow. 
The  current  account  deficit  is  one  of  the  risk  factors  for  our  economy  today  as  it  was  in  the  past. 
Management  of  this  risk  like  the  other  risks  besides  its  control  through  medium  and  long-term 
structural  measures  considering  its  structural  peculiarities  are  vital  for  the  establishment  of  a 
permanent stability in the economy. 
Finally, I would like to express my pleasure one more time for having this opportunity to communicate 
my views about the policies of the Bank and the macroeconomic developments. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 28/2007
