Thomas Jordan: Communication, transparency and monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Vereinigung Basler Ökonomen, Basel, 24 May 2007. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 In the last two decades, central banks have significantly enhanced their transparency with regard to 
their  goals,  strategies  and  background  information  on  their  monetary  policy  decisions.  This  change 
has  been  brought  about  by  the  demand  that  independent  central  banks  in  democratic  societies  be 
accountable  to  the  public.  Moreover,  it  has  been  recognised  that  transparency  improves  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  However,  theoretical  and  empirical  studies  have  shown  that 
increased transparency is not necessarily beneficial in every case. Nevertheless, the studies provide 
only  limited  information  as  to  what  exactly  an  efficient  policy  of  transparency  and  communication 
should look like in practice. 
Since  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates,  the  Swiss  National  Bank 
(SNB) has cultivated an open dialogue with the public. When the SNB changed its strategy of money 
supply  targets  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  to  a  monetary  policy  using  inflation  forecasts  as  a  central 
indicator,  this  again  significantly  enhanced  transparency  and  strengthened  its  communication 
activities. The SNB now publishes comprehensive information on a regular basis. A key instrument in 
the  SNB's  communication  is  the  inflation  forecast.  These  inflation  forecasts  are  based  on  the 
assumption that the reference interest rate will remain steady during the forecasting period. The major 
advantage of this method is that it is simple and the forecasts are clear to interpret. In economic theory 
and  practice,  two  alternative  methods  for  producing  inflation  forecasts  are  also  being  discussed 
intensively. One is based on expected market rates, whereas the other focuses on the interest rate 
forecasts  published  by  the  central  bank.  Both  have  certain  advantages  over  the  assumption  of  a 
steady interest rate, but they also entail some serious disadvantages. At the moment, the SNB sees 
no reason why it should abandon its current practice. 
Efficient  communication  helps  the  general  public  to  better  understand  the  SNB’s  approach  and  its 
interpretation of new data. The SNB’s experience with its communication policy has been very positive 
in the last few years. Evidently, the public has a good understanding of its monetary policy concept 
and  its  economic  analyses.  Intensive  and  well-targeted  communication  between  the  quarterly 
monetary policy assessments has improved the predictability and transparency of the monetary policy 
decisions. However, even with a transparent monetary policy, surprises can never be completely ruled 
out.  
In  a  constantly  changing  environment,  communication  and  transparency  must  be  allowed  to  evolve 
further. However, blindly following the fashion of the moment jeopardises credibility. Communication 
and transparency are not pursued for their own sake, but serve to achieve monetary policy goals in the 
best possible way. When judging them, one must take the specific historical, cultural and institutional 
characteristics of a country into account. A “one size fits all” communication strategy for central banks 
does not exist.  
BIS Review 53/2007 
 1
