Lucas Papademos: Education, financial markets and economic growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of 
the 
35th Economics  Conference  on  “Human  Capital  and  Economic  Growth”  organised  by  the  Austrian 
National Bank, Vienna, 21 May 2007. 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at 
 Introduction  
I. 
“Upon  the  education  of  the  people  of  this  country  the  fate  of  this  country  depends”,  British  Prime 
Minister Benjamin Disraeli observed over 100 years ago with great prescience. Today, his insightful 
observation about the crucial importance of education and human capital for the welfare of countries 
and the performance of their economies is widely recognised, especially in all advanced countries with 
their increasingly knowledge-based economies. In Europe, the Lisbon strategy has placed education 
high on the policy agenda – together with some key structural reforms in product, labour and capital 
markets – in order to make Europe a more competitive, knowledge-based and dynamic economy. It is, 
therefore,  highly  appropriate  and  very  much  appreciated  that  the  Österreichische  Nationalbank  has 
devoted its 35th Economics Conference to the topic of “Human capital and economic growth”, and I 
am delighted to have been invited to address this distinguished audience.  
Education contributes significantly to economic growth and welfare through various channels and in 
many ways. [SLIDE 2] In the first part of my presentation, I will review these channels and assess their 
relative importance on the basis of the available empirical evidence about the quantitative significance 
of  the  effects  of  education  on  a  number  of  key  determining  factors  of  growth.  In  particular,  I  will 
examine the role of education in accounting for differences in economic growth across countries and 
regions, as well as for the growth performance of different sectors within our economies. In the second 
part  of  my  speech,  I  will  address  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  in  fostering  economic  growth, 
concentrating on how the development, efficiency and stability of financial markets can contribute to 
the dynamism and growth of other sectors and of the economy as a whole. I will then explore how 
education, research and the diffusion of knowledge have supported and facilitated the development of 
financial markets; and how education can further contribute to fully realising the benefits of financial 
innovation, thereby supporting through this channel, our economies’ growth performance. Finally, I will 
draw  some  conclusions  regarding  the  implications  of  our  analysis  for  public  policy  and  for  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Education and economic growth 
II.  
Through  which  channels  does  education  foster  economic growth?  Economists have  tried  to  explain 
the  large  cross-country  variation  in  economic  growth  and,  more  generally,  welfare,  in  terms  of 
differences in the contribution of factors of production and their overall efficiency. Growth theories – 
both  the  extended  neoclassical  model  and  the  new  “endogenous”  growth  theories  –  specify  the 
economy’s aggregate output as a function of capital, employed labour services, that is hours worked 
by  the  economically  active  population,  and  a  measure  of  technological  progress.  Capital  is  broadly 
defined to include both physical and human capital. Technological progress is usually described as the 
process  that  determines  how  efficiently  all  factors  of  production  are  used,  that  is,  it  measures  total 
factor  productivity.  This  general  theoretical  specification  implies  that  the  growth  rate  of  per  capita 
aggregate output can be expressed as the sum of real investment (capital deepening), human capital 
accumulation, the rate of change of labour utilisation and total-factor-productivity (TFP) growth. [SLIDE 
3] The so-called “growth accounting” framework employed in empirical analyses, which need not be 
based on concrete analytical foundations, uses the same, or a similar, decomposition of output growth 
in terms of its basic determinants. This analytical framework provides a useful means for examining 
and  assessing  the  various  channels  through  which  education  fosters  growth.1  It  should  be  kept  in 
mind,  however,  that  this  framework  depends  on  several  simplifying  assumptions  that  may  impose 
limitations  on  the  analysis.  It  also  does  not  take  explicitly  into  account  the  potential  effects  on 
economic  efficiency  of  “social  capital”  and  human  development;  that  is,  the  set  of  institutions  and 
                                                      
1   See, for example, Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992) and Caselli (2005). 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 1
social values that underpin the functioning of markets and can influence the behaviour (and collective 
actions) of economic agents.  
Education affects economic growth both directly since it is a key determinant or component of human 
capital, as well as indirectly by influencing the other factors of production and total factor productivity. 
[SLIDE  4]  Human  capital  is  a  broad  concept  which  is  determined  by  education  –  the  quantity  and 
quality  of  schooling  –  as  well  as  by  on-the-job  training  and  learning,  cognitive  skills  and  the  health 
status of the labour force (as proxied, for example, by life expectancy).  
Direct effects of education on growth 
The direct positive effects of education, and more generally of human capital, on growth have been 
demonstrated  by  empirical  analyses  employing  both  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  data.2 
[SLIDE 5] Several empirical studies show that more affluent countries are also richer in human capital. 
[SLIDE 6] This is illustrated in the chart on slide 6 that shows the relationship between the average 
years of schooling (using data from the most recent update of the Barro-Lee dataset) and the real per 
capita GDP in the year 2000 (using data from the latest update of the Penn World Tables). To further 
illustrate  this  positive  relationship,  the  next  two  charts  on  slide  7  [SLIDE  7]  show  that  countries  in 
which  the  general  education  level  has  improved  significantly  over  the  past  decades  have  also 
experienced  faster  economic  growth.3  For  example,  East  Asian  “tiger”  economies  (South  Korea, 
Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia) have not only been the fastest growing economies in the post world-
war II period, but they are also those countries where the average duration of school education for the 
population as a whole has increased most. Recent research has tried to improve the quality of cross-
country  schooling  data  (e.g.  Cohen  and  Soto,  2007;  Domenech  and  de  la  Fuente,  2006).  These 
studies, based on improved statistics, find that there is a stronger correlation between improvements 
in schooling and growth, even when other features of economic development are taken into account 
(such as physical capital accumulation or time-invariant country characteristics). 
Correlation, however, does not necessarily imply causality. After all, improvements in education and 
faster  growth  may  be  both  influenced  by  other  country  factors,  such  as  institutional  infrastructure, 
social  capital,  geography  or  culture.  The  correlation  between  schooling  and  growth  (shown  in  the 
previous  charts)  may  also  be  driven  by  “reverse  causality”  from  growth  to  education,  as  individuals 
invest more in education when the economy’s growth performance and prospects are good. It is thus 
difficult to establish causality employing cross-country data, because it is almost impossible to control 
for all the variables that could affect economic performance. [SLIDE 8] Nevertheless, using detailed 
data on wages for individuals and households, a vast literature in the field of labour economics has 
provided ample evidence that there is a significantly positive and robust causal relationship between 
the years of formal schooling (at the primary, secondary and tertiary level) and wages. This evidence 
suggests that the private, or so-called “Mincerian”4, returns on education are within a range of 6.5%-
9%, that is, an additional year of formal schooling is associated with an increase in wages of 7.5% on 
average over the working life. The richness of micro data also enables us to address the key issue of 
causality.  Labour  economists  have  employed  sophisticated  econometric  techniques  and  innovative 
methodological approaches (such as studies of twins who followed different education and life paths) 
to establish causality between education and private returns.5 Moreover, the social return to education 
– that is the benefit of increases in the human capital of the population for the economy and society as 
a whole – will, in all likelihood, be further increased as a result of so-called human capital externalities. 
Such  externalities  arise,  for  example,  through  knowledge  spillovers  from  more  educated  workers  to 
less educated ones.6  
                                                      
2   For general surveys of the contribution of human capital and education to economic growth, see Krueger and Lindahl (2001) 
and Wasmer et al. (2006). De la Fuente and Ciccone (2002) review the literature with specific reference to Europe. 
3   See, for example, Domenech and de La Fuente (2006) and Cohen and Soto (2007). 
4   The  so-called  “Mincerian  equation”  (developed  by  Polish-American  economist  Jacob  Mincer)  specifies  a  relationship  an 
individual’s education and experience and his or her wages. See Mincer (1974). 
5   For en extensive review of the micro evidence, see Card (1999). 
6   The  importance  of  human  capital  externalities  in  the  process  of  development  has  been  stressed  by  Lucas  (1998)  and 
Azariadis  and  Drazen  (1990),  among  others.  Empirical  studies  in  the  US  have,  however,  failed  to  detect  human  capital 
externalities at the US state and city level (e.g. Acemoglu and Angrist, 2000; Ciccone and Perri, 2006). Moretti (2004) does 
provide some evidence of sizable (and statistically significant) externalities at the US plant level. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2007
The quality of education  
Education,  however,  is  only  one  component  of  the  broader  concept  of  human  capital,  which  also 
involves on-the-job training and learning as well as cognitive skills. Moreover, the quality of education 
is at least as important as the years of formal schooling.7 These factors are economically significant. 
For example, the returns on training could be as high as 5%, which is a rate comparable to the range 
of estimates for the private returns on the years of formal schooling of between 6.5% and 9%. There is 
also  plenty  of  evidence  that  points  to  the  importance  of  the  quality  of  education.  [SLIDE  9]  This  is 
usually  measured by  pupil-teacher  ratios,  by  public spending  on education,  the  educational  level  of 
teachers,  as  well  as  students’  performance  in  internationally  standardised  tests.  Measures  of  the 
quality  of  the  labour  force  (at  the  macro  level),  based  on  internationally  comparable  test  scores, 
explain a significantly larger proportion of the cross-country variation in growth rates than the simpler 
measure of average years of schooling which is usually employed.8 Micro studies using individual data 
on  wages  also  emphasize  the  importance  of  labour  quality.  Interestingly,  a  number  of  international 
studies also suggest that, with regard to explaining the impact of education on growth, the quality of 
schooling is far more important than the quantity of schooling. Put simply, spending time at school is 
not enough; it is what you learn, how you learn it, and from whom that very much counts.  
The crucial importance of labour quality for Europe’s economic performance is also corroborated by 
recent  research  at  the  ECB  (Schwerdt  and  Turunen,  2007)  which  suggests  that  improvements  in 
labour quality have made a substantial positive contribution to labour productivity growth in the euro 
area. Due mainly to a notable increase in college education, the average annual growth rate of labour 
quality in the euro area is estimated at about 0.5% in the twenty-year period 1984-2005. The relative 
contribution of the improvement in labour quality has also increased over time, accounting for up to 
one  fourth  of  euro  area  labour  productivity  growth  since  2000.  What  is  behind  the  observed  –  and 
highly welcome – steady improvement in the quality of the euro area workforce? First, more educated 
workers work longer hours.9 Second, both the business cycle and changes in the structural features of 
the labour market have influenced the human-capital composition of the euro area workforce. In the 
late  1990s,  labour  quality  growth  moderated,  mainly  reflecting  entry  into  the  labour  market  of  low 
skilled workers. You may recall the debates about the “jobless recovery” and the labour market policy 
pursued at that time which aimed in particular at increasing the employment intensity of growth.  
Indirect effects of education on growth 
Education influences economic growth not only directly – as explained thus far – but also indirectly, 
[SLIDE  10]  through  its  effects  on  a  number  of  other  growth  determinants,  notably:  labour  force 
participation, overall labour utilisation, total factor productivity, the so-called skill-bias of technological 
progress  and  the  complementarity  –  or  substitutability  –  of  physical  capital  and  skills.  I  will  briefly 
discuss  each  of  these  in  turn.  First,  education  enhances  growth  by  raising  labour  utilisation  (and, 
specifically, the number of hours worked per worker). [SLIDE 11] The higher the education level, the 
higher the participation in the labour force: in other words, if people are more educated, they are more 
likely to seek or hold a job. [SLIDE 12] Let me provide you some evidence for this proposition from the 
euro  area:  in  2006,  total  labour  force  participation  ranged  from  70.1%  for  persons  with  below 
secondary education, to 84.3% for persons with above secondary education and 90.6% for persons 
with  tertiary  education.  In  addition,  a  higher  level  of  education  is  usually  connected  with  a  higher 
percentage of the labour force being employed. In 2006, the employment rate in the euro area was 
83.5%  for  persons  with  tertiary  education,  while  only  57.2%  for  persons  with  below  secondary 
education.  
                                                      
7   Human capital also includes health. Yet accounting for health, while of major importance in emerging and under-developed 
countries, is most likely of minor importance for the industrial world. 
8   See, for example, Hanushek and Kimko, (2000); Bosworth and Collins, (2003). The Appendix Table reports some simple 
cross-country  regressions  illustrating  this  point.  Models  (1)  and  (2)  report  the  (standardized  "beta")  coefficients  on  initial 
average years of schooling and schooling quality in explaining long-term growth in the period 1960-2000. While both human 
capital proxies enter with highly significant coefficients in specifications (1) and (2), models (3) and (4) that jointly assess 
their effect show that schooling quality is a far more significant correlate of growth than schooling quantity. The estimated 
effects are similar if the analysis is confided to the periods 1970-2000, 1980-2000, or 1990-2000. 
9  There is evidence of increased share of the total hours worked by more educated workers and, in particular, of a sizeable 
increase in the share of hours worked by those with tertiary education. 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 3
A most significant and far-reaching contribution of human capital to the European economy and other 
advanced  economies  stems  from  its  positive  effect  on  total-factor-productivity  (TFP).  [SLIDE  13] 
Empirical studies suggest that countries that are richly endowed with human capital tend to better use 
existing  technologies  and  firms  and  entrepreneurs  in  these  countries  also  innovate  much  more. 
Building on an early contribution of Richard Nelson and Nobel Prize winner Edmund Phelps (Nelson 
and Phelps, 1966), the new “endogenous” growth theories have stressed the role of human capital in 
sustaining long-term growth, because it enables these economies to catch up with the technological 
frontier  and  innovate.10  In  line  with  these  theories,  which  have  also  emphasised  the  importance  of 
research & development and entrepreneurial activity, cross-country empirical studies show that human 
capital  accelerates  progress  towards  the  technological  frontier  (e.g.  Benhabib  and  Spiegel,  1994). 
There are valuable lessons for the advanced EU countries, because the contribution of human capital 
is especially important for economies that are closer the technological frontier and thus depend more 
on innovation rather than imitation.11  
The role of human capital, and education in particular, in fostering innovation and a rapid adoption of 
technological advances has been crucial over the past decades, when technology has been “biased” 
towards highly-skilled labour. There is now a consensus that in the 1980s and 1990s (and even in the 
1970s)  technological  progress  has  been  favouring  educated  and  highly  trained  workers.12  For 
example, the private return on education in Europe and the US rose from about 6.5%-7.5% in the early 
1970s to 10% in the early 1990s. This increase was almost exclusively driven by college graduates 
and highly trained workers, who were the beneficiaries of the higher skill-bias of recent technological 
innovation. If we analyse this rather general result in greater depth, and assess the effect of education 
in facilitating technology adoption and the skill context of recent technological innovation, we find that 
countries  with  abundant  human  capital  managed  to  better  utilise  technological  innovations  in  skill-
intensive  sectors  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  (Ciccone  and  Papaioannou,  2005).  And  it  was  precisely 
those  industries  that  experienced  higher  total  productivity  growth  globally.  [SLIDE  14]  The  chart  on 
slide 14 illustrates this point. It shows the relationship between the cross-country marginal return on 
human capital at the industry level and the industry skill-intensity. There is a clear positive relationship 
between the effect of schooling for industry growth and the skill-bias of an industry. To cut a long story 
short, education appears to be far more important for the growth of R&D intensive sectors such as 
drugs and pharmaceuticals and computer and office equipment than footwear and textiles. [SLIDE 15] 
The next chart exhibits a similar relationship but uses educational quality as a proxy for human capital. 
The  results  are  even  more  striking,  indicating  that  educated  societies  were  more  successful  in 
adopting the R&D intensive technologies of the 1980s and 1990s.13 
Finally, human capital may foster growth due to so-called capital-skill complementarities. [SLIDE 16] 
While capital complements both skilled and unskilled labour, it tends to be more relevant for tasks and 
sectors  that  use  skilled  labour  more  intensively.  Recent  work  is  supportive  to  this  hypothesis. 
Research using very detailed data for the United States show that capital invested in information and 
communication technologies (ICT) strongly complements skilled workers in performing complex tasks, 
while it substitutes low-skilled workers in manual tasks. Similarly, studies on the adoption of computers 
in the US over the past three decades clearly shows that computerisation is associated with reduced 
labour  input  of  routine  manual  tasks  and  increased  labour  input  of  non-routine  tasks.14  This  also 
highlights the importance for Europe to invest in both human and physical capital, since their positive 
effects on growth will most likely be mutually reinforcing, and thus greater.  
Education, financial development and economic performance 
III.  
One sector which has undergone a rapid transformation in the past decades, and especially since the 
1990s,  partly  as  a  result  of  the  large-scale  adoption  of  advanced  information  and  communication 
                                                      
10   See, for example, Romer (1990), Grosman and Helpmann (1991), and Aghion and Howitt (1992). 
11   For a formalisation of this intuition, see Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti (2006). 
12   See, among others, Acemoglu (1998, 2002); Caselli and Coleman (2006); Berman, Bound and Machin (1998). 
13   The  skill  context  of  the  recent  technological  revolution  has  also  been  a  key  force  for  raising  inequality.  If  this  pattern 
continues  then  it  is  of  fundamental  importance  for  Europe  to  further  invest  in  human  capital.  Not  only  this  would  further 
sustain growth, but also help reduce social injustices. 
14   For the effect of computer adoption on wages and skill upgrading in the US, see also Autor, Katz and Krueger (2003). 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2007
technologies, is the financial sector, where the complementarity between human capital and physical 
capital can be expected to be particularly large. The financial sector has also played a central role in 
fostering economic growth in both advanced and emerging economies. This role has been supported 
and facilitated by education in a broad sense – involving both teaching and research in the fields of 
finance and the new technologies – and by the effective use of the acquired knowledge in practice. 
For these reasons, I would like to focus now on the relationship between financial sector development 
and economic growth, and the contribution of education to the development, efficient functioning and 
stability of financial markets.  
What are the mechanisms through which the financial sector fosters economic growth? [SLIDE 17] In 
theory,  the  financial  system  can  affect  economic  growth  by  influencing  the  investment  and  saving 
decisions of economic agents and by fostering innovation and productivity. A well-functioning financial 
system  should  (i)  improve  the  available  information  on  investment  opportunities  and  reduce 
informational asymmetries; (ii) facilitate the diversification and management of risk; (iii) contribute to 
better corporate governance; (iv) mobilise and pool savings; and (v) foster the exchange of goods and 
services.  The  references  to  these  functions  highlights  key  features  of  the  financial  intermediation 
process, such as information availability and transformation, risk diversification and management and 
corporate governance, that clearly indicate the central role of education, knowledge and technological 
(ICT)  advances  in  the  development  and  efficient  functioning  of  financial  markets.  And  the  better  a 
financial system performs these functions – that is, the more developed and efficient it is – the greater 
its contribution to economic growth.  
The  empirical  evidence  supporting  this  proposition  –  that  financial  development  and  integration 
promote economic growth – is substantial.15 Numerous studies have shown that countries with more 
liquid  capital  markets  and  developed  banking  systems  grow  on  average  faster,  and  that  financial 
sector  reforms  and  financial  liberalisation  policies  positively  affect  GDP  growth  and  investment.  For 
example, evidence from emerging and developing countries shows that financial liberalisation policies 
are followed by a 0.5%-1% increase in investment and a significant fall in the cost of capital (by 100 
basis  points  on  average).  More  generally,  the  evidence  from  cross-country  and  country-specific 
studies  (in  both  developed  and  emerging  economies)  shows  that  deregulation,  privatisation  and 
financial  development  result  in  an  acceleration  of  growth  and  a  sustained  increase  in  total  factor 
productivity (e.g. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad, 2006). Financial development is especially beneficial 
for industries which for technological reasons depend predominantly on external finance (Rajan and 
Zingales, 1998; Guiso, Jappeli, Padula, and Pagano, 2005).  
There is another important channel through which a well-developed financial system fosters innovation 
and sustained growth: by facilitating the rapid re-allocation of capital from declining industries to fast-
growing sectors, and, in this way, raising aggregate productivity in the economy.16 [SLIDE 18] Recent 
studies have confirmed this proposition which was first put forward one hundred years ago by a great 
Austrian,  Joseph  Schumpeter.  He  was  among  the  first  to  emphasise  the  catalytic  role  of  well-
developed financial intermediaries in the process of “creative destruction”. The efficient functioning of 
this  Schumpeterian  capital  reallocation  mechanism  is  especially  relevant  in  advanced  economies, 
such as the euro area, where the promotion of entrepreneurship and openness to competition are key 
to  raising  productivity  and  growth.17  Recent  empirical  research  at  the  ECB  demonstrates  that  the 
larger and more developed the financial markets are, the greater is the efficiency with which capital is 
reallocated across sectors. The two charts on slide 19 [SLIDE 19] show the relationship between a 
measure of capital efficiency and an indicator of financial development for a sample of 65 countries 
and for the OECD sample of high-income countries. The higher a country scores on the vertical axis, 
the faster its industries respond to investment opportunities; the horizontal axis denotes the size of the 
financial  market:  the  upward  slope  of  the  line  clearly  indicates  that  capital  is  reallocated  more 
efficiently in financially advanced countries.18  
                                                      
15   Levine (2006) provides a thorough review of the literature. Papaioannou (2007) also surveys work focusing on studies that 
are mostly related to advanced economies. 
16   See, among others, Fisman and Love (2004, 2007), Wurgler (2000), Ciccone and Papaioannou (2006). 
17   See Strahan (2003) for a review on the US evidence, Bertrand, Schoar, and Thesmar (2007) for the aftermath of French 
financial reforms of the mid-80s and Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) for the Italian experience. 
18   These figures draw on Ciccone and Papaioannou (2007) and Hartmann, Heider, Lo Duca, and Papaioannou (2007) and are 
based on a methodology proposed by Wurgler (2000). Data taken from UNIDO (2005 Edition). 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 5
Financial development is thus manifestly beneficial for growth. But what is the role of education and 
research in this process? It would be useful to investigate further the relationship between education 
and (ICT) technological advances, on the on hand, and financial development and economic growth, 
on the other. Conceptually, such a link appears plausible, if not perfectly clear. Progress in the theory 
of  finance  and  management,  employing  mathematical  and  statistical  techniques,  combined  with  the 
exponential  growth  of  computing  power  and  the  diffusion  of  information  and  communication 
technologies  –  which  made  the  application  of  theoretical  advances  technically  feasible  –  have 
supported  the  creation  of  new,  innovative,  sometimes  complex,  financial  instruments  and  the 
development  of  alternative  investment  vehicles.  Market  participants  –  financial  institutions  and 
investors – further elaborated this knowledge, initially developed in and learned from universities, and 
applied it in practice, fruitfully interacting with centres of higher education. In addition, the education 
pertaining  to  the  organisation,  management  and  governance  of  firms  also  contributed  to  financial 
development  and  enhanced  productive  efficiency.  The  increasing  breadth  and  sophistication  of 
financial markets, in turn, have been conducive to economic growth, for the reasons I outlined above. 
Intuition and anecdotal evidence suggest that these are reasonable propositions. It would be useful to 
examine  the  available  evidence  in  a  systematic  manner  and  try  to  quantify  and  estimate  the 
contribution of education and research to the development and efficiency of the financial system and 
the  resulting  direct  and  indirect  effects  on  total  productivity  growth.  It  would  also  be  valuable  to 
examine  how  education  and  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  on  risk  measurement,  assessment  and 
management  can  help  to  better  safeguard  financial  stability,  by  enhancing  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  system  to  shocks  and  to  the  potential  materialisation  of  risks  associated  with  the 
intermediation  process.  And  the  outcome  of  such  analysis  could  perhaps  be  discussed  in  a  future 
OeNB conference on education, financial development and economic growth.  
Financial education and literacy 
Needless to say, this is a very broad theme. But I would like to point to an additional, important issue 
concerning  the  link  between  education  and  financial  development  which  has  attracted  attention 
recently and let to some interesting findings. This pertains to the fact that it is not only the education 
and sophistication of bankers, brokers, analysts, asset managers, or risk management specialists that 
determines the extent to which the full benefits of financial development and risk diversification can be 
reaped; it is also the financial education and literacy of all savers and investors.19 [SLIDE 20] And on 
that front, I am afraid, the news is not good: the evidence indicates that even in advanced countries, 
financial  illiteracy  is  widespread.  For  example,  a  recent  study  in  the  United  States  (Lussardi  and 
Mitchell, 2006) found that on average only 50% of those close to retirement (aged 50+) could correctly 
answer  two  simple  questions  regarding  interest  compounding  and  inflation;  the  scores  were  worse 
when  questions  about  risk  diversification  were  raised.  Evidence  from  other  industrial  countries  is 
similarly  alarming.  Of  course,  these  averages  conceal  differences:  more  affluent  people  with  higher 
education,  especially  those  with  college  education,  tend  to  be  more  financially  literate  than  people 
from lower-income groups. But this fact is no solace. 
The implications of financial illiteracy are far from negligible. Proper retirement planning, the ability to 
exploit diversification opportunities and the propensity to invest in high-return and high-risk assets is 
more  widespread  among  financially  literate  households  (Lussardi  and  Mitchell,  2006,  2007;  and 
Calvet, Campbell and Sodini, 2005). Especially in the context of ageing populations and the expected 
progressive shift away from public pension provision, based on pay-as-you-go schemes, to privately 
funded  schemes  where  people  have  to  assume  responsibility  for  their  own  retirement  savings, 
enhancing financial literacy becomes essential. Aristotle’s wisdom that “education is the best provision 
for old age”, understood also in this specific sense, therefore still holds today; and it should provide 
guidance for public policy. Programmes to enhance people’s ability to understand some basic financial 
and economic concepts (such as interest compounding, percentages, etc.) have demonstrated their 
usefulness,  especially  for  less-educated  participants.  The  best  way,  however,  to  enhance  financial 
literacy so as to fully realise the benefits of financial development is to further invest in education, for 
there is clear evidence of a strong relationship between the level of schooling and financial literacy.  
                                                      
19   The  OECD  (2006)  defines  financial  education  as  “  The  process  by  which  financial  consumers/investors  improve  their 
understanding of financial products and concepts and, through information, instruction, and/or objective advice, develop the 
skills and confidence to become more aware of financial risks and opportunities to make informed choices, to know where to 
go for help, and to take other effective actions to improve their financial well-being." The importance of financial literacy for 
household finance is stressed also by Campbell (2006) in his Presidential Address to the American Finance Association. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2007
Policy implications 
IV.  
Overall,  there  is  widespread  and  robust  evidence  that  education  plays  a  key  role  in  enhancing 
economic  performance,  especially  in  those  sectors  where  productivity  and  labour  utilisation  is 
relatively low. Therefore, improving education – and quantitative and qualitative terms – has to be at 
the heart of policy measures aimed at raising the growth potential of the euro area in a sustainable 
manner. The Lisbon agenda aims at precisely this. Given the lower productivity growth in the financial 
sector compared to the productivity gains achieved in other sectors in the euro area, but also relative 
to those recorded in the United States, policies that can accelerate the integration and development of 
European financial markets are essential. For they will help to raise the European economy’s growth 
potential, enhance its capacity to adapt to changing global conditions and structures and strengthen its 
resilience to shocks. [SLIDE 21] In particular, further financial integration and development in the euro 
area  would  allow  for  a  more  balanced  systemic  response  of  its  economy  to  asymmetric  shocks  – 
which  is,  of  course,  of  particular  relevance  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union.  The  better  risk-sharing  opportunities  of  an  integrated  financial  market  should  also  help  to 
synchronise  more  the  business  cycles  across  the  euro  area  and  reduce  the  volatility  of  output  and 
employment.  Last,  and by  no  means  least,  more  integrated  and  sophisticated  financial  markets  will 
also enhance the smooth and effective transmission of the single monetary policy impulses across the 
euro area. This brings me to my final point: the links between education and monetary policy. 
What are the potential implications of a rise in the level of education for the conduct of monetary policy 
in the euro area? [SLIDE 22] Improvements in education and in labour quality affect monetary policy in 
two principal ways. First, by fostering higher productivity growth and labour utilisation, a higher level of 
education  raises  potential  growth  and  thus  the  “speed  limit”  of  the  economy,  meaning  that  the 
economy  can  attain  a  faster  rate  of  sustainable  growth  that  is  compatible  with  price  stability.  The 
second channel through which education affects the conduct of monetary policy relates to the efficient 
functioning of national labour markets and to the role of labour mobility as an adjustment mechanism, 
which is especially relevant in a monetary union. Increased labour force participation and mobility of 
high-skilled workers will improve job-matching efficiency in the euro area, especially when there are 
certain  skill  shortages.  To  the  extent  that  more  educated  workers  display  a  greater  mobility  across 
firms, sectors and borders compared to workers with fewer qualifications, a higher level of education 
can  contribute  to  containing  the  size  of  economic  fluctuations  and  mitigating  the  effects  of  shocks 
because  labour  markets  can  adjust  faster  and  in  a  manner  that  reduces  output  and  employment 
volatility.  
Concluding remarks 
V.  
Economic activity  in  the  euro  area  is expanding  at a  solid  pace and conditions  are  in place  for  the 
ongoing expansion to continue at sustained rates. The improved growth performance of the euro area 
economy reflects the positive influence of the policies being pursued and the reforms that have been 
implemented. It is essential to preserve the favourable conditions that are fostering sustained growth 
and  to  step  up  the  efforts  that  can  enhance  the  dynamism  and  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area 
economy. 
Monetary policy has been contributing decisively to fostering sustainable growth by having established 
an  environment  of  price  stability  and  by  ensuring  that  medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations 
remain solidly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. And this is what our policy will continue 
to do. The ECB’s Governing Council remains strongly vigilant and ready to act in an effective, firm and 
timely manner to ensure that price stability is preserved over the medium and longer term. 
At the same time, the euro area’s potential for higher sustained growth and it capacity to effectively 
absorb  economic  shocks  can  be  further  enhanced  by  the  implementation  of  appropriate  structural 
reforms  that  can  increase  productivity  and  employment  growth  and  improve  market  efficiency  and 
flexibility. In my presentation, I examined and assessed the links between education and the growth 
performance of our economies. There is ample and robust evidence that more and better education 
can foster productivity growth and raise labour utilisation. Moreover, I emphasised the important role 
which  the  development  of  financial  markets  can  play  in  fostering  innovation,  entrepreneurship  and 
productivity  growth  and  I  argued  that  education  has  contributed  and  can  further  contribute  to  the 
development  and  stability  of  the  financial  system.  What  counts  now  is  to  use  these  insights  and  to 
implement the necessary policy measures to enhance the quantity and quality of education in Europe. 
After all, as Anton Chechov reminds us, “ knowledge is of no value, unless you put it into practice.”  
BIS Review 52/2007 
 7
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References 
Acemoglu, Daron. 1998. "Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change 
and Wage Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 113(4): 1055-1090. 
Acemoglu, Daron. "Directed Technical Change." 2002, Review of Economic Studies, October, 69(4), 
pp. 781-810. 
Acemoglu, Daron; Philippe Aghion, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2006. "Distance to Frontier, Selection and 
Economic Growth." Journal of the European Economic Association, March, 4(1): 37-74. 
Acemoglu,  Daron  and  Joshua  Angrist.  2001.  "How  Large  are  the  Social  Returns  to  Education: 
Evidence  from  Compulsory  Schooling  Laws"  in  B.  Bernanke  and  K.  Rogoff  (eds.)  NBER 
Macroeconomic Annual 2000 (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press) 9-59. 
Autor, David; Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. "The Skill Content of Recent Technological 
Change: An Empirical Exploration." Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 118(4): 1279-1334. 
Autor, David; Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. "Computing Inequality: Have Computers 
Changed the Labour Market?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 113 (4): 1169-1214. 
Azariadis,  Costas  and  Allan  Drazen.  1990.  "Threshold  Externalities  in  Economic  Development." 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(2): 501-526. 
Barro,  Robert  J.  and  Jong-Wha  Lee.  2001,  "International  Data  on  Educational  Attainment:  Updates 
and Implications." Oxford Economic Papers, 3(3): 541-563. 
Bekaert,  Geert,  Campbell  R.  Harvey,  and  Christian  Lundblad.  2005.  "Does  Financial  Liberalization 
Spur Growth?" Journal of Financial Economics, July, 7(1): 3-55. 
Benhabib, Jess and Mark M. Spiegel. 1994. "The Role of Human Capital in Economic Development." 
Journal of Monetary Economics, October 1994, 34(2), pp. 143-174.  
Berman, Eli; John Bound, and Stephen Machin. 1998. "Implications of Skill-Biased Technical Change: 
International Evidence." Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 113(4): 1245-1279. 
Bertarnd,  Marianne,  Antoinette  Schoar,  and  David  Thesmar.  2007.  "Banking  Deregulation  and 
Industry  Structure:  Evidence  from  the  French  Banking  Reforms  of  1985."  Forthcoming,  Journal  of 
Finance. 
Calvert, Laurent, John Campbell and Paolo Sodini. 2006. "Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Costs 
of Household Investment Mistakes." Mimeo, Harvard University. 
Caselli, Francesco. 2005. "Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences." in Philippe Aghion and 
Steven Durlauf (eds.) The Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland, Amsterdam: 2005. 
Campbell, John. 2006. "Household finance." Journal of Finance, 61, 1553-1604. 
Caselli,  Francesco  and  John  Wilbur  II  Coleman.  2006.  "The  World  Technology  Frontier."  American 
Economic Review,. 
Ciccone,  Antonio,  and  Elias  Papaioannou.  2005.  "Human  Capital,  the  Structure  of  Production  and 
Growth." Centre for Economic Policy Research (London, UK) Discussion Paper 5354 and ECB WP 
623. 
Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou. 2006. "Adjustment to Target Capital, Finance and Growth." 
Centre for Economic Policy Research (London, UK) Discussion Paper 5969. 
Ciccone,  Antonio,  and  Elias  Papaioannou.  2007.  "Financial  Development  and 
Investment: New Estimates and Evidence." mimeo European Central Bank and UPF. 
Ciccone  Antonio  and  Giovanni  Peri.  2006.  "Identifying  Human  Capital  Externalities:  Theory  with 
Applications." Review of Economic Studies, 73(2):381-412. 
Cohen, Daniel, and Marcelo Soto. 2007. “Growth and human capital: good data, good results”, Journal 
of Economic Growth, Springer, 12(1), pp. 51-76, March 
Intersectoral 
8 
 BIS Review 52/2007
de  la  Fuente,  Ángel  and  Antonio  Ciccone.  2002.  "Human  capital  in  a  global  and  knowledge-based 
economy." European Commission; Directorate-General for Employment and Social Affairs 
de la Fuente, Ángel and Rafael Domenech. 2006. "Human Capital in Growth Regressions: How Much 
Difference Does Data Quality Make." Journal of the European Economic Association. 
Fisman, Raymond, and Inessa Love. 2007. "Financial Development and Growth in the Short and Long 
Run." Journal of the European Economic Association Papers and Proceedings.  
Griliches, Zvi. 1969. "Capital-Skill Complementarity." Review of Economics and Statistics, 51(2), 465- 
468. 
Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli, Mario Padula, and Marco Pagano. 2005. "Financial Market Integration and 
Economic Growth in the EU." Economic Policy, 19(40): 523-577. 
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2004. "Does Local Financial Development Matter?" 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 119(3): 929-969. 
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2007. “Trusting the Stock-Market”. Mimeo University 
of Chicago, January. 
Hartmann,  Philipp;  Florian  Heider;  Marco  Lo  Duca,  and  Elias  Papaioannou.  "Finance  and 
Productivity." in Financial Institutions and Markets: A European Perspective. X. Freixas, P. Hartmann 
and C. Mayer (eds.), Forthcoming 2007, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 
Krueger,  Alan  B.  and  Mikael  Lindahl.  "Education  for  Growth:  Why  and  For  Whom?"  Journal  of 
Economic Literature, December 2001, 39(4), pp. 1101-1136. 
Levine, Ross. 2005. "Finance and Growth: Theory, Evidence, and Mechanisms." in The Handbook of 
Economic Growth, ed., P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
Lucas,  Robert.  1998.  "On  the  Mechanisms  of  Economic  Development."  J  ournal  of  Monetary 
Economics, July, 22(1): pp.3-42. 
Lussardi,  Annamaria  and  Olivia  Mitchell.  2006.  “Financial  Literacy  and  Planning:  Implications  for 
Retirement Wellbeing," mimeo Wharton School and Dartmouth College. 
Lussardi,  Annamaria  and  Olivia  Mitchell.  2007.  “Baby  Boomer  Retirement  Security:  The  Roles  of 
Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth” Forthcoming Journal of Monetary Economics.  
Mankiw,  N.  Gregory,  David  Romer,  and  David  N.  Weil.  1992.  "A  Contribution  to  the  Empirics  of 
Economic Growth." Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 107(2): 407-437. 
Mincer, Jacob. 1974. “Schooling, Earnings, and Experience”, Columbia University Press, New York. 
Moretti,  Enrico.  2004.  "Workers  education,  spillovers,  and  productivity:  Evidence  from  plant-level 
production functions." American Economic Review, 94(3): 656-690 
Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps. 1966. "Investment in Humans, Technical Diffusion, and 
Economic Growth." American Economic Review, March, 56(1/2): 69-75. 
Papaioannou, Elias. 2007. "Finance and Growth: A Macroeconomic Assessment of the Evidence from 
a  European  Angle."  in  Financial  Institutions  and  Markets:  A  European  Perspective.  X.  Freixas,  P. 
Hartmann and C. Mayer (eds.), Forthcoming 2007, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK. 
Rajan,  Raghuram  G.,  and  Luigi  Zingales.  1998.  "Financial  Dependence  and  Growth."  American 
Economic Review, 88(3): 559-586. 
Romer, Paul. 1990. "Endogenous Technical Change." Journal of Political Economy, October, 98(5): 
S71-S102. 
Schwerdt, Guido and Jarkko Turunen. 2007. "Growth in Euro Area Labour Quality", updated version of 
ECB WP 575.  
Strahan, Philipp E. 2003. "The Real Effects of US Banking Deregulation." The Federal Reserve Bank 
of St. Louis Review, July/August, 85(4): 111-128. 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization. Industrial Statistics. New York, 2005. 
Wasmer,  Etienne;  Peter  Fredriksson;  Ana  Lamo;  Julián  Messina  and  Giovanni  Peri.  2006.  “The 
Macroeconomics of Education.” in Education and Training in Europe. Edited G. Brunello, P. Garibaldi. 
BIS Review 52/2007 
 9
Wurgler,  Jeffrey.  2000.  "Financial  Markets  and  the  Allocation  of  Capital."  Journal  of  Financial 
Economics, 58(1): 187-21. 
  10 
 BIS Review 52/2007
    BIS Review 52/2007 
 11
  12 
   BIS Review 52/2007
    BIS Review 52/2007 
 13
  14 
   BIS Review 52/2007
    BIS Review 52/2007 
 15
  16 
   BIS Review 52/2007
    BIS Review 52/2007 
 17
 18 
   BIS Review 52/2007
   BIS Review 52/2007 
 19
 20 
 BIS Review 52/2007
