Thomas Jordan: Currency reserve adjustments, the SIC payments system and 
financial market developments 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 14 June 2007. 
 In my remarks, I would like to address three topics. First, I will speak about the adjustments in the 
composition of our currency reserves. Then, I would like to comment on the Swiss Interbank Clearing 
(SIC)  payment  system  and  its  twenty  years  of  existence.  At  the  end,  I  will  say  a  few  words  about 
developments in the financial markets. 
Adjustments in the composition of currency reserves 
1.  
The  Swiss  National  Bank  is  adjusting  the  composition  of  its  currency  reserves.  Before  the  end  of 
September  2009  it  will  sell  250  tonnes  of  gold  and  increase  its  foreign  exchange  reserves  by  a 
corresponding amount. The overall level of currency reserves will remain unchanged. 
The gold sales fall within the bounds set by the second Gold Agreement of 8 March 2004, in which the 
central banks of the Eurosystem, plus the Sveriges Riksbank and the Swiss National Bank, agreed to 
limit  their  gold  sales  over  a  period  of  five  years,  beginning  on  28  September  2004.  The  Gold 
Agreement specifies that annual sales by all signatories may not exceed 500 tonnes and that the total 
sales volume over this period shall not amount to more than 2,500 tonnes. For the gold sales it was 
planning, the SNB was allocated a quota not claimed  by other central banks that were party to the 
agreement of 2004. The SNB has chosen an approach for its gold sales that will avoid market unrest, 
with regular sales transactions. 
The Swiss National Bank holds currency reserves in the form of foreign currency and gold, thereby 
ensuring that it has room for manoeuvre in its monetary policy at all times. As a result of the sharp rise 
in the price of gold, the proportion of the currency reserves held as gold has increased by about a 
quarter since mid 2005, from 33% to the current level of 42%. The purpose of the SNB's gold sales is 
to rebalance the composition of currency reserves with respect to its monetary policy requirements. 
Moreover, by reducing its gold reserves and increasing its foreign exchange reserves, the overall risk 
on  SNB  assets  will  decline.  Once  the  sales  have  been  completed,  the  Swiss  National  Bank's  gold 
holdings will amount to some 1,040 tonnes. 
Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC) to celebrate its 20th anniversary 
2.  
Over the next few days, the Swiss Interbank Clearing System SIC will celebrate its 20th anniversary. In 
1987,  the  introduction  of  the  SIC  payment  system  represented  a  revolution  for  Swiss  payment 
transactions. SIC was one of the first payment systems in the world of the type known as Real Time 
Gross Settlement (RTGS). 
Before the introduction of SIC, payments in Switzerland were first offset against each other through a 
system of eight clearing houses. The net positions were then settled through the banks’ sight deposits 
at the SNB. This system was extremely cumbersome, costly and fraught with large credit and systemic 
risks.  In  SIC  by  contrast,  all  payments  are  settled  individually  and  directly  via  sight  deposits  at  the 
SNB. Thus, the payments are final and irrevocable – just like cash payments. SIC is extremely efficient 
and has drastically reduced credit and systemic risks. It is one of the most secure and cost-effective 
systems in the world. 
Nowadays,  SIC  forms  the  backbone  of  Switzerland’s  payment  system.  Not  only  interbank  payment 
transactions, but also payment transactions between PostFinance and banks as well as cashless retail 
payment transactions are essentially carried out via SIC. In addition, the international foreign currency 
settlement  system,  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  (CLS),  is  linked  to  SIC.  SIC,  together  with  the 
trading platforms of SWX/Eurex and the securities settlement system SECOM of SIS, forms the Swiss 
Value Chain, Switzerland’s integrated financial market infrastructure. The SIC payment system is of 
utmost  importance  for  financial  stability  and  the  implementation  of  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy.  Our 
BIS Review 67/2007 
 1
monetary policy instruments are tailored to the palette of integrated SIC functions within the framework 
of the Swiss Value Chain. 
Initially, the SIC turnover in terms of value amounted to CHF 100 billion per working day; it currently 
stands at CHF 180 billion. The number of transactions, however, has increased far more markedly. 
One year after the SIC launch, approximately 130,000 transactions were processed each day. Now, 
twenty years later, an average of 1.3 billion – i.e. ten times more – transactions are carried out per 
working day. The growth trend for SIC looks set to continue its upward path. The rise in turnover and 
transactions depends largely on economic growth, technical innovations in payment instruments and 
developments in the Swiss financial centre. 
The  SNB  has  partially  outsourced  its  SIC  operations.  SIC  AG,  a  Telekurs  Group  company,  is 
responsible for technical operations and for further development of the system. The SNB steers the 
liquidity  in  the  SIC  system,  sets  the  conditions  for  participation  and  is  responsible  for  crisis 
management.  Cooperation  between  SIC  AG  and  the  SNB  is  excellent.  The  SNB  would  like  to 
congratulate  SIC  AG  and  Telekurs  Group  on  this  anniversary  and  thank  them  for  the  outstanding 
quality of their work. 
The  boards  of  directors  of  SWX  Group,  SIS  Group  and  Telekurs  Group  have  recently  signed  a 
declaration  of  intent  regarding  the  merger  of  their  companies,  with  the  goal  of  founding  a  Swiss 
financial centre infrastructure holding company. SIC AG, or rather Telekurs Group, would be part of 
this holding company. The SNB is affected by this development in different ways. On the one hand, we 
are a direct contractual partner of all three companies involved. On the other hand, it is our task to 
oversee  the  systemically  relevant  payments  and  securities  settlement  systems.  The  Swiss  Value 
Chain, run by the three companies, is of vital importance for the implementation of monetary policy. 
There is no alternative infrastructure for our monetary policy operations. Therefore, we will keep a very 
close watch on further developments in this area. 
Developments in the financial markets 
3.  
The positive underlying sentiment in the international financial markets remained largely unchanged in 
the first half of 2007, despite some turbulence in the stock markets, which was rather strong at times, 
and some difficulties in the US sub-prime mortgage market. 
On  27  February,  after  a  correction  in  the  Chinese  stock  market,  major  falls  in  share  prices  were 
recorded worldwide. The price decline temporarily gave rise to fears that the current bull market, which 
has lasted for many years now, could come to an end. After only a few days, however, the markets 
returned to normal. A few weeks later, most share indices had already compensated the losses (figure 
1). A further correction has occurred in the past few days. However, despite this turbulence, the rise in 
implicit volatilities – a measure of expected uncertainty – has been relatively insignificant and short-
lived in historical terms. Implicit volatilities are still at a very low level (figure 2). In addition, interest 
premiums on credit risks both for companies and emerging economies remain low, although yields on 
long-term government bonds have increased markedly since the beginning of March. 
As in the case of the financial market turbulence of May 2006, the latest correction on the stock market 
has been negotiated without any major difficulties. The positive underlying sentiment in the markets 
and  the  appetite  for  high-risk  investments  remained  for  the  most  part  unabated.  Not  least,  this  is 
probably  attributable  to  the  extensive  investment  requirements  worldwide  and  the  associated  high 
level of liquidity on the part of the investors. This large requirement for high-risk investments originates 
from the dynamic growth rate that has prevailed for some time now, a high savings ratio worldwide, 
the globalisation and liberalisation of the financial markets as well as the increasingly professionalised 
asset management by private, government and institutional investors. 
The durability of the valuation of high-risk investments is extremely difficult to assess, since valuations 
depend  on  subjective  expectations  of  future  earnings,  discount  rates  and  volatilities.  The  latest 
turbulence is a salutary reminder of the risks, however. In the past, risk premiums at levels lower than 
ever recorded before, rapidly rising prices for many high-risk investment categories and hectic activity 
in the area of company acquisitions have been signs of developments that were not sustainable in the 
long run. Therefore, market participants should not allow themselves to be distracted by the short-lived 
nature of financial market setbacks so far and simply extrapolate the favourable market trends of the 
past few years into the future. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2007
The steady rise in the prices of high-risk investments, the low risk premiums and low volatilities might 
possibly even have an influence on the external value of the Swiss franc. Let me comment on this 
statement in a little more detail. 
In  international  currency  portfolios,  the  Swiss  franc  has  always  been  a  safe  haven  currency.  In  the 
past,  this  was  reflected  in  the  fact  that  the  Swiss  franc  rose  against  other  investments  when  the 
situation was uncertain. Thus, the Swiss franc took on a kind of insurance function and many investors 
held Swiss franc investments to protect themselves against political and economic crises. 
Just  as  the Swiss  franc  is  particularly  attractive  as  a  safe  haven  in  stormy conditions,  there  is  little 
interest in the Swiss franc when the weather is calm. Due to the very low level of risk awareness and 
risk  aversion  at  present,  the  demand  generated  for  hedging  and  thus  for  Swiss  francs  is  weak. 
However,  in  the  past,  phases  of  calm  weather  in  foreign  exchange  markets  were  repeatedly 
interspersed  with  stormy  periods.  Therefore,  financial  market  participants  and  other  market  players 
with exchange rate exposures should remain aware of the exchange rate risks they are incurring. 
 
 BIS Review 67/2007 
 3
 4 
 BIS Review 67/2007
