Toshihiko Fukui: Growth, integration and monetary policy in East Asia 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  14th  International 
Conference  hosted  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of  Japan,  Tokyo, 
30 May 2007. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. It is my great honor to address the 14th international conference 
hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies. On behalf of my colleagues at the Bank of 
Japan,  I  welcome  all  the  distinguished  guests  from  central  banks,  international  organizations,  and 
academia. The theme of this year’s conference is “Growth, Integration and Monetary Policy in East 
Asia.” 
East Asia’s growing integration into the global economy 
II.  
Over  the  past  decades,  East  Asia  has  been  one  of  the  most  rapidly  growing  regions  in  the  world 
economy. Although the region suffered from a temporary setback owing to the financial crisis of the 
late 1990s, it has exhibited an impressive economic recovery. The average annual growth rate of East 
Asian  emerging  economies  since  2000  reached  7  percent,  substantially  exceeding  that  of 
industrialized economies. Since the crisis, there has been a considerable improvement in economic 
fundamentals  in  the  region.  Large  stocks  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  have  accumulated,  balance 
sheets  of  both  the  corporate  and  banking  sectors  have  improved,  and  structural  reforms  in  various 
areas have proceeded, all of which have contributed to making East Asia more resilient to external 
shocks. It is highly likely that East Asia will continue to play a major part in the sustained growth of the 
world economy. 
East Asia’s high growth has been accompanied by its deepening economic integration with the world. 
The  integration  is  taking place  at both  the  inter-regional and  intra-regional  levels.  It  is reported  that 
Asia’s share of world trade more than doubled during the past three decades. Intra-regional trade in 
East  Asia  also  increased  considerably.  The  share  of  East  Asia’s  intra-regional  trade  is  comparable 
with the NAFTA, although it is slightly lower than that of the EU. The increasing trade is a reflection of 
developments in the supply chain wherein each country specializes in the optimal parts of the global 
production network based on its resource endowment and comparative advantages. 
Meanwhile, it is notable that the rapid emergence of China is adding further momentum to the growth 
dynamism of the world economy in various ways. First, China’s buoyant domestic demand provides 
more  business  opportunities  for  the  rest  of  the  world.  China’s  role  in  the  world  economy  has  gone 
beyond a mere production base. It is increasingly a source of final demand as well. Second, China’s 
integration into the global economy is promoting transformation of trade, investment, and production 
patterns  of  other  economies.  Previously,  China  maintained  its  comparative  advantages  mainly  in 
production  of  goods  and  services  that  were  intensive  in  the  use  of  unskilled  labor.  In  recent  years, 
however,  it  has  attracted  sizable  foreign  direct  investment  from  developed  countries  and  thereby 
strengthened its competitiveness in production of capital-intensive or knowledge-intensive goods and 
services.  Such  changes  on  the  part  of  China  have  affected  comparative  advantages  of  other  East 
Asian economies as well and required them to reallocate domestic resources accordingly. 
The  efficient  reallocation  of  resources  could,  in  principle,  lead  to  higher  growth  of  the  region  as  a 
whole.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  adjustment  process  sometimes  entails  certain  costs.  If 
domestic markets and institutions are not flexible enough to facilitate reallocation of labor and financial 
resources from unproductive sectors to productive sectors smoothly, the cost might appear in the form 
of stagnant growth and unemployment. In this regard, it is of utmost importance for policymakers to 
continuously  pursue  reforms  to  ensure  that  their  domestic  systems  remain  responsive  to  structural 
changes in the economy. 
On the financial front, East Asia’s integration with the international financial system has also advanced 
steadily  in  recent  years.  The  integration  brings  benefits  to  the  economies  in  the  region.  With  more 
funding options available, borrowers in the region can raise funds on more favorable terms. With more 
global  investment  options  available,  investors  can  improve  the  risk  profile  of  their  portfolio  through 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 1
diversification. However, as financial integration deepens and international capital flows become more 
active, negative shocks originating from one country or region are easily transmitted to another country 
or region. Such transmission of shocks is not only from developed economies to emerging economies, 
but also vice versa. Asset prices, in particular, stock prices, are closely correlated both globally and 
regionally. It should be noted that, in such circumstances, asset prices tend to overshoot economic 
fundamentals from time to time, causing excessive volatility, which could in turn negatively affect the 
developments in the real economy. 
Issues for discussion at the conference 
III.  
Whereas  East  Asia’s  integration  could  bring  substantial  benefits  to  both  the  global  and  regional 
economies, possible side effects should be monitored carefully. It will be a challenge to reap maximum 
benefits from deepening economic and financial integration while minimizing costs that could possibly 
arise from such integration. Keeping these broad viewpoints in mind, let me raise several questions 
that I hope are discussed at the conference. 
First, what are the implications of East Asia’s growing economic and financial integration on the global 
business  cycle  and  price  movements?  The  mechanisms  through  which  integration  affects  various 
economic  variables  are  complicated.  Among  these,  the  relationship  between  global  economic 
integration and the inflation process is of particular interest to central bankers. Integration of emerging 
economies including East Asian economies appears to have exerted downward pressure on wages 
and prices through intensified competition among firms. Whether this trend will continue into the future 
will have important bearings on the conduct of monetary policy. 
Second, what issues are raised for central banks of industrialized economies and East Asian emerging 
economies by growing external imbalances? It has been argued that global economic and financial 
integration has contributed to making large current account imbalances more sustainable. East Asia 
has been a beneficiary of a substantial amount of private capital flows from developed economies, and 
at the same time, an exporter of an even greater amount of capital in the form of foreign reserves. This 
is not consistent with the prediction of traditional economic theory that capital flows from developed 
economies  to  emerging  economies  where  the  marginal  productivity  of  capital  is  higher.  A  question 
naturally arises as to whether the phenomenon has been driven by the fundamental misallocation of 
global  savings  and  investment.  In  any  case,  disorderly  unwinding  of  the  imbalances  and 
accompanying capital flows would have detrimental impacts on global financial stability. It is critical for 
us to carefully examine the factors underlying the imbalances and the desirable policy for both surplus 
and deficit economies. 
Third,  what  kind  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  regimes  are  appropriate  for  East  Asian  emerging 
economies  to  pursue  sustained  economic  growth  under  price  stability?  In  the  world  of  highly  open 
capital accounts, the effectiveness of monetary policy depends on the exchange rate regimes in place. 
After the crisis, there has been a tendency in emerging economies to abandon exchange rates as a 
nominal anchor. As a matter of fact, a growing number of economies have moved away from pegged 
exchange rate regimes toward relatively more flexible exchange rate regimes. So far, it seems that the 
benign  international  market  environment  for  emerging  economies  in  recent  years has  made  such  a 
transition more or less smooth. Nevertheless, the extent to which exchange rate fluctuation should be 
tolerated remains a challenging question. Looking ahead, the appropriate policy regimes could change 
over time. It is important for central banks to review the appropriateness of the policy regimes in light 
of  the  changes  in  their  economic  and  financial  structure  and  the  state  of  the  international  financial 
system. 
Conclusion 
IV.  
To conclude, East Asia has been in the process of dynamic transformation. We are still a long way 
from fully understanding the policy implications of East Asia’s integration into the global economy. I am 
looking  forward  to  learning  from  both  prominent  scholars  and  central  bankers  their  analyses  and 
perspectives on the issues. I would be delighted if all of you could take away some insights from the 
discussion. 
Thank you for your attention. 
Note:  “East  Asia”  or  “East  Asian  emerging  economies”  is  defined  as  comprising  of  People’s  Republic  of  China,  Hong  Kong, 
Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2007
