Y V Reddy: India – perspective for growth with stability 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Symposium on Current India 
at the Institute for Indian Economic Studies, Waseda University,Tokyo, 28 May 2007. 
 Professor Sakakibara, Governor Fukui, Ambassador Singh and the distinguished participants,  
I am honoured to be invited at the “Symposium on Current India” organised by the Waseda University 
Institute for Indian Economic Studies. I am grateful to Professor Sakakibara, a globally distinguished 
economic  statesman,  for  inviting  me  to  be  here.  It  is  also  a  privilege  to  share  a  platform  with 
universally respected Governor Fukui.  
There are strong complementarities in the economic endowments of India and Japan. For example, 
these relate to capital surplus, demography, technological specialistion and raw material endowment. 
We know that Indo-Japan trade and economic relations are moving on to a new trajectory with major 
new initiatives in Asia.  
Several infrastructure projects in India are being considered in joint-partnership with Japan. I hope that 
during the Symposium, vital issues and areas relevant for the mutual benefit of both countries would 
be highlighted.  
Keeping  in  view  the  topic  of  the  Symposium  and  my  locus  standi,  I  have  chosen  to  speak  on 
“Perspective for Growth with Stability” in the context of Indian economy.  
A quarter century of growth with stability (1980-2005)  
1.  
The Indian economy has been growing at an average growth rate of about 6.0 per cent over a period 
of 25 years since 1980-81 (India’s fiscal year is from 1st April to 31st March).  
The  important  point  to  note  is  that  not  only  the  growth  rate  of  the  Indian  economy  has  been  high 
during this period, but there has been considerable amount of stability also. A remarkable feature of 
India's growth experience has been its resilience to both global and domestic shocks.  
Several hypotheses are given to explain this level of consistency in India's growth rate despite the fact 
that we faced several exogenous shocks like contagion effect of international financial crises, security 
tensions, international sanctions, poor rainfall, etc.  
The  dominance  of  domestic  consumption,  contributing  on  an  average  to  almost  two-thirds  of  the 
overall  demand,  has helped  in  reducing  the  volatility  of  GDP.  Services sector  is  dominant  and  less 
volatile compared to agriculture and this phenomenon has also been imparting stability to the Indian 
growth  process.  The  larger  share  of  the  services  sector  growth  is  currently  providing  the  synergy 
between  services  and  manufacturing  industry,  which  is  enhancing  total  factor  productivity  and 
competitiveness in both. However, agriculture remains the most critical sector for ensuring sustained 
growth, over the medium term, to benefit large masses of people – especially in rural areas.  
Recent acceleration of growth and confidence 
2.  
After growing at around 6 per cent for 25 years, India has entered into what one might call a high-
growth phase, with the growth rate averaging 8.6 per cent per annum in the last four years since 2003-
04. During this period, the average inflation rate has been contained at about 5 per cent, which has 
been significantly lower than that of around 8 per cent in the previous three-and-a-half decades. In the 
last two years, the growth rate has averaged 9.1 per cent with GDP estimated to have grown at 9.2 
per cent in 2006-07. For the year 2007-08, the Reserve Bank projects the growth rate in GDP is to be 
around 8.5 per cent.  
During 2006-07, the average headline inflation rate remained at about 5.4 per cent despite some pick 
up in inflation rate to above 6 per cent in the terminal months of financial year 2006-07. There is some 
moderation since then and the headline inflation for the week ended May 12, 2007, is 5.27 per cent. 
For the year 2007-08, the Reserve Bank's policy endeavour would be to contain inflation close to 5.0 
per cent in 2007-08. In recognition of India’s evolving integration with the global economy and societal 
BIS Review 54/2007 
 1
preferences,  the  resolve,  going  forward,  is  to  condition  policy  and  expectations  for  inflation  in  the 
range of 4.0–4.5 per cent. This objective would be conducive for maintaining self-accelerating growth 
over the medium-term.  
A welcome development in regard to inflation and growth prospects is that the fiscal position of the 
Government,  both  central  and  States,  is  undergoing  consolidation  in  terms  of  targeted  reduction  in 
fiscal  deficit  indicators.  The  improvement  in  the  fiscal  position  of  several  States  is  particularly 
impressive.  
A notable recent development is that India is also becoming a major hub for manufacturing and export 
of manufactured products and some examples of global competitiveness of Indian industry may be in 
order.  Steel  production  in  India  is  now  amongst  the  lowest-cost  production  in  the  world. 
Pharmaceutical  and  biotech  firms  are  likewise  very  competitive  internationally.  In  recent  years,  we 
have  witnessed  the  coming  of  age  of  the  Indian  IT  multinationals,  indigenous  players  beginning  to 
build noticeable presence in other locations – through cross-border acquisitions, off-shore winning of 
contracts  and  organic  growth  in  other  low-cost  locations.  Indian  manufacturing  firms  are  acquiring 
firms  abroad  to  leverage  comparative  advantage  of  foreign  locations,  using  synergies  between  the 
parent  company  and  the  company  under  acquisition  to  gain  scale  economies  as  well  as  domain 
knowledge.  
It is a matter of satisfaction to the Reserve Bank of India that the financial sector has acquired greater 
strength,  efficiency  and  stability.  This  is  the  combined  effect  of  increased  competition,  regulatory 
measures aligned with international standards, conducive policy environment and motivation amongst 
the market players, including the banks. The money market has been progressively developed. The 
Government  securities  market  is  deep,  liquid,  vibrant  and  well  developed  in  terms  of  instruments, 
processes and participants. The exchange rate of the rupee has been flexible, particularly, in the last 
few  years  and  the  turnover  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  increased  considerably.  The  stock 
market has been opened to foreign institutional investors and is comparable with major international 
equity markets in terms of market capitalisation, turnover and systems and processes.  
True,  the  corporate  debt  market  in  India  is  somewhat  less  developed  relative  to  major  financial 
centres, but has a large potential in the medium term to raise resources particularly for infrastructure 
projects, housing and for corporate and municipal needs. Supply of institutional funds is likely to be 
enhanced  with  ongoing  transformation  in  insurance  and  pension  sectors.  The  well-developed 
government  securities  market,  the  strong  micro-structures  and  financial  infrastructure,  the  skills  of 
market participants should enable a very rapid and healthy growth of the debt markets in India.  
As far as India’s external sector is concerned, it has become resilient with the current account deficit 
being maintained at very modest levels after a couple of years’ marginal surplus. Exports have been 
growing  at  an  average  rate  of  around  24  per  cent  during  the  last  four  years.  Sustained  growth  in 
export  of  services  and  remittances  continued  to  provide  buoyancy  to  the  surplus  in  the  invisible 
account.  There  was  a  significant  strengthening  in  the  capital  account.  With  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves  above  US$  200  billion,  the  reserves  currently  exceed  the  country’s external  debt  of  about 
US$ 142.7 billion as at end December 2006, thereby reflecting improved external sector sustainability 
of the economy.  
The current mood in our country on Indian economy is best summed up in the words of our Prime 
Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh: 
"We  must  think  big  and  bold.  We  must  move  away  from  the  paradigm  of  incremental  growth  to  a 
paradigm of exponential growth and growth into uncharted territory." 
Explorations on economic prospects 
3.  
There  are  sound  reasons  for  the  optimism  expressed  in  our  Prime  Minister’s  statement  and  the 
overarching  policy  challenge  at  this  stage  is  to  manage  the  transition  to  a  higher-growth  path  in  a 
sustainable manner by containing inflationary pressures. In this context, I would like to explore here 
some relevant issues. 
Savings-investment: favourable trends  
(i)  
The strengthening of economic activity in the recent years has been supported by persistent increase 
in domestic investment rate from 22.9 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to 33.8 per cent in 2005-06 coupled 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2007
with an efficient use of capital. Domestic saving rate has also improved from 23.5 per cent to 32.4 per 
cent during the same period. This was made possible due to improvements in both public sector and 
private corporate savings. Given the fact that Indian per capita income is increasing rapidly and policy 
efforts towards financial deepening for achieving a more inclusive growth are underway, savings rate 
in India could even rise further in the medium to long run. The level of saving rates should help finance 
the investment needs of the economy especially for development of social and physical infrastructure. 
As  already  mentioned  in  regard  to  financial  sector  developments,  especially  the  corporate  debt 
market, we should expect efficient financial intermediation to match the growth in savings, especially 
long-term contractual savings, through insurance companies and pension funds and meet the growing 
demands for long-term funds for infrastructure in India.  
Evidence of increasing productivity  
(ii) 
Yet another positive factor for India is the trend in productivity. Some of the recent studies relating to 
India have indicated an increase in total factor productivity (TFP) growth in recent years. For instance, 
Rodrick and Subramanian, in an IMF working paper of 2004, point out that India seems to have large 
amount  of  productivity  growth  from  a  relatively  modest  reforms.  A  more  recent  paper  by  Barry 
Bosworth,  Susan  Collins,  and  Arvind  Virmani  (2006)  confirms  this  trend.  They  find  that  output  per 
worker grew only 1.3 per cent annually during 1960-1980, when GDP growth was also at a low of 3.4 
per cent. TFP growth was barely above zero, according to their calculations, indicating that growth in 
output was almost entirely driven by growth in inputs. In contrast, growth in output per worker nearly 
tripled to 3.8 per cent during 1980-2004, while TFP increased ten-fold to 2 per cent.  
The evidence of an increase in the growth of labour productivity is also available from other studies 
(Economic  Intelligence  Unit,  2007).  A  Study  by  Tata  Services  (2003)  found  that  for  the  all-India 
manufacturing sector, labour productivity (output per unit of labour) has increased significantly during 
the post-reform period, compared to the pre-reform period.  
Physical infrastructure: grounds for optimism  
(iii)  
Admittedly, a critical constraint to economic growth in India in recent years has been the infrastructure 
deficit. The Approach Paper to the 11th Five Year Plan has estimated that for accelerating the GDP 
growth  from  7  to  9  per  cent,  there  is  a  need  for  accelerating  the  current  level  of  investment  in 
infrastructure from 4.6 per cent of GDP to 8 per cent during the Plan period. The issue of providing 
adequate and quality infrastructure has already attracted attention of policy makers at all levels. The 
Committee on Infrastructure, headed by the honourable Prime Minister, has estimated the investment 
requirements of the Indian economy during the 11th Five-Year Plan at around US$ 345 billion, i.e., 
roughly 8 per cent of GDP, every year.  
There  are  several  grounds  for  optimism  in  regard  to  overcoming  the  problems  relating  to  physical 
infrastructure,  provided  the  framework  of  public  policy,  especially  regulatory  environment,  is 
conducive. First, there is adequate generation of domestic savings while India has also become an 
attractive destination for foreign capital.. As in the past, over 90 to 95 per cent of investment could be 
funded by domestic savings. As already mentioned, recent developments in insurance, pension, debt 
market, fiscal side, etc., add to the prospects of efficient and adequate domestic financing options for 
infrastructure  development.  Second,  the  infrastructure  investments  in  India  are  basically  demand 
driven  and  hence,  are  likely  to  have  a  short  gestation.  Third,  there  are  significant  domestic 
entrepreneurial-,  construction-,  technological-skill  capabilities  to  execute  the  projects  efficiently  and 
promptly. Fourth, the growth and quality of services sector in India adds to the potential for enhanced 
productivity  in  investments  in  physical  infrastructure.  Finally,  a  dynamic  mix  of  public-private  and 
domestic-foreign partnership is already evident in many sectors such as airports. 
Improvements in fiscal balance  
(iv) 
It is true that the aggregate stock of public debt of the Centre and States as a percentage of GDP is 
high, currently at around seventy five per cent. However, there are signs of improvement even after 
adjusting  for  recent  favourable  cyclical  factors.  The  fiscal-management  of  Central  Government  is 
broadly in the direction of achieving the targeted ratio of gross fiscal deficit (GFD) to gross domestic 
product (GDP) to three per cent and eliminate revenue deficit (RD) by 2008-09. It may be noted that 
the GFD / GDP and RD / GDP ratios are already budgeted to reduce to 3.3 per cent and 1.5 per cent 
in 2007-08. In the recent years, there has been a significant improvement in State level finances also. 
BIS Review 54/2007 
 3
The GFD of all States declined from 4.7 per cent of GDP in 1999-2000 to 2.7 per cent of GDP in 2006-
07, while the RD came down from 2.7 per cent of GDP to 0.1 per cent of GDP. Most States have also 
enacted fiscal responsibility legislations.  
It is also useful to note that there are several unique features of management of public debt in India, 
which  imparts  overall  stability  to  macro-economy.  First,  States  have  no  direct  exposure  to  external 
debt. Second, almost the whole of public debt is local currency denominated and held almost wholly 
by residents. Third, public debt, of both Centre and States is actively and prudently managed by the 
Reserve Bank of India ensuring comfort to financial markets without any undue volatility.. Fourth, the 
government securities market has developed significantly in recent years in terms of turnover, depth 
and participants, and significant further improvements are underway. Fifth, stable contractual savings 
supplement marketable debt in financing deficits. Finally, direct monetary financing of primary issues 
of debt has been discontinued since April 2006. Hence, the high stock of public debt relative to GDP 
has not so far been a matter of concern as far as stability is concerned, while it is recognised that long 
term sustainability would call for a gradual reduction to prudential levels.  
Demographic dividend and challenge  
(v)  
India has the world’s youngest and fastest growing working-age population. At present, about 36 per 
cent of Indian population is below 15 years age. It is expected that the average age of the population 
in India will decline, before it begins to rise after 25 years. In contrast to the rise in the median age of 
population in the industrialised countries from early 30s to early 40s over the last two decades, the 
median age in India has increased from 20 in 1980 to 24 in 2005. According to the projections made 
by the United Nations, the median age in India would cross 30, only by 2025 and would remain around 
35 till 2040. In 2020, the average Indian will be only 29 years old, compared with the average age of 
37 years in China and the US, 45 in west Europe and 48 in Japan.  
While  there  are  some  inter-regional  differences  in  demographic  features,  given  the  free  labour 
mobility, for the country as a whole, the relatively prolonged favourable demographic transition would 
have an important bearing on the overall economic growth process. 
Given  our  emphasis  on  human  resource  development  in  terms  of  producing  large  number  of 
engineers, technologists, doctors, etc., it is expected that a large and young population of India would 
have high labour productivity along with lower need for social security and health related expenditures. 
This  is  expected  to  power  the  growth  process  of  not  only  India,  but  would  increasingly  meet  the 
growing need of other industrialised countries.  
The  demographic  process  would,  no  doubt,  create  a  large  and  growing  labour  force.  However,  the 
window of opportunity provided by a relatively large and young workforce in India needs a conducive 
social policy environment for getting realised. In this context, it is recognised that further efforts are 
needed at accelerated pace to create a quality social infrastructure in terms of education and health 
which can help the easy and productive absorption of the prospective ''youth bulge''. Public policy is 
increasingly  aware  of  the  need  to  give  high  priority  to  education  and  health  and  also  generating 
employment  that  is  consistent  with  global  competitiveness.  In  other  words,  to  reap  the  rewards  of 
demographic dividend, public-policy has a critical role to play.  
Poverty and employment: the litmus tests  
(vi)  
The growth story in any developing country is incomplete without assessing its impact on the poverty 
and employment situation. The number of people living below the poverty line in India has decreased 
from  around  36  per  cent  in  1993-94  to  22.0  per  cent  in  2004-05.  The  average  decline  in  the 
percentage of people below the poverty line over the period 1993-94 to 2004-05 is 0.74 percentage 
points per year. India has ranked 126th, in terms of human development index (HDI) according to the 
UNDP Human Development Report, 2006. The most daunting task for public policy is to ensure that 
adequate work is found for millions of poor people and in particular to the growing number of young 
persons. 
As per broad results of a recent job survey published in one of the popular magazines, the current 
high  growth  phase  is  not  a  jobless  growth,  but  now  the  jobs  are  created  in  almost  all  sectors  as 
compared to the 1990s. According to the report and other anecdotal evidence, the benefits of recent 
surge in growth rate of GDP are not just restricted to large cities, but people in other urban and semi 
urban areas are also gaining.  
4 
 BIS Review 54/2007
While there is some evidence of reduction in under employment and disguised unemployment in the 
informal  sector  and  larger  work  opportunities,  the  provision  of  productive  employment  is  of  highest 
priority in India.  
5.  
Explorations on the financial sector 
Strong and resilient banking sector – the way ahead 
(i) 
While the broad objectives of the financial sector reforms were to enhance efficiency and productivity, 
the  process  of  reforms  was  initiated  in  a  gradual  and  properly  sequenced  manner  so  as  to  have  a 
reinforcing effect. The approach has been to consistently upgrade the financial sector by adopting the 
international best practices through a consultative process.  
The banking system in India has undergone significant changes during last 16 years. There have been 
new banks, new instruments, new windows, new opportunities and, along with all this, new challenges. 
While  deregulation  has  opened  up  new  vistas  for  banks  to  augment  incomes,  it  has  also  entailed 
greater  competition  and  consequently  greater  risks.  The  traditional  face  of  banks  as  mere  financial 
intermediaries has since altered and risk management has emerged as the defining attribute. Banks 
have been provided significant operational freedom in their resource allocation using their commercial 
judgements in a market oriented environment. The capital adequacy ratio has increased to 12.4 per 
cent for scheduled commercial banks as at end March 2006, which is much above the international 
norm. Commercial banks’ net profits were at 0.9 per cent of total assets during 2004-05 and 2005-06, 
up  from  0.16  per  cent  in  1995-96.  The  net  non-performing  assets  declined  to  1.3  per  cent  of  net 
advances during 2005-06 from 2.0 per cent in 2004-05. According to the preliminary financial results 
available for most of the banks for the year 2006-07, the financial soundness has improved further. 
Our  banking  sector  reform  has  been  unique  in  the  world  in  that  it  combines  a  comprehensive 
reorientation of competition, regulation and ownership in a non-disruptive and cost-effective manner. 
Indeed our banking reform is a good illustration of the dynamism of the public sector in managing the 
overhang problems and the pragmatism of public policy in enabling the domestic and foreign private 
sectors to compete and expand.  
The way ahead for the financial sector as whole, given the strong foundations and basic institutional 
framework, relates to the pace of further deregulation and liberalisation, consistent with the progress of 
reform  in  the  real  and  fiscal  sectors.  The  Reserve  Bank  and  the  commercial  banks  have  been 
preparing  to  implement  Basel  II.  In  practice,  within  the  given  legal  framework,  priorities  have  to  be 
appropriately  set  ensuring  implementation  of  intended  reforms  in  banking  sector  in  tune  with  the 
evolving domestic and external developments. 
Financial markets – efficient and developing 
(ii)  
Development of financial markets received a strong impetus from financial sector reforms since the 
early 1990s. Reforms in financial markets were carefully sequenced ensuring that they were in sync 
with  the  real  sector.  The  reforms  were  also  important  for  developing  the  environment  for  effective 
monetary  policy  making  and  monetary  transmission  mechanisms.  As  in  other  areas  of  reform,  a 
gradual approach was followed in respect of development of financial markets. This has served India 
well  since  it  helps  in  continuous  rebalancing  of  the  various  elements  depending  on  global  and 
domestic  developments  and  thus  maximises  benefits  while  minimising  costs  associated  with  the 
process of financial integration. In this approach, the pace and sequencing of financial liberalisation 
could  be  tempered  keeping  in  view  the  degree  of  comfort  in  moving  forward  in  a  credible  way. 
Gradualism also enables harmonisation with reforms in other sectors of the economy.  
A  wide  range  of  regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  were  introduced  in  a  planned  manner  over  a 
period  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  financial  markets.  These  included  development  of  market  micro 
structure,  removal  of  structural  bottlenecks,  introduction/  diversification  of  new  players/instruments, 
free  pricing  of  financial  assets,  relaxation  of  quantitative  restrictions,  better  regulatory  systems, 
introduction  of  new  technology,  improvement  in  trading  infrastructure,  clearing  and  settlement 
practices  and  greater  transparency.  Prudential  norms  were  introduced  early  in  the  reform  phase, 
followed by interest rate deregulation and gradual lowering of statutory pre-emptions. These policies 
were supplemented by strengthening of institutions, encouraging good market practices, rationalised 
tax structures and enabling legislative and accounting framework.  
BIS Review 54/2007 
 5
Going forward, a judicious mix of appropriate policy, strong macro economy and sound and resilient 
financial system would be necessary as the Indian economy moves up in the ladder from an emerging 
market economy towards a more mature economy. As development of financial markets is an ongoing 
process, initiatives to further deepen and widen the various segments of financial markets would have 
to be continuously pursued. As the economy ascends a higher growth path, with greater opening up 
and financial integration with the rest of the world, the financial sector development in all its aspects 
will need further scaling up along with corresponding measures to continue regulatory modernisation 
and strengthening. Since the overall objective of maintaining price stability in the context of economic 
growth  and  financial  stability  will  remain,  the  effort  will  be  to  harmonise  the  deregulation  and 
liberalisation of financial markets with the domestic developments in real as well as fiscal sectors and 
global developments in international financial architecture.  
Capital account: calibrated liberalisation  
(iii) 
Drawing  on  the  experience  of  the  past  decade  and  a  half,  India’s  approach  to  capital  account 
liberalisation can be summarised as follows: First, capital account liberalisation is treated as a process 
and not an event. Second, it is recognised that there may be links between the current and capital 
accounts  and  hence  procedures  are  in  place  to  avoid  capital  flows  in  the  guise  of  current  account 
transactions.  Third,  capital  account  liberalisation  is  kept  in  tune  with  other  reforms.  The  extent  and 
timing  of  capital  account  liberalisation  is  properly  sequenced  with  other  concomitant  developments 
such  as  strengthening  of  banking,  fiscal  consolidation,  market  development  and  integration,  trade 
liberalisation, and the changing domestic and external economic environments. Fourth, the pace and 
sequencing of liberalisation is responsive to domestic developments, especially in the monetary and 
financial sectors, and the evolving international financial architecture. As liberalisation advances, the 
administrative  measures  are  reduced  and  price-based  measures  are  increased,  but  the  freedom  to 
change the mix and reimpose controls is demonstrably available. Fifth, a hierarchy is established in 
the sources and types of capital flows. The priority has been to liberalise inflows relative to outflows, 
but  all  outflows  associated  with  inflows  have  been  totally  freed.  Sixth,  significant  liberalisation  on 
outflows on behalf of individuals, corporates, and mutual funds is underway consistent with significant 
strengthening of the external sector. Finally, while pursuing the medium-term objective of fuller capital 
account  liberalisation,  currently  the  need  for  pursuing  controls  of  a  prudential  nature  particularly  on 
financial  intermediaries  and  contextually,  more  active  management  of  capital  account  is  duly 
recognised. 
Going  forward,  India  plans  to  continue  its  carefully  calibrated  gradualist  approach  as  it  enables 
harmonisation  with  reforms  in  other  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  pace  of  further  liberalisation  will, 
however,  depend  on  domestic  factors,  especially  further  progress  in  reforms  in  real  sector,  fiscal 
consolidation,  and  the  evolving  financial  architecture;  and  international  developments  in  addition  to 
achievement of certain “concomitants”, indicated in the latest Tarapore Committee on the subject.  
Concluding remarks 
6.  
Friends, I hope that I have given you a bird's eye view of performance of the Indian economy, in terms 
of  growth  and  stability.  As  mentioned,  there  are  challenges,  especially  in  the  area  of  physical 
infrastructure,  agriculture  and  delivery  of  essential  public  services  such  as  education  and  health.  I 
have also explained that there are some grounds for optimism that we in India are on a path of self-
accelerating developmental mode with some inherent and unique strengths. The growth dynamics in 
India are led by widespread and well-dispersed entrepreneurial talent with a penchant for innovation. It 
is  a  business-led  growth  with  large  networks  of  markets  both  in  real  economy  and  financial  sector, 
transiting from emerging to a fully mature status. The growth is led significantly by domestic demand – 
both consumption and investment. We have remarkable political system stability. India is a country of 
great  diversities,  but  with  incredibly  harmonious  coexistence  of  various  religions,  languages  and  a 
unified culture. Hence, personally, I believe that India has inherent strengths, in terms of assimilating 
constructively, healthy, new and diversified values to fit into the international systems very smoothly 
and efficiently. 
Let me conclude by thanking the organisers again for giving me this opportunity to be with you and 
mutually benefit from the deliberations. 
6 
 BIS Review 54/2007
