Erkki Liikanen: CashSSP – the cash single shared platform 
Remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, on the occasion of signing the Cash 
Single  Shared  Platform  agreement  between  the  Bank  of  Finland  and  the  central  banks  of  Belgium, 
Luxembourg and the Netherlands, Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 16 March 2007. 
 We are here today to witness what could be considered a historic event. The governors of two central 
banks will in some minutes sign an agreement, by which the Bank of Finland becomes a partner of the 
group  using  a  joint  information  system  for  central  bank  cash  management  –  CashSSP  –  the  cash 
single shared platform.  
I  am  glad  that  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  a  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB 
responsible  for  the  banknotes  directorate,  was  able  to  join  this  important  event,  together  with  our 
Belgian guests and partners. I know that also my colleagues from the Bank of Finland appreciate the 
presence of you all.  
As we all know, CashSSP is a product originally developed years ago by the National Bank of Belgium 
to  manage  its  own  and  the  country's  cash  handling  requirements.  Over  the  years,  the  product  has 
been updated and today it is capable of meeting the broad range of requirements that are placed on 
such systems.  
The Benelux countries enjoy a tradition of strong and long-standing cooperation, on top of which, they 
have always been known for their progressive thinking and open approach to change. It is therefore 
completely  natural  that,  when  it  came  time  to  consider  modernising  their  own  systems,  they  first 
looked to their closest neighbours. This was also the case when introduction and development of the 
Eurosystem brought with it pressures to change the respective national information systems for cash 
handling,  for  example.  The  Netherlands  and  Luxembourg  were  natural  partners  for  Belgium  –  both 
already users of CashSSP.  
How then did the Bank of Finland come in on the project? We have in place information systems which 
we  ourselves  have  set  up  to  meet  our  currency  supply  needs,  and  which  –  both  technically  and 
functionally – are becoming outdated. Almost two years ago, planning started to replace the systems 
with new ones, and we were already reaching the point where a project plan to build a new system 
was ready, only formal approval was pending.  
At the same time, however, we received information on the Belgian system and their willingness to 
offer the system to other euro area central banks. We took up the matter with the NBB, and it soon 
appeared  that  CashSSP,  as  it  had  already  been  expressively  named,  would  also  suit  the  Bank  of 
Finland's needs. For us, the key selection criteria were:  
• 
It enables the streamlining of work flows in the best and most economically sensible way, by 
making widespread use of modern bar code techniques, for instance.  
It  reduces  the  need  for  our  own  resource  input  in  IT  by  offering  an  almost  fully-fledged 
system as well as the equipment to run the system.  
It  supports  harmonisation  of  the  Eurosystem's  cash  distribution  function  towards  a  Single 
Euro Cash Area.  
It is in line with the Eurosystem's mission, strategic objectives and organisational principles.  
• 
Having decided to join the CashSSP, negotiations were commenced on the necessary agreements, 
pricing  policy  and  a  more  detailed  operational  framework.  It  is  clear,  that  when  trying  to  find  the 
common denominator in information technology, business options and in sharing costs and benefits, 
negotiations are not necessarily simple or easy.  
In the course of the process, our cooperation partners have, however, shown understanding for the 
questions  we  have  raised,  and  the  negotiations  have  taken place  in  a  very  constructive  and  fruitful 
atmosphere; as an expression of these efforts we are now here to sign the agreement, and the Bank 
of Finland's CashSSP project can be formally launched. At the practical level, we have already been 
preparing this project for a long time.  
  BIS Review 26/2007 
 1
Despite  a  comprehensive  cooperation  agreement,  the  success  of  CashSSP  will  be  based  on 
confidence  between  all  parties  involved  and  on  the  quality  of  ongoing  cooperation.  The  parties  are 
committed to help each other to the best of their ability. An excellent example of this is the assistance 
that the NBB is already providing to us in the form of system installation and user training.  
In a broader context, cooperation by National Central Banks in the CashSSP project is a significant 
case  of  the  new,  truly  European  approach  to  central  bank  operations,  which  is  evolving  within  the 
Eurosystem. Member NCB's are now looking for ways to deepen their cooperation in a flexible and 
creative manner, developing areas of specialisation on the basis of their relative strengths.  
This  is,  without  doubt,  a  welcome  development.  According  to  the  Organisational  Principles  of  the 
Eurosystem, as adopted by the Governing Council, "potential synergies and economies of scale shall 
be  identified  and  exploited  to  the  extent  feasible",  and  "the  Eurosystem  shall  energetically  pursue 
organisational options that ensure effectiveness, efficiency and prompt action".  
Developing our division of labour is especially important, as the Eurosystem needs to improve its cost 
efficiency to a significant degree. Many activities have large fixed costs and thus delegating them to 
some central banks avoids duplication of these costs. This kind of pooling is actually one of the most 
promising ways of pursuing the efficiency goals set out in the Organisational Principles.  
For these reasons, the Bank of Finland takes a very positive attitude to this drive for efficiency through 
deeper cooperation. However, some conditions for further progress in the field should still be borne in 
mind.  
In  particular,  governance  and  accounting  systems  must  be  built  very  carefully  for  each  "pooling" 
arrangement, ensuring that costs and benefits are adequately measured and shared, and that users 
can get sufficient control of how the pooled services are produced and developed. This is, of course, 
necessary  for  the  kind  of  trust  required  for  the  delegation  of  tasks.  It  is  also  in  conformity  with  our 
Organisational Principles which emphasize the values of transparency and accountability.  
Secondly, we expect that all Eurosystem central banks can and will participate in the emerging division 
of  labour  on  the  basis  of  reasonable  reciprocity.  This  reciprocity  also  conforms  nicely  with  the 
Organizational  Principles,  according  to  which  "all  members  of  the  Eurosystem  shall  contribute 
strategically and operationally to the goals of the system".  
The Bank of Finland for its part – as with other NCB's – actively analyses its relative strengths and 
considers its capacity to participate in the emerging division of labour in a balanced way; not only as a 
user of pooled services, but also as a service provider. So I expect that our willingness to participate in 
future pooling schemes will be in some proportion to our prospects of hosting some of the services, 
where we feel we can usefully contribute.  
However, I expect that the conditions which I have mentioned here will not prove any great obstacles 
for  progress  in  the  important  further  deepening  of  operational  cooperation  within  the  Eurosystem. 
Good governance models for pooling schemes will be developed – perhaps along the lines marked by 
the  CashSSP  project  –  and  NCB's  will  find  their  niches,  in  which  they  can  make  their  strongest 
contribution to the success and efficiency of the system as a whole.  
To  finish,  let  me  again  congratulate  all  those  who  have  worked  in  order  to  make  this  cooperation 
agreement  possible  and  also  express  my  appreciation  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium  for  its  very 
useful and innovative work. Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 26/2007
