Ardian Fullani: Concerns of the prospective ERM II members  
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  conference  “The  Mission  of 
Contemporary Central Bank” organized by the National Bank of Poland, Warsaw, 15 December 2006.  
 Your Honor Mr. Balcerowicz,  
Honorable Governors,  
Dear Colleagues,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Balcerowicz and the National Bank of Poland for the 
invitation. It is an honor for me to take part in this discussion and to share my thoughts concerning the 
challenges facing prospective ERM II members.  
The central theme of this conference – the mission of the contemporary central bank with the focus on 
euro adoption – is of crucial importance for countries aspiring to become members of the big EU family 
in  the  not-too-distant  future.  Drawing  from  the  experience  of  current  and  prospective  members, 
accession to this family is a complex and challenging process.  
As  a  test  of  the  nominal  convergence  of  a  country,  the  ERM  II  mechanism  has  attracted  a  lot  of 
academic  interest  and  criticism.  Conceptually  speaking,  the  ERM  II  directly  precedes  the  full 
integration in the EMU.  
ERM II as a step towards EMU  
(I) 
To put the ERM II in a proper context, we need to be clear on the fact that it is an early necessary step 
before  Euro  adoption.  Therefore,  entry  into  ERMII  is  conditional  on  the  economic  and  political 
readiness  for  entering  the  EMU.  Several  considerations  need  to  be  made.  By  adopting  a  single 
currency,  the  country  foregoes  independent  monetary  policy  and  the  central  bank  can  not  act  as  a 
lender of last resort. The loss of monetary policy independence can be problematic if a country has 
achieved  little  in  the  way  of  real  convergence  (both  structural  and  cyclical  convergence)  and  is 
susceptible to asymmetric shocks. On the other hand, the loss of the lender of last resort function by 
the national central banks implies high and protracted fiscal costs in the case of financial crises. For 
this reason, a healthy and resilient financial system would be required for participating in the monetary 
union.  
It is partly a reflection of these economic challenges that the new EU members appear to be 
following  different  trajectories  towards  EMU.  On  one  hand,  Slovenia,  the  Baltic  countries, 
Malta, Cyprus and Slovakia have proceeded to join the ERM II with a view to enter EMU in the 
future. The other countries, notably the larger Central European ones, have opted to stay out of 
the ERM II in order to have more time to do the necessary economic adjustments.  
Challenges of the ERM II  
(II)  
Once  the  economic  argument  and  the  political  consensus  are  strong  enough  to  support  EMU 
membership, the acceding country can decide to enter the ERM II mechanism. What could go wrong 
for accession countries during the ERM II? Some often-cited issues are related to fiscal consolidation, 
financial stability and the choice of the central parity. Let me say a few words about these issues.  
- 
The  exchange  rate  stability  is  one  of  the  five  (nominal)  Maastricht  convergence  criteria. 
Consumer price stability, long-term interest rate convergence and fiscal consolidation are the 
other conditions a country has to fulfill in order to gain EMU membership. Clearly, the burden 
of  ensuring  compliance  with  these  conditions  does  not  fall  solely  and  exclusively  on  the 
monetary policy authorities. The fiscal and labor policies must be aligned with the monetary 
policy  objectives  and  the  achievement  of  political  commitment  to  ERM  II  is  of  paramount 
importance.  I  find  the  practice  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  dialogue,  as  stipulated  in 
Accession Strategies of some of these countries, a commendable achievement.  
BIS Review 1/2007 
 1
 Financial instability has been identified as a potential negative outcome of the bilateral fixing 
of the exchange rate for accession countries. Limited exchange rate flexibility under ERM-II 
and  disinflation  conditions  expose  the  EU  acceding  countries  to  large  ‘convergence  play’ 
capital  inflows.1  If  the  exchange  rate  in  accession  countries  is  forced  to  fluctuate  within  a 
relatively  narrow  band,  the  outcome  might  be  additional  and  unnecessary  inflation.  The 
central  bank’s  reaction  to  increasing  inflation  would  restrict  economic  growth.  Such  an 
outcome is even more likely in the presence of the Balassa-Samuelson effects, commonly 
experienced by the transition economies.2 In such a scenario, the dual task of preserving the 
domestic and international value of the currency can be jeopardized. It is on these grounds 
that the ERM II design has come under attack, as an unnecessarily lengthy period.3  
Thus,  it  is  not  surprising  that  some  acceding  countries  prefer  to  stay  there  for  the  shortest  time 
possible.  
- 
The  last  issue  I  would  like  to  discuss  is  the  determination  of  the  central  parity  rate.  The 
potential implications of an exchange rate misalignment are large, as the corrective burden 
would fall on the real sector. An undervaluation or overvaluation of the exchange rate would 
result  in  higher  inflation  or  lower  economic  growth  until  the  real  exchange  rate  returns  to 
equilibrium.  In  the  absence  of  a  nominal  exchange  rate  channel  the  adjustment  process 
would tend to be slow.  
Now let me briefly turn to the policy implications the aforementioned issues pose.  
The ECB policy stance on ERM II (ECB, 2003) emphasizes the primacy of the inflation objective 
over the exchange rate stability. Approaching the EMU in the context of an IT regime seems 
quite  a  plausible  option,  and  one  which  is  even  encouraged  by  the  ECB.  The  period  of 
residence in the ERM II needs however to be as short as possible, so as to avoid the inherent 
incompatibility of these two targets in the face of the Balassa-Samuelson effects and increased 
capital inflows. The countries approaching the EMU from a fixed exchange rate regime might 
have a different perspective on the subject. However, even these countries will experience the 
Balassa-Samuelson effects, facing a difficulty to reconcile the fulfilment of the exchange rate 
and price stability criteria. At the same time, given the wide fluctuation bands that are foreseen 
by the ERM II template, the credibility gain is likely to be marginal.  
Policy implications  
(III)  
As  a  conclusion,  let  me  re-emphasize  the  need  for  a  careful  approach  to  the  EMU  in  that  a 
certain degree of real economic and structural convergence is needed. The EMU membership 
can  not  be  delayed  by  much  however.  First,  a  really  high  degree  of  economic  convergence 
might  require  a  lengthy  period  of  time  to  be  achieved  and  people  could  perceive  an 
enlargement  without  EMU  as  incomplete.  Second,  in  adopting  the  single  currency  the 
exchange  rate  risk  will  be  eliminated,  resulting  in  positive  impulses  to  the  financial  market 
development.  Thirdly,  the  endogeneity  forces  of  trade  and  financial  integration  discussed  in 
the literature might be an additional driver of real convergence that is worth exploring. Neither 
economic theory nor central banking practices offer an optimal approach to ERM II from the 
point of view of the monetary regime. The alternative theories agree however, on the need to 
stay there for the shortest time possible  
To conclude my speech, let me briefly say a few words on the Albanian case.  
                                                       
1   See Begg et al., (2002). 
2  
It  is  worth  remembering  that  the  Maastricht  criteria  were  designed  to  ensure  the  nominal  convergence  of  industrial 
economies with roughly similar economic structures. Their validity in ensuring the convergence of transition economies is an 
issue that is hotly contested by several economists (see Buiter et al., 2002). 
3   See Buiter and Grafe (2002) and Begg et al. (2002). 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2007
The Bank of Albania approach to EU accession  
(IV)  
The monetary policy of the Bank of Albania focuses on maintaining price stability through the control of 
monetary aggregates which are used as intermediate target. Indirect instruments are used to transmit 
interest rate and liquidity signals to the market. Repo rate is the leading indicator for short term interest 
rates while repo and reverse-repo operations are used to manage liquidity.  
Over the last five years the Bank of Albania stability oriented monetary policy has generated low and 
stable inflation; it has also ensured that medium and long run inflation expectations have been well 
contained.  
The economic growth has been robust at around 5-6 percent of GDP, while enjoying a high degree of 
financial stability. (In other words, it seems like we are already close to the ERM II standards.) Such 
results reflect the opinion that economic convergence should not be held back by the political one.  
Political processes dictate that ERM II and EMU should be preceded by entry into the EU. The Bank of 
Albania has a clear view of the EU accession process. The design of the current and future monetary 
policy strategies is in line with the ultimate objective of EU accession.  
- 
On the policy side, it is striving to maintain monetary conditions in line with the Maastricht 
Criteria. In this respect, Bank of Albania is carefully considering all available alternatives of 
monetary  policy  regimes,  among  which  priority  is  given  to  fully  fledged  inflation  targeting 
strategy.  
This framework will provide a more sophisticated approach to decision-making and will create a better 
platform for communicating our commitment to price stability, ultimately leading to a better anchoring 
of inflation expectations. However, the choice of the new regime will be a conditional decision based 
upon results of current ongoing research, evaluation of the preconditions and building up of capacities. 
To  this  end,  we  are  carefully  refining  our  technical  capacities  and  decision-making  processes, 
following the necessary preconditions, working to achieve real independence for the monetary policy, 
upgrading our analytical capacities and designing appropriate internal processes.  
- 
On the structural side, the Bank of Albania is also pushing the reform agenda in the financial 
sector. The reform agenda in the Albanian financial sector aims at gradual implementation of 
the  Acquis  Communnautaire  standards  in  banking  legislation.  We  are  revising  the  legal 
infrastructure.  
In this regard, a new Draft Banking Law is prepared by the Bank of Albania; likewise a new Law on 
Securities will be introduced shortly. In addition, efforts are underway to revise legislation on Pension 
and Investment Funds, and draft a Law on the Payments Systems, which will substitute several sub-
legal  acts  issued  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  until  now.  Prudential  regulations  have  been  tightened  in 
response to rapid credit growth and intensified competition in the banking system. We are working to 
ensure proper supervision over the parts of the Albanian financial sector that are outside the Bank of 
Albania’s jurisdiction, while trying to preserve fair competition across the sector. The Bank of Albania 
is  assisting  the  MoF  to  improve  its  debt-management  capacities.  I  believe  our  hard  work  will  be 
reflected in a satisfactory rating of our sovereign debt, due to be carried out early next year.  
The competence, credibility and professionalism of our monetary policy provide necessary conditions 
to  support  and  guarantee  achievement  of  economic  goals  and  successfully  fulfill  economic 
convergence toward ERM II preconditions. However, our achievements will not last in the absence of 
a careful fiscal policy and conservative fiscal expansion. The Bank of Albania is not the only major 
economic player. Therefore, we must find and implement clear anchors to guarantee the compliance 
of  other  players’  economic  policies.  In  this  respect,  we  can  transform  ERM  II  preconditions  into  an 
important foreign anchor to preserve the credibility of our reforms in the future.  
As a pre-accession country, Albania will be facing ERM II problems in the medium term. We are well 
aware of the difficult road ahead and the challenges we will face. Nevertheless, we remain committed 
toward  economic  and  legal  reforms  considering  it  as  a  natural  approach  toward  EU  accession 
process.  
 BIS Review 1/2007 
 3
References  
Begg, B., Einchengreen, B., Halpern, L., Hagen, J. Wyplosz, CH. (2002). “Sustainable Regimes of 
Capital Movements in Accession Countries”, CEPR.  
Buiter, W.H. and Grafe, C. (2002). “Anchor, Float or Abandon Ship: Exchange Rate Regimes for the 
Accession Countries”, EBRD 10 Year Anniversary Conference.  
European Central Bank, (2003). “Policy Position of the Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank on Exchange Rate Issues Relating to the Acceding Countries.’  
4 
 BIS Review 1/2007
