Toshihiko Fukui: Developments in Japan’s economy in 2006 and the outlook 
for 2007 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Board  of 
Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, 25 December 2006. 
 Introduction 
There is now less than a week until the end of 2006. The year has been marked by the sustained 
recovery  of  Japan's  economy,  which  began  in  January  2002,  exceeding  the  record  of  the  Izanagi 
boom,  the  longest  postwar  economic  expansion  (57  months  during  1965-70).  The  Bank  of  Japan 
terminated the quantitative easing policy in March and in July returned to pursuing a monetary policy 
in  which  it  controls  interest  rates.  Although  Japan's  economy  still  faces  further  structural  changes 
going forward, the year 2006 can be regarded as a year of steady progress toward normalization after 
the  long  adjustment  phase  since  the  bursting  of  the  bubble.  Today  I  will  review  this  year's 
developments in the economy and prices as well as the conduct of monetary policy, and talk about the 
outlook for 2007.  
Developments in overseas economies 
I.  
One of the factors behind the sustained recovery of Japan's economy is the continued strong growth 
of overseas economies. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the global economy is 
likely to register growth of around 5 percent in 2006 for the third consecutive year. It is a generally 
accepted view that the global economy will continue to expand in 2007, at around the same pace as in 
2006, across a broader range of regions. 
As a risk factor to this outlook, developments in the U.S. economy should be mentioned. The pace of 
growth  in  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  slowing  recently  reflecting  decreases  in  housing  investment, 
while private consumption has so far been firm with a limited slowdown in the pace of growth. Since 
the  adjustment  in  the  housing  market  seems  to  be  continuing,  attention  should  be  paid  to  future 
developments in that market and the possible negative effects on private consumption and production. 
As for prices, the rate of increase in the core consumer price index is still relatively high, despite a 
moderate  decline  in  crude  oil  prices.  We  basically  think  that  inflation  pressures  are  likely  to  ease 
gradually in line with the deceleration of economic expansion and the U.S. economy is likely to realize 
a  soft  landing  and  move toward  sustainable  growth,  but  both  upside  and  downside risks  should  be 
borne in mind.  
With regard to developments in other regions, China's economy has continued to expand strongly and 
economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  has  become  more  evident.  Oil-producing  countries,  especially 
those of the Middle East, and the ASEAN economies continue to show steady growth. Given these 
developments,  our  main  scenario  is  that  the  global  economy  as  a  whole  will  likely  keep  expanding 
through 2007, with possible slowing growth in the U.S. economy being offset by high growth in other 
regions.  
Developments in the corporate sector 
II.  
Japanese firms are succeeding in utilizing the strong growth of overseas economies to realize good 
business  performance.  In  2006,  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector,  as  seen  in  steady  growth  of 
profits  and  increases  in  business  fixed  investment,  became  more  evident.  The  recently  released 
December  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  shows  that  firms  are 
projecting growth in their current profits for the fifth consecutive year since fiscal 2002 and the ratio of 
current  profits  to  sales  is  exceeding  the  peak  reached  in  the  bubble  era.  In  this  situation,  business 
sentiment continues to be favorable and firms are planning to increase fixed investment for the fourth 
consecutive  year.  Moreover,  their  projections  of  both  current  profits  and  fixed  investment  for  fiscal 
2006 have been revised upward from the September Tankan. 
Nevertheless,  we  believe  the  current  strength  in  business  fixed  investment  does  not  indicate 
"overheating," given that firms are increasing investment to reinforce their production capacity not only 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 1
to  meet  domestic  demand  but  also  to  capture  opportunities  for  higher  profits  in  growing  overseas 
markets. Firms continue to scrutinize the investment profitability of each project amid greater exposure 
to  the  discipline  of  the  capital  market.  Continuation  of  this  disciplined  investment  stance  under 
accommodative financial conditions is important if Japan's economy is to follow the path of sustainable 
growth.  
Developments in the household sector 
III.  
The  positive  influence  of  the  strength  in  the  corporate  sector  is  feeding  through  to  the  household 
sector  at  a  moderate  pace.  Throughout  2006,  the  number  of  employees  has  increased  steadily.  A 
closer  look  reveals  that  not  only  part-time  employees  but  also  full-time  employees  have  been 
increasing steadily. Many firms seem to have hired a greater number of new graduates this year. The 
December  Tankan shows  that  both  large  and small  firms  are planning  to continue hiring more  new 
graduates in the coming year. Labor market conditions are tightening as suggested by the fact that the 
annual average of the ratio of job offers to applicants is almost certain to exceed 1.00 for the first time 
in 14 years and the unemployment rate decreased further from last year's level. As for wages, with 
overtime and bonus payments rising, household income overall is increasing.  
Nonetheless, the pace at which the positive influence of the corporate sector is feeding through to the 
household sector is, in fact, slow relative to the corporate sector's strength. This is evident especially 
in regular payments, which remain virtually unchanged year on year. This seems to be responsible for 
the often-heard statement that it is difficult to realize that Japan is in the middle of the longest postwar 
economic  expansion.  The  slowness  of  the  increase  in  regular  payments  is  attributable  to  both  the 
stance  of  firms  and  the  preference  of  employees:  given  the  intensifying  global  competition,  firms 
remain  cautious  about  raising  regular  payments  because  this  is  likely  to  push  up  fixed  costs;  while 
employees, having experienced a severe employment situation, continue to prefer stable employment 
to a wage increase.  
However, in a situation where the population of those 15 years old and over has been leveling off, 
further tightening of labor market conditions seems inevitable if demand for employees remains on the 
rise in line with the continuing economic expansion. Given this situation, upward pressures on wages 
are  likely  to  increase  gradually.  Wages  for  part-time  and  temporary  workers  have,  in  fact,  started 
rising.  
If  an  increase  in  wages  becomes  more  apparent,  the  pace  of  increase  in  household  income  is 
expected to accelerate, thereby firming the sustainability of the upward trend in private consumption. 
Some  indicators  related  to  private  consumption  have  recently  been  somewhat  sluggish,  partly 
reflecting  unfavorable  weather  conditions  and  consumers  holding  back  from  buying  before  the 
introduction of new products. Although these developments continue to require close monitoring, our 
basic view is that private consumption will remain on the rise if increases in household income are in 
prospect.  
Although, as I explained, developments in the corporate sector have been somewhat stronger than 
projected  while  those  in  the  household  sector  have  been  somewhat  weaker,  we  believe  the  basic 
mechanism of an economic expansion based on a virtuous circle of production, income, and spending 
is  in  operation.  Nevertheless,  given  the  fact  that  there  are  some  weak  developments  in  indicators 
related  to  private  consumption  and  consumer  prices,  we  will  carefully  examine  various  types  of 
incoming data and information.  
Developments in prices 
IV.  
With  these  developments  in  the  economy,  the  environment  surrounding  prices  has  been  changing, 
albeit gradually. In the December Tankan, for the first time in more than a decade, the number of firms 
that  reported  a  shortage of  production  capacity  outnumbered  those  reporting  an  excess, and  it  has 
become clear that firms are increasingly feeling a shortage of labor. These developments imply that 
resource  utilization  has  been  rising.  Wages  are  increasing,  albeit  moderately,  particularly  in  special 
and overtime payments, and downward pressure on prices stemming from declining unit labor costs 
has been abating. Furthermore, inflation forecasts of households and firms are being revised upward. 
For  instance,  in  the  December  Tankan,  the  share  of  firms  that  replied  their  sales  prices  had  risen 
compared to three months earlier increased to levels not seen since the early 1990s. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2007
With  such  changes  in  the  environment  surrounding  prices,  year-on-year  changes  in  domestic 
corporate  goods  prices  rose  to  around  3.5  percent  in  mid-2006,  reflecting  increases  in  prices  of 
international commodities such as crude oil. Although the pace of increase has recently been slowing 
somewhat due to a softening of crude oil prices, it is expected to continue its uptrend if there were no 
large fluctuations caused by commodity prices and foreign exchange rates. 
On the other hand, although the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) has 
been  on  a  positive  trend,  the  rate  of  increase  remains  very  low  relative  to  the  improvement  in  the 
economic situation. It is possible that the sensitivity of prices to changes in economic activity has been 
decreasing  compared  to  the  past.  This  tendency  has  been  observed  in  recent  years  in  economies 
overseas as well. It is thought that economic globalization as well as deregulation and advances in 
information and communication technology are behind this phenomenon. If competition with products 
imported from newly industrialized countries heightens, inflationary pressure is likely to be contained. 
Likewise, if firms, faced with intensified global competition, become more cautious in raising wages, 
price developments will be influenced. In the case of Japan, where year-on-year changes in the CPI 
have been in the process of improving from negative territory, the rate of increase in the CPI tends to 
be  low  compared  with  other  major  economies.  We  project  that  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  will 
gradually rise as the economy continues its long expansion. However, the pace at which it rises should 
continue to be watched carefully.  
Conduct of monetary policy in 2006 
V.  
Looking back on the conduct of monetary policy this year, the Bank terminated the quantitative easing 
policy  in  March,  and  in  July  it  raised  the  operating  target  of  money  market  operations  (the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate) from "effectively zero percent" to "around 0.25 percent," bringing 
the zero interest rate environment to an end after five years.  
An  underlying  factor  that  enabled  us  to  make  this  decision  was  the  fact  that  structural  adjustment 
pressure in the corporate sector and the financial system, which had continued since the bursting of 
the economic bubble, had mostly been removed. When we introduced the quantitative easing policy, 
the Japanese economy was in a recession triggered by the collapse of the global IT bubble. Financial 
institutions  were burdened  by  a  huge amount  of nonperforming  loans (NPLs)  and  there was  strong 
concern about the stability of the financial system. In this situation, a risk of the economy falling into a 
vicious circle of falling prices and deteriorating economic activity, in other words a deflationary spiral, 
was also a concern.  
In  these  circumstances,  the  quantitative  easing  policy  played  a  significant  role  in  maintaining  the 
stability  of  the  financial  markets  and  the  accommodative  financial  environment  and  in  preventing  a 
contraction of economic activity. Under the accommodative financial conditions, firms have, after great 
effort, cast off the three excesses -- excess employees, excess capacity, and excess debt. Financial 
institutions have almost resolved the NPL problem, and stability was regained in the financial system. 
Major and regional banks posted their highest-ever profits in fiscal 2005, exceeding the record of the 
bubble period, and their interim results indicated that their profits have remained high in the current 
fiscal  year.  Repayment  of  public  funds  totaling  12  trillion  yen  injected  into  financial  institutions 
proceeded, with the three major financial groups completing redemption in autumn this year. With the 
strengthening  of  the  capital  position,  financial  institutions'  risk-taking  capability  has  been  recovering 
and as a result their lending attitude has become positive. Against this background, the year-on-year 
rate of change in outstanding bank loans has turned positive this year for the first time since 1996.  
New framework for the conduct of monetary policy 
VI.  
As  the  Japanese  economy  is  heading  toward  normalization,  we  have  altered  the  framework  of 
monetary  policy  to  support  movement  in  that  direction.  Under  the  quantitative  easing  policy,  we 
conducted  monetary  policy  in  line  with  the  commitment  expressed  in  terms  of  developments  in  the 
CPI.  This  was  a  way,  when  we  faced  the  zero  constraint  on  nominal  interest  rates,  to  produce  an 
additional monetary easing effect by intentionally sacrificing the flexibility of policymaking. In contrast, 
the new framework for the conduct of monetary policy, introduced when the quantitative easing policy 
was  terminated,  is  a  forward-looking  framework  whereby  the  Bank's  thinking  behind  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy is made public along with its projection for the economy and prices and risk factors. At 
the same time, it was announced that the Policy Board members' "understanding of price stability from 
a  medium-  to  long-term  viewpoint"  expressed  in  the  year-on-year  changes  in  the  CPI  was  an 
BIS Review 1/2007 
 3
approximate  range  between  zero  and  two  percent,  and  that  the  members  would  conduct  monetary 
policy in the light of this understanding.  
Japan's economy is expected to continue its expansion through fiscal 2007 with gradual rises in the 
rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI.  In  other  words,  Japan's  economy  is  expected  to  achieve  sustainable 
growth under price stability. Our assessment is that an upside risk to this projection would be large 
fluctuations  in  economic  activity  and  prices  as  the  stimulative  effect  of  monetary  policy  is  further 
increasing, while a downside risk would be the possibility that economic expansion and rising prices 
may stall. However, at present, there is no bias toward either of these risks. We will conduct monetary 
policy in light of this assessment, and if economic activity and prices develop in line with the projection, 
we will adjust the level of interest rates gradually in the light of developments in economic activity and 
prices, while maintaining the accommodative financial conditions ensuing from very low interest rates 
for some time.  
Of  course,  a  forward-looking  approach  does  not  imply  that  we  have  predetermined  the  level  of  the 
target  rate  in  the  future  or  the  timing  of  a  policy  change.  There  are  inflows  of  new  information 
regarding the state of economic activity and prices every day. We will make our best judgment based 
on  careful  assessment  of  such  incoming  data  and  a  candid  view  of  the  Japanese  economy  in  the 
future.  
Closing remarks 
Japan's economy is expected to continue its moderate expansion in the coming year. However, it will 
be increasingly important to address medium- to long-term issues that Japan's economy faces, such 
as the declining birthrate and aging population as well as fiscal consolidation. To provide a basis for 
dealing with these issues, achieving sustainable economic growth under price stability is vital from a 
macroeconomic  policy  perspective.  Minimizing  economic  and  price  fluctuations  is  an  important 
prerequisite for firms and households to engage in economic activity without anxiety. Fulfillment of this 
prerequisite will lead to full utilization of Japan's economic potential and its realization in actual growth. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  conduct  monetary  policy  appropriately  by  utilizing  and  refining  the  new 
framework to support the attainment of the desired state of the economy.  
4 
 BIS Review 1/2007
