Rundheersing Bheenick: Escaping the fate of the Dodo 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on the occasion 
of  the  Commemoration  Dinner  for  the  40th  Anniversary  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  Bank  of 
Mauritius, 24 August 2007. 
 A very warm welcome to you Mr President and Lady Jugnauth, to you Mr Prime Minister and 
Mrs  Veena  Ramgoolam,  our  Deputy  Prime  Ministers  and  their  spouses,  members  of  the 
Board and to all our guests this evening, who honour us with your presence, at this special 
Commemoration  Dinner.  And  let  me  wish  to  all  of  my  colleagues  in  the  Bank  of  Mauritius 
here today, Happy Birthday! Happy 40th Birthday! and especially those benefiting from the 
pension fund: many…many…Happy Returns of the Day!! 
I have to admit to you now, that, faced with the formidable history of the achievements of my 
predecessors, many of whom we welcome here tonight, I am feeling rather modest. A most 
unusual state to be in as Governor! Some would say, I suspect, a most unusual feeling for 
this  particular  Governor,  often  taxed  –  in  the  past,  and  wrongly,  as  I  would  say  –  with  a 
certain arrogance and an “effortless sense of superiority”! 
At the inception of the Bank in 1967, I had just completed my time at Oxford, broke, as is the 
fate of all students, and wondering what I would do with my life. Yet it was at this moment 
that  Robin  Harrison,  the  Warden  of  my  college,  Merton,  Oxford  introduced  me  to  his  old 
friend Professor James Meade1 who came down from that other place, Cambridge, for an 
excellent  lunch.  Over  lunch,  Meade  steered  me  towards  demography  and  the  runaway 
population explosion that he had identified as the biggest threat to Mauritius, which was then 
a world leader in the fertility stakes! Meade was pleased to see me to exchange views on the 
prospects for Mauritius. For it was he who with his team had planted that vital signpost in the 
early story of the economic and financial outlook for our country in 1961, with the seminal 
Report on the Economic and Social Structure of Mauritius. 
The  then  Prime  Minister,  Sir  Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam2,  sent  me  a  letter  through  Sir 
Dayendranath Burenchobay3, the then Permanent Secretary at the Prime Minister’s office – 
actually transmitted through no less a person than Raymond Chasle, then running the newly-
opened  Mauritius  High  Commission  in  London,  inviting  me  to  return  to  Mauritius,  and 
detailing a list of openings in the economics field. The list included the Economic Planning 
Unit, The Development Bank of Mauritius, The Bank of Mauritius and the University. Since 
February this year, I can say, I have been associated with all the institutions on that list, in 
one capacity or another! 
We have come a long way! 
                                                 
1   James Edward Meade, 1907-1995, economist, author of “The Economic and Social Structure of Mauritius” 
(Methuen & Co, London, 1961) and “The Economic and Social Structure of Mauritius: Report to the Governor 
of  Mauritius”  (Publisher:  London,  Cass,  Date:  1968.),  chaired  the  Economic  Survey  Mission  to  Mauritius, 
1960-1961.  He  prophesied  in  the  early  1960’s  that  Mauritius's  development  prospects  were  poor  –  that 
Mauritius  was  a  strong  candidate  for  failure,  with  its  heavy  economic  dependence  on  one  crop  (sugar), 
vulnerability to terms of trade shocks, rapid population growth, and potential for ethnic tensions. History – or, 
rather, Mauritius – proved Meade's dire prognostication famously wrong. 
2   Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, known as the Father of the Nation, LRCP, MRCS (18 September 1900-15 
December 1985) was the Prime Minister of Mauritius from 1961 until 1982. As decolonisation swept the third 
world,  he  led  his  country  to  independence  from  the  United  Kingdom  in  1968.  He  was  Governor-General  of 
Mauritius from 28 December 1983 until his death in December 1985. 
3   Sir  Dayendranath  Burrenchobay,  (24  March  1919-29  March  1999),  served  as  Governor-General  of 
Mauritius from April 26, 1979 to December 28, 1983. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 1
In truth, reflecting on the story of the forty years of banking, as we are doing now, makes me 
full  of  wonder  and  admiration  for  what  has  been  achieved.  I  remain  therefore  heavily 
conscious of the responsibility we inherit for sustaining the course. 
Meade was to become a Nobel laureate in 1977, but this year 2007, is also significant, as it 
is the 100th anniversary of his birth. His work in economics as an adviser to us in Mauritius 
and to other countries is perhaps not as widely celebrated as that of Keynes4, with whom he 
collaborated,  but  it  is  more  significant  for  us  today  through  his  contribution  to  the  linkage 
between development theory and monetary practice. 
In his invaluable report of 1961 to which I referred earlier, he produced about 100 detailed 
recommendations but just gave us one option for averting the fate of the Dodo5 itself; invest 
and industrialise! The question was, should it focus on import substitution or on exports. The 
great and somewhat fruitless debate was engaged, the answer being not either but of course 
both. But Meade gave us the shock we needed to get us going. He continued to be a wise 
counsellor on policy and planning in developing countries. 
In his Banquet speech on receiving the Nobel prize he had this to say about economists: 
“The well-balanced economist …(has)… his warm heart on the Left, his practical 
work-a-day hand on the Right, and his clear and thoughtful head in the Centre.” 
A sage prescription for the profession. The history of the Central Bank here in Mauritius has, 
I believe, admirably reflected that balance. 
Our  saving  grace,  in  the  face  of  all  the  challenges  which  he  outlined  in  such  stark  and 
ominous  terms,  has  been  the  foundation  of  a  secure  financial  system,  firmly  laid  at 
Independence, and the period leading up to it, respect for law and order and a productive 
relationship with the colonial powers that was to ease open the gateways to the future and, 
not the least, at the heart of the economy, the banking sector. 
William Kogan, a distinguished economic journalist has referred to Meade’s approach as  
“a model of globalization that doesn’t leave anyone behind.” 
He adds, Meade’s 
“was  a  pragmatic  approach  to  management  of  economic  stability,  embracing 
globalization,  but  taking  responsibility  for  handling  its  social  and  economic 
consequences.” 
Meade would be in the league now with those macro-economists who today are concerned 
for the “losers” from Globalization such as Joseph Stiglitz6, and Lawrence Summers7. Meade 
also had some sharp things to say about our need for technical transition. He referred to the: 
                                                 
4   John  Maynard  Keynes,  (1883-1946).Noted  principally  for  his  1936  publication  “The  General  Theory  of 
Employment, Interest and Money.” 
5   The Dodo (Raphus cucullatus) was a flightless bird that lived in Mauritius. The dodo has been extinct since 
the mid-to-late 17th century. It is commonly used as the archetype of an extinct species because its extinction 
occurred during recorded human history, and was directly attributable to human activity. The phrase "as dead 
as the dodo" means undoubtedly and unquestionably dead. 
6   Joseph  E.  Stiglitz,  (1943-),  2001-winner  Nobel  Prize  in  economics,  cabinet  member  of  the  Clinton 
Administration,  served  as  Senior  Vice  President  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  World  Bank,  author  of 
“Globalization and its Discontents”. 
7   Lawrence Henry ("Larry") Summers, (1954- ), American economist and academic. He is the 1993 recipient 
of the John Bates Clark Medal for his work in macroeconomics, was Secretary of the Treasury for the last year 
and a half of the Clinton Administration, and served as the 27th President of Harvard University from 2001 to 
2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2007
“startling  ignorance  (in  Mauritius)  of  modern  ideas  about  education  and  its  true 
purpose” 
and  he  encouraged  a  greater  attention  to  technical  inefficiency  then  rampant  in  the  public 
sector  with  its  lack  of  Organisation  and  Methods  study  to  link  inputs  to  outputs.  We  now 
begin  to  see  in  Mauritius  forty  years  later  a  more  problem-oriented  approach  to  education 
and continuing professional development as core principles for human capacity-building. In 
the new Medium Term Expenditure Framework of my friend the Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  we  now  also  have  a  target  date  for 
establishing  results-based  budgets  for  the  whole  of  the  public  sector.  Change  does  not 
always come fast; we must be patient. Some reforms can take a generation to flower, as they 
have to press against the embedded climate of inertia inherent in our traditional culture and 
values. 
In 1961, when Meade was reviewing our gloomy prospects, we not only had no Central Bank 
and  no  Stock  Exchange  but  we  also  had  to  confront  a  kind  of  unholy  alliance  somewhat 
opposed to such ideas of regulation and standardisation. Surely, some might have mused, 
Independence would mean just the opposite: a free operation of the market, de-regulation 
and an escape from colonial-style central control. 
In the early days the old Chamber of Brokers convened, informally in a little room, for quietly 
facilitating the buying and selling of private shares in local family companies. Rather different 
today;  but  did  reforms  come  about  in  a  seamless  way,  an  inescapable  progression  in  our 
unfolding  destiny?  Indeed  no;  and  many  here  can  offer  evidence  of  the  immense  efforts 
expended in achieving the difficult transition from the third to the first world – or at least the 
doors of the first world, for we are certainly not there yet. Reform requires first inspiration, 
then perspiration, with determination and courage aplenty to overcome the innumerable set-
backs and the disappointments on the way! 
James Meade’s seminal report was a shock from which we have mercifully recovered, more 
than once! But I suspect it was always intended to be a wake-up call, not a requiem. In his 
summary section, he declared: 
“Continuous and self-sustaining improvement in production and in the real standards 
of living can be achieved in Mauritius only if over the next five years or so there is a 
relentless effort to introduce all those economic reforms which are essential to set 
this process of economic growth to work. “ 
If there is a secret to the continual forward impulsion of the country it is set in the foundations 
of  the  state  itself  and  the  capacity  of  its  leaders  and  the  sturdy  fortitude  of  people  of  our 
country  to  want  something  better  for  their  country  and  for  their  children.  We  have  now  so 
much we owe to the aspirations of our parents and the strength of our family life! 
In one of the formative policy documents which set the scene for Independence, Sessional 
Paper No.9 of 19668, we find the following context for our work: 
“Ministers of Finance have their ears to the political ground; A Central Bank should 
concern itself with the economic facts of life and above all should be “in” and “of” the 
financial and business community.” 
Tellingly, this paper refers to the Central Bank as the “Government’s Bank” and the “Bankers’ 
Bank”.  That  was  a  key  formula  for  the  times,  defining  the  role  of  the  new  Bank-to-be  in 
providing  advice  to  Government  and  to  business  on  domestic  monetary  and  economic 
matters. 
                                                 
8   Parliamentary Paper in Mauritius. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 3
I am the sixth Governor of the Bank of Mauritius. It is a great honour to follow the lead of 
those five men before me. 
The life of a Governor in this part of the world for those who are statistically-oriented is about 
8 years, but with a large deviation, from the shortest 2 years to the longest 14 years. Sir John 
Shaw  Rennie9,  Governor  of  Mauritius,  at  the  inauguration  of  the  Bank,  and  addressing  its 
Governor,  remarked  that  his  wife  had  drawn  his  attention  to  a  dictionary  definition  of 
governor: 
“an  automatic  attachment  to  an  engine  for  controlling  the  speed,  usually  by 
regulating the supply of working fluid.” 
Happily not a phrase appearing on my job description! 
The first Governor Mr Aunauth Beejadhur10, having just opened the shop for business on 14 
August  1967,  responding  to  the  immediate  challenges  on  his  desk,  had  this  to  say  at  the 
official opening three weeks later: 
“We intend to proceed cautiously…The Bank would not have seen the light of day if 
it were not for the imagination, the sagacity and drive of the Premier and Minister of 
Finance.  He  has  untiringly  brought  one  more  financial  institution  into  being  and 
continues to watch over its fortunes, with undiminished interest… “ 
But the first Governor was a man in a hurry. For he proceeded in short shrift to take over the 
Exchange Control Department on Friday 1st September, and on Monday 4th September, to 
issue bank notes, in the name of the new Bank, sent under close security by our good friends 
at  De  La  Rue.  I  salute  the  presence  of  the  CEO  of  De  La  Rue,  Mr  Quinn,  at  our 
commemoration dinner tonight. 
The actual origins of the idea of the Bank were disclosed in the Second reading of the Bank 
of Mauritius Bill, no. 33 of 1966, on the 5th July that year, when the Premier mentioned that 
he  had  been  thinking  of  a  central  bank  since  the  1940’s,  citing  the  then  leader  of  the 
Opposition, Jules Koenig, in support of his claim. If we are commemorating the birth of the 
Bank in 1967, we should I suppose cherish the thought that the first twinkle in the eye of the 
father of the nation, the creative urge, was some twenty years earlier. Some gestation! Our 
debt to our founding fathers is truly immense. 
At its birth the Bank inherited a fixed link with the pound, at Rs 13.40!, Now there is some 
nostalgia for you! I have been reminded of one of the early tests for the Bank, by  a good 
friend11, a scrupulous analyst and commentator on financial affairs of state, with his store of 
memories  from  a  vantage  point  very  close  to  the  centre.  The  courage  of  the  Bank  was 
immediately tested in its capacity for taking an independent line in September 1967, when 
the pound sterling was devalued. 
After  some  consultation  with  expert  opinion  and  in  concert  with  the  then  internal  adviser 
seconded  from  the  Bank  of  England,  who  was  also  the  Managing  Director  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius,  Mr.  Donald  George  Herbert  Cook12,  it  is  reported,  the  consensus  was  that  the 
rupee should follow the pound sterling. The Bank presented documentation to the Premier 
                                                 
9   Sir  John  Shaw  Rennie,  (1917-1981),  was  Governor-General  of  Mauritius  from  March  12  to  September  3, 
1968. Previously, he was the British Resident in what is now known as Vanuatu from 1955 to 1962, and the 
governor of Mauritius from 1962 to 1968, when Mauritius gained independence and Rennie served his brief 
term as Governor-General. 
10   Mr Aunauth Beejadhur, first Governor of the Bank of Mauritius from July 1967 to December 1972. 
11   Philippe  Hein,  who  was  then  serving  as  the  first  Mauritian  Executive  Director  of  the  Mauritius  Employers 
Federation from 1968 to 1974. 
12   Mr Donald George Herbert Cook, first Managing Director of the Bank of Mauritius, from July 1967 to June 
1968. 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2007
and  Minister  of  Finance  to  devalue  the  rupee  in  line  with  the  pound  sterling.  Un  moment 
critique! To say there was hesitation by the Premier, is to lightly paraphrase my informant’s 
account!  I  understand  an  official  communiqué  some  days  later,  presented  the  remarkable 
paradox to the faithful people, in language worthy of Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam: 
“The  rupee  is  not  being  devalued;  the  Government  has  decided  to  maintain  its 
relationship with the pound!”. 
With  a  heavy  reliance  on  sterling  trade,  this  was  one  way  to  resolve  the  dilemma  and 
preserve the independence of the Bank, even if it stretched the meaning of the English used 
to its very limits. 
Tonight,  however,  is  not  the  time  or  the  occasion  for  me  to  try  to  trace  the  blow-by-blow 
history of the crises met and resolved by  my predecessors and their gallant teams. In the 
course  of  this  year  we  are  to  prepare  a  series  of  events  and  publications  which  will  more 
thoroughly explore that history, the dilemmas, the decisions and the people involved. It is a 
fascinating story, which culminates with us tonight being able to commemorate forty sturdy 
years of this Bank in its fearless service of the country. 
But I cannot let the opportunity go without making some mention of the pathway we have 
travelled,  some  passing  reflections  on  the  bases  of  policy  development  and  a  few  of  the 
principal “dramatis personae”. 
So I am glad to say that we have with us tonight a wondrous clutch of previous Governors, 
Board  members,  leading  lights  from  the  commercial  banking  sector,  the  chambers  of 
commerce and government, and distinguished actors from the wider world of economics and 
finance, many of whom together have contributed to the undoubted success of the venture 
embarked upon 40 years ago, plus others here who will continue to guide our future. 
I  am  especially  pleased  that  we  are  honoured  by  the  company  of  two  of  our  former 
Governors of the Bank: 
• 
Sir  Indurduth  Ramphul,  appointed  Governor  –  in  1982  and  who  continued  until 
1996, and 
Mr Mitrajeet Dhaneshwar Maraye, appointed Governor in 1996 who continued until 
1998. 
 In a different capacity, I was instrumental in ensuring a smooth transition between the two of 
them. I very much regret that my immediate predecessor 
• 
Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, appointed Governor in 1998 and serving until 2006, 
was not able to be present with us tonight. 
I am very pleased that, marking the history of the Bank, we have with us tonight the son of 
our  first  Governor  Mr.  Beejadhur,  and  the  young  nephew  of  the  second  Governor  Mr 
Bunwaree13, who is also here in his capacity as a former Minister of Finance. May I say I am 
delighted that Lady Ringadoo the widow of our first Minister of Finance on Independence14 is 
with us tonight. The other former Ministers of Finance who are sadly unable to be present 
here  tonight  are  Mr  Paul  Berenger15,  Mr  Vishnu  Lutchmeernaraidoo16  and  Mr  Pravind 
Jugnauth17 who have sent their good wishes for this historic occasion. 
                                                 
13   Goorpersad  Bunwaree,  Former  Financial  Secretary  before  becoming  Managing  Director  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius, from 1969 to 1973 when he became Governor. 
14   Sir  Veerasamy  Ringadoo,  GCMG  (1920–2000),  was  Minister  of  Finance  from  1968  to  1982.  He  was 
Governor-General  of  Mauritius  from  January  1986  to  March  12,  1992,  when  Mauritius  became  a  Republic. 
Ringadoo then served as acting President of Mauritius until late in 1992. 
15   Paul Raymond Bérenger, (1945- ) is a Mauritian politician and former Prime Minister of Mauritius from 2003 
to 2005. He was Minister of Finance from July 1982 to March 1983. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 5
Finally, I want to say, how glad I was to know that Mr Leo Quinn CEO of De La Rue plc has 
been  able  to  make  the  long  journey  from  the  UK,  to  represent  our  banknote  and  security 
printers, as we were amongst their first colonial clients. 
I wanted also to refer to certain milestones along the pathway we have travelled together, 
which have helped to consolidate the role of the Central Bank, as an indispensable institution 
of  governance  in  a  modern  democratic  state.  In  talking  with  people,  however,  about  the 
history of the Bank, it is evident that there are many quite different perspectives, making a 
kaleidoscope of impressions of the journey made in the passage of time. 
Some see the story in terms of the issue of new currency; the banknotes and the coins with 
the  images  of  monarchs  and  presidents  and  the  great  and  the  good.  Some  consider  the 
milestones  are  the  laws  which  have  prescribed  the  duties  and  powers  of  the  Bank,  one 
account  even  citing  the  legendary  UK  Bills  of  Exchange  Act  of  1882,  the  model  on  which 
subsequent legislation for Mauritius was built, followed by the Banking Ordinances of colonial 
times and then the Banking and Companies Acts of the Parliament of Mauritius. Others see 
the  story  in  terms  of  the  changing  structure  of  the  Bank  to  respond  to  the  need  for 
implementing those laws and providing the operational mechanisms increasingly adapted to 
the  needs  of  modern  banking.  They  cite  for  example  the  coming  of  Departments  for 
Research and for Information Technology, which strengthen our back-office capacities and 
with  the  Administration  Department  itself,  serve  the  needs  of  the  continually-developing 
frontline  Departmental  functions  of  the  Bank;  the  Departments  concerned  with  Financial 
markets,  with  Accounting  and  Budgeting,  with  Banking  and  Currency  and  with  the 
Supervision of financial institutions. 
Other people, when you ask them about the significant events in the life of the Bank, will talk 
of  appointments,  disappointments,  personal  careers,  departures,  marriages,  deaths,  fires, 
even a strike; these are the sagas of the internal and personal life of the people here who 
make the Bank a working living organism at the service of the State and the people.  
Beyond the internal workings of the Bank itself there are other perspectives too, those of the 
wider  Banking  and  commercial  community  in  Mauritius,  our  investors  and  creditors,  the 
global banking community, the Governments who have accorded us our role and last but not 
least the citizens of this country on whose trust we depend. 
In  mapping  the  history  of  the  Bank  over  the  coming  months  we  shall  try  to  bring  together 
these strands in the real life story of this complex Institution, warts and all. 
At the silver anniversary of 25 years of the Central Bank in 1992, the then Prime Minister, 
now President18, had this to say about the place of the Bank in Mauritian society; the Bank is, 
he said, 
“a  centre  of  moral  authority,  an  authority  capable  of  expressing  constructive 
criticisms  in  moments  of  exaggerated  optimism  or  exaggerated  pessimism.  To 
succeed  in  this  mission  the  Bank  required  from  the  outset  public  friendship  and 
support and public confidence” 
Indeed, as we well know, trust and confidence are the primordial qualities for a central bank: 
                                                                                                                                                      
16   Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Finance from 1983 to 1991. 
17   Pravind Jugnauth, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance from 2003 to 2005. 
18   Sir Anerood Jugnauth, KCMG, QC (1930 - ) is now President of the Republic. He served as Prime Minister 
from  1982  to  1995,  and  again  from  2000  to  2003.  Sir  Anerood  Jugnauth  is  credited  with  the  paternity  of 
Mauritius’ "economic miracle" of the 1980’s – a set of liberal policies such as the creation of a duty-free trade 
zone and establishing Mauritius as a leader in textiles production – which allowed the island to develop into an 
economic powerhouse in the region. 
6 
 BIS Review 99/2007
“Who steals my purse steals trash; ’tis something, nothing… 
but he that filches from me my good name, 
Robs me of that which not enriches him, 
And makes me poor indeed” 
As in Shakespeare’s Othello with this delineation of the political values in the 16th century 
Venetian court, so in Banking today name, trust and reputation are all. 
The  reputation  of  any  Bank  takes  years  to  build  and  can  be  lost  in  moments.  That  good 
name of this Bank, and of banking in Mauritius in general for that matter, has been bought by 
the diligent toil of so many here in Banking past and present. 
Over the next year as we set down the history of the Bank of Mauritius, chapter by chapter, 
we shall be also capturing something of the social dimension to show the character of the 
changing  times  and  the  pattern  of  working  of  our  dedicated  staff.  In  opening  this  chapter 
recently I have been reminded of some of the social elements of those early days and I hope 
that many of you here will help in the coming months to paint in these aspects of the picture 
with anecdotes from times past. 
For example, we have been reminded by the longest-serving members of staff, of the initial 
days  when  there  was  not  one  building  for  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  as  now;  the  staff  were 
scattered in as many as five different locations. In 1967 there were no computers, no electric 
accounting  machines,  no  electric  calculators  nor  even  electric  typewriters.  All  was  largely 
done by hand, mostly in pen and ink. 
Many  of  the  junior  staff  were  recruited  straight  from  school  but  had  to  sit  for  an  exam 
including  a  précis  and  questions  to  be  answered  on  the  scope  and  content  of  the  1966 
Banking Ordinance, before they would be taken on. Hours of work were generally 9-4 but on 
Thursdays and Saturdays they were 9-12. Long gone are those days of Saturday banking. 
Trousers  for  women  were  banned;  no  married  women  were  recruited  to  any  Bank  in 
Mauritius  and  when  a  girl  on  the  staff  announced  her  marriage,  she was  forced to  resign. 
This rule was only revoked in 1974 after continued protests, and by a special edict from the 
Prime  Minister’s  Office;  but  women  who  came  back  had  either  to  repay  the  compensation 
they had received on their early departure, or lose seniority. 
That was a different world that we must document before the passage of time buries these 
secrets of the past from our collective memory. 
If I refrain from elaborating on the history now, let me make two points about monetary policy 
and investment. Economists are commonly expected to have a position on macroeconomic 
matters  derived  from  theory  covering  monetary  policy  and  practice  as  a  basis  for  shaping 
advice  on  decision-making.  These  theoretical  principles  may  derive  from  the  18th  century 
classical  economics  of  the  Free  Market,  the  neo-classical  developments  of  the  late  19th 
century  Alfred  Marshall19,  from  John  Maynard  Keynes’  postulates  for  promoting  full-
employment in the post-Depression era, the post-Keynes developments by Nicholas Kaldor20 
and  his  colleagues,  to  respond  to  the  challenges  of  wage  inflation,  from  the  modernist 
positions of Milton Friedman21 to control money supply, and from even the post-modernist 
evidence-based approaches of Jeffrey Sachs22. It was Sachs, one of today’s “big shots” in 
                                                 
19   Alfred Marshall, (1842-1924), British economist, noted for his 1890 publication “Principles of Economics”. 
20   Nicholas Kaldor, (1908-1986), British economist. His works on macro-economics had a major impact on the 
application of economic theory to government policies of western countries. 
21   Milton  Friedman,  (1912-2006),  Nobel  Prize  winner  in  Economics,  noted  for  advocating  the  free  market 
system and monetarism. 
22   Jeffrey Sachs, (1954- ), Director of the Earth Institute and Professor of Sustainable Development at Colombia 
University, USA. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 7
macro-economics, who at a stroke put the brakes on hyperinflation in Bolivia in the 1980’s. 
Each  of  these  iconic  scholars  represents  schools  of  thought  which  to  the  outsider  have 
something of the appearance of coteries or clubs of isolated sects. 
Now on such matters of economics schools, clubs and theories I tend to keep an open mind, 
without  going  to  the  extreme  position  of  my  friend  Marx…  Groucho23  of  course!  He  once 
famously declared: 
“Any club that would have me as a member… I would not want to join!” 
You  see  monetary  theory  has  been  growing  wildly  for  years  and  I  guess  is  just  about 
approaching its infancy, that is as an evidence-based arena of positive economics. 
On  an  occasion  such  as  this,  I  am  sure  you  would  not  want  me  to  further  explore  the 
intricacies of this very complex subject. Yet as we celebrate all those medals gained in the 
Jeux des Iles24, although as a central banker I have to say unhappily rather more in bronze 
than gold, as we enjoy the opening of the new Season of the Premier League, and as we 
come fresh from the third meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee, I cannot resist offering 
a  sporting  metaphor,  as  a  vehicle  for  my  take  on  Monetary  Theory  and  its  application  to 
national economic policy. 
In doing this I would like borrow from the “Maradona theory of interest rates” as enunciated 
by an elder in the metier, our colleague from the Bank of England, Governor Mervyn King, in 
his  Mais  lecture  in  2005.  It  is  a  football  metaphor,  that  beautiful  game  for  gentlemen 
commonly played by ruffians! 
The Maradona Theory of interest rates is, I believe, a really innovative and apt contribution to 
the  bulging  portfolio  of  macroeconomic  theory.  The  Maradona  theory  is  named  after  the 
famed Argentinian footballer Diego Maradona – and was there a greater ruffian than he in 
the annals of that beautiful game? If I may be allowed to elaborate just a little, this theory 
encompasses,  iteratively  both  a  classical  free-market  approach  to  theory  and  a  post-
modernist line. The field-work setting is the World Cup in Mexico in 1986 when, you may well 
recall,  the  Argentinians  swept  a  strong  England  team  out  of  the  world  competition  when 
Maradona notoriously scored two remarkable goals. 
The first goal aptly illustrates the Adam Smith25 principles of the free unregulated market and 
the operation of the “invisible hand”, or as the great Diego subsequently called it, “the hand 
of God”. 
The second goal, Mervyn King declares, admirably illustrates the power of expectations in 
the modern theory of interest rates. 
As with the Manchester United Portuguese star, Ronaldo of the modern game, when his legs 
are  crisscrossing  to  deceive  the  tackler,  the  ball  itself  continues  rolling  straight  on  with  its 
initial forward propulsion. The five defenders, confronting the Argentinian star in 1986, fell in 
turn to one side or the other expecting a corresponding feint. Maradona ran some 60 yards 
from  inside  his  own  half,  beating  the  whole  defence  and  then  the  goal  keeper,  keeping  in 
virtually a straight line. This, King declares, illustrates the misguided power of expectations: 
the conflict between appearance and reality. 
Monetary policy, says King, works in a similar way: market interest rates react to what the 
Central Bank is expected to do. Thus, no simple rule must be applied if the object is inflation 
                                                 
23   Groucho Marx, Famous American film comedian in the 1930’s. 
24   Jeux des Iles: Regional sports competition involving Indian Ocean islands. The competition is held every four 
years. 
25   Adam  Smith,  (1723-1790),  noted  as  father  of  classical  economics  through  his  1776  hugely-influential  “An 
inquiry into the nature and causes of the Wealth of Nations”. 
8 
 BIS Review 99/2007
targeting and the stability of the markets. The precise rule that Central Banks follow is less 
important than their ability to condition expectations. But once the cat was out of the bag, 
neither classical nor post-modernist theory could help even Maradona to score again in the 
match. 
So monetary policy must be embedded in a continuous process of learning; or what Jeffrey 
Sachs refers to as “the process of clinical economics”, an evidence-based iterative process 
of the continuing testing of fresh hypotheses. 
In the short run monetary policy, wisely attuned, does affect output and employment and so 
has the potential to be an effective stabilisation tool. Inflation targeting requires two elements, 
a medium-term target and a short-term response to economic shocks. King calls this  
“a framework of constrained discretion”. 
Together with the Minister of Finance, the members of the Monetary Policy Committee, and 
the research staff at the Bank, we are now getting these elements more firmly in place. 
The  second  big  point  I  want  to  make,  if  I  may  crave  your  further  indulgence,  is  on  the 
urgency  of  the  promotion  of  savings  in  line  with  the  new  economic  framework  of  the 
Government.  Without  wishing  to  upset  the  apple-cart  with  my  commercial  banking 
colleagues, we must extract ourselves from what have been referred to as the  
“disasters of a culture of wild speculation and debt delinquency” 
that are eroding economies of the world. Whilst the Polonius26 financial policy 
“never a borrower nor a lender be” 
was never good news for banking, we must be concerned when these days it seems easier 
to spend on credit than to save; I’m told you can even borrow money from one credit card 
company to pay off a loan from another! 
In the past weeks there has been a spectre hanging over the banking world emerging from 
the sub-prime market in housing loans in the US and ricocheting off most other components 
of the complex market in credit. For every loan there has to be a clear reciprocal relationship 
between debtors and creditors. 
Here in Mauritius we can see in microcosm the problems  of the failure of this relationship 
emerging in the sale-by-levy traumas and the new processes of regulation and family support 
that have been so rapidly put in place by the Government to help the poor debtors subjected 
to  such  foreclosures.  Ultimately  there  are  of  course  no  free  lunches  and  no  free  loans; 
people must be persuaded that in the end, if you borrow, you have to pay it back and the 
sooner the cheaper. It is certainly a concern if we are to drift on the Moody’s scale of reliable 
debtors. 
One  of  our  tasks  ahead  is  no  less  than  to  change  the  culture  and  the  forms  of  access  to 
services. Just as the Government and even our Civil Service are trying to become more and 
more people-oriented, so this Central Bank needs to achieve that transition from being The 
Bank of Mauritius to being the Bank for Mauritians; the Bank of the People. We must make 
the sound financial choices for every family, the easy choices. We must also re-orient our 
communications  accordingly.  If  we  want  to  penetrate  a  new  market,  we  must  adopt  a 
marketing strategy to compete with the other goods and services ordinary people buy. We 
will need a new language for getting the message across. As has been said in a recent IMF 
seminar on finding this new market, the people out there have a different set of priorities in 
terms of the trends and the shape of the economy and their options for saving or spending: 
                                                 
26   Polonius,  Courtier  in  Shakespeare’s  play  Hamlet  offering  advice  to  his  son  before  the  latter  leaves  for 
England. 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 9
“They don’t care about the shape of the Phillips curve, but they do want to know if 
their mortgage payments are going up”. 
We may even have to start giving away pens rather than chaining them up at the counter. 
We must also beware of viewing the world of banking just as a bunch of accountants and 
economists, of whom George Bernard Shaw said: 
“they know the price of everything but the value of nothing!” 
For in Mauritius, in these forty years that we celebrate today, we have come to treasure not 
just  the  Treasury  Bills,  but  also  the  non-traded  assets  of  these  islands.  Trust,  probity, 
friendship, truth and beauty. Let us cherish these values above all in the years ahead; the 
natural and human assets of our homeland. 
So what is the agenda for the next forty years. Who can say? It is tough to make predictions, 
especially  about  the  future!  Much  experience  in  forecasting  suggests  that  its  principal 
function is better to illuminate the known unknowns. 
As we establish more elaborate computer-based models for our planning we should perhaps 
test-run  them  through  the  1967  data  when  we  opened  for  business  and  see  how  far  they 
would reveal the shape of things now. Something for our research team to use as the litmus 
test for any new mathematical modelling kit! 
In recent years, the world of finance has encountered what Taleb from the US, a professor of 
the science of uncertainty, denotes as the “Black Swans” of economic life, the unexpected 
eruptions  which  sharply  deviate  from  the  smooth  transitions  of  the  Gaussian  bell-shaped 
curve.  We  must  be  ready  for  the  unexpected  and  nurture  a  capacity  for  resilience  to 
withstand the future shocks and crises. 
IBM forty years ago was predicting little future for the PC, entrenched as they were in main-
frame systems; when “Big Blue” failed, Bill Gates was the beneficiary. In the US they used to 
consider the profession of accounting straight, if rather boring, and company accounts a fair 
presentation  of  the  financial  state  of  affairs.  That  is  all  being  swept  aside  in  the  light  of 
unexpected events, with the new tighter company regulatory systems; adieu Arthur Anderson 
and the rest. 
That is the Black Swan bad news; but a fairer wind blows: now Goldman Sachs is telling us 
that socially-responsible companies are out-performing the global stock index by a stunning 
25%.  Those  companies,  that  have  more  concern  for  their  ecological  footprint,  get  a  larger 
payoff  and  are  increasingly  attractive  to  investors.  We  should  anticipate  that  here  and, 
indeed, promote it to be ahead of the game. 
Despite  the  future  uncertainties,  to  say  nothing  of  the  uncertainties  of  Futures,  we  are 
reshaping  things  here  at  the  Bank,  by  what  might  be  called  a  little  light  re-engineering. 
Supported by its own dedicated research unit, the new Monetary Policy Committee is now in 
place. The outcome of its third meeting was announced this week. In the last fifteen years, 
inflation targeting has taken the central banking world by storm and through this MPC vehicle 
we are hoping to get on top of this elusive matter. 
Let me also mention some of the other steps we are already taking to change the face of the 
Central Bank whilst preserving its essential role. We recognise that in these small islands, 
banks  should  take  more  of  a  role  in  community-leadership  and  in  conserving  the  natural 
capital of our country and its heritage. So, working hand in hand with our colleagues in the 
banking and finance community in promoting these principles, we are developing a new eco-
friendly  theme  to  extend  the  idea  of  garden  cities  and  the  eco  touch  into  the  capital,  the 
major towns and various districts. We are planning to entrench our presence in the island of 
Rodrigues.  Islamic  banking  is  coming,  and  other  financial  facilities  are  on  the  agenda  too, 
with guidelines still awaiting to be developed in many of these areas. 
10 
 BIS Review 99/2007
We are bringing in more outside talent to promote an R&D theme in our work to assist our 
drive to adapt international best practice to our changing needs. Whilst combating inflation is 
in sharp focus as it should be, we see that as just one element in the primary functions of the 
Bank to maintain price stability and to promote orderly and balanced economic development. 
That can only be done with closer links with the world of employers, trade unions, and other 
economic operators through their respective chambers and associations. 
We are also establishing a process of continuing education and development for professional 
staff, aided by commercial banks. Consultants from another central bank are reviewing our 
organisational structure and practices. 
High  on  our  immediate  priorities  is  completing  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  with  its  risk-
sensitive components in our supervision of banks. But we are also aware that our regulatory 
function needs to be increasingly extended to the wider range of financial dealers. 
Forty  years  ago  there  were  just  five  banks  and  very  few  others  in  the  formal  business  of 
money transactions; now we have 18 Banks, 13 non-bank financial institutions with deposit-
taking  transactions,  3  registered  bureaux  de  change,  and  5  registered  foreign  exchange 
dealers. That makes some 40 in all; an eight-fold increase in forty years! This is a sign of the 
expanding economy but at the same time it translates into an increasing challenge for our 
key function in keeping the system reliable and clean. 
In the speech of the then Minister of Finance, Mr Rama Sithanen, at the 25th anniversary of 
this Bank, he wisely observed that throughout history we see that: 
“evolution depends on small currents as well as great tides…the ability to sense a 
trend, the will to act on understanding and intuition.” 
Amid the flux of the future life of the Bank, we must do several things: ensuring continuity, 
probity, and above all adaptability; securing a stable state within a changing world; making 
investment  more  accessible;  bank-rolling  effective  innovation;  and  playing  our  part  on  the 
regional and global stage. We must be willing to learn, though we do not always like being 
taught!  As  we  are  opening  our  doors  to  over-the-counter  sales  of  Government  and  Bank 
instruments to the general public, so we are opening our ears to the best practice and best 
advice from beyond our walls. 
We are committed to playing a lead role beyond our shores in regional and global banking. 
The African Union has set the future targets to which we are signed up: this agenda includes 
an African Central Bank; an African Monetary  Fund, and  an African Development Finance 
Institution. It is of course no state secret that our friends in De La Rue have yet to be asked 
to tender for printing the new Afro, which must remain for some time to come more an ethnic 
hairstyle than a unit of regional currency. 
You might ponder on the fact that from Jean Monnet to Jean Claude Trichet – that is from the 
concept of European money to the final trick of issuing the new notes for Europe – took over 
50 years. I think we could do better than that! 
My  vision  of  the  future  includes  a  wider  role  for  us  in  promoting  greater  transparency  in 
Banking, better communication with the public and the banking sector, and greater consumer 
protection. At the heart of transparency and consumer protection are education and effective 
communication not just with the banking community but with the country at large. That is a 
vital task for all banks in a modern world and especially for the Bank of Mauritius in setting 
the tone and style for sustainable development. We are now becoming the institution that Sir 
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam called for in that 1966 debate I referred to earlier, one worthy of 
developed countries, along with the Development Bank and the Economic Planning Unit. 
In 2004, the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) reflected on the success of 
the development of Mauritius and its banking and financial sector. It did not see the story as 
one of seamless progress. Where Meade had presented the haunting vision of catastrophe 
BIS Review 99/2007 
 11
IDRC  underlined 
international  competitiveness,  bringing  unemployment  down 
ahead in the 1960’s, the IDRC paper highlighted the downside, for example in the 1980’s, 
and listed the challenges ahead. 
The 
the  severe  economic  setbacks  of  25  years  ago,  soaring 
unemployment, rapid inflation, acute foreign exchange shortages, low reserves, public sector 
finance in a shambles, low investments, increasing debt and the rest of it. But by 1988, with 
the success of the EPZ sector, more favourable terms of trade and falling oil prices, those 
dark clouds had dissipated and near full-employment was reached.  
The  relative  success  of  Mauritius  which  is  evident  in  a  regional  perspective,  was  not 
dependent on a single factor or a formula that could be replicated elsewhere. Key elements 
included  the  following:  political  stability  –  Mauritius  is  not  considered  a  high  risk  country 
politically – strong chambers of agriculture and commerce, an educated population, a pro-
business government, fresh COMESA preferential trade (with many opportunities yet to be 
exploited) for niche markets, the unfolding of the policies of the regional hub, delocalisation 
of  production,  and  more  investment  in  other  countries  in  the  region  such  as  Madagascar, 
Mozambique, Lesotho, Cote d’Ivoire by then being exploited. 
The  IDRC  recipe  for  continued  success  requires  sound  macro-economic  management  to 
sustain 
to  2%  without 
jeopardising  inflation,  reducing  public  sector  expenditure  to  22%  of  GDP,  bringing  more 
banks  into  the  financial  sector  to  promote  competition,  a  foreign-exchange  management 
monitoring  committee,  greater  productivity  and  competitiveness,  co-ordinated  mechanisms 
for  promoting  investment,  R&D,  low  and  uniform  level  of  protection,  and  more  effective 
negotiations at the WTO. 
We give thanks for the lives of those who over the last forty years have given their services 
to this Bank; the foundations on which a great Bank is built. In the Jeux des Isles one of the 
concluding events is the relay where the athletes complete their run and then pass the baton 
to the next and so on towards the winning line. 
At  this  anniversary  event  we  take  on  that  baton  passed  to  us  from  the  former  Governors 
here, Board members and staff, with the determination to compete in the future to match and 
outmatch their performance, adapting our stride to the new course as it unfolds. 
In keeping with the occasion we are presenting to the President and to the Prime Minister a 
newly-carved large wooden Dodo. This bird is the traditional icon of the Bank of Mauritius. In 
the English language, our bird has achieved an unenviable notoriety representing, as it does, 
the grim finality of species extinction. We are taking the liberty of also placing a replica of this 
carving in the new entrance hall of the brand-new Bank of Mauritius Tower, as a continuing 
reminder to all of us who work here of the fate that becomes a species that fails to adapt to 
its ever-changing environment and the threat from new predators! 
Once again, thank you for honouring us with your presence tonight. Enjoy your dinner. And 
thank you for your attention. 
12 
 BIS Review 99/2007
