Stefan Ingves: Housing and monetary policy – a view from an inflation 
targeting central bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City's Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 1 September 2007.  
 I  am  honoured  to  have  been  asked  to  participate  in  this  final  panel  debate  in  such 
distinguished company. What I intend to bring to this panel is an account of how Sveriges 
Riksbank, an inflation targeting central bank, takes into consideration developments in asset 
prices,  house  prices  in  particular,  and  our  experience  thus  far  of  doing  so.  Hopefully  this 
account  will  be  of  interest,  since  it  illustrates  some  of  the  challenges  –  analytical  and 
pedagogical  –  that  policy  makers  face  when  deciding  on  the  appropriate  way  of  bringing 
asset price developments into monetary policy decisions making. 
In  going  through  events  in  the  past  few  years  I  will  also  touch  on  the  criticism  that  the 
Riksbank has received from various directions – members of the public in Sweden, financial 
market participants, and from some members of academia. As a matter of fact, some of the 
criticism levelled at the Executive Board has come from within the Bank, i.e. from members 
of the staff. As I will elaborate below, this reflects that there are no simple answers to the 
question of what the proper role is for house prices in an inflation targeting framework.  
Let  me  say  at  the  outset  what  I  and  other  members  of  the  Executive  Board  have  said  on 
many  occasions  –  Sveriges  Riksbank  does  not  have  a  target  either  for  the  level  of  house 
prices or for house price inflation, or for any other asset price for that matter. However, when 
we  observe  long  periods  of  high  growth  rates  in  asset  prices  and  debt,  growth  rates  that 
appear to be unsustainable in the long run, our view is that it is not reasonable to completely 
ignore  that  there  may  be  risks  associated  with  this,  even  though  it  is  difficult  to  give 
consideration to these risks in any simple manner in our regular forecasting process. What 
this view has meant in practice is fairly marginal changes in the timing of our interest rate 
changes and substantial public oral and written focus on the issue. Having said that, and for 
the  benefit  of  those  not  familiar  with  the  monetary  policy  framework  in  Sweden,  let  me 
provide a short background. 
Sveriges Riksbank is an inflation targeting central bank, having adopted an explicit target for 
inflation in 1993, effective from 1995. Our goal is to keep inflation at 2 per cent in terms of 
changes in the CPI. The regime has now been in place for well over ten years, and there is 
broad agreement that the regime has been a successful one; CPI-inflation has been low and 
stable  over  the  period,  averaging  around  1.3  per  cent,  while  the  real  economy  has 
experienced  annual  growth  of  around  3  percent.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  that 
exclude the effects on CPI of our own interest-rate changes have been closer to the target of 
2 per cent, as have inflation expectations (see Figure 1). 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 1
Figure 1: Inflation Expectations in Sweden
Money market agent expectations, annual
percentage change
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
1994
Inflation expectations
CPI
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
Sources: Prospera Research AB and Statistics Sweden
 Figure 2: Real estate prices
Index 1996 4th quarter = 100
Australia
UK
United States
Sweden
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
  Sources: Australian Bureau of Statistics, Nationwide, OFHEO and Statistics
S eden
Since my remarks are to be on the role that house prices have played in Swedish monetary 
policy in recent years the following should be noted too. Since 1996 nominal house prices in 
Sweden have more than doubled (the increase is around 140 per cent, see Figure 2) and the 
average  price  for  a  coop  condominium  has  risen  even  more.  The  corresponding  figures 
concerning the increase in housing prices are for the UK +220%, the US + 110 %, Australia + 
140 %. In recent years, household borrowing has also increased, both in absolute terms and 
relative to household income. 
Rapidly growing house prices and household indebtedness were increasingly highlighted by 
members  of  the  Executive  Board  from  around  2004  and  onwards.  From  2006  statements 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2007
regarding  the  development  of  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  have  often  been 
included  in  press  releases  following  monetary  policy  decisions,  and  discussions  in  the 
minutes from the Executive Board meetings. 
The role of house prices in an inflation targeting regime 
With these institutional and other details in place, let me turn to a more general discussion of 
the role of house prices in an inflation targeting regime. 
As we are all well aware, the debate regarding the role of house prices in the formulation of 
monetary policy has yet to settle in a working consensus. There are many ways in which the 
different views in this ongoing debate can be summarized. Without claiming to have captured 
all views, and perhaps exaggerating a bit, let me mention three: “textbook flexible inflation 
targeting”, “leaning against the wind”, and “extending the forecast horizon”. Let me elaborate 
on each category in turn and then return to our view. 
Textbook flexible inflation targeting  
The textbook account of a flexible inflation targeting regime explains that when interest rates 
are set to bringing inflation back to the target, consideration is also given to the effects on the 
real economy; an appropriate balance between inflation and real variability is sought, which 
implies that an immediate reversal to the target is not an end in itself. Textbook accounts of 
flexible  inflation  targeting  typically  give  the  following  answer  to  the  question  of  how  asset 
prices should be factored into the monetary policy decision: monetary policy should respond 
to changes in asset prices to the extent that they affect the inflation and growth forecasts. 
Thus,  there  is  no  independent  role  for  e.g.  rapidly  rising  house  prices.  Their  effect  on  the 
monetary policy decision should come only through their effect on the inflation and growth 
forecasts. This recommendation, and the assumptions on which it is based, is something I 
will comment more on, below.  
Leaning against the wind  
Another  view  often  put  forward  is  that  a  central  bank  can  bring  about  better  outcomes  for 
inflation  and  output  by  reacting  to  rapidly  rising  asset  prices,  over  and  above  their 
implications for inflation and growth. In short, there are two arguments for this: (i) engaging in 
such behaviour – let’s call it “leaning against the wind” – in situations when an asset price is 
changing due to non-fundamentals can dampen the effects of the unmotivated price change 
on  the  real  economy  and  thereby  prevent  an  inefficient  allocation  of  resources;  (ii)  if  the 
market  knows  that  the  central  bank  engages  in  “leaning  against  the  wind”  activities  the 
probability will fall of non-fundamental price changes arising in the first place. 
The  key  issue  here  is,  of  course,  identifying  price  changes  that  are  driven  by  non-
fundamentals. This problem cannot be overly emphasized. But difficult or not, it is an issue 
that  central  banks  cannot  ignore.  If  prices  of  houses  or  other  assets  are  partly  driven  by 
factors that are hard to explain and that are believed to give rise to inefficient allocations and 
risks of large fluctuations in real economic activity and inflation, such events will, in one way 
or another, find their way into our thinking about monetary policy. 
Extending the forecasting horizon 
In practice, most inflation targeting central banks have chosen to adopt forecast horizons of 
two  to  three  years,  at  least  in  external  communication  and  official  documents.  In  this 
environment,  the  idea  that  a  central  bank  can  need  to  extend  the  horizon  over  which  it 
constructs  inflation  and  output  forecasts  is  one  that  has  been  heard  from  many  central 
banks.  Doing  so  may  enable  the  central  bank  to  take  into  consideration  the  longer-run 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 3
consequences on inflation and production of potentially large movements in asset prices and 
levels of indebtedness that have been built up over long periods of time. 
From a theoretical perspective, central banks should always look at inflation and growth over 
the indefinite future, and thus this seems a reasonable proposal. At the same time one must 
remember that in practice it is difficult to construct forecasts for longer horizons that actually 
contain more information than that which is contained in the forecast for the coming two to 
three years. Also, the horizon may in fact have to be very long to illustrate the issues at hand.  
The Riksbank view 
The monetary policy strategy followed by the Riksbank is that of flexible inflation targeting. 
When  setting  interest  rates  we  consider  not  only  the  outlook  for  inflation  but  also  the 
development of the real economy. In most situations, monetary policy is focused on bringing 
inflation back to target within a two-year horizon, which is deemed as providing enough time 
to  allow  consideration  to  be  given  to  developments  in  the  real  economy.  In  certain 
circumstances,  if  inflation  has  deviated  substantially  from  the  target,  it  is  reasonable  to  let 
inflation return to target at a slower pace, provided this does not undermine the credibility of 
the  inflation  target.  Doing  so  will  dampen  the  effects  on  the  real  economy  of  the  policy 
measures that are adopted in order to return inflation to the stipulated target.  
Described in this way, the Riksbank’s strategy is close to the textbook treatment of flexible 
inflation targeting. However – and here I come to an area where the Riksbank has recently 
been criticized – we do also allow for taking into consideration developments in asset prices, 
including house prices. As explained in the policy document “Monetary Policy in Sweden”  
“the paths of asset prices and indebtedness can at times be either difficult 
to rationalize or unsustainable in the long term. This means that there are 
risks of sharp corrections in the future which in turn affect the real economy 
and inflation. …In practice, taking risks of this kind into consideration can 
mean  that  interest  rate  changes  are  made  somewhat  earlier  or  later,  in 
relation  to  what  would  have  been  the  most  suitable  according  to  the 
forecasts for inflation and the real economy.” (p. 15-16) 
Why is such a statement included in the Riksbank’s monetary policy strategy? Why is it for 
instance  not  sufficient  to  simply  follow  the  prescriptions  of  the  textbook  account  of  flexible 
inflation targeting? This type of criticism was raised in a recent external evaluation authored 
by Francesco Giavazzi and Frederic Mishkin. 
A close adherence to the textbook account of flexible inflation targeting requires a belief that 
the  analytical  tools  and  models  currently  available  have  accurately  captured  the  important 
linkages in the economy. It requires a belief that we as central bank economists have a solid 
understanding  of  all  important  aspects  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  In  my 
opinion – which is neither very original nor controversial – we are not quite there yet.  
One such area in which our understanding can be improved concerns the credit markets. A 
fundamental problem is that we presently lack the analytical tools that accurately capture the 
role played by credit and house prices in the economy. The research of Chairman Bernanke 
and  others  regarding  the  importance  of  collateral  constraints  and  the  financial  accelerator 
effects  on  firms’  investment  have  paved  the  way  for  an  increased  understanding  of  these 
complex issues. Their research has been extended by others to the household sector – the 
idea being that as house prices increase, credit-constrained households are able to engage 
in so-called mortgage equity withdrawals and raise their consumption. In time, insights from 
these models will help us to better analyze house prices and household debt in integrated, 
general equilibrium setups. In fact, this is an area into which the Riksbank is putting some 
modelling efforts, trying to understand how credit markets can be integrated with our general 
equilibrium approach to fluctuations in growth and inflation.  
4 
 BIS Review 96/2007
In the future we will hopefully be better able to analyze how developments in asset prices 
influence  the  future  course  of  inflation  and  output,  and  how  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism  is  affected  by  changing  asset  prices.  Until  we  are  confident  that  our  various 
formal models adequately capture the risks that we in the Executive  Board are concerned 
about, we will have to continue relying heavily on judgement when taking such effects into 
account in the conduct of monetary policy. 
Let me reflect a bit on what in my mind has brought about this stance. On the one hand we 
normally talk about inflation targeting in a two year time perspective, on the other hand there 
are risks associated with credit and asset prices that may lead to substantial deviations from 
the forecasted inflation and output paths. The judgement issue then becomes one of meeting 
or  not  meeting  the  target  at  the  two-year  horizon  versus  the  risk  of  costly  deviations  both 
within  and  beyond  the  normal  forecast  horizon.  Such  deviations  are  likely  to  be  low 
probability events but with high costs in inflation and real terms should they occur. We know 
that these developments are very hard to predict using the standard models we normally rely 
on but I do believe it is our responsibility ex ante to reflect on how to avoid future negative 
outcomes. The nature of such outcomes will vary depending on what part of the asset market 
that generates the risks, the market microstructure available for sorting out a problem in an 
efficient manner and the extent to which monetary policy is able to counteract the risks. Here 
we certainly can deepen our understanding of how different imbalances unwind and what the 
costs are. We often talk about asset markets in very general terms without going into any 
great detail. 
In this context one can argue that monetary policy is a blunt instrument and considerations of 
risks associated with credit and asset markets should be left to the supervisory structures in 
place. In principle, supervisory rules can be fine tuned towards different asset markets in a 
more precise way than monetary policy. If prudential rules are or become binding we are also 
likely to see some macroeconomic consequences of these policies. In my view it is far from 
obvious  how  much  weight  is  to  be  put  on  monetary  policy  and  how  much  on  supervision. 
Monetary policy can play a role, albeit perhaps a limited one, not the least because this will 
help  to  manage  inflation  expectations  over  the  long  term.  Furthermore,  when  imbalances 
build up monetary policy and supervision can support one another.  
Criticism from different sides… 
I  mentioned  in  the  beginning  that we  have  been  criticized  from  many  angles.  Thus,  in  the 
very same year that an outside review came to the conclusion that the Riksbank had given 
too  much  independent  weight  to  house  price  developments,  other  Riksbank-watchers 
criticized  us  for  neglecting  the  ongoing  build-up  in  house  prices  and  debt  levels.  Some 
market commentators in Sweden have in the past year referred to the rapidly rising house 
prices  as  a  reason  for  increasing  the  repo  rate  at  a  substantially  faster  rate  than  our 
published  interest  rate  forecasts.  House  prices  have,  as  I  mentioned  in  the  introduction, 
increased by 140 per cent since 1996; annual changes are now in the vicinity of 8 per cent, 
down from around 13 per cent a year ago. As in many other countries, these developments 
have  been  the  subject  of  much  attention  in  the  media,  and  calls  have  been  made  for  the 
Riksbank “to do something about it”.  
Here  some  pedagogical  challenges  arise.  We  must  explain  that  we  do  not  target  house 
prices but that we do not ignore risks associated with them. This is far from having a target 
for  house  prices.  House  prices  vary  in  response  to  changing  economic  conditions,  one  of 
them  being  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  In  Sweden,  as  in  many  other  countries,  house 
prices have increased in an environment characterized by strong macroeconomic conditions, 
rising  disposable 
this 
environment it is impossible to pin-point an appropriate rate of change in house prices. But 
policy makers always have to take decisions under a high degree of uncertainty.  
increasingly  sophisticated 
financial  markets. 
incomes  and 
In 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 5
Concluding remarks  
In conclusion, let me say that we have tried to be open and honest about the uncertainties 
surrounding  the  effects  of  house  price  developments  on  the  rest  of  the  economy  and  the 
appropriate  monetary  policy  response.  We  have,  in  fact,  been  open  about  our  own 
uncertainties and the differences in opinion, albeit small, that have arisen at times. This may 
have given rise to “confusion about the confusion”. But one could also say this comes with 
transparency – outside observers were very aware of the discussions that were being held 
and the uncertainties involved.  
Inflation targeting so far has proved to be a successful way of conducting monetary policy, 
but there are unresolved issues and one concerns the treatment of house and other asset 
prices;  it  has  been  hard  to  formally  fit  asset  price  developments  into  the  frameworks 
researchers and central banks use when they study inflation targeting.  
The models currently available to us and other policy makers, while indispensable as tools 
for  organizing  our  thoughts  concerning  difficult  matters,  are  incomplete  representations  of 
complex economies and cannot be the sole input into our analysis. Thus, while the academic 
community and researchers at central banks – including Sveriges Riksbank – continue their 
efforts  to  formulate  models  that  combine  firm  founding  in  economic  theory  with  good 
empirical  properties,  policy  makers  have  to  use  judgement  and  take  into  account  those 
relationships that history and experience suggest are of importance. 
In  my  view  it  is  well  worth  keeping  an  eye  on  house  prices  and  other  asset  prices  and 
passing judgement on the risks that their developments may give rise to. If the probability of 
very negative outcomes can be reduced ex ante I believe this to be a good thing and a better 
solution compared to picking up the pieces ex post. 
6 
 BIS Review 96/2007
