Martín Redrado: Financial stability and the importance of AML/CFT supervision 
and regulation 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the FIBA Annual AML 
Compliance Conference, Miami, 13 February 2007. 
 All of us in this room share a vision about the need for regional integration. Efforts include forums like 
this one for discussion about opportunities and shared challenges in different spheres of action at the 
regional  level.  In  my  view,  these  efforts  represent  an  effective  mean  of  adopting  international 
standards  and  adjusting  them  to  the  realities  of  the  continent.  Regional  agreements  are  extremely 
valuable as a way of consolidating the implementation of a uniform set of best practices. 
For those of us who, on top of being central bankers, are also bank supervisors, we must increase our 
efforts  to  incorporate  the  advantages  of  international  standards,  with  the  fundamental  addition  of  a 
regional  perspective.  This  means  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  reality  of  each  region  to  take  into 
account the factors that affect its dynamic. 
Regional  realities  evolve,  and  regional  demands  do  not  necessarily  match  the  original  design  and 
development of international standards. 
Let  me  give  you  a  practical  example:  as  an  international  standard,  consolidated  supervision  has 
existed for over thirty years. The situation with quantitative supervision is pretty much straightforward: 
standards are uniformly and widely applied. However, there are gray areas on qualitative supervision 
(that  is  the  impact  on  risks  of  related  non-financial  activities),  where  standards  are  just  being 
developed and, therefore, the implementation as a tool for supervision is under debate. 
Another  concrete  case  is  the  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  Accord  on  capital  requirements, 
particularly on how to compute capital requirements for operational risk (that is the risk of loss resulting 
from inadequate processes and systems, or from external events). 
We  have  dedicated  sizable  resources  to  managing  market  and  credit  risks,  and  those  were  well-
known,  narrowly-defined.  Operational  risk  was  anything  but  well  defined  since  there  is  a  lot  of 
disagreement about the specific contingencies that should be considered under this umbrella. 
In the basic approach banks must hold capital for operational risks equal to the overall average over 
the  previous  three  years  of  a  fixed  percentage  of  annual  gross  income.  Now,  in  the  standarized 
approach, banks’ activities are divided into several business lines: corporate finance, sales & trading, 
retail banking, commercial banking. Operational risks should be considered for these particular lines of 
business. 
In Latin America, stress tests determine relatively high regulatory capital charges for operational risk, 
based  on  the  alternatives  foreseen  in  the  new  capital  accord.  In  my  opinion,  the  operational  risk 
measure, as it is proposed, does not necessarily reflect our risk of operations. As a consequence, we 
are working on developing a better measure to reflect operational risk appropriately in Latin America. 
This, again, in no way implies concerns about the soundness of the international standard proposed 
by the Basel Committee. On the other hand, it shows a clear commitment to its application: to identify, 
understand, measure and mitigate risks, at the same time as it also evidences a thorough awareness 
of the particular situation of our financial systems. 
These examples provide a framework for introducing the key issue in our discussion today, which is 
our vision on Latin America’s agenda for fighting against AML/CFT. 
We support all initiatives intended to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. Nevertheless, 
any counter-terrorist effort, whether through regulation, control or the gathering of information, that is 
applied without understanding the idiosyncrasy of the region would be counterproductive. 
We cannot ignore that the US Patriot Act is a legitimate and valuable instrument to fight against these 
global  crimes  that  affect  our  values  and  have  become  a  threat  to  sustainable  economic  growth. 
However, by not specifying what appropriate performance with “due diligence” means, it has increased 
BIS Review 16/2007 
 1
the  cost  of  opening  and  maintaining  correspondent  accounts,  and  this  has  affected  heavily  the 
financial systems of the region and the smaller institutions in particular. 
This  is  reflected  in  the  number  of  correspondent  accounts  closed  in  recent  years.  In  the  case  of 
Argentina, for instance, over 200 correspondent accounts were closed between March 31, 2001 and 
September  30,  2005.  In  this  period,  almost  fifty  financial  institutions,  both  public  and  private, 
experienced  closure  of  correspondent  accounts.  Not  one  case  showed  a  situation  of  AML  or  CFT. 
Something along the process is flawed. Within the context of our analysis of the situation in the region, 
we have surveyed the impact of regulations on correspondent business in Latin America with similar 
results. 
This outcome has nothing to do with the objectives pursued by standards that combat global crimes. 
On the contrary, should this trend persist, it will result in growing informality within financial circuits, 
greater  political  reluctance  to  cooperate,  and  a  diversion  of  financial  channels  towards  other  more 
realistic markets. 
The  challenge  is  always  the  same:  to  ensure  that  those  actions  designed  to  combat  and  prevent 
crimes, in addition to being well designed, are also effective. 
One necessary condition for the success of a policy is relying on an evaluation that correctly describes 
the existing situation. The absence of this condition could mean that the proposed objectives are not 
met, or could even introduce additional distortions, leading to outcomes that are the opposite of those 
desired. 
This  is  not  a  minor  challenge:  reality  is  a  complex  synthesis  of  an  almost  countless  conjunction  of 
causes, where history, economic and social factors clearly stand out. The challenge lies in the fact that 
these conditioning factors are structural in nature and are thus, by definition, difficult to modify over the 
short-term. 
A  second  relevant  feature  of  an  effective  policy  (thoroughly  tested  over  the  course  of  history)  is 
building  consensus.  Policies  cannot  be  imposed  in  an  authoritarian  manner  or  imported  from  other 
countries.  They  should  be  endogenous  to  each  society  as  a  result  of  collective  decisions  with  the 
participation of social groups with different tasks and preferences. 
Such a collective decision-making process may take longer but policies designed and implemented by 
“conviction”  rather  than  by  “obligation”  or  “necessity”,  and  with  a  degree  of  consensus,  significantly 
improve their odds for success, and persistence over the long-term. 
We are therefore working to carry out a suitable, detailed diagnosis of the current situation in Latin 
America as a way to cooperate in developing a specific set of rules and regulations in this subject. We 
have found that one of the recurring features of our economies - and Argentina is not an exception - is 
the high level of informality, evidenced in various ways, such as tax evasion, smuggling, capital flight, 
black markets, among others. 
Making it clear that we must never give up the fight to bring economic activity into the formal circuits, it 
must be recognized that the consequences of these features are conclusive: high informality prevents 
a  linear  implementation  of  recommendations  and  best  practices,  which,  in  turn,  leads  to  high 
reputational risks. 
In our particular case, from the Central Bank of Argentina, we have made adjustments to regulations 
on money laundering, and have introduced specific new rules on the prevention and control of terrorist 
financing. 
Although the framework in place is in line with international standards, we have considered that our 
“traditional” regime for the prevention of money laundering could not easily be adapted to combating 
terrorist  financing.  We  know  that  there  are  significant  differences  that  have  an  impact  on  the 
monitoring and information systems of financial institutions. 
In  addition,  we  have  established  a  specific  mechanism  for  supervision  and  control  over  the  units 
developed  for  combating  money-laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  This  is  based  on  the  work  of  a 
team of dedicated inspectors exclusively assigned to these tasks, and a rating system for the internal 
control units of each financial institution. 
Furthermore, recognizing the importance of developing regional standards and best practices, we are 
working towards the design of a regional view specifically on AML/CFT supervision. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2007
We would like to generate renewed emphasis to the implementation of the surveillance mechanisms 
that already exist in the region, such as the new mutual evaluation methodologies of the FATF and 
GAFISUD, the multilateral evaluation mechanism of the CICAD/OAS, the IMF’s Article IV, the FSAP, 
and  the  due  diligence  established  by  the  US  financial  system  in  its  commercial  and  correspondent 
banking relations with Latin American banks. 
In the global economy, financial systems have changed in such a way that our approach to prudential 
regulation  is  always  scrutinized.  Traditional  regulation  and  banking  supervision  mechanisms  have 
become  obsolete.  Modern  approaches,  rather  than  establishing  limits,  place  greater  emphasis  on 
requiring financial institutions to improve analysis of internal risks, management and control systems. 
They require us to seek evidence of sound risk management and adequate control systems within the 
financial  institution  itself.  For  this  reason  a  uniform  and  a  reasonable  criteria  to  ensure  the 
effectiveness of results on the basis of the application of these standards must be urgently defined. 
Our initiative with regard to specialized AML/CFT supervision could be implemented at the regional 
level. Let me be very clear: we are not attempting to replace the standards that have already been 
agreed. On the contrary, the actual aim is to supplement such recommendations with a mechanism for 
banking supervision that provides support to the actual implementation of those standards. 
Our  vision  contains  four  central  pillars:  regulation,  specialized  supersivison,  ratings  and  information 
sharing. 
We consider that a uniform regulatory framework should be applied, based on the existing standards, 
such as those established within the framework of the FATF. 
To do so, it would be key to define a methodology to measure the levels of informal economic activity 
in  Latin  American  economies.  An  annual  indicator  to  track  informality  levels  in  our  economies  and 
other  indicators  for  monitoring  both  unregistered  activities  and  under-registered  activities  is  critical. 
This  kind  of  tools  would  enable  us  to  develop  proposals  for  action  geared  towards  Latin  American 
financial  systems  that  contribute  to  reducing  such  informality  levels  in  the  medium  term,  with  the 
support of multilateral agencies. 
The second pillar is specialized supervision, that is to say the application of specific AML/CFT-oriented 
approach based on inspection programs according to a risk matrix, carried out by a qualified team of 
inspectors.  There  are  no  specific  international  standards  on  this  matter.  All  the  principles  and 
recommendations mention supervision as the core component of prevention, but we are still in need of 
a standardized methodology. 
The third pillar is rating. We believe that specific rating mechanisms developed by local supervisors 
should be implemented, on the basis of an agreement on aspects such as components to be rated, 
and the rating systems applicable to financial institutions. 
Although  traditionally  we  have  rated  financial  institutions  mainly  according  to  liquidity  and  solvency 
considerations in order to protect the stability of financial systems, we consider that rating banks on 
the basis of compliance with aml/cft regulations will be relevant. 
The last pillar concerns information sharing. Guidelines for the use of information and to which extend 
it  may  be  shared  should  be  defined.  All  of  this,  with  special  emphasis  on  the  analysis  of  the  legal 
frameworks of the different jurisdictions. 
Standards with these features would allow to enhance awareness of financial systems on AML/CFT 
matters, providing them with a credible and stable framework for conducting their businesses and, in 
addition, for developing a valuable flow of information that can be exchanged between private sector 
parties and between the private and the public sector. 
This supervision methodology, in the process of being implemented in Argentina, includes technical 
assistance from international institutions such as the World Bank. 
Our vision is fully consistent with the risk-based approach that allows financial institutions to focus their 
resources on those operations, transactions, customers and accounts that show greatest vulnerability 
to  global  crimes.  These  approaches  -already  adopted  by  countries  such  as  the  United  States-  are 
included in several of the regulatory aspects proposed by the US Patriot Act, and are in line with the 
spirit of many of the recommendations of the FATF. 
The risk-based approach recognizes that the banking business has peculiarities linked to cultural and 
historical matters associated with each region. Therefore, any regulatory framework must be flexible 
BIS Review 16/2007 
 3
enough to be able to ensure certain discretion to member countries, being applied on the grounds of 
their knowledge of their own banking and financial practices.  
There  is  no  unique  solution  or  pre-established  methodology  for  governments  or  international 
institutions to define the nature and content of a risk-based approach. Nevertheless, certain principles 
have been developed, describing basic concepts, which serve as a guide to develop and implement a 
system that can operate reasonably. However, specific aspects must be developed by the institutions 
on the basis of the particularities of each case.  
Standards  that,  for  example,  break  down  risk  into  three  vectors  -  country  risk,  customer  risk  and 
service risk- should be used universally, but the specific weight assigned to each of these components 
when  evaluating  global  AML/CFT  risk  must  be  based  upon  the  strategy  pursued  by  each  country’s 
regulatory  authorities,  who  best  know  the  domestic  market.  This  includes  the  periodic  review  of 
strategy by the regulator and by each financial institution.  
Although standards are important, no less important is the value of the judgment by those responsible 
for  supervision  and  control.  For  instance,  what  magnitudes  are  we  discussing  when  analyzing 
fluctuations in the current account balances or the size of certain transactions? What level of volatility 
is unusual for a certain type of business or customer? The answer is not the same for Turkey, Russia 
or Argentina. 
The  risk-based  approach,  like  the  spirit  of  our  proposal,  tells  us  that  these  kinds  of  assessments 
require  acquiring  special  expertise  on  the  nature  of  the  business  that  should  also  include  thorough 
knowledge of standard domestic market practices. This includes not only regulatory and market issues 
but  also  elements  such  as  corporate  governance,  relations  with  the  community,  and  the  economic, 
historical and cultural context. As a matter of fact, we would like to reiterate our strong support to work 
together with the US treasury to make the most out of the Cartagena Meeting as part of the private 
sector dialogue initiative. 
We all know that cash-intensive activities by definition carry a greater associated risk. Nevertheless, 
their treatment should take into account whether the economy is in itself highly dependent on the use 
of  cash,  given  the  historically  low  penetration  by  financial  services.  Elements  such  as  these  are 
essential  when  it  comes  to  adequately  allocating  risk  to  a  customer  or  a  transaction,  and  will 
undoubtedly  increase  the  ability  to  detect  criminal  operations  efficiently.  Once  financial  institutions 
have  detected  through  their  risk  analysis  processes  those  transactions  or  customers  showing  high 
levels of risk, they must implement the necessary internal control measures. 
Obviously  this  type  of  approach  should  be  supplemented  by  a  smooth  and  constant  flow  of 
appropriate  information  from  the  various  government  entities  to  the  financial  system’s  supervisors 
regarding  those  actions  that  could  be  linked  to  terrorist  activities.  In  this  instance,  the  timing  of  the 
availability of the relevant information will be essential to be able to act upon, particularly in the case of 
the  fight  against  terrorism,  when  the  funds  used  do  not  necessarily  derive  from  illegal  or  criminal 
activities. 
In our opinion, an approach of this nature has a positive effect on financial stability and minimizes the 
negative externalities associated with specific issues that can become systemic problems. 
To sum up, we share the goals and we would like to contribute to meet these objectives. This is why 
we suggest policies that contribute to acquire a better understanding of the field as a way to reduce 
uncertainty and increase the effectiveness of our existing programs. 
It is time to outline our experience, our knowledge, and put our organizations to work to implement 
concrete  results  to  develop  standards  and  better  practices  at  regional  level.  It  will  contribute  to  the 
stability and sustainable development of our financial systems and our economies. 
After  this  meeting,  I  am  invigorated  to  keep  working  on  the  effective  implementation  of  AML/CFT 
policies with the same dedication, the same commitment, the same energy in my country and in Latin 
America. My deepest belief is that only with a responsible and realistic contribution of regulators and 
the  private  sector  we  will  succeed  in  giving  ourselves  the  chance  to  live  in  better  countries,  better 
regions and a better world. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2007
