Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Gulf Executive Development Programme  
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the Gulf Executive Development Programme Graduation Ceremony, Manama, 30 April 2007. 
 Members  of  the  Steering  Committee,  Distinguished  Guests,  Programme  Graduates,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen: Good Evening. 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all here this evening, and to publicly acknowledge both my 
own support and that of the Central Bank of Bahrain for the Gulf Executive Development Programme. 
This graduation marks the 9th such programme to have been completed – its continued popularity, in 
my view, clearly shows the inherent strengths of its offering, and the commitment of all its sponsoring 
organizations. 
Let  me  begin,  however,  by  first  acknowledging  the  success  of  tonight’s  graduates.  All  study 
programmes which have to be combined with full time employment represent unique challenges, in 
terms  of  time-management  and  commitment.  These  challenges  are  all  the  more  acute  when  the 
programme is at an advanced level, such as the GEDP. 
Congratulations, therefore, are richly deserved for all of you graduating tonight, for your hard work and 
perseverance. Of course, armed with your new qualification, even more will be expected of you. But I 
am  confident  that,  having  successfully  completed  this  challenge,  you  will  move  on  to  even  greater 
professional success in the years to come. 
I am sure that after your studies, you appreciate that true education isn’t so much about knowing all 
the  answers,  but  knowing  what  questions  to  ask;  and  that  true  leadership  requires  the  exercise  of 
responsibility,  not  just  of  authority.  Remember  also  that  success  is  measured  as  much  in  how  we 
achieve something, as in what we achieve. 
Of course, many others have also been involved in making GEDP 9 a success this year, and I should 
also like to acknowledge them publicly. In particular, the sponsoring employers, faculty members, and 
business  leaders,  who  have  so  graciously  given  their  time,  have  all  contributed  enormously  to  this 
programme. 
I would like in particular to thank, as always, the faculty of the Darden Graduate School of Business 
Administration  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  the  members  of  the  GEDP  9  Steering  Committee,  and 
Khalil Nooruddin of the BIBF and all his staff.  
Let  me  finish  by  wishing  this  programme  continued  long-term  success.  Our  economy  needs  an 
educated workforce in order to develop, and in turn the current high growth and continued expansion 
of our economy translates into a strong need for well educated professionals. You will all have seen, 
for  instance,  the  startling  numbers  which  were  published  recently,  showing  that  financial  sector 
employment alone grew by nearly 19% during 2006. 
Programmes such as the GEDP demonstrate that we have the capacity, together with our partners, to 
develop  our  human  resources,  and  give  me  the  confidence  that  together  we  will  continue  to  move 
forward and meet tomorrow’s challenges. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 53/2007 
 1
