Ranee Jayamaha: Basel II – a roadmap for Sri Lankan banking system with 
international comparisons 
Opening remarks by Dr Ranee Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at an 
event  of 
the  Association  of  Professional  Bankers,  Colombo, 
18 December 2006. 
lecture  series,  organized  by 
 Mr.  Theagarajah,  Mr.  Ajantha  Madurapperuma,  officials  of  the  Association  of  Professional  Bankers, 
distinguished participants, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for the invitation to deliver the opening 
speech on “Basel II – a Roadmap for Sri Lankan Banking System with International Comparisons”. 
Let me deviate a bit from the topic and first deal with the flexible approach the Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka (CBSL) has adopted in moving forward for full compliance of Basel II in the next few years. I will 
then set out some of the key implementation issues which need to be addressed not only by us but 
also  by  the  Basel  Committee  and  all  host/home  supervisors.  For  international  comparison,  I  will 
provide a brief a summary of how some of the other countries have fared in implementing Basel II from 
2008  onwards.  Mr  Samarasiri,  Director,  Bank  Supervision  will  outline  a  broad  roadmap  in 
implementing Basel II. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has released the document, “International Convergence 
of  Capital  Measurement  and  Capital  Standards:  A  Revised  Framework”  in  June  2004  which  is  well 
known as Basel II. Since then, the bankers and the regulators all over the world have been occupied 
with the adoption of the revised Framework. The Accord in full is meant for the internationally active 
banks but other banks are expected to follow suit. Although international institutions such as the IMF 
and the World Bank have announced that the adoption of Basel II will not be a yardstick for measuring 
compliance with the international best practice, sooner than later it will be the international norm and 
they  will  start  monitoring  the  progress.  So,  there  is  no  point  in  debating  whether  or  not  we  should 
implement Basel II. The debate, if at all, should be how best to implement it and, where possible, be 
ahead of others. Overall, the benefits to the industry in terms of improvements in risk management 
and corporate governance and the supervisory action embedded in the Accord cannot be ignored.  
Basel II has three mutually reinforcing pillars, namely, the Minimum Capital Requirement under Pillar I, 
the Supervisory Review Process which is Pillar II and Market Discipline or Pillar III. The whole purpose 
of this exercise is to make capital the key shock absorber in banking operations. For that, simple risk 
mitigation  measures  in  Basel  I  were  not  considered  adequate.  Therefore,  a  risk  sensitive  capital 
requirement and risk mitigation practices were combined in a more meaningful manner. Banking is a 
highly leveraged and risky operation and it is imperative to mitigate risks. With or without the Basel 
Capital  Accord,  banks  and  financial  institutions  must  find  ways  and  means  to  identify  risks,  assess 
them  and  put  in  processes  and  procedures  to  deal  with  such  risks.  Risk  mitigation  is  not  new  to 
bankers all over the world and same is true for Sri Lanka. Most of you who are sitting here this evening 
are professional bankers of high calibre. Banking is like swimming across waters. Bankers know how 
to  swim.  Regulators  need  not  teach  you  how  to  do  it.  We  can  warn  you  of  bad  weathers,  choppy 
waters, high-tides and currents that can pull you down, but we cannot swim for you. That’s why the 
regulators expect the shareholders, boards of directors, CEOs, senior management and all employees 
of banks to understand potential risks of their own operations and be ready to deal with them if such 
risks  were  to  occur.  Therefore,  all bank  officials  individually  and collectively  are  responsible  for  risk 
mitigation. 
Basel  II  seeks  to  balance  leveraging  internal  risk  systems  with  supervisory  prudence.  It  is  also  a 
reflection  of  the  rapid  change  in  financial  market  innovations,  advances  in  risk  management  and 
enhanced supervisory approaches. In essence, we expect from the banking profession to objectively 
and reliably identify risks, evaluate them and come up with appropriate risk mitigation measures. Many 
enterprises fail due to unforeseen risks because they have not paid attention to risk mitigation. When it 
comes to banking and financial institutions, we need to be much more careful, because they are the 
custodians of other people’s money. 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 1
Flexible approach by CBSL 
In  the  process  of  adopting  Basel  II,  CBSL  will  endeavour  to  adhere  to  the  Basel  criteria  as  far  as 
possible and to retain the spirit of the Accord. However, certain modifications have been made and will 
also be made in the future to suit local conditions. Since Basel II provides a menu of approaches for 
the measurement of risk to suit the level of sophistication of the banks, it is suggested that the banks 
in Sri Lanka adopt the simplest approaches, initially. 
Credit risk 
For the measurement of credit risk under pillar I, we have requested banks to adopt the Standardised 
Approach,  which  is  very  similar  to  the  existing  framework  or  Basel  I  and  requires  very  little 
modifications  to  the  existing  risk  management  systems  by  banks.  The  key  to  the  success  of  this 
Approach is the rating of counterparts. The banks should, as far as possible, encourage developing a 
culture of credit ratings. CBSL will consider the representations made with regard to reducing the risk 
weight  applicable  to  below  BB-rated  entities  initially  in  order  to  inculcate  the  rating  culture,  but  this 
should not be taken as the norm as we expect higher ratings to be considered for the purpose. 
The  Basel  II  Framework  provides  a  preferential  risk  weight  of  75%  for  claims  that  fall  within  the 
regulatory  retail  portfolio.  The  qualifying  criteria  for  retail  and  SME  loans  that  would  fall  within  this 
portfolio have been modified to suit the local conditions and agreed with the banks. However, in order 
to avail of the preferential risk weight, banks have to prove that this regulatory retail portfolio meet the 
qualifying criteria.  
Operational risk  
Basel II introduces an explicit capital charge for a bank’s operational risk, i.e. the risk of losses caused 
by inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or by external events such as natural 
disasters  which  calls  for  increased  capital  requirements.  Throughout  this  year,  the  Central  Bank 
insisted on banks having comprehensive business continuity plans to ensure that there are alternative 
arrangements if the core-banking functions or payment and settlement functions of banks were to fail. 
We issued guidelines, discussed with banks on one to one basis and I believe that action has been 
taken  or  is  being  taken  to  ensure  that  business  continuity  plans  are  done  with  utmost  care  and 
dedication. 
As with credit risk, Basel II provides a choice of 3 approaches to the measurement of operational risk 
and initially, the simplest approach which is called the Basic Indicator Approach is recommended for 
use by all banks. Accordingly, the capital charge will be based on the gross income of the banks. The 
most complex Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA) can be made applicable at later stages as 
techniques for the quantitative measurement of operational risk are still not widely used by Sri Lankan 
banks.  However,  regardless  of  the  approach  used,  all  banks  are  expected  to,  in  their  own  interest, 
have in place sound internal operational risk management systems that are commensurate with the 
nature  of  their  business  activities.  From  the  regulator’s  point  of  view,  it  is  difficult  to  leave  risk 
evaluation entirely to each bank’s discretion particularly because of the need to assess how best each 
bank uses its capital efficiently in dealing with general and specific risks. For market risk, the present 
computation of the capital charge introduced in March 2006 will continue. 
The preparatory work in this area and parallel calculations are at a satisfactory level and we hope that 
banks will be fully ready by the beginning of 2008 to implement the processes they have already put in 
place. However, the implementation process does not stop there. The essence of Basel II is to move 
towards  more  advanced  approaches  which  will  require  advanced  risk  management  techniques  and 
improved corporate governance. 
Adoption of advanced approaches 
For  pillar  I,  CBSL  will  consider  permitting  those  banks  which  wish  to  adopt  the  more  advanced 
measurement approaches such as the Internal Ratings Based (IRB) approaches at a later stage, when 
the  capabilities  at  both  the  supervisory  level  and  at  the  banks  have  improved  and  the  necessary 
infrastructure is in place. As a general principle, for the time being, CBSL will not mandate any of the 
licensed  banks  to  adopt  the  IRB  approaches.  The  banks  themselves  should  conduct  their  own 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2007
feasibility studies and analyze associated costs and benefits in order to decide whether to use the IRB 
approach. The adoption of IRB approach would entail significant changes to their existing systems, the 
collection  of  extensive  data  as  well  as  the  fulfillment  of  many  other  qualitative  and  quantitative 
requirements. Such banks are advised to start building up the necessary data systems now itself in 
order to be able to qualify for the advanced approaches and to plan the application of the ratings for 
their credit management.  
The IRB approach will permit the banks to use their own estimates for the measurement of credit risk 
with  regard  to  certain  parameters.  CBSL  will  stipulate  the  minimum  qualifying  criteria  regarding  the 
comprehensiveness  and  integrity  of  the  rating  systems,  including  the  ability  for  those  systems  to 
produce reasonably accurate and consistent estimates of risk. This will be done in consultation with 
the  industry  and  by  announcing  a  timeframe  for  permitting  the  Foundation  IRB  approach  and  the 
submission of applications in 2007. 
Irrespective of whether the advanced approaches are used or not, the Central Bank encourages all 
banks  to  study  carefully  the  more  advanced  risk  management  concepts  and  practices  embodied  in 
Basel II and consider adopting those relevant to their risk management purposes, even though they 
may not use them for capital allocation as such.  
Pillar II – supervisory review process 
This is a critical and integral part of Basel II which aims at ensuring that banks have sufficient capital to 
support  the  risks  in  their  business  activities,  encourage  banks  to  develop  and  use  better  risk 
management  techniques, and  foster  an  active  dialog  between  the  banks  and supervisors  regarding 
capital  adequacy  and  risk  management  standards.  In  this  regard,  banks  are  expected  to  have  an 
internal process for assessing overall capital adequacy in relation to their risk profile and a strategy for 
maintaining  the  required  level  of  capital,  which  is  expected  to  be  evaluated  by  the  regulator,  and 
intervene at an early stage to prevent banks’ capital from falling below prudent levels. 
Accordingly, the implementation of Pillar II will be an extension of the current regulatory practice and 
an elaboration and refinement rather than a radical change of existing practices. Where necessary, the 
Central Bank will consider imposing higher capital adequacy levels for certain banks, depending on 
their risk exposure. This is expected to result in developing a transparent and systematic approach for 
evaluating the capital assessment processes of the banks and refinement of the CBSL’s risk-based 
approach  to  supervision  to  cover  the  Pillar  II  aspects.  Its  aim  is  to  ensure  the  quality  of  risk 
management  standards  rather  than  just  setting  capital  against  risks.  In  particular,  the  emphasis  on 
other non-credit risks such as interest rate, market, liquidity, concentration, operational, strategic, legal 
and reputational risks should increase. This would be a natural extension of the risk-based approach 
to  supervision  that  is  already  applied  and  it  should  be  viewed  as  a  means  of  fostering  closer 
interaction between the industry and the regulator, rather than an imposition of regulations. To enable 
the process, CBSL has begun to examine the legal requirements in this regard.  
The internal capital adequacy assessment processes (ICAAP) of banks should cover the identification 
and  measuring  of  the  risks  and  assessing  how  much  capital  is  needed  to  support  such  risks.  After 
implementation, the CBSL will review banks’ ICAAP as part of the risk-based supervisory process. In 
addition, there will be an ongoing evaluation of the capital adequacy of banks, including stress tests. In 
the process of evaluation, CBSL will review and evaluate the risk profile of the banks, the adequacy 
and reliability of the ICAAP, and identify any weaknesses or inadequacies and necessary prudential 
measures.  
Pillar III – market discipline 
The purpose of this Pillar is to complement Pillars I and II by encouraging market discipline through 
the public disclosure of key information on risk exposures and capital adequacy. 
Disclosures are applicable at the bank level as well as supervisory level. The level and content of Pillar 
III  disclosures  will  vary  according  to  the  measurement  and  calculation  approaches  adopted  by  a 
relevant  bank.  In  terms  of  Basel  II,  the  disclosures  would  have  to  be  made  on  an  annual  and 
semi-annual  basis.  The  implementation  process  will  be  developed  in  2007  along  with  the 
Sub-committee appointed for the purpose. 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 3
Key implementation issues 
What is the appropriate capital adequacy ratio? 
I. 
Under  Basel I,  the  minimum  capital  adequacy  requirement  was  fixed  at  8%  of  risk-weighted  assets 
which  is  expected  to  be  the  minimum  even  under  Basel  II.  In  Sri  Lanka,  we  have  specified  the 
minimum capital adequacy to be at 10% from 2003, because it was considered necessary to have a 
cushion of additional 2%, so that any unforeseen risks could be covered to some extent. Under Basel 
II, the minimum capital adequacy ratio could be well above 10% or even lower than 10% if the bank 
concerned  is  absolutely  sure  that  it  can  mitigate  all  risks  that  are  associated  with  its  banking 
operations. We will continue to use the yardstick of 10% for measuring the minimum capital adequacy 
ratio consisting of 5% for Tier I. The other related issue is “Will 10% be adequate to cover market and 
operational risks as specified in Basel II?” This is where the regulator is going to leave it in the hands 
of the banks, but insist that the two new areas of risks are covered and all risks in banking operations 
are calculated in an objective manner. It is also necessary for the banking institutions to go one step 
further and take into account the risks of their clients also in a meaningful manner. This is certainly a 
challenge for both the bank and also the supervisor. This challenge is not unique to Sri Lanka, but 
common to all countries which have opted to comply with Basel II requirements. 
To address this issue, banks in other countries have created a dedicated post in their institutions, i.e. 
Chief Risk Manager, who will not only look into the risks in the bank’s own portfolios, but also to the 
clients’  portfolios.  The  job  of  the  Chief  Risk  Manager  is  to  identify,  evaluate  risks  and  make 
recommendations  to  set  out  appropriate  processes  in  managing  the  relevant  risks.  The  processes 
should be acceptable to the senior management and the boards of the banks and also to the external 
auditors and the regulators.  
Appropriate risk evaluation techniques 
II.  
Application of appropriate techniques for risk evaluation is an implementation issue. This is where the 
modeling  comes  into  play.  Modeling  is  used  as  a  popular  technique  for  identifying,  quantifying  and 
analyzing  risks  to  enable  the  management  of  banking  and  financial  institutions  to  decide  on  the 
allocation of capital. But one need not entirely depend on modeling and be out of reality as modeling 
will  produce  a  statistical  outcome  depending  on  the  data  you  feed  into  a  set  of  equations  or  a 
simulation model. Modeling also involves issues such as focus on loss data, validation, calibration and 
issues on floors and ceilings. A practical issue on loss data is a different reporting system by banks, 
especially when it comes to large losses. Secondly, some institutions may not reveal large losses at 
all, but there are implications for operational risks. 
Financial reporting and accounting issues 
III.  
It is equally important for banks to take care of the financial reporting framework, be it international 
accounting standards or local accounting standards given that Basel II requires financial reporting on 
international  accounting  standards.  Most  banks  in  Sri  Lanka  will  have  to  apply  local  accounting 
standards  and  make  necessary  adjustments  in  their  financial  accounts  to  comply  with  Basel  II 
principles.  
The  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  is  proposing  to  adopt  the  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards  (IFRS),  in  particular  IAS  39  and  40.  CBSL  will  monitor  the  impact  this  will  have  on  the 
regulatory  capital  of  banks  and  formulate  policies  in  this  regard  taking  into  consideration  the 
international developments and practices of other regulators.  
Single borrower limits and other sub-limits 
IV.  
Should the regulators and supervisors continue with the regulations imposed on single borrower limits, 
group borrower limits and aggregate limits that are in operation under Basel I, when they proceed to 
Basel II from 2008 onwards? and when will the supervisors lift sub-limits such as the single borrower 
limits that are currently in place and give more flexibility to the financial intermediaries? There is no 
clear answer to this, but we hope that some of the commercial banks which are conscious of the full-
scale risk mitigation would be able to put in place appropriate processes and convince the supervisors 
of their ability to move to advanced approaches of risk mitigation. At that point we need to adopt more 
flexible attitudes towards limits and sub-limits in lending.  
4 
 BIS Review 3/2007
Involvement of boards, senior management and governance issues 
V. 
Basel II requires the involvement of the senior management in the process of identification, evaluating 
and mitigating risks. Does this mean that the senior management and the board members should use 
some supervisory and monitoring powers to ensure that the technical and other officers continue to 
engage in risk mitigation activities and that the board is satisfied with action taken by them? When 
there  are  several  layers  of  supervision,  you  might  need  a  liaison  officer  to  communicate  with  the 
management and the board. The bank management should address this issue early and avoid serious 
governance issues.  
VI.   Capturing new risks 
When  financial  market  innovation  takes  place  globally,  new  products  such  as  derivatives, 
securitization  will be  introduced and  they  are  likely to  bring  in  new risks  including  operational risks. 
How  do  we  balance  these  new  risks  with  other  internal  risks,  systems,  processes  and  also  with 
supervisory prudence? It is evident that Basel II enables banking to be based on more market driven 
systems  which  is  conducive  to  financial  innovation  and  it  requires  setting  aside  risk  mitigation 
processes to deal with ever increasing financial innovation. 
VII.   Handling of operational risks 
Should banks use stress testing or best practices in handling operational risk? Stress testing is merely 
a tool which gives results on a reliable set of data. The banks need to compile a reliable database for 
all operational risks that have arisen in the past 5 years or so and assess losses recorded during the 
period. It is only then one can simulate and assess how much capital should be allocated if a similar 
operational risk were to take place. Stress testing therefore is not only an add-on, but also a cushion 
for  management  of  risks  in  terms  of  validation  and  allocation  of  capital  and  it  is  one  of  the  highly 
accepted and commonly used tools.  
VIII.   Cross-border transferability issues 
This is relevant to both supervisors and banks where home and host supervisors require to agree on a 
common approach. Do banks which have global operations adequately take into account legal issues, 
capital issues and assumptions about liquidity or capital transferability? How well are local managers 
able to respond to host supervisory concerns? Currently, there is no sufficient data or experience to 
deal  with  these  issues.  All  know  there  are  legal  issues  in  transferring  capital  on  cross-border  basis 
which are relevant to banks which have assets linked internationally. 
 Compliance by financial conglomerates 
IX. 
Generally,  a  financial  conglomerate  is  defined  in  terms  of  combined  activities,  such  as  banking, 
securities  and  insurance.  To  what  extent  the  financial  conglomerate  would  use  regulatory  arbitrage 
and not adequately assess the systemic problems is a key element under Basel II? This is particularly 
relevant when it comes to similar financial products that can be packaged as an insurance product, a 
banking  product  or  a  securities  product  as  same  business  can  be  undertaken  by  either  a  bank, 
investment bank or an insurance company. A key implementation issue is how to delineate the double 
gearing and how to make available capital to deal with risks of both insurance and securities products. 
As far as the EU is concerned, the financial conglomerates directive has already been issued and they 
are expected to comply with them. USA’s umbrella supervisory provisions are included in the Graham 
Leach – Bliley Act. In Sri Lanka, we still have not come to terms in dealing with a consolidated or a 
group-wide financial conglomerate.  
X.   Proper definition of capital  
How do you identify new capital instruments such as hybrid capital and perpetual debentures? Should 
it  be  Tier  I  or  Tier  II?  One  needs  to  be  cautious  here  as  hybrid  capital  can  disappear  given  its 
derivative nature. Currently, there is a wide disparity between the Basel II preparation processes in 
Europe,  USA  and  Asia.  The  issue  of  treating  hybrid  capital  is  significant  as  many  Asian  banks  are 
moving  towards  synthetic  securitization  in  producing  hybrid  capital  and  exposing  their  portfolios  to 
credit  risks,  especially  when  equity  participation  has  been  synthetically  securitized.  The  Basel 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 5
Committee has now decided to pay greater attention to give a standard definition for capital, hopefully 
before the implementation begins in 2008.  
investment  banking, 
fund  management,  trade 
International Comparison 
Many  countries  have  not  tackled  all  these  issues  associated  with  Basel  II,  but  there  is  notable 
progress; some slowly, some moderately and some at a faster phase. For example, the Development 
Bank of Singapore (DBS), the largest bank in Singapore and the 5th largest group in Hong Kong with 
universal  banking,  providing  full  range  of  products  and  services  for  consumer,  small  and  medium 
enterprises,  corporate  banking, 
finance,  cash 
management, securities and treasuries has taken a keen interest over the last 2-3 years in meeting 
the Basel capital adequacy requirements and to implement the same in 2008. At present, it has a Tier 
I  capital  ratio  of  10.1%  and  a  total  capital  ratio  of  14.1%.  The  main  philosophy  behind  the  DBS’s 
approach is a balanced and enlightened one based on the management of capital. The approach is 
led by the DBS’s board and senior management and it is embedded within business of a whole group. 
It  is  constantly  reviewed  by  supervisors  and  communicated  to  the  markets.  The  DBS  group  has 
implemented a large-scale Basel II governance structure at several levels which is a success factor. 
Its  governance  structure  is  based  on  DBS’s  credit  model  risk  policy  which  sets  out  the  minimum 
principles  and  standards  for  the  oversight  control  and  management  of  all  credit  risks  models  in  the 
group and the roles and responsibilities. Several committees have been set up at the board level and 
at group credit level to identify and manage risks. In terms of modeling, the model owner will design, 
select  and  parameterize  the  key  elements  of  the  model.  The  model  implementation  is  also  by  the 
model  owner  who  will  work  closely  with  the  model  users  and  performance  monitoring  unit.  Above 
them, are the model validators who are under the oversight by a Group Credit Risk Committee. The 
Board’s Risk Management Committee sits above these groups. It is a tightly knitted process which is 
transparent throughout the DBS group and they are moving progressively, using internal rating in the 
management of credit risks. 
Despite  using  several  internal  rating  models  and  regardless  of  the  types  of  the  models  used,  DBS 
continuously review the risks which need to be mitigated using its practical knowledge throughout the 
group. So the commonsense approach prevails there too. 
Countries like Sweden have also begun addressing issues of Basel II implementation. Their case is 
much more difficult than ours as they have spread among few of the Nordic countries in a significant 
way. They are plagued with issues such as options and national discretions, different interpretations 
and  practices,  reporting  requirements  across  the  EU  system  and  the  difference  between  legal  and 
operational  structures  in  banking  groups,  basically,  issues  under  pillar  II.  As  a  country  within  the 
EU-system, Sweden will have to comply with common reporting frameworks for capital requirements 
and  have  consolidated  financial  data.  They  have  to  deal  with  common  recognition  processes  for 
external  credit  assessment  institutions  and  comply  with  home/host  country  guidelines.  Sweden  is 
attempting to deal with these issues in a systematic manner during 2007, following the regulations to 
be  passed  by  its  Parliament.  Fortunately,  Sri  Lanka  does  not  have  to  deal  with  such  cross-border 
issues as in many other countries.  
South Africa is well ahead in terms of handling implementation issues on time targets. During 1999-
2003, they have complied with core principles for banking supervision issued by BIS. In 2004, Basel II 
regulations were issued and economic impact studies were completed in 2005. In 2006, consultations 
have begun and in 2007 parallel runs will be conducted to implement Basel II in 2008. In fact, South 
Africa has begun data capturing and mandatory requirements way back in 2004 and had discussed 
appropriate models with banks opting to use internal rating based models. Informal field tests were 
also  conducted  in  2006.  In  order  to  avoid  supervisors  performing  redundant  and  uncoordinated 
approval  and  validations  of  models  and  risk  assessment  by  banks,  South  Africa  has  established 
supervisory  colleges  to  share  information  and  coordinate  supervisory  actions.  They  have  also 
prepared “to-do” lists and MOUs with home/host supervisors.  
Australia has defined capital more precisely and is on a moderate phase in moving towards Basel II. 
The basic rule for Tier I and Tier II capital have been that Tier I capital should be of high quality with no 
debt claims. They are permanent capital and also helps prevent failures. Tier II capital is subordinated 
to depositors. Non-payment is a default and it is treated as an additional cushion in a failure. 
These  are  some  of  the  examples  we  were  able  to  pick  when  Mr.  Samarasiri  and  I  attended  the 
Executives’ Meeting of East Asia and the Pacific (EMEAP) held in Hong Kong last week. It gave us 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2007
some comfort  that  we  are  not  that  bad  in  international  comparison.  But,  we  need  to  recognize  that 
many countries have already laid down solid processes and procedures which are more comforting 
than ours. The dedication of some of the banks like DBS is also worth noting as they have begun their 
homework  with  great  commitment  across  the  group  over  the  last  couple  of  years.  Although  the 
progress made by banks in Sri Lanka is satisfactory, we need to be more committed and move ahead 
in 2007, faster than we did in 2006 in readiness for Basel II implementation.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your patient hearing. 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 7
