Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy ten years after the Asian 
crisis 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central Bank of 
the Philippines), at the International Symposium “Ten Years After the Asian Currency Crisis: Future 
Challenges  for  the  Asian  Economies  and  Financial  Markets”,  hosted  by  the  Center  for  Monetary 
Cooperation in Asia (CeMCoA), Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 22 January 2007. 
All the charts can be found on the Bank of Japan’s website presentation (190KB). 
 Good morning to everyone. Honorable Governor Fukui, Managing Director de Rato, your Excellencies, 
my fellow governors, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I think this is really an auspicious 
time to gather around and take a look, assess the past 10 years since the 1997 Crisis. In doing this, I 
will try to focus on the Philippines. How it was affected by the Crisis… The policy response… What the 
effects of the policy package that was implemented have been… And what the future challenges and 
policy directions for us are. 
I have circulated a set of charts and I will be making my presentation in accordance with the order of 
the  charts.  I  will  focus  on  three  areas.  First,  I  will  discuss  why  the  impact  of  the  Crisis  on  the 
Philippines had been moderate compared to other Crisis-hit countries. Second, I will share with you 
the reforms and policies we pursued to pull the economy back on its feet and lastly, I will discuss some 
of  the  current  challenges  that  we  face  and  the  policy  directions  that  we  are  pursuing  to  propel  the 
economy to a higher growth path. 
What was the impact of the Crisis on the Philippine economy? Like in the other countries in the region, 
a  brief  look  at  some  of  the  indicators  in  the  Philippines  will  show  that:  First,  the  peso  significantly 
depreciated; Second, economic growth slowed down; Third, inflation picked up while the balance of 
payments shifted to a deficit; and, Fourth, the impact of the Crisis on the banking system took some 
time to manifest itself with the non-performing loans rising significantly after only about three to four 
years. 
Nevertheless,  the  Philippines  was  one  of  the  countries  that  was  spared  the  harshest  effects  of  the 
financial crisis and this may be attributed to three main factors. First, growth in the Philippines was at a 
more moderate pace, lower than other Crisis-hit economies in the run up to the Crisis and was at a 
more  sustainable  level.  This  is  the  argument  of  the  “latecomer  to  the  party”  so  the  impact  of  the 
collapse  was  bearably  moderate  on  us.  Because  of  this,  there  was  no  significant  buildup  of  asset 
bubbles, including those in the property markets prior to the Crisis. 
Second, private consumption has historically been less volatile in the Philippines. This may partly be 
driven by workers’ remittances which tend to act as a source of buffer funds for consumption and a 
safety  valve  for  employment  in  periods  of  external  shocks.  Third,  major  structural  reforms  in  the 
Philippines were initiated in the decade prior to the Crisis. Reforms were implemented to strengthen 
the  financial  system.  Progress  had  been  realized  in  at  least  three  important  fronts:  First  was  the 
restructuring  of  the  Central  Bank  into  a  new  and  independent  monetary  authority  that  was  more 
effective in discharging its mandate of promoting price stability and financial systems stability. Second 
was the improvement of prudential policies; including in the areas of capitalization requirements: limits 
on  loans  to  related  interests,  provisioning,  audit  and  reporting  requirements,  and  limits  on  the 
exposure of banks to the real estate sector. Third was the liberalization of the entry of new banks into 
the system and the easing of restrictions on the entry of foreign banks. These led to an improvement 
in the regulatory environment and a more competitive and efficient financial industry. Thus, when the 
1997 Crisis broke out, there was no widespread failure of financial institutions in the Philippines. 
A trade liberalization program was also implemented, involving the reduction of the level and range of 
tariff  rates.  The  tariff  reform  program  helped  mitigate  some  of  the  immediate  impact  of  the  Crisis, 
including  on  inflation.  Foreign  exchange  liberalization  was  also  pursued  in  the  early  1990s.  This 
included  the  removal  of  the  mandatory  surrender  of  foreign  exchange  receipts  as  well  as  the 
liberalization  of  foreign  exchange  purchases,  investment  flows  and  access  to  foreign  loans.  The 
foreign  exchange  deregulation  allowed  the  Philippines  to  attain  Article  Eight  status  with  the  IMF  in 
1995 and the resulting capital inflows provided additional liquidity and depth in the foreign exchange 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 1
and financial markets. Of course, the capital flows served as an additional mechanism for encouraging 
macroeconomic policy discipline. 
 On  Chart  8,  we  show  that  the  Philippines  fairly  quickly  recovered  from  the  Crisis,  posting  positive 
growth  rates  starting  in  1999  on  the  back  of  the  recovery  in  the  agricultural  sector  and  strong 
government  spending.  There  was  some  slowdown  following  the  downturn  in  global  information 
technology cycle in 2001 but the economy eventually picked up momentum from 2002 onwards. 
It should also be mentioned that the average GDP growth as well as GNP growth in the Philippines 
was higher in the post-Asian Crisis period compared with the pre-Crisis period. How did we recover 
and  shift  gears?  The  recovery  was  helped  in  part  by  supportive  global  economic  conditions.  More 
importantly, the authorities also continued to embrace reforms, well aware that reforms strengthen the 
institutional underpinnings of policies and the economy’s flexibility in responding to shocks. However, 
we  continued  to  face  challenges,  including  those  that  are  non-economic  in  nature  and  I  am  really 
talking  about  political  developments  at  that  time.  These  challenges  hampered  the  dynamism  of  the 
business environment and contributed to weak investments. On the monetary front, the initial task of 
the authorities following the Crisis was to try to stabilize the financial markets while limiting the effects 
on  inflation  and,  to  some  extent,  on  output.  A  tightening  of  monetary  policy  through  higher  interest 
rates  and  reserve requirements on bank deposits was  implemented  along with  some  administrative 
measures. This resulted in a tempered depreciation of the peso – relatively tempered although it was 
still quite significant – while avoiding a large uptick in interest rates that could have negatively or more 
negatively affected the corporate and household sectors. 
By the way, we had an ongoing IMF program at that time and when the Crisis started, this program 
was augmented with additional resources. As the inflation outlook began to improve, the BSP began 
to work on enhancing its policy framework. This led to the formal adoption of the inflation targeting 
approach to monetary policy in 2002. The inflation targeting framework has provided the BSP with a 
more  information-intensive  and  forward-looking  approach  in  which  monetary  policy  decisions  are 
based on the assessment of the future evolution of inflation and inflation expectations. This approach 
is  also  supplemented  by  tools  like  an  early  warning  system  and  quarterly  surveys  of  business  and 
consumer expectations. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2007
On Chart 10, we show that inflation, which picked up in 1998 to 9.3%, gradually trended downward to 
reach a low of 3% in 2002, the first year of implementation of inflation targeting. Inflation began to rise 
again beginning 2004, due mainly to oil price shocks. However, since mid-2005, price pressures have 
been  easing,  with  2006  inflation  settling  at  6.2%,  but  with  the  November  and  December  numbers 
declining to within the target inflation bands of 4-5%. 
  On Chart 11, we show that during the period after the Crisis, we also took the opportunity to implement 
further reforms in the financial sector to enhance the system’s capacity to withstand shocks. One of 
the key reforms was the passage of the General Banking Law of 2000. This law intends to modernize 
the  legal  framework  governing  the  banking  system.  At  the  same  time,  it  institutionalizes  the  critical 
mass  of  banking  reforms  in  the  areas  of  risk  management,  corporate  governance,  competition  and 
even  micro-finance.  As  the  Central  Bank  considered  it  highly  essential  to  address  the  asset  quality 
issue, we pursued the passage of the Special Purpose Vehicle Act which provided the legal framework 
for  SPVs,  including  the  incentives  for  the  disposal  of  banks’  non-performing  assets.  It  must  be 
emphasized  that  this  approach  has  not  involved  public  funds  and  remains  a  private  sector-led 
exercise. 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 3
Much effort was also done to bring domestic prudential regulations closer to international standards 
and other best practices. We have defined the roadmap to make the banking system compliant with 
Basel  II  by  July  2007  for  the  standardized  approach  and  by  2010  for  the  internal  ratings-based 
approach.  While  this  has  been  happening,  we  have  also  begun  the  change  over  to  international 
accounting standards last year and we expect that this will strengthen the transparency and disclosure 
requirements in financial reporting. 
Now, on Chart 12, you can see that over time, the reforms have had positive effects on the financial 
sector. The impact on non-performing loans did not manifest itself right away as it is evident in the 
gradual rise in the NPL ratio shown in the chart. The ratio peaked at almost 19% of total loans in 2001, 
and has gone down to less than 7% as of the end of November 2006, closer to the pre-Crisis level. 
The implementation of a phased program of capital increases as well as the adoption of the risk-based 
capital adequacy framework helped build up banks’ capitalization. As a result, the commercial banks’ 
capital adequacy ratio has steadily gone up to about 19% as of March 2006. The industry’s capital 
adequacy ratio exceeded the statutory level set by the Bangko Sentral at 10% and the BIS standard at 
8%. 
 4 
  BIS Review 46/2007
On Chart 14, we show here the fiscal consolidation program which is one of the key priorities of the 
national  government  to  address  the  large  budget  deficit  of  the  Philippines.  However,  fiscal  reforms 
took time in coming, partly because of the need to generate consensus for the adjustments necessary 
to improve fiscal finances. The national government, nevertheless, persevered in implementing a fiscal 
consolidation  program  involving  tax  measures,  expenditure  streamlining  and  administrative  reforms. 
On  the  revenue  side,  a  landmark  development was  the  increase in  the  value-added  tax  (VAT)  rate 
from 10% to 12% and the broadening of the VAT base. Various efficiency-enhancing administrative 
measures were also implemented to help improve the tax take, including through improved audits. On 
the expenditure side, the government adopted a prudent approach to government-wide spending and 
this  involved  expenditure  rationalization  and  close  monitoring  of  revenue  sources  to  better  match 
these with government spending. 
The passage of the VAT and its implementation in 2005-2006, we think, proved to be a turning point 
for the Philippine economy. It has allowed the accelerated pace of fiscal adjustment and has provided 
fiscal space for priority spending, including on infrastructure and social services. As a result, the fiscal 
position has improved after the widening of the deficit to as much as 5.3% of GDP in 2002. During the 
first nine months of 2006, the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio had gone down to 1.2%. Fiscal reforms which 
have been instrumental in the rapid pace of fiscal consolidation have also lifted investor confidence 
and contributed to a sharp fall in country risk premium. Favorable market sentiment has translated into 
strong dollar inflows from FDI and portfolio investments. Combined with a strong export earnings and 
OFW (overseas Filipino workers) remittances, these flows moved the peso to an appreciating trend 
starting with the last quarter of 2005. At the end of that year the Philippine peso had appreciated by 
6% to the US dollar, and in 2006 until early 2007 this appreciation has continued and this has been in 
line with the movement of other regional currencies. The strong inflows of foreign investments in the 
past two years and the significant growth in remittances also allowed us to build up our international 
reserves, which now compare favorably with internationally accepted reserve adequacy benchmarks. 
 On Chart 18, we show that the turnaround in the fiscal position also reduced the need for borrowing by 
the government and helped improve debt sustainability. The availability of foreign exchange has also 
given us an opportunity to prepay part of our foreign debt. From a peak of 72.9% of GDP in 2001, 
external debt has gone down to 48.6% of GDP as of the end of September 2006. This has reduced 
the  economy’s  vulnerability  to  roll  over  and  exchange  rate  risks  and  to  the  moods  and  swings  of 
international capital markets. 
Amidst the improved economic conditions, some key challenges remain in lifting our growth to a higher 
gear. First is the need to sustain the economic reforms. Sustaining the reform momentum is essential 
in maintaining investor confidence and setting the stage for sustained higher growth. Sustained growth 
and stronger public finance, in turn, will help promote poverty reduction and build popular support for 
the government’s reform agenda. 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 5
Second, there is a need to boost capital spending investment as its share of GDP has remained at a 
low level in the Philippines. To a large extent, this is the result of the rationalization of government-
wide spending that was necessary to address the problem with the fiscal deficit. Weaknesses in the 
business  climate,  including  regulatory  impediments  and  governance  issues,  could  have  also 
constrained investment. To address this, the government has undertaken a strong effort to improve 
governance and there are indications that the situation has started to improve. The government has 
also embarked on a plan to boost capital spending. This will involve a substantial increase in spending 
on transportation, irrigation, energy and other infrastructure over the next few years. The government 
is also planning to focus on regional development, building up “super regions” in different parts of the 
country. 
 On Chart 22, we show that bank lending growth has continued to be moderate and this is the other 
challenge  that  we  face.  The  modest  growth  in  bank  lending  of  certain  recent  years  is  due  to  a 
combination of demand and supply factors. On the demand side, borrowers have not borrowed heavily 
due partly to excess capacity and highly liquid positions of companies. The anemic demand for loans 
may also be traced to the changing nature of businesses. The emerging growth industries, such as 
trading and business process outsourcing, are less capital and credit-intensive. On the supply side, 
credit growth may have been constrained by the bank’s weak asset position, mainly in the form of non-
performing  loans.  Moreover,  with  the  adoption  of  risk-based  supervision,  banks  and  investors  have 
become more risk-oriented. However, the present environment presents an opportune time for credit 
to  grow  at  higher  rates.  Banks’  balance  sheets  have  been  improving  as  their  NPLs  continue  to  go 
down. We believe that the prevailing low-interest rate environment, as inflation decelerates and as the 
fiscal debts narrowed, should eventually also spur stronger loan demand for credit. This is expected to 
ignite the credit transmission channel of monetary policy and help boost growth further. 
Lastly, we need to closely monitor and deal with capital surges, given the improving market sentiment 
towards the country. Foreign investment, as I mentioned earlier, has increased significantly as a result 
of  the  improvement  in  the  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  evidently  in  the  respectable  economic 
growth  in  pro-fiscal  position  and  easing  inflation  rates.  This  strong  capital  inflow  poses  several 
challenges,  including  the  rapid  appreciation  of  the  domestic  currency  which  could  affect  the 
competitiveness of the country’s exports. It could also lead to dramatic surges in liquidity growth which 
could  affect  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  Going  forward,  we  at  the  Bangko 
Sentral,  cognizant  of  these  challenges,  will  remain  watchful  of  the  potential  risks  of  a  sustained 
acceleration of liquidity with a view to acting preemptively to address threats to price stability. We are 
also  currently  examining  the  foreign  exchange  regulatory  regime  which  was  last  subjected  to  a  full 
review  in  1993.  The  BSP  is  looking  at  a  measured  pace  of  liberalization  in  line  with  efforts  to 
strengthen domestic institutions including the financial system. 
In  conclusion,  let  me  say  that  there  have  been  important  improvements  in  the  economy  and  the 
prospects are positive. However, the authorities remain aware that the work is not yet complete. On 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2007
the monetary front, the BSP will continue to focus on achieving the inflation target. Cautious monetary 
policy should allow us to see inflation move within the range for this year and next. On the external 
front, we will continue to institute market-driven measures to boost our external payment position and 
enable  us  to  further  build  up  our  international  reserves.  On  the  fiscal  front,  we  expect  fiscal 
consolidation  to  continue  on  the  back  of  the  fiscal  reforms  pursued  by  the  government.  So  in  the 
coming  years,  the  Central  Bank,  together  with  other  economic  agencies,  will  continue  to  focus  on 
strengthening the economy in the short term and preserving the momentum for economic reforms that 
will  sustain  growth  in  the  long  term.  The  second  part,  I  think,  we  will  be  discussing  about  regional 
financial and monetary cooperation. I will give my remarks at that point. Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 46/2007 
 7
