Christian Noyer: Is the euro a success story? 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Paris  EUROPLACE 
International Forum, Tokyo, 29 November 2006. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  and  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  such  a 
distinguished audience. I want to talk to you about a success story: the euro. As you well know, there 
have been difficult times for European integration. The Treaty creating a Constitution for Europe was 
not  ratified  last  year  and  the  future  of  political  integration  is  fraught  with  uncertainties.  Also,  much 
remains to be done, in terms of structural reform, if the European countries want to achieve the same 
level of long term growth as other developed economies. 
Nevertheless, I feel very optimistic. And the reason for this optimism is the euro. The single currency 
has the potential to bring enormous benefits to European nations, which they can use to achieve a 
high degree of stability and prosperity. 
What are those benefits? 
1)  
The first, and most obvious, is price stability. Over the last five years, inflation has stayed broadly in 
line with the price stability objective set by the European Central Bank, i.e. inflation below but close to 
2%  over  the  medium-term.  Gone  are  the  days  when  European  citizens  had  to  worry  about  the 
purchasing  power  of  their  savings.  This  stability  goes  beyond  the  behaviour  of  prices.  Inflation 
expectations  themselves  have  been  remarkably  stable,  including  during  the  recent  period  when  oil 
prices  jumped  to  levels  no  one  could  have  expected  only  a  year  ago.  This,  by  itself,  illustrates  the 
credibility achieved by the Eurosystem, after only six years of existence. 
Second, European households and companies are reaping the benefits of that credibility. Long term 
interest rates stand at an historically low level, around 100 basis points below the level in the United 
States.  So,  even  after  the  recent  increases  in  short  term  rates,  monetary  and  financial  conditions 
remain  extremely  favourable  for  investment  and  growth.  And  indeed,  we  might  be  witnessing  in 
Europe the start of period of sustained and stable growth, at least if current projections and surveys 
prove to be right in the coming months. 
A third benefit of the Euro is the boost it gives to financial integration in Europe. In many segments, 
European financial markets have reached the depth and liquidity which, up to now, were the preserve 
of dollar markets. This stimulates productive investment, helps in restructuring (as witnessed by the 
current wave of M&As) and, more generally, allows a better allocation of savings and sharing of risks. 
As  a  consequence,  the  euro  is  becoming  extremely  attractive,  as  a  vehicle,  a  transaction,  an 
investment and a reserve currency. As you may know, as central bankers, we remain neutral as far as 
the  internationalisation  of  the  euro  is  concerned.  We  are  neither  encouraging,  nor  discouraging  the 
process. But, as a citizen, I cannot help and feel proud of having one the two main currencies in the 
world. 
In sum, benefits of the euro include a high degree of credibility of monetary policy reflected in the level 
of  long-term  interest  rates;  diminished  exchange  rate  volatility;  completion  of  the  single  market  and 
encouragement to cross-border trade. 
None of this, of course, can be taken for granted. Benign conditions currently prevailing on financial 
markets can be reversed. External or internal shocks may be coming, which would impact negatively 
European  economies.  The  American  economy  could  for  example  slow  down  more  sharply  than 
anticipated.  Fuelled  by  an  excessive  expansion  of  credit,  some  internal  imbalances,  although  in  no 
way comparable to those in some other developed economies, could also develop in the euro area, 
especially in the housing sector. But I have the strong conviction that we are fully equipped to deal 
with  any  contingency,  and,  provided  the  necessary  structural  reforms  are  undertaken,  keep  the 
economy on a path of growth and stability. 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 1
How have those successes been achieved? 
2)  
A lot comes, in my view, from the institutional and operational framework in which monetary policy is 
developed and implemented. 
The  independence  of  the  ECB  and  of  the  12,  very  soon 13,  participating  NCBs  is  enshrined  in  the 
Treaty. They are institutionally, operationally and financially independent from European Community 
institutions and national governments. 
We have a clear and transparent definition of price stability: inflation below but close to 2% over the 
medium-term. 
The monetary policy framework of the Eurosystem is “medium-term” oriented. It rests on a two-pillar 
approach:  on  the  one  hand  the  economic  analysis  examines  cyclical,  economic  and  financial 
indicators  related  to  the  main  determinants  of short-term  inflation;  on  the  other  hand  the  "monetary 
analysis"  looks  at  the  behaviour  of  money  and  credit  aggregates  and  provides  a  perspective  on 
longer-term inflation. Crosschecking the outcome of the economic analysis – broadening growth in the 
euro area – with the monetary analysis – ample liquidity and strong monetary growth – supports the 
assessment of risks over the medium to long-term horizon, which have led to the Governing Council’s 
decisions since December 2005. 
Implementation  is  decentralized.  Monetary  policy  decisions  taken  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the 
ECB are implemented by the NCBs. 
This framework has proven its robustness and efficiency. But there are limits to what monetary policy 
can deliver. Its main contribution to growth is to achieve price stability. Ultimately, however, whether 
this  will  translate  into  higher  growth  in  the  longer  run  depends  on  reforms  aimed  at  increasing  the 
economy's potential. Here European countries are making progress, although at too slow a pace. 
How can EU Member States increase their growth potential? 
3)  
In 2000, the Lisbon European Council designed a new strategy in order to promote competitiveness of 
the EU and defined ambitious goals in that respect. The Lisbon agenda has introduced a multilateral 
surveillance of structural policies. In 2005, EU Heads of Government re-launched the Lisbon strategy 
with an enhanced focus on jobs and growth and a streamlined governance regime. The key elements 
are  the  National  Reform  Programs  which  cover,  for  each  country,  the  commitments  taken  over  a 
3-years cycle as regards structural reforms. 
EMU, with a single monetary policy and 12 governments responsible for budgetary policies, requires 
an institutional fiscal framework. It has to be simple, easy to implement, and able to ensure that fiscal 
policies are sound and sustainable, to avoid free-riding behaviours as well as neo-ricardian effects. 
The most widely-discussed surveillance process, because it is the most binding one, is the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  (SGP).  The  Pact  may  be  defined  as  the  “users  instructions”  for  the  obligation, 
defined in the Treaty, for EU Member States, to achieve a medium-term budgetary position of close to 
balance or in surplus, while maintaining the ratio of the annual government deficit to gross domestic 
product (GDP) at within 3 % and the ratio of gross government debt to GDP at within 60 %. Member 
States  which  do  not  respect  these  ratios  face  an  “excessive  deficit”  procedure  which  may  lead  the 
Ecofin Council to take a series of measures which range from simple recommendations to financial 
sanctions. 
In 2005, the European Council agreed to reform the SGP. The important role of the SGP in terms of 
budgetary  discipline  is  confirmed.  The  reform  sets  out  the  criteria  for  the  implementation  of  the 
excessive  deficit  procedure  and  allows  for  more  leeway  in  the  time-frame  for  correcting  excessive 
deficits. It does not, however, diminish the binding nature or the efficiency of the Pact. 
Let me conclude by mentioning how much we have achieved in Europe over the last fifty years. The 
EU has reached a diversified but, broadly speaking, very ambitious level of integration: it is complex 
because the degree of integration is largely dependent on which areas are at stake, it is ambitious 
since, in some areas precisely, the system is completely integrated and relies on one single policy. 
The euro, in that regard, is both the symbol of our achievements and our best hope for the future of 
European integration. 
Thank You. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2007
