Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament  
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at a hearing before the 
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 11 June 2007. 
 Madame  la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs  les  membres  de  la  Commission  Economique  et 
Monétaire,  je  me  réjouis  d'apparaître  devant  votre  commission  aujourd'hui  et  de  poursuivre  notre 
dialogue  fructueux.  Comme  toujours,  je  commencerai  mon  intervention  par  une  évaluation  de  la 
situation économique et monétaire. 
Anschließend  möchte  ich  auf  zwei  Themen  näher  eingehen:  erstens,  auf  den  EU-Rahmen  für  die 
Regulierung, Aufsicht und Stabilität der Finanzmärkte sowie die Role des Eurosystems; und zweitens 
auf  die  Unternehmensfinanzierung  in  der  Eurozone,  ein  Thema  das  im  Strukturbericht  der  EZB 
behandelt wird, den ich heute dem Europäischen Parlament presentieren möchte. 
Economic and monetary issues 
Since my previous appearance before the European Parliament in March, incoming information has 
confirmed our view that economic growth in the euro area continues to expand at a pace significantly 
stronger  than  expected  a  year  ago.  Regarding  price  developments,  upside  risks  to  price  stability 
prevail over the medium to longer term, as identified by both our economic and monetary analyses. 
Thus,  in  order  to  ensure  that  longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  solidly  anchored  at  levels 
consistent with price stability, on 6 June the Governing Council of the ECB decided to raise the key 
ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. After this decision, given the positive economic environment in 
the euro area, our monetary policy is still on the accommodative side, with overall financing conditions 
favourable, money and credit growth vigorous, and liquidity in the euro area ample. Let me explain the 
Governing Council’s assessment underlying its decision. 
Starting with the economic analysis, real GDP grew by 0.6% quarter-on-quarter in the first quarter of 
2007 and thus again somewhat stronger than previously expected. Looking ahead, conditions are in 
place for the euro area economy to continue to grow at solid rates. Euro area exports continue to profit 
from  robust  and  broad-based  growth  in  the  world  economy.  Domestic  demand  in  the  euro  area  is 
expected to maintain its relatively strong momentum, as employment growth continues to strengthen, 
supporting  real  disposable  income.  Investment  should  remain  dynamic,  benefiting  from  financing 
conditions  which  remain  favourable.  This  positive  outlook  is  reflected  in  the  latest  macroeconomic 
projections  of  Eurosystem  staff  who  foresee  average  annual  real  GDP  growth  in  a  range  between 
2.3% and 2.9% in 2007 and between 1.8% and 2.8% in 2008. 
In  the  Governing  Council’s  view,  the  risks  to  this  favourable  medium-term  outlook  for  growth  are 
broadly balanced over the shorter term, while the balance of risks remain on the downside at medium 
to longer horizons. These relate mainly to external factors, notably potential protectionist pressures, 
possible further oil price rises, global imbalances and potential shifts in financial market sentiment.  
Turning  to  price  developments,  annual  HICP  inflation  was,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate, 
1.9%  in  May,  unchanged  from  April  but  somewhat  higher  than  expected  a  few  months  ago,  in 
particular owing to increasing oil prices over recent months. Looking ahead, the short-term profile of 
annual  inflation  rates  continues  to  be  determined  largely  by  current  and  past  energy  price 
developments, as last year’s volatility in energy prices leads to significant base effects. Against this 
background, the Eurosystem staff projections foresee average annual HICP inflation of between 1.8% 
and  2.2%  in  2007,  slightly  revised  upwards  compared  with  the  March  projections,  and  of  between 
1.4% and 2.6% in 2008. 
In the Governing Council’s view, risks to the outlook for price stability remain on the upside over the 
medium term. Notably, these risks are on the domestic side. They relate mainly to emerging capacity 
constraints and, closely related, stronger than expected wage dynamics, which would pose significant 
upside risks to price stability. In addition, pricing power in market segments with low competition may 
increase  in  such  an  environment.  It  is  therefore  crucial  that  all  parties  concerned  meet  their 
responsibilities. Wage agreements in particular should be sufficiently differentiated to take adequately 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 1
into account price competitiveness positions, the still high level of unemployment in many economies 
and sector-specific productivity developments.  
Cross-checking with the monetary analysis confirms the prevalence of upside risks to price stability at 
medium  to  longer  horizons,  given  the  continued  strong  underlying  rate  of  monetary  expansion  in  a 
context  of  already  ample  liquidity.  While,  from  a  medium-term  perspective,  there  are  several 
indications that higher short-term interest rates are now influencing monetary dynamics, they have not, 
as  yet,  fully  translated  into  a  significant  dampening  of  the  overall  strength  of  the  underlying  rate  of 
monetary and credit expansion. 
Overall, the Governing Council will monitor closely all developments in order to ensure that risks to 
price  stability  over  the  medium  term  do  not  materialise.  Consequently,  acting  in  a  firm  and  timely 
manner to ensure price stability in the medium term remains warranted. 
Fiscal  developments  in  euro  area  countries  in  2006  turned  out  to  be  significantly  better  than 
anticipated  and  the  latest  available  forecasts  suggest  a  further  reduction  in  the  government 
deficit-to -GDP  ratio  of  the  euro  area  over  the  period  2007-08.  However,  this  reflects  more  cyclical 
improvements in the context of a favourable macroeconomic outlook rather than structural progress. 
The  current  economic  “good  times”  should  be  used  to  rapidly  redress  the  remaining  budgetary 
imbalances in euro area countries as well as to accelerate the adjustment towards their medium-term 
objectives of sound budget positions with a focus on expenditure restraint. As agreed by the euro area 
finance ministers at the Eurogroup meeting in Berlin on 20 April, taking advantage of the favourable 
cyclical conditions would enable most euro area members to achieve their medium-term objectives in 
2008  or  2009,  and  all  of  them  are  committed  to  achieve  their  MTO  in  2010  at  the  latest.  This  is 
particular important with a view to reducing the still high government debt ratios and preparing for the 
fiscal challenges arising from population ageing. 
Allow me to stress on this occasion that in the Governing Council’s view it is crucial for the smooth 
functioning of EMU that all countries comply with the rules and provisions of the Stability and Growth 
Pact, given that the Stability and Growth Pact is an indispensable part of the institutional setting. 
As  regards  structural  reforms,  the  Governing  Council  fully  supports  any  efforts  that  enhance 
competition,  increase  productivity  and  foster  economic  flexibility,  thus  promoting  higher  sustainable 
real  GDP  growth  and  employment.  Exploiting  the  complementary  nature  of  reforms  would  increase 
their benefits in terms of long-term economic dynamism and price stability. Higher productivity growth 
will  allow  increases  in  real  wages  without  negatively  affecting  employment,  thereby  supporting  the 
income growth of the euro area workforce.  
In  fact,  as  a  reflection  of  undertaken  reform  efforts  so  far  and  as  a  result  of  continued  wage 
moderation  in  some  countries,  the  euro  area  employment  has  increased  by  more  than  12  million 
people  since  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU  in  1999,  which  compares  very  favourably  with  the 
somewhat  more  than  two  million  increase  in  the  eight  years  before  1999.  According  to  the  latest 
Spring  Forecast  by  the  European  Commission,  prospects  are  for  another  3.8  million  employed 
persons in the euro area in the period 2007-08. 
Financial regulation, supervision and stability 
Let me now turn to an issue you have asked me to discuss today, which is the framework for financial 
regulation, supervision and stability and the way in which it can cope with the challenges stemming 
from increasing financial integration.  
Starting with financial regulation and supervision, the Lamfalussy framework was introduced with the 
purpose of speeding up the process of adopting Community legislation and making its implementation 
more consistent at the national level in line with the needs of the single financial market. As such the 
Lamfalussy framework represents in itself an important institutional innovation and therefore we have 
always  shared  the  stance  that  it  should  be  exploited  to  the  maximum  possible  extent  before 
considering any far-reaching institutional changes.  
This entails in practice that all four levels of the approach should work at their best and, when this is 
not the case, appropriate measures should be taken. It is therefore important – as it has been the case 
so far – to monitor systematically the concrete implementation of the framework to identify areas for 
possible enhancement. While at the beginning, the monitoring activity concentrated on the regulatory 
part  of  the  approach  (notably  the  Level  1  and  2),  the  focus  has  rightly  turned  more  recently  to  the 
supervisory level (i.e. the Level 3). One of the main challenges concerning the Level 3 activity is to 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2007
ensure  that  the  deliberations  taken  by  the  supervisory  committees  concerning  co-operation  and 
convergence are applied consistently in practice. 
In  this  respect,  the  concrete  implementation  of  the  recommendations  contained  in  the  Report  on 
Financial  Supervision prepared  by  the  Financial  Services Committee  and endorsed by  the  ECOFIN 
Council on 5 May 2006 represents certainly an important milestone. More generally, the forthcoming 
review of the Lamfalussy process represents an important occasion for further reflections about the 
efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  current  EU  supervisory  setting.  In  this  context,  an  important 
objective  of  the  review  should  be  the  identification  of  concrete  measures  to  further  strengthen  the 
supervisory role of the Level 3 Committees.  
Turning to the framework for financial stability, the ECB supports in general the current discussions at 
the EU level to enhance the arrangements for handling financial crises, never forgetting that a crucial 
responsibility  must  remain  with  the  private  sector  itself.  It  is  important  indeed  that  all  competent 
authorities for financial stability, namely central banks, supervisory authorities and ministries of finance 
are well prepared and have a common understanding of how to manage potential financial crises with 
a cross-border dimension, whilst avoiding any moral hazard.  
In this respect, we should not neglect that significant progress has already been achieved to enhance 
financial  crisis  arrangements  through  the  work  of  relevant  forums,  including  the  Economic  and 
Financial Committee,  the Financial  Services  Committee,  the  ESCB  Banking  Supervision  Committee 
and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors. The 2005 MoU on co-operation and exchange 
of  information  in  crisis  situations  is  a  clear  and  relevant  example  in  this  respect.  I  see  the  current 
discussions as focusing on crisis resolution and their outcome should be, in my view, in line with three 
main principles.  
First,  the  principle  of  flexibility.  The  arrangements  on  crisis  management  and  resolution  should  be 
flexible  enough  to  keep  pace  with  market  developments  and  to  handle  the  specific  features  of  the 
actual crisis. Second, the principle of consistency. There should be coherence between the framework 
for crisis prevention – which is based for the most part on prudential supervision – and the framework 
for crisis management and resolution. This implies acknowledging the current institutional distribution 
of responsibilities between home-country and host-country authorities also in a crisis situation. Third, 
the  principle  of  the  primacy  of  private  sector  solutions  as  regards  crisis  resolution.  Again,  the 
arrangements should avoid any kind of moral hazard that could provide the wrong incentives for risk-
taking by the financial industry. 
Concerning the specific role of the Eurosystem, the system has arrangements and procedures in place 
for  the  effective  performance  of  its  functions  in  crisis  situations  as  well  as  for  the  provision  of 
emergency  liquidity  assistance  by  the  national  central  banks.  These  arrangements  are  periodically 
reviewed and tested also through the conduct of simulation exercises. The most recent exercise took 
place in May 2006. These simulations allow to maintain a high degree of preparedness of the system. 
The outcome of these reviews so far has shown that the Eurosystem is well equipped to cope with a 
financial crisis situation with an area-wide dimension.  
Corporate finance in the euro area 
Finally, I would like to use this opportunity to present to the Committee the ECB’s Structural Issues 
Report, which this year deals with “Corporate Finance in the euro area”. 
The aim of the report is to analyse the main features of the functioning of the market for corporate 
finance in the euro area, including the specifics of the national markets and the conditions applicable 
to the borrowers. Given the great interest in the issue of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
access  to  finance,  the  report  also  analyses how  financing  patterns  differ  across  large,  medium  and 
small  enterprises.  Finally,  the  report  discusses  the  recent  trends  observed  in  the  corporate  finance 
landscape of the euro area over the past few years and how they have influenced the availability of 
external finance for firms.  
Let me briefly summarise some of the results contained in the report:  
First, firms’ financial structures are relatively homogeneous across euro area countries. Still, even after 
taking  into  account  the  average  firm  size  and  sectoral  composition  across  countries,  some  cross-
country  differences  remain  which  may  be  explained  by  the  remaining  differences  among  legal  and 
institutional frameworks. 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 3
Second, regarding SMEs, the report indicates that several of the differences in the financial position of 
firms according to size which had been identified in previous studies are driven mainly by the relative 
weights  of  SMEs  and  large  firms  in  the  various  sectors,  and  also  to  some  extent  by  the  relative 
weights of SMEs in the various countries.  
At  the  same  time,  the  report  also  highlights  that  some  differences  across  size  classes  remain 
regarding the reliance on bonds and the share of financial to total assets – which is lower for SMEs – 
and in terms of the reliance on bank loans and cash – which is higher for SMEs. The latter may point 
to the need of keeping liquid balances to finance future projects. Small and medium-sized firms tended 
also  to  be  in  a  somewhat  weaker  financial  situation  as  indicated,  for  example,  by  their  higher 
indebtedness. 
Finally,  concerning  the  role  of  financial  intermediaries  in  providing  finance  to  firms,  a  two-tiered 
process has been identified. Firstly, bank lending has become even more prominent in the last two or 
three years. Secondly, the link between the banking sector and the markets has been strengthened 
significantly,  with  commercial  banks  shifting  from  acting  as  traditional  financial  intermediaries  to 
functioning  as  credit  risk  originators  and  sellers  as  a  result  of  securitisation  processes  and  the 
increasing use of credit derivatives. 
From the point of view of monetary policy, four main conclusions can be drawn. 
First,  the  growing  importance  of  structured  finance  and  increased  competition  between  banks  and 
other  financial  intermediaries  may  provide  corporations  with  easier  and  cheaper  access  to  external 
finance. 
Second,  as  credit  granted  is  evaluated  on  a  more  mark-to-market  basis  and  the  banking  sector 
becomes more and more competitive, the speed of transmission of monetary impulses to bank interest 
rates is expected, ceteris paribus, to quicken. 
Third,  it  is  likely  that  credit  risk  will  be  less  concentrated  on  banks,  thereby  making  them  less 
vulnerable in the event of shocks, whilst it remains to be fully understood if and where credit risks are 
again concentrating on some particular sub-sectors in the non-bank constituencies. 
And fourth, we must be aware of the fact that episodes of mispricing of credit risk will necessarily be 
followed by adjustments. It depends on all the parties concerned that such adjustment be smooth and 
orderly and not abrupt and sharp, which in the second case would be adverse for the global economy  
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2007
