T T Mboweni: Risks to the inflation outlook – looking ahead to the 
August Monetary Policy Committee meeting 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the Oxford & 
Cambridge Business Alumni of South Africa (OCBASA), Johannesburg, 2 August 2007. 
Honoured guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
 Introduction 
1.  
I would like to thank you for the opportunity to address such an illustrious gathering. I was not 
fortunate enough to attend either the University of Cambridge or the University of Oxford but 
should state that I followed the rowing competition held annually between the two universities 
with  keen  interest.  I  have  always  wondered  how  my  Alma  Mater  –  the  University  of  East 
Anglia – would perform in this competition. I am sure the students at the University of East 
Anglia would relish such a challenge. 
Members of the Oxford and Cambridge Business Alumni of South Africa play an important 
role in the economic and social life of the country. Members of the organisation include Chief 
Executive  Officers  of  banks,  investment  bankers,  investment  analysts,  professors,  bishops 
and headmasters, to name a few. 
My role this evening is to talk about the more mundane issues of monetary policy. I will share 
with you some of the issues that are of concern to the Bank. These concerns are not new 
and  they  have  been  raised  in  recent  MPC  statements,  but  I  thought  I  would  elaborate  on 
some of them in more detail.  
The inflation target: where do we stand? 
2.  
Before highlighting these issues, let me first remind you where we stand with respect to our 
monetary policy objective. Our mandate is to keep CPIX inflation within the inflation target 
range  of  3-6  per  cent  on  a  continuous  basis.  This  we  successfully  achieved  for  43 
consecutive months between September 2003 and March 2007. In April 2007 CPIX inflation 
breached the upper end of the target at 6,3 per cent, and remained outside the target at 6,4 
per cent in May and June. The major drivers of these developments were higher food and 
petrol  prices.  In  these  months,  had  food  and  energy  prices  been  excluded,  CPIX  inflation 
would  have  averaged  around  4,6  per  cent.  Nevertheless  there  is  evidence  that  underlying 
inflation is becoming more generalised as evidenced by the fact that this narrower measure 
of inflation has been trending upwards in recent months from a low of 2,5 per cent in June 
last  year.  In  response  to  these  adverse  inflation  pressures,  monetary  policy  has  been 
tightened  and  we  have  increased  the  repo  rate  by  a  total  of  250  basis  points  since  June 
2006. 
It is of concern to the Bank that inflation has breached the target range. However I should 
emphasise that this should not be seen as a failure of monetary policy. As I noted, the main 
drivers of the recent surge in inflation were petrol and food price inflation. It is important to 
emphasise however that monetary policy reacts with a lag, and that it takes approximately 18 
months to 2 years for the effects of an interest rate change to be reflected fully in inflation. 
This  implies  that  there  is  little  monetary  policy  can  do  about  current  inflation,  which  is  an 
historical  number,  particularly  if  it  has  been  caused  by  unanticipated  external  shocks.  In 
setting the monetary policy stance we therefore have to focus on the medium to long term.  
BIS Review 87/2007 
 1
This does not mean that we can be complacent about near-term developments, as inflation 
expectations  and  monetary  policy  credibility  are  determined  in  part  by  these  short  term 
considerations. The challenge for monetary policy is to ensure that inflation is brought back 
to within the target range, and also to convince the markets that we will are serious about 
this. In this way we will ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored within the target 
range. 
I  should  note  that  we  are  not  alone  in  missing  our  targets.  During  the  past  year  or  so,  a 
number  of  central  banks  have  temporarily  exceeded  their  targets,  the  most  recent  notable 
example  being  the  Bank  of  England.  Pressures  emanating  from  oil  and  food  prices  are  a 
global phenomenon and are posing a challenge to many central banks. 
Dealing with inflation shocks: International oil prices 
3.  
Rising international oil prices and food prices have been on the top of our list of risk factors 
for some time. I am often asked what monetary policy can do about oil or food prices? If we 
tighten monetary policy in the face of higher international oil prices, this will not cause OPEC 
to raise output or market prices to decline. Similarly with food prices – raising interest rates 
will not make it rain. Yet these are two variables that are high on our list of concerns. 
Let us first consider oil prices. At the beginning of 2004, the price of North Sea Brent crude 
oil was around US$30 per barrel. It is now almost US$80 per barrel. In the first 5 months of 
this year the domestic petrol price increased by R1,34 per litre, although it has since declined 
by R0,23. Most of this increase has been due to higher international product prices rather 
than exchange rate effects. International oil prices are affected by a variety of factors ranging 
from higher demand in a fast-growing world economy, particularly from China; and risks to 
supply  emanating  from  OPEC  cutbacks,  supply  disruptions  in  a  number  of  oil-producing 
countries,  geopolitical  tensions  and  adverse  weather  conditions.  These  factors  have 
contributed to the upside risk to the oil price.  
How  should  monetary  policy  react  to  this?  The  impact  of  a  change  in  the  international  oil 
price is direct and relatively quick, given that domestic petrol prices are adjusted each month 
in  terms  of  the  formula  of  the  Department  of  Minerals  and  Energy.  Petrol  has  a  weight  of 
about 5 per cent in CPIX, so a 10 per cent increase in the petrol price would increase CPIX 
inflation by approximately 0,5 percentage points. This is the impact effect or what we call the 
first-round effect, and clearly there is nothing we can do about this.  
Our  concern  is  with  the  broader  impact  of  this  effect,  that  is,  the  so-called  second-round 
effects. We have to assess whether or not these increases will be passed on over time in the 
form of higher transport costs which will increase prices of other commodities, for example 
food, or through higher production costs. We also have to assess whether there will be an 
impact on wage and price setting, which will impact broadly on inflation. Over the past two 
years  these  second-round  effects  have  been  relatively  moderate.  This  could  be  due  to  a 
number  of  reasons,  including  increasingly  anchored  inflation  expectations  as  a  result  of 
enhanced  monetary  policy  credibility;  increased  competitiveness  in  the  economy;  and  the 
fact  that  some  of  these  increases  were  in  fact  reversed  late  last  year.  The  longer  the 
international oil prices are subject to upward pressure, the more likely these second-round 
effects will feed through to generalised inflation. 
The  challenge  for  the  MPC  therefore  is  predicting  not  only  the  future  course  of  volatile 
international oil prices, but also assessing how these increases will feed through to further 
inflation pressures over time. In deciding on the appropriate monetary policy response, it is 
not always easy to differentiate between first and second round effects. Some analysts have 
argued that we should exclude food and oil from the price index that we target. We do not 
believe  that  targeting  such  an  index  would  be  credible.  The  Economist  magazine  has 
appropriately referred to such an index as “the cold-and-hungry index”.  
2 
 BIS Review 87/2007
Food prices  
4.  
Food prices have also become a cause for concern. Food prices have a weight of almost 26 
per cent in the CPIX basket, although this proportion is much higher at around 51 per cent in 
the consumption basket of the lowest category of income earners.  
As  is  the  case  with  oil  prices,  there  is  an  international  dimension  to  the  increase  in  food 
prices. Higher food inflation is an international phenomenon. This is partly weather induced, 
but  perhaps  more  significantly,  the  increased  diversion  of  maize  and  sugar  to  biofuels 
production has resulted in significant price increases in the international markets. Domestic 
maize  and  wheat  prices  are  directly  affected  by  these  higher  international  prices  and 
combined with domestic drought in some areas of the country, have caused the spot price of 
maize in South Africa to increase almost four-fold over the past two years.  
Higher  maize  prices  have  not  only  increased  the  cost  of  maize  products  but  have  also 
affected meat prices, which last year were increasing at rates of almost 20 per cent. Meat 
has a weight of around 7 per cent in the CPIX basket, and in 2006 was the single biggest 
contributor to overall CPIX inflation. Food prices are currently increasing at rates in excess of 
9 per cent per annum, and we are still feeling the effects of the maize price increases. One 
small consolation is that meat price increases have moderated from their peaks last year as 
more cattle are brought to the market during periods of drought. This trend may not persist 
as farmers are likely to restock at some stage. 
Household consumption expenditure 
5. 
Much has been said about the strong growth in household consumption expenditure and the 
associated increase in domestic credit extension. Household domestic expenditure has been 
increasing  at  a  year-on-year  rate  of  between  7  and  8  per  cent  for  the  past  three  years, 
compared to rates of growth of around 3 per cent in the preceding three years. At the same 
time, credit extension to the private sector has been growing at rates of around 26 per cent 
despite the tighter monetary policy stance. These are uncomfortably high levels and I have 
expressed my concern in this regard on various occasions.  
Excessively  high  rates  of  expenditure  growth  will  ultimately  impact  on  domestic  inflation, 
although the timing and extent of these effects are at times uncertain. These developments 
will remain an important focus of our monetary policy deliberations. 
My concern, however, extends beyond simple monetary policy considerations. As a result of 
the high levels of credit extension, household indebtedness has increased to record levels, 
currently  at  around  76  per  cent  of  disposable  income.  Although  the  debt  service  ratio 
reached a low of 6 per cent of disposable income in 2004 and 2005, this has now risen to 9 
per cent.  
Although part of this increased indebtedness is justified on the basis of improved household 
balance  sheets,  my  concern  relates  to  the  socio-economic  impact  of  excessive  debt 
accumulation.  As  more  and  more  people  find  employment  or  better  paid  employment,  the 
temptation is to rush out and buy a bigger car and a bigger house. Very soon, we see people 
becoming overextended and repossessions become commonplace. Part of this development 
is due to excessive exuberance on the part of consumers. There is not a culture of saving in 
South Africa, as demonstrated by our very low savings rate, and people are happy to borrow 
excessively against future income in order to finance current consumption.  
The problem has also been compounded on the supply side with banks and others, including 
retailers,  falling  over  themselves  to  extend  credit,  resulting  in  a  number  of  questionable 
lending practices. Perhaps the situation is not as bad as in other countries such as Australia, 
where it was reported a few months back that a woman successfully applied for a credit card 
for her cat. But some of the stories we have heard locally are not much better. 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 3
Fortunately some sanity appears to be returning to the market with the recent adoption by 
the banks of a voluntary code of good conduct with respect to the marketing of credit. At the 
same time, further constraints on lending have become evident with the introduction of the 
National  Credit  Act  in  June,  when  stricter  requirements  were  imposed  on  lenders  to 
determine the creditworthiness of borrowers. Although this may have a dampening affect on 
certain categories of credit extension and introduce more careful risk assessment, we do not 
believe that this will replace the need for monetary policy restraint. 
Economic growth and inflation 
6.  
Excessively  high  economic  growth  brings  with  it  potential  inflationary  pressures  to  which 
monetary policy has to be sensitive. In each of the past three years, the economy has been 
growing  at  a  rate  of  5  per  cent,  which  is  high  compared  to  our  experience  of  the  past  25 
years  or  so.  Capacity  utilisation  in  the  manufacturing  sector  has  also  reached  record  high 
levels.  While  we  in  the  Bank  are  pleased  by  this  strong  growth  performance,  we  have  to 
ensure that this growth does not affect inflation adversely. 
In economic terminology this refers to the concept of potential output, which at a simplified 
level is the rate at which the economy can grow without generating inflationary pressures. 
From  a  monetary  policy  perspective  we  have  to  consider  whether  our  current  growth 
experience is inflationary. In other words, are we growing in excess of our potential output?  
Unfortunately, estimating potential output is not a simple task and the estimates are subject 
to  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty.  Current  research  in  the  Bank  estimates  that  the  potential 
output of the economy is now at least around 4,5 per cent per annum. This can be compared 
to  estimates  of  around  3  per  cent  or  less  during  the  1990s.  If  this  estimate  is  correct,  it 
implies we are currently growing at a rate above potential. This is not necessarily a threat to 
inflation  if  this  growth  entails  the  necessary  microeconomic  reforms  which  will  allow  for  a 
higher  potential  growth  rate.  However  if  the  growth  rate  does  not  improve  the  productive 
capacity  of  the  economy,  there  could  be  inflationary  consequences.  These  considerations 
are not easily observable, which makes our job that much more difficult. 
Wage settlements 
7.  
In  recent  weeks,  following  the  publicity  emanating  from  the  public  servants  strike,  much 
attention has been focused on the risk to inflation from higher wage settlements. From an 
inflation  perspective,  higher  real  wage  settlements  may  increase  domestic  demand 
pressures.  There  also  may  be  a  cost-push  effect  as  producers  pass  on  the  higher  wage 
costs in terms of higher prices. The latest consolidated data for the economy as a whole are 
not yet available but there does appear to be a worrying trend towards higher nominal wage 
settlements. However we should also bear in mind that at this stage real wage settlements 
do  not  appear  to  be  significantly  higher  than  in  the  recent  past.  In  other  words,  higher 
nominal wage settlements are simply compensating workers for the higher trend in inflation. 
It is therefore important that we reverse this inflation trend.  
Furthermore, we also need to focus on the increases in unit labour costs, that is, the nominal 
wage increases adjusted for increases in labour productivity. The latest data indicate that in 
the first quarter of this year unit labour costs in the non-agricultural sector increased by 2,2 
per cent compared to the first quarter of last year of 2006. So although wage growth poses 
an increasing threat to the inflation outlook, it does not appear to be out of control. 
Administered prices 
8. 
When we initially adopted the inflation targeting framework, one of the constant laments we 
had at that time was the challenge posed to us by the range of administered or regulated 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2007
prices  in  the  economy  which  remained  stubbornly  high.  Administered  price  setting  by  the 
regulators  eventually  became  more  market-related,  and  from  around  2003  till  recently  this 
category  did  not  feature  among  the  list  of  our  concerns.  Unfortunately  this  situation  is 
changing.  The  administered  price  index  (excluding  petrol)  has  been  increasing  steadily  in 
recent months. The API excluding petrol increased at a year-on-year rate of 5,6 per cent in 
June  this  year,  compared  to  4,3  per  cent  a  year  ago.  Top  of  our  list  of  concerns  are  the 
proposed electricity price increases requested by Eskom. These increases are of the order of 
18 per cent for the next two years.  
While we fully appreciate the need to expand electricity generating capacity in the country as 
a matter of urgency, it is essential that alternative financing options be carefully considered 
as  these  will  have  significant  implications  for  inflation  and  monetary  policy.  A  similar 
argument can be made for other areas where infrastructure expansion will take place. It is 
accepted that increases in tariffs or indeed excise or fuel taxes should not be regarded as 
“true” inflation. However if they are a regular annual feature of the economic landscape they 
become an integral part of the inflation process which we have to take account of. We are 
mandated  to  achieve  a  particular  inflation  outcome,  but  to  achieve  this,  government  and 
other regulators need to take account of this in their price setting. 
Conclusion 
9.  
I have attempted to outline some of the major concerns currently facing the MPC. This does 
not mean that other issues are not concerning us, or that we see no positive developments. I 
should also emphasise that we do not have a target for any particular variable – our focus is 
on  the  overall  inflation  outcome,  which  is  the  outcome  of  the  interaction  of  a  number  of 
variables.  In  other  words,  we  cannot  say  what  the  appropriate  growth  of  household 
consumption spending should be, as it would need to be seen in the context of the behaviour 
of the other factors that determine the inflation rate. 
Monetary  policy-making  is  not  a  simple  matter  of  adjusting  an  interest  rate  lever  in  an 
automatic way. Because monetary policy has to be forward-looking, and because the future 
is inherently uncertain, we have to make decisions on the basis of our best estimates of the 
most  likely  outcomes.  Despite  these  difficulties,  we  will  continue  to  strive  to  achieve  our 
mandate and bring inflation back to within the inflation target range. This will be the true test 
of the success of monetary policy. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 5
