Jean-Claude  Trichet:  Presentation  of  the  ECB’s  Annual  Report  2006  to  the 
European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
to the European Parliament, Strasbourg, 11 July 2007. 
 Monsieur le Président, Mesdames et messieurs les députés,  
J’ai l’honneur de vous présenter aujourd’hui le Rapport annuel de la BCE pour l’année 2006. 
Le  Rapport  annuel  constitue  un  des  outils  principaux  de  la  BCE  pour  rendre  compte  aux 
citoyens de l’Europe et à ses représentants élus – le Parlement européen – de sa politique 
monétaire et de ses activités dans les autres domaines de sa compétence.  
Ich  werde 
Ihnen  zunächst  einen  kurzen  Überblick  über  die  wirtschaftlichen  und 
geldpolitischen Entwicklungen im Jahr 2006 geben und die geldpolitischen Maßnahmen der 
EZB erläutern. Danach möchte ich einige Anmerkungen zur Finanzmarktstabilität sowie zum 
Thema Zahlungsverkehrsysteme machen.  
Economic and monetary issues 
In  2006  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  continued  to  anchor  medium  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations at levels consistent with price stability. This reflected the credibility of the ECB 
in conducting its monetary policy, in full compliance with its primary objective of maintaining 
price stability over the medium term. The solid anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations 
is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting 
sustainable economic growth and job creation in the euro area, in line with Article 105 (1) of 
the EC Treaty.  
In  2006  the  euro  area  economy  expanded  at  the  highest  growth  rate  since  2000. 
Notwithstanding the impact of high and volatile oil prices, real GDP rose by 2.9% in 2006, 
compared with 1.5% in 2005. The economic recovery gradually broadened in the course of 
2006, and the nature of the economic expansion became increasingly self sustaining, with 
domestic demand acting as the main driver. Despite some moderation, the ongoing strong 
momentum  in  economic  growth  continued  in  the  first  quarter  of  2007.  The  euro  area 
continued  to  benefit  from  the  robust  ongoing  expansion  of  the  world  economy,  while 
substantial  gains  in  corporate  profits  and  an  extended  period  of  very  favourable  financing 
conditions supported investment growth and employment. Consumption growth observed a 
gradual recovery, in line with improving conditions in the labour market. 
The latest data and survey releases have remained broadly positive, supporting the view that 
economic activity in the euro area in the second quarter of 2007 continued to expand at solid 
rates. Looking ahead, the medium-term outlook for economic activity remains favourable and 
the conditions are in place for the euro area economy to continue to grow at a sustained rate. 
As regards the external environment, global economic growth remains robust, while domestic 
demand in the euro area is also expected to maintain its relatively strong momentum.  
The risks surrounding this favourable medium-term outlook for economic growth are broadly 
balanced over the shorter term. At medium to longer horizons, risks remain on the downside, 
owing mainly to external factors.  
Regarding price developments, average annual HICP inflation in 2006 was 2.2%, unchanged 
compared  with  the  previous  year.  This  was  slightly  above  the  ECB’s  aim  to  keep  inflation 
over  the  medium  term  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  Although  this  outcome  mainly  reflects 
increases in oil and commodity prices, and although inflation has been slightly below 2% in 
the first half of 2007, there is no room for complacency.  
BIS Review 80/2007 
 1
The  outlook  for  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  remains  subject  to  upside  risks.  As 
capacity  utilisation  in  the  euro  area  economy  is  high  and  labour  markets  are  gradually 
improving, constraints are emerging which could lead in particular to stronger than expected 
wage developments. In addition, pricing power in market segments with low competition may 
increase in such an environment. The Governing Council stresses the importance of avoiding 
wage  developments  that  would  eventually  lead  to  inflationary  pressures  and  harm  the 
purchasing  power  of  all  euro  area  citizens.  In  addition,  upside  risks  to  price  stability  arise 
from increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those anticipated thus far 
and  the  potentially  pro-cyclical  stance  of  fiscal  policy  in  some  countries.  Finally,  on  the 
external side, upside risks stem from the possibility of further unexpected oil price rises.  
The Governing Council’s assessment that upside risks to price stability prevailed has been 
confirmed throughout the period from the start of 2006 to mid 2007 by cross-checking with 
the  monetary  analysis.  The  marked  dynamism  of  monetary  and  credit  growth  in  2006 
reflected  a  continuation  of  the  persistent  upward  trend  in  the  underlying  rate  of  monetary 
expansion in the euro area that has been observed since mid-2004, adding further to liquidity 
accumulation. Also in 2007, the underlying rate of monetary expansion remains strong, as 
reflected in the continued rapid growth of M3 as well as the still high level of credit growth. 
Following several years of robust monetary growth and the continued vigour of the ongoing 
expansion in money and credit, liquidity in the euro area remains ample. In this environment, 
there are clear indications of upside risks to price stability at medium to longer-term horizons. 
Therefore,  monetary  developments  continue  to  require  very  careful  monitoring,  particularly 
against the background of the expansion in economic activity and still strong property market 
developments. 
To address the upside risks to price stability identified by the ECB’s economic and monetary 
analyses, the Governing Council has adjusted the monetary policy stance gradually in eight 
steps  since  the  end  of  2005.  As  a  result,  the  minimum  bid  rate  in  the  main  refinancing 
operations of the Eurosystem rose from 2.00% in December 2005 to 4.00% in June 2007. 
After the adjustments in the key interest rates, the ECB’s monetary policy remains still on the 
accommodative side, with overall financing conditions favourable, money and credit growth 
vigorous,  and  liquidity  in  the  euro  area  ample.  Looking  forward,  firm  and  timely  action 
continues  to  be  warranted  to  ensure  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The  Governing 
Council will continue to monitor closely all developments in order to ensure that risks to price 
stability over the medium term do not materialise.  
Fiscal policies  
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  the  ECB  shares  the  view  expressed  in  the  draft  resolution  that 
fiscal consolidation is key and all the more necessary in good times in order to achieve long-
term growth. In a benign environment, budget balances in 2006 were generally better than 
expected.  It  is  imperative  that  forthcoming  budget  plans  build  on  this  favourable  outcome, 
assigning  higher  than  expected  revenues  to  deficit  reduction  and  speeding  up  progress 
towards the achievement of medium-term budgetary objectives. The ECB is concerned about 
recent  developments  which  point  to  a  relaxation  of  fiscal  targets  in  some  countries,  the 
aforementioned  risk  of  pro-cyclical  policies  and  a  repetition  of  past  policy  mistakes.  It  is 
imperative that all governments comply with the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact 
on fiscal consolidation and that all the countries concerned honour the commitments made at 
the Eurogroup meeting in Berlin on 20 April 2007. As agreed in Berlin, taking advantage of 
the  favourable  cyclical  conditions  would  enable  most  euro  area  countries  to  achieve  their 
medium-term objectives in 2008 or 2009, and all of them should aim for 2010 at the latest. 
These  pledges  should  be  reflected  in  the  2008  budget  plans  so  as  to  avoid  repeating 
governments’ past failure to adjust fiscal balances in economic “good times”. The Governing 
Council  also  welcomes  the  emphasis  placed  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  on  measures  to 
improve the quality and efficiency of public finances. 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2007
Economic differentials in the euro area and structural policies  
Turning  to  structural  policies,  the  draft  resolution  adopted  by  the  ECON  Committee  refers 
several  times  to  economic  divergences  in  the  euro  area.  I  should  like  to  stress  first  that, 
overall,  inflation  differences  among  euro  area  countries  have  fallen  and  are  currently 
relatively  limited  by  historical  standards.  The  magnitude  of  current  inflation  and  output 
differentials  is  similar  to  that  observed  across  regions  or  states  within  the  United  States. 
These  differentials  can  be  considered  normal  to  the  extent  that  they  reflect  catching-up 
phenomena  or  country-specific  shocks.  However,  inflation  differentials  tend  to  be  rather 
persistent in the euro area, and they reflect in part persistent differences in unit labour cost 
developments. In addition, the variation of output growth across some euro area countries 
can  largely  be  attributed  to  differences  in  potential  output  growth  rather  than  in  business 
cycles. In a number of cases, this may reflect existing rigidities in product and labour markets 
and a lack of competition, leading to sluggish adjustment processes and a restrained growth 
potential. It is very important to monitor the accumulated competitiveness losses in some of 
the euro area countries. A more comprehensive analysis of the sources and implications of 
these  differentials,  as  requested  in  your  draft  resolution,  has  already  been  provided  in  our 
Monthly Bulletin of April this year.  
A single currency means a single monetary policy and a single exchange rate vis-à-vis other 
currencies. It is therefore all the more important to ensure that all the national mechanisms of 
adjustment  to  shocks  function  perfectly.  The  efficient  and  smooth  functioning  of  economic 
adjustments within the euro area requires the removal of institutional barriers to flexible wage 
and  price-setting  mechanisms  as  well  as  the  completion  of  the  Single  Market  and  thus 
greater  cross-border  competition.  Indeed,  well-designed  structural  reforms  implemented  by 
national governments are crucial to improve the functioning of product, labour and financial 
markets and to reinforce competitiveness. Increased market competition and a reduction of 
cross-border barriers are beneficial for consumers since they lead to lower prices, higher real 
wages and a greater choice of products. They are also beneficial for firms since they lead to 
higher  efficiency,  greater  dynamism  and  an  enhanced  capacity  to  cope  with  economic 
shocks  and  to  face  the  challenges  and  opportunities  posed  by  globalisation.  Free  and 
undistorted  competition  fosters  long-term  economic  growth  and  job  creation  and  facilitates 
the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. The completion of the Single Market must 
therefore be a priority for all of us, in particular as regards further financial market integration, 
the  pursuit  of  effective  competition  in  the  energy  market  and  the  implementation  of  the 
Services Directive. 
through 
Financial stability 
Mister  President,  honourable  members  of  the  European  Parliament,  let  me  now  address 
some  financial  stability  issues,  in  particular  the  ECB’s  view  on  hedge  funds  and  leverage 
buyouts, both of which continue to remain at the forefront of financial market activity.  
The ECB acknowledges the positive role that hedge funds play by contributing to enhancing 
the efficiency and liquidity of financial markets. We should be aware, however, that hedge 
funds can represent also a source of risk to the stability of the financial system. This can take 
place 
investors  and 
counterparties, primarily banks, and the potential impact on financial markets and particularly 
derivative  markets.  Concerning  the  latter,  it  is  not  fully  clear  what  could  be  the  impact  of 
hedge funds’ behaviour on the liquidity of financial markets in a stress situation.  
Against this background, the report issued in May 2007 by the Financial Stability Forum on 
High-leveraged  institutions  is  welcome.  The  report  concluded  that,  while  the  so-called 
indirect  regulation  of  hedge  funds  through  their  regulated  counterparties,  foremost  banks, 
remains the most adequate approach for containing potential risks to financial stability, the 
effectiveness  of  this  approach  cannot  be  taken  for  granted  and  needs  to  be  monitored 
regularly.  Therefore,  the  report  contains  a  number  of  recommendations  addressed  to 
two  main  channels,  notably 
the  possible  effects  on 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 3
supervisors, hedge funds’ counterparties and investors, and the hedge fund industry itself, 
which I fully share. As for the role to be played by the industry, more than ever I will support 
the proposal that the hedge fund sector would strive for best practices and that industry-led 
benchmarks would be a suitable tool to pursue this objective. In this vein, the recent initiative 
undertaken  by  the  industry  to  set  up  a  working  group  to  review  best  practices  is  a  very 
welcome development and I look forward to the result of such work. 
My second point concerns private equity and leveraged buyout (LBO) activity. This activity 
has been booming in Europe – also as a consequence of abundant market liquidity – and 
has seen an increasing involvement of banks. In a recent study on large banks’ involvement 
in the LBO market in the EU, which was conducted by the Banking Supervision Committee 
and published by the ECB, banks’ debt exposures were assessed as being manageable with 
respect to their capital buffers. However, the study identified so-called warehousing risk as a 
significant  risk  to  which  banks  are  becoming  exposed  through  LBO-related  activities.  This 
risk arises from the material amounts of LBO debt that underwriting banks take on, with the 
aim of distributing it into the market shortly after the transactions are completed. The efficacy 
of  these  risk  distribution  processes  strongly  rely  on  the  effectiveness  of  syndication 
processes and the degree of liquidity in credit risk transfer (CRT) markets. I consider that the 
warehousing risks faced by banks start to increase. 
Payment systems 
My  final  remarks  concern  the  integration  of  payment  systems  in  Europe.  I  noted  with 
satisfaction the positive assessment you made in the draft resolution about the Single Euro 
Payments Area and the Target 2 project. The Eurosystem will continue to play its role in this 
regard.  
As  for  the  Target2-securities  (T2S)  project,  the  draft  resolution  shares  the  Eurosystem’s 
assessment that this project might have the potential to foster the integration, the efficiency 
and the safety of the clearing and settlement infrastructure in Europe. At the same time, the 
draft resolution notes that an appropriate governance structure is of the essence. As for the 
latter point, we have always wished to have a strong involvement of the markets in the T2S 
project. We have put in place a governance model for the development phase which seeks to 
involve all stakeholders through the creation of an Advisory Group on T2S where markets 
players  are  well  represented.  The  “Advisory  Group”  –  which  reports  directly  to  the  ECB 
Executive  Board  and  Governing  Council  –  is  composed  for  about  two  thirds  by  market 
participants  and  only  one  third  by  central  bankers.  Hence,  strong  interaction  between  the 
ECB and the markets takes place on a continuous basis.  
On 26 April 2007, the ECB Governing Council launched an official public consultation on the 
principles  and  proposals  underlying  the  T2S  Project.  The  2-month  public  consultation 
launched by the ECB is now finalised, and the market feedback is very useful. We received 
quite a high number of comments. A first preliminary assessment of these comments shows 
that their feedback is generally rather positive. Out of 67 proposals, we have obtained a total 
of 3200 remarks from 56 institutions. 67% of these 3200 remarks indicated full agreement to 
the proposals, while only 6% indicated full disagreement. All the feedback received has been 
published  (unless  the  respondent  explicitly  requested  not  to  do  so)  and  is  being  carefully 
considered.  
The governance of T2S is of special importance for us and thus an important element of our 
work  programme.  My  colleague,  Mrs  Tumpel-Gugerell  and  Mr  Godeffroy,  Director-General 
Payment Systems and Market Infrastructure, have made presentations before the Parliament 
this year to present the case for T2S and inform on the governance for T2S. The governance 
arrangements for the next phases of the project will be discussed in the coming months and 
the EP will be kept fully informed. 
I thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2007
