Radovan Jelašić: The development of payment cards in Serbia 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, in the Serbian Chamber of 
Commerce  on  the  occasion  of  the  annual  meeting  dedicated  to  payment  cards,  Belgrade, 
8 June 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to greet you on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia on the occasion of annual 
meeting  of  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  of  Serbia  dedicated  to  the  development  of  payment  cards 
business. 
Before  discussing  the  topic  of  the  meeting  itself,  allow  me  to  point  out  three  details  related  to  the 
general  economic  situation  in  the  country  which  very  much  affect  the  progress  of  card  business  in 
Serbia. 
• 
Very  many  people,  I  may  even  say,  most  people,  including  myself,  do  not  and  can  not 
remember the times when inflation in Serbia was lower than it is today. The reason is very 
simple,  they  were  not  born  yet!  The  rate  of  inflation  which  is  lower  than  the  currently 
prevailing 4.4 per cent, and 3 per cent for core inflation, was last recorded, would you believe 
it, 44 years ago, that is in 1963. I am convinced that the current low inflation rate will help the 
development of card business and make it cheaper and more attractive because expansion 
of the network actually represents the highest fixed cost element.  
I am honoured to be the first governor in a number of decades who can spend his day in 
office  without  even  having  to  mention  the  word  “exchange  rate”.  Since  Monday  this  week 
when regular daily exchange rate fixing was abolished, the NBS dived with full force into the 
waters  of  managed  floating  exchange  rate  with  the  emphasis  on  “floating”  rather  than  on 
“managed”. Those not happy with the exchange rate for the dinar will have to submit their 
complaints to the market and not to the NBS, and the other way around, those happy with 
the exchange rate will have to give their thanks to the market.  
As negotiations related to stabilization and association with the EU continue, in addition to 
the money from Brussels, numerous foreign investments, and hopefully a better credit rating, 
Serbia  will  get  one  more  thing,  which  I  think  is  the  most  important  one,  and  that  is  a 
CHANCE to show and prove who and what it really is and what it has done so far in terms of 
attempts at reform. If the politics represent a stumbling block, you are never given a chance 
to present or prove for what you are worth!  
   The results achieved in the domain of development of card business in Serbia in the course of the last 
four years are really imposing as is proved by the following: 
• 
Number  of  cards  issued  has  reached  5.6  million  and  was  increased  by  as  much  as  2.2 
million in the course of the last four years alone;  
Half of the above number of issued cards are DinaCards;  
Almost 70 million transactions in Serbia were performed via payment cards in the course of 
the last 12 months, of which 6.5 million in May alone;  
There are over 50,000 POS terminals, and  
almost 1800 ATMs in Serbia today.  
• 
• 
The time has come for us to make another step – a step towards improving the quality of payment 
cards  business  in  Serbia.  This  step  shall  certainly  take  place  in  the  course  of  this  year  by  way  of 
improving quality of service and increasing the number of options on offer, like payment via mobile 
telephone or on-line, which has recently been enabled through the DinaCard system. 
One of the major issues thrust upon us by the standards achieved so far in respect of card business in 
Serbia, are the costs of payment system and the so called trade fees. In view of the fact that the level 
of guaranteed fee, interchange rate, to be retained by the card issuer in international card systems is 
disproportional to the level of fees in the EU member countries and that the gap will only widen further 
BIS Review 63/2007 
 1
after a new set of rates is becomes applicable from 1 January 2008, the NBS has, following into the 
footsteps  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  decided  to  actively  engage  in  improving  efficiency  of  card 
payments and the resulting relationship between banks and trades people. 
I wish to inform you of the steps we intend to take to remove this anomaly, such as: 
• 
Introduce a system  of  interchange rates  from  2  September  2007  instead  of applying  fixed 
trade fees, that is a system in which banks and trades people will be free to regulate their 
mutual relations on their own.  
Make a comprehensive analysis of costs of payment systems as well as relations between 
banks and trades people in the course of next three months so as to be able to make an 
informed  conclusion on  the  optimum  level  of  interchange rate  to be  applied  on  the  use  of 
cards issued in Serbia.  
 On this occasion, however, the NBS invites banks to reach an agreement among themselves in the 
near  future  as  to  the  applicable  level  of  interchange  rate  that  would  provide  for  a  more  efficient 
payments system and to attempt to substitute NBS regulations by introducing self-regulating measures 
in  this  area.  The  interchange  rate  to  be  applied  in  the  DinaCard  system  will be  0.7  per  cent  of  the 
purchase  value  for  majority  of  trades  people  (and  0.25%  for  petrol)  which  shall  be  a  temporary 
measure pending comprehensive agreement among banks to apply to all bank cards issued in Serbia. 
I  wish  to  conclude  by  reminding  you  that  the  NBS  has  recently,  through  the  National  Centre  for 
Payment Cards, also become a member of the Berlin Group, one of the initiatives for linking national 
card systems in Europe in line with the SEPA initiative. This was a necessary step to prepare us for 
joining European integrations in the area of card business for which purpose the NBS shall continue to 
monitor  closely  the  development  of  regulatory  bodies  worldwide  and  shall  undertake  all  measures 
needed. 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2007
