T T Mboweni: Artistic science or scientific art? – The role of forecasting 
in monetary policy formulation 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Reuters 
Economist of the Year Award, Johannesburg, 6 September 2007. 
Honoured Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1. 
It is said that there are two kinds of economists: those who cannot forecast, and those who 
don’t know that they cannot forecast. We have to be thick-skinned to be economists as we 
are often the butt of jokes. Apparently there are more jokes about economists than any other 
profession, except perhaps lawyers. It would appear that the negative perceptions that are 
held about economists can be blamed to a large extent on economic forecasters who, we are 
told, have accurately forecast eight of the last three recessions.  
But  forecasting  is  not  always  a  joke,  and  the  quality  of  the  contestants  of  the  Reuters 
Economist of the Year competition is testament to that. Forecasting is a serious and integral 
part of economic life. Any decision, whether an investment decision or a policy decision, or in 
fact any decision in life that involves taking a view on the future, has to be made on the basis 
of some forecast. So if we regard forecasting as a joke, then the joke is on us. Unfortunately 
we do not have perfect foresight and therefore we will never be able to forecast perfectly. 
The best we can do is to strive to create forecasting models that are close approximations of 
reality which in turn provides a coherent and disciplined framework for making decisions. In 
my  comments  to  you  this  morning,  I  will  discuss  the  role  of  forecasting  and  how  we  use 
forecasts in the monetary policy decision-making process. 
Models and forecasts  
2.  
There are different ways we can go about generating forecasts. Although there may be some 
forecasters  who  engage  in  pure  guesswork  or  thumb-sucking,  most  forecasters  would  be 
informed  by  models  with  varying  degrees  of  sophistication.  These  could  vary  from  simple 
extrapolation of the past, to analysing current developments and assessing their implications 
for the future, to a more complex dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model, which is the 
latest  fad  among  model  builders.  Forecasting  success,  however,  is  not  guaranteed  by  the 
level of sophistication of the model.  
The type of model we use would, to some extent, depend on the time horizon that we are 
interested in, as different models are better suited to different forecast horizons. In the short 
run, momentum of data may be more important than longer-term structural and behavioural 
relationships. We therefore see different types of forecasting strategies in the markets. For 
example, many traders have time horizons of a few minutes. To them tomorrow is very long 
term.  Those  needing  short-term 
forecasts  will  probably  use  chartist  or  bottom-up 
spreadsheet techniques. These models have little basis in economic theory, and are unlikely 
to perform well over longer-term horizons. Our structural models in the Bank, for example, 
use quarterly data, so by definition they cannot be used for predicting one month ahead. For 
this  we  would  use  autoregressive  integrated  moving  average  (ARIMA)  models,  which  are 
also  momentum-type  models  with  no  underlying  economic  theory.  Predictions  based  on 
ARIMA  are  used  for  short-term  predictions,  and  since  they  are  based  purely  on  historical 
trends, they are not very good when it comes to predicting turning points.  
BIS Review 97/2007 
 1
Some  forecasters  rely  on  simple  correlations  noted  in  the  market.  As  we  all  know, 
correlations do not imply a causal relationship or even any direct relationship. The dangers of 
spurious  correlations  are  well-known.  David  Hendry,  the  renowned  Oxford  University 
econometrician,  in  his  appropriately-titled  paper:  “Forecasting:  alchemy  or  science?” 
illustrated  this  perfectly  when  he  showed  that  there  was  a  better  relationship  between 
inflation  and  the  cumulative  rainfall  in  Scotland,  than  between  inflation  and  monetary 
aggregates.  I  don’t  know  if  this  means  that  we  should  be  employing  Scottish  weather 
forecasters  in  the  Bank  to  make  our  inflation  forecasts.  I  am  told,  however,  that  weather 
forecasters were created in order to make economic forecasters look good.  
to 
inflation 
Why are forecasts wrong?  
formation  process,  yet  modelling 
3.  
Even  if  we  do  build  sophisticated  structural  models  incorporating  good  behavioural 
relationships,  the  forecasts  are  still  likely  to  be  wrong.  There  are  various  types  of forecast 
errors.  Firstly,  there  may  be  misspecification  of  the  model.  This  could  mean  that  we  have 
excluded one or more variables, or that we have specified the wrong type of function. Our 
modelling  team  is  continually  developing  our  models  to  try  and  overcome  this  type  of 
problem. Secondly, there may be structural breaks in the economy which are difficult to take 
account of when estimating over a long time horizon. This means that there may be a bias to 
the estimated coefficients of the model. This is particularly relevant to South Africa given the 
transformation of the economy over the last decade or more.  
A third problem relates to data. Historical data are subject to measurement error and are also 
revised after publication. In a number of instances we don’t have a consistent series going 
back  far  enough  to  ensure  a  more  reliable  estimate  of  the  parameters.  In  addition,  some 
variables,  such  as  the  wealth  or  expectations  variables,  have  to  be  proxied.  Inflation 
expectations  are  central 
the 
inflation 
expectations is a major challenge.  
While misspecified models, bad methods and inaccurate data are often blamed for serious 
forecast  errors,  David  Hendry  argues  that  they  are  not  the  main  cause  of  systematic 
mistakes. Rather it is the unanticipated large changes or shocks within the forecast period 
that are the primary source of errors. These are totally unpredictable or idiosyncratic events 
that  we  simply  cannot  predict,  and  in  these  instances  the  fault  then  lies  in  not  rapidly 
adjusting  the  forecasts  once  they  become  inconsistent  with  the  exogenous  shock.  When 
shocks  occur,  the  best  we  can  do  is  to  adjust  our  forecasts  accordingly.  This  is  why  we 
should be constantly monitoring new developments.  
There  are  instances  where  the  risks  to  the  forecast  may  be  known  but  are  unquantifiable. 
The current round of financial market volatility is a case in point. Although it was not a totally 
unpredictable  shock,  the  timing  was  always  uncertain  and  we  still  don’t  know  what  the 
ultimate impact will be. Lawrence Meyer, a former Federal Reserve Governor, in commenting 
on the Federal Reserve’s reactions to the financial market turbulence, said that the recent 
shift  in  policy  stance  “tells  us  how  difficult  it  is  to  translate  financial  turbulence  into 
macroeconomic forecast.” 
A model-based forecast is only as good as the key assumptions that it is based on. In the 
forecasting  process  of  the  Bank,  a  lot  of  time  and  effort  is  dedicated  to  the  process  of 
deciding on the exogenous assumptions of the model. Staff at various levels make inputs, 
but ultimately, about two to three weeks in advance of the MPC meeting, the MPC members 
meet  to  finalise  the  assumptions.  Making  assumptions  about  exogenous  variables  is  an 
important component of the forecasting process. But it is not always easy. Take for example 
the international oil price for example. It is one of the most important exogenous assumptions 
in  our  model  and  we  have  to  formulate  a  view  of  the  price  over  the  coming  three  years. 
Unpredictable geopolitical events, hurricanes etc., will surprise us over the period and force 
us to change our views. No matter how well we analyse the underlying market conditions, we 
are likely to be wrong because of unpredictable events.  
2 
 BIS Review 97/2007
The  difficulty  of  forecasting  the  oil  price  is  well  illustrated  when  comparing  the  oil  price 
forecasts of a number of different forecasters. For the 2008 forecast, the spread between the 
highest  and  lowest  forecast  in  the  market  is  almost  US$22  per  barrel,  and  for  2009  the 
spread is slightly wider. If the oil experts are so uncertain, how confident can we be? Yet this 
variable has a critical bearing on the inflation outcome and the accuracy of our forecasts.  
One way we try and cope with this uncertainty is to consider various oil price scenarios, so 
that  we  can  see  the  sensitivity  of  the  forecast  to  possible  changes  in  the  exogenous 
variables. We then have to make a judgement call as to which is the most likely scenario. As 
is the case with policy making, forecasting is very often a science as well as an art.  
The use of forecasts in monetary policy decision-making 
4.  
The Bank does not rely on a single model for its forecast. In line with most central banks we 
have a suite of models that can be used for different purposes and various time horizons. As 
I noted earlier, we use ARIMA models or vector autoregressive (VAR) models for short-term 
forecasting  and  for  estimating  impulse  responses.  Other  models  include  a  disaggregated 
model  which  builds  up  the  inflation  forecast  from  the  individual  components  of  CPIX 
independently, which helps us identify the categories where price changes and inflationary 
pressures have started to emerge. Finally, we have our main quarterly core model which has 
18 structural equations. 
Policy,  like  investment  decisions,  has  to  be  made  on  a  forward-looking  basis.  As inflation-
targeters, we need to set interest rates on the basis of our expectations of inflation over the 
next two years or so. This is particularly the case given the lags in adjustment to interest rate 
changes. The closer the model represents reality, the better it will be. However, as outlined 
earlier,  no  model  fully  captures  all  the  interrelationships  in  the  economy  or  captures 
expectations appropriately. Furthermore, as I outlined earlier, idiosyncratic shocks cannot be 
forecast. 
Much  is  made  in  the  markets  every  month  when  new  inflation  data  comes  out.  To  us  the 
latest data point is only important to the extent that it may contain clues to the future and that 
it  gives  us  a  new  data  point  for  the  longer-term  projection.  The  latest  data  point  is  in  fact 
history. We can compare this to driving a car. We do not drive a car by focusing only on the 
rear-view  mirror.  That  is  a  sure  recipe  for  disaster.  True,  we  have  to  look  in  the  rear-view 
mirror every now and again in case there is a bad driver bearing down on us, but we should 
be  generally  looking  ahead.  Unfortunately,  as  with  policy-making,  the  road  ahead  is  not 
always clear.  
For  these  reasons, it  is  not  possible  to  use  the  forecast  in  a  mechanical  way.  Although  in 
theory models should incorporate all available information at any given point in time, there is 
still  a  certain  amount  of  judgement  that  must  be  used.  So  as  policy-makers,  we  cannot 
devolve  our  responsibilities  to  the  outcomes  of  the  model.  Much  consideration  has  to  be 
given to a thorough analysis of the risks to the outlook. Even the most sophisticated models 
need  to  be  supplanted  by  anecdotal  and  other  off-model  information.  As  Federal  Reserve 
Chairman Ben Bernanke recently remarked, “for all the advances that have been made in 
modeling  and  statistical  analysis,  practical  forecasting  continues  to  involve  art  as  well  as 
science.” 
Our most recent forecast that we reported on in the August MPC statement suggests that we 
will be outside the target range until the second quarter of next year, and then inflation will 
gradually decline. However this forecast is only as good as the assumptions we have put in 
to the model. The sensitivity of the forecast to oil price and exchange rate changes are well 
known, and any unexpected changes in these or other variables will cause the forecast to 
change.  So  there  can  be  no  guarantee  that  the  forecast  will  be  the  same  next  time. 
Forecasts cannot be followed in a mechanical fashion since relevant off-model information 
has to be accounted for and the risks to the forecasts assessed. 
BIS Review 97/2007 
 3
Forecasting and transparency 
5.  
The  global  trend  in  recent  years  is  towards  increased  transparency  in  monetary  policy 
formulation.  This  helps  to  make  monetary  policy  more  predictable  which,  in  turn,  helps 
reduce volatility in markets and make forward planning easier. We can debate about where 
to  draw  the  line  as  to  the  limits  of  transparency,  but  one  of  the  new  trends  has  been  for 
central banks to publish their forecasts as well as their forecasting models. For some time we 
have been showing our central forecast and the associated fan chart in the Monetary Policy 
Review (MPR) which we publish twice a year. This is the forecast presented to the MPC at 
the most recent MPC meeting prior to the publication of the MPR. 
Furthermore, in our statements which are released after each MPC meeting, we give details 
of the forecast so that market participants have a good idea of the timing and level at which 
inflation is expected to change direction. We also indicate where we expect inflation to be at 
the end of the forecast period.  
More  recently  we  have  also  published  our  core  model  following  numerous  requests  from 
private  sector  analysts  and  forecasters.  We  have  also  provided  an  assessment  of  the 
performance of the model over time which shows that the Bank’s model has performed well, 
particularly relative to other private sector forecasts. The obvious question to ask is, should 
these analysts not also be transparent with their models? Would it not improve the quality of 
debate or assist in the development of better models if we could see how other forecasters 
generate  their  forecasts?  I  have  noted  a  deafening  silence  when  I  raise  this  issue  with 
market economists. 
Conclusion 
6.  
I  will  not  attempt  to  forecast  the  winner  of  the  competition.  I  congratulate  all  of  the 
contestants. The winner is the forecaster who has most accurately forecast the month-ahead 
inflation  over  the  past  year.  Although  forecasting  near-term  inflation  is  useful,  as  the 
Financial  Times  columnist,  Sir  Samuel  Brittan  argued,  this  type  of  forecast  tells  us  more 
about  the  present  and  the  recent  past  than  about  the  future.  From  a  monetary  policy 
perspective, we are primarily concerned with forecasting over a longer time horizon. There is 
nothing monetary policy can do about the latest inflation numbers. Monetary policy should be 
judged on whether appropriate actions are being taken today to ensure that inflation will be 
within the target range in 18-24 months time. For this we need to have a good medium-term 
forecast to provide us with a coherent framework. 
Despite all the problems associated with forecasting, they remain integral to policy decisions, 
and we will continue to use them. The models have become increasingly sophisticated, but 
the future is inherently uncertain. At the same time the economic and political environment 
has  also  become  more  challenging  and  difficult  to  predict.  Unfortunately,  as  is  sometimes 
said, the future is not what it used to be. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 97/2007
