Erkki Liikanen: Globalization – declining risks but increasing uncertainty? 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Session on Underlying Forces in 
the  Global  Economy  of  the  2007  Money  and  Banking  Conference  "Monetary  Policy  Under 
Uncertainty", hosted by the Central Bank of Argentina, Buenos Aires, 4 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
Globalization  is  the  big  story  of  our  times.  Forces  of  globalization  change  the  domestic  inflation 
process and the way in which monetary policy measures are transmitted in the domestic economy. 
The  uncertain  nature  and  magnitude  of  these  changes  makes  the  job  of  the  central  bankers  more 
demanding.  But  at  the  same  time,  globalization  has  helped  central  bankers  by  exerting  some 
dampening effect on prices. 
On  balance,  the  low  and  stable  inflation  we  have  witnessed  in  recent  years  gives  confidence  that 
central  bankers  can  cope  with  this  uncertain  and  changing  operating  environment  as  long  as  the 
process of globalization remains orderly. Therefore, I will not today talk much about how globalization 
is changing the domestic inflation process and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. 
Instead, in my remarks today, I will mainly talk about how globalization is changing the landscape of 
risks and what this implies for central banks and other policymakers. In particular, I will discuss the 
somewhat  paradoxical  phenomenon  of  a  broad-based  decline  in  risk  premia  at  the  time  when 
uncertainty, i.e., those risks that cannot be readily quantified, may in fact be increasing.  
Globalization: the big picture 
It is often claimed that there is nothing new about globalization. While this may be true in some sense, 
it seems to me that the current phase of globalization differs markedly from the previous ones in its 
extent, speed, intensity and impact. 
It is not possible to pinpoint the exact start of the current phase of globalization. But still, we can say 
that, the demise of centrally-planned economies – most notably the internal transformation of China 
and the dissolution of the Soviet Union unleashed the forces of globalization which had been building 
up during the 1980's. 
The  obvious  result  of  this  was  that  the  former  communist  block  countries  opened  up  and  became 
integrated into the world economy. The failure of the centrally-planned economic models profoundly 
changed the political landscape in already democratic countries. Specifically, it enabled and prompted 
them  to  adopt  increasingly  market-oriented  policies  conducive  to  competition  and  improvements  in 
productivity. 
The  point  which  I  want  to  stress  here  is  that,  although  globalization  is  nowadays  often  seen  as  an 
inevitable  and  irreversible  "force  of  nature",  its  present  phase  was  triggered  by  political  events  and 
needs some global institutions and international political support to be sustained. 
If the collapse of central planning was the main trigger, then rapid advances in technology have been 
the main driving force behind globalization. In particular, the explosive development of information and 
communication  technologies  has  played  a  central  role.  By  reducing  dramatically  the  cost  of 
transporting  and  sharing  information  and  services,  it  has  made  the  world  more  interconnected  and 
interdependent than any reasonable observer could have thought possible just 20 years ago. 
Unprecedented economic benefits 
The  economic  benefits  of  globalization  are  clear  and  widespread.  The  ongoing  global  economic 
expansion is the longest in 30 years. The robust global growth is reducing the number of people living 
in  extreme  poverty.  And,  for  the  first  time  in  decades,  the  average  incomes  of  developing  and 
developed countries are converging. 
Forces of globalization have intensified competition and fostered rapid improvements in productivity; 
these  factors  have  exerted  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Financial  globalization,  in  turn,  has 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 1
contributed to a broad-based decline in risk premia on various markets and asset classes, which has 
enabled much greater access to financing for households, firms and countries around the globe. 
On  the  whole,  despite  many  structural  changes  brought  about  by  globalization,  the  economic 
environment has become more stable and seemingly more predictable. We have witnessed what has 
been  rightly  coined  "the  Great  Moderation",  a  significant  decline  in  variability  of  both  output  and 
inflation. 
A significant part of the credit has been attributed to improved monetary policies. Institutional reform 
and thereby enhanced credibility of monetary policy has anchored inflation expectations, and this has 
been a major factor in ensuring the low level of long-term interest rates. 
So why the rising anxiety? 
Despite  these  resoundingly  positive  effects,  anxiety  about  globalization  and  uncertainty  about  its 
continued smooth progress is on the rise. One much-publicized source of concern is global current 
account imbalances and the risk of their abrupt and disorderly unwinding. 
Moreover, two other “imbalances” seem to be emerging. 
First, uneven distribution of benefits of globalization, combined with increased feeling of job insecurity, 
is  starting  to  erode  also  middle  classes'  support  for  globalization  in  some  countries,  notably  in  the 
United  States.  This  disillusionment  of  the  key  segment  of  the  electorate  raises  the  specter  of 
protectionism.  
Second, there are indications that the narrowing of risk premia observed in many markets and asset 
categories may not be fully on a sustainable basis. This implies the possibility of an abrupt and broad-
based  widening  of  risk  premia.  Given  the  unprecedented  degree  of  financial  interdependence,  the 
consequences might be serious. 
So,  somewhat  paradoxically,  we  are  in  a  situation  in  which  the  baseline  economic  outlook  remains 
benign,  and  many  measurable  risks  remain  low  or  are  even  receding,  while  uncertainty,  i.e.,  those 
risks that cannot be readily quantified, timed, priced or hedged in the markets, may in fact be on the 
rise.1
It is this apparent dichotomy and its implications that I will focus on in the rest of my remarks. I will first 
look  at  in  more  detail  the  various  forces  that  have  been  driving  down  the  risk  premia.  Then  I  will 
discuss what implications and challenges the constellation of low risks and heightened uncertainty has 
for central banks. I will conclude by highlighting some broader policy implications. 
Declining risk premia 
A broad-based compression of risk premia has been an important force in supporting global growth in 
recent years. Much of this decline in price of risks seems to have reflected developments that are on a 
sound basis. 
• 
"The great moderation", lower volatility of output and inflation, has played an important role 
in  reducing  risk  premia,  in  particular  inflation  risk  premium.  Central  banks  have  clearly 
contributed to this by credibly anchoring inflation expectations.  
Whether reflecting a "savings glut" or "monetary overhang", the ample global supply of funds 
–  as  reflected  in  the  growth  of  monetary  aggregates  and  their  counterparties  –  has  also 
contributed to lower long-term interest rates, as well as the compression of risk premia more 
generally.  
                                                       
1   According  to  Frank  H.  Knight’s  famous  distinction,  "risk"  refers  to  situations  where  the  decision-maker  can  assign 
mathematical  probabilities  to  the  randomness  which  he  is  faced  with  (e.g.,  risk  premia  and  volatility  based  on  historical 
data), while "uncertainty" refers to situations when this randomness cannot be expressed in terms of specific mathematical 
probabilities  (e.g.,  disruptive  unwinding  of  global  imbalances,  possibly  accompanied  by  unprecedented  widening  of  risk 
premia). To put it slightly differently, uncertainty is a type of ambiguity where the probability of an act or outcome cannot be 
calculated whereas a risk has some element of calculation - there is a certain probability of some known act or outcome 
occurring. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2007
   Improved  market  liquidity,  reflecting  a  host  of  different  factors,  such  as  development  of 
market  infrastructure,  broadening  of  investor  base,  and  more  prudent  macroeconomic 
policies in many emerging market countries, has reduced liquidity risk premia.  
More  prevalent  use  of  portfolio  diversification  has  increased  demand  for  assets  that  have 
relatively high unsystematic risk, pushing down the price of idiosyncratic risks in many asset 
categories  (e.g.  equities  and  sovereign  debt).  This  is  reflected  especially  in  emerging 
markets.  
Financial  innovation,  such  as  unbundling  of  risk  with  the  help  of  some  time  complex 
derivatives,  has  improved  the  allocation  of  risk  bearing  and  increased  demand  for  many 
types  of  risky  assets.  This  has  exerted  downward  pressure  on  various  risk  premia,  most 
notably  credit  risk.  Similarly,  increased  ability  to  transfer  risks  through  securitization  has 
reduced risk premia.  
Most of these developments are welcome and reflect improved fundamentals and development and 
innovation in financial markets. At the same time, some of these may not be permanent and others 
may  help  feed  some  unsustainable  developments  with  systemic  implications.  As  such,  they  need 
careful monitoring. 
There  are  also  some  more  worrying  developments  that  have  compressed  risk  premia.  One  such 
development has been "search for yield", or higher returns in riskier assets, in its many manifestations. 
In  some  cases,  declines  in  risk  premia  arising  from  search  for  yield  may  have  been 
• 
reinforced  by  circular  relationships  between  cause  and  effect.  That  is,  perceptions  about 
lower risks may have shaped the reality, leading to self-reinforcing cycles of narrowing risk 
premia.  
There  is  a  risk  that  modern  quantitative  risk  management  tools  could  in  some  cases  be 
contributing to excessive compression of risk premia. If used mechanically, falling volatility 
leads  to  an  increase  in  a  trader's  risk  budget,  which  in  turn  may  encourage  further  risk 
taking, thus contributing to the compression of risk premia. Measuring on the basis of past 
developments,  statistical  tools  may  also  underestimate  risks  stemming  from  rare,  but  big 
events – such as natural catastrophies or major political events.  
In  some  cases  investment  managers'  incentive  structure  leads  a  rational  manager  to  take 
knowingly excessive risks.2 Raghuram Rajan has written and spoken extensively about how 
some  investment  managers  may  be  tempted  to  take  excessive  hard-to-quantify  "tail  risks" 
that pay positive return most of the time to compensate for relatively rare but very negative 
returns. The situation is exacerbated because other managers may take on board increased 
risk just in order to avoid performing poorly relative to their peers.  
  It is impossible to know how wide-spread this type of unhealthy risk taking is, or what is its significance 
in  quantitative  terms.  However,  this  type  of  behavior  is  likely  to  be  most  prevalent  during  times  of 
abundant  liquidity  and  general  stability,  i.e.,  conditions  that  we  currently  have.  Moreover,  it  seems 
likely that the volume of funds managed by managers with potentially unhealthy incentive structures 
has grown with the increased popularity of hedge funds. 
But increased uncertainty about durability of benign conditions? 
To  sum  up,  there  has  been  a  broad-based  decline  in  many  measurable  risks  and  much  of  this 
development reflects factors that are welcome and sound. Moreover, the markets seem to expect that 
global economic conditions will remain broadly favorable going forward. At the same time, one could 
argue that uncertainty may in fact have increased. 
One  source  of  uncertainty  is  that  the  decline  in  risk  premia  may  have  become  excessive  due  to 
unhealthy under-pricing of risks. The increasingly integrated global financial markets imply that a major 
                                                      
2   See e.g., Rajan, R.G. (2005); "Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier", paper presented at the Jackson Hole 
symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  August  25-27,  2005;  and  Rajan,  R.G.  (2007); 
"Financial  conditions,  alternative  asset  management  and  political  risks:  trying  to  make  sense  of  our  times",  Banque  de 
France, Financial Stability Review – Special issue on hedge funds, No. 10, April 2007. 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 3
retrenchment of risk taking in one market has a potential to feed rapidly to other markets. Therefore, a 
large  enough  shock  could  bring  about  a  broad-based  and  potentially  disruptive  widening  of  risk 
premia. 
A related concern is that the resiliency of the new global financial system in the face of a major shock 
remains untested. Financial innovations have enabled transferring various risks to the investor with the 
biggest  appetite  for  a  particular  type  of  risk.  During  calm  and  predictable  market  conditions,  this 
compresses risk premia. At the same time, financial innovations may well have created new types of 
systemic risks that will only become evident in more turbulent conditions. 
Finally,  the  combination  of  large  global  imbalances  and  signs  that  political  support  for  globalization 
may be beginning to wane is a clear cause for concern and a source of uncertainty. 
We should avoid sounding alarmist, but one of the lessons of history is that when the consensus view 
is becoming very optimistic, a prudent person should become worried.  
Implications for central banks 
What does this dichotomous view of the word, a benign baseline underpinned by continued smooth 
globalization and the apparent increase in uncertainty mean for central banks? 
I  will  look  at  this  only  from  two  different  angles.  First,  what  would  an  increased  uncertainty  and 
possibly more adverse operating environment imply for central banks? And second, I will briefly touch 
upon the role of monetary analysis in the apparently low risk environment characterized by heightened 
uncertainty. 
Key trends in central banking: increased independence and transparency 
During  the  past  couple  of  decades  there  has  been  a  clear  trend  towards  greater  central  bank 
independence.  The  increased  independence  has  naturally  been  accompanied  with  mandates  that 
have  given  more  clarity  to  central  banks'  objectives  and  required  from  them  increased  democratic 
accountability and transparency.  
Over  time,  many  central  banks  have  chosen  to  define  their  objectives  more  narrowly  than  their 
mandates  in  some  cases  would  absolutely  require,  including  through  the  adoption  of  quantitative 
definitions of price stability, or numerical inflation targets. 
There has also been a general trend towards greater transparency. Central banks have become much 
more  open  about  their  analysis  and  decision  making.  In  general,  the  central  banks  have  sought  to 
become more predictable. To this effect, many central banks have started to publish macroeconomic 
forecasts,  together  with  their  underlying  assumptions  and  other  supporting  analysis.  Central  banks 
have  also  increased  transparency  by  holding  press  conferences  following  the  meetings  of  their 
decision  making  bodies,  publishing  minutes,  or  releasing  written  statements  explaining  the  policy 
stance. 
Much of the recent debate has centered on the issue of how and to what extent central banks should 
communicate  on  their  views  and  intentions  regarding  future  interest  rates.  A  few  have  started  to 
publish their views on the future path of short term interest rates. Most central banks have, however, 
opted for qualitative statements regarding their future intentions. 
To sum up, in the past couple of decades we  have witnessed a trend towards independent central 
banks  that  are  becoming  increasingly  specific  and  open  regarding  their  objectives,  analysis  and 
intentions. In a significant and successful act of delegation, political decision-makers have been giving 
central banks more leeway to act, while central banks have accepted – not involuntarily – constraints 
of various degrees of rigidity regarding their policy goals. 
Are we likely to see these trends continue going forward, even in the face of heightened uncertainty? 
To  answer  this  question,  it  is  useful  to  recall  the  main  forces  that  have  underpinned  these  trends 
during the current phase of globalization. 
Role of monetary policy research 
The evolution of central banking during the past two decades has been greatly influenced by findings 
of  monetary  policy  research.  The  findings  have  underscored  the  need  to  insulate  monetary  policy 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2007
decision making from political pressures and the importance of clearly defined objectives in stabilizing 
inflation expectations. Moreover, after research in the early 1980s suggested that central banks could 
influence the real economy only by being unpredictable, it is nowadays generally accepted that central 
banks should focus on achieving price stability, and there it pays to be predictable. 
Here it is important to note that although more transparency does not imply any explicit commitment 
from the part of a central bank, transparency goes hand in hand with consistency. Therefore, in many 
respects,  the  tradeoff  between  transparency  and  opaqueness  is  similar  and  parallel  to  the  more 
"traditional" tradeoff between (binding) rules and discretion. 
Role of economic and political operating environment 
During the current phase of globalization central banks have greatly benefited from a confluence of 
benign economic and politically environment. 
As noted earlier, central banks clearly contributed to the Great Moderation. However, the causality ran 
also the other way round. Namely, by making the central banks' economic environment increasingly 
predictable, the Great Moderation driven by forces of globalization enabled and encouraged central 
banks to become more transparent and specific about the objectives and intentions. 
Increasingly benign economic environment played also a role in the trend toward more independent 
central banks. This is because without the increasingly predictable environment brought about by the 
Great Moderation, political decision makers would have been less likely to put their trust in the central 
banks ability to deliver on their mandates at politically acceptable cost. 
Against  this  background,  one  could  argue  that  if  the  central  banks'  operating  environment  were  to 
become more uncertain and less benign, we could well expect to see a reversal in trends described 
above. 
The  increase  of  political  pressure  in  less  benign and  less predictable  environment  is  inevitable  and 
largely  beyond  central  banks'  control.  However,  it  underscores  the  need  to  give  central  bank 
independence  solid  legal  basis  when  times  are  good.  Without  the  support  of  solid  de  jure 
independence, de facto independence enjoyed during "fair weather" may vanish with arrival of "rainy 
days".  But  de  jure  institutions  are  durable  only  if  supported  by  a  well-rooted  policy  culture  and  a 
general consensus of the public at large. When central banks invest in public trust by demonstrating 
their transparency and accountability, and by promoting economic literacy, they are in fact investing in 
financial and macroeconomic stability "for the rainy day".  
Financial stability and role of monetary analysis 
Financial  globalization  and  the  related  phenomenon  of  declining  risk  premia  have  required  central 
banks to attach increasing weight on financial stability considerations. 
Therefore, let me just make a few points about financial stability from central banks' perspective, and 
the role of monetary analysis in this context. 
One set of important issues relates to the need to ensure that central banks' role in, and strategies for 
crisis management  and  resolution  are  sufficiently  clear.  While  moral  hazard considerations  demand 
some constructive ambiguity vis-à-vis the markets, it is imperative that the rules of the game and the 
division of responsibilities is made clear among the relevant authorities. 
Another set of important issues relates to crisis prevention. While most issues in this area belong to 
the realm of supervision, in which central banks' competences vary widely, I would like to highlight one 
aspect that is directly related to monetary policy – namely that of the role of monetary analysis. 
As we all know, instability in the short-run relationship between money and inflation has resulted in 
much pressure to downgrade the role of monetary analysis in monetary policy deliberations at various 
central banks. 
I concede that the relative value of monetary analysis may well have declined with respect to analysis 
of short-term pressures on price stability. At the same time, monetary aggregates, credit growth, asset 
prices etc. contain valuable information that remains relevant for assessing longer-term future inflation 
developments and, importantly, potential emerging threats for financial stability.  
BIS Review 58/2007 
 5
First,  I  would  argue  that  "money  matters"  especially  during  conditions  of  possibly  excessively 
compressed risk premia. Indeed, here I would like to quote Charles Goodhart who in his recent paper 
notes how in booms "official policy rate may rise, but risk premia may fall. Against this background it 
would be short-sighted not to cross-check for the combined effect that a combination of official policy 
measures and changing risk aversion may have by looking carefully at the time path of the monetary 
aggregates."3
Second,  uncertainty  underscores  the  need  for  a  broad-based  monetary  analysis  that  takes  into 
account other relevant economic information. In addition to monetary aggregates, and perhaps even 
more importantly, such an analysis needs to pay particular attention to credit developments. Clearly, 
the rate and composition of credit expansion can contain valuable information about factors affecting 
developments  of  risk  premia.  Moreover,  such  analysis  can  offer  hints  about  possible  build  up  of 
uncertainty. 
Broader policy implications 
While the exact anatomy of the next major crisis can not be known in advance – otherwise the crisis 
could be avoided – it seems reasonable to assume that one feature could well be a possibly broad-
based reversal in risk premia resulting in financial instability. Moreover, the policymakers have to be 
prepared for the various challenges arising from weaker economic growth. 
We have a shared obligation to address tensions that could conceivable trigger adverse outcomes. 
Much  can  also  be  done  to  minimize  the  damage  caused  by  adverse  events  by  increasing  the 
resilience of the systems and ensuring orderly resolution of crises. This calls for strengthening policies 
and institutions, both at international and national levels. 
International level 
The multilateral arrangements, which play an important role in underpinning global growth, need to be 
safeguarded and strengthened. 
It goes without saying that we need a successful completion of the WTO Doha round. 
I would also want to emphasize the importance of the IMF. First, despite its shortcomings, the IMF's 
surveillance can play a role in reducing the risk of disruptive adjustments, including as regards global 
imbalances. Its FSAP (Financial Sector Assessment Program) contributes to more resilient financial 
systems. Moreover, the IMF can provide a unique forum for crisis resolution. As we all know, many 
important  reforms,  both  related  to  the  tools  at  the  IMF's  disposal  as  well  as  the  IMF's  governance 
structure, are now at a critical juncture and compromises are needed to make progress. 
Another issue is the need for strengthened supervision of cross-border financial institutions. We need 
more  clarity  on  how  to  divide  the  tasks,  powers,  and  responsibilities  between  different  countries  in 
supervising cross-border financial institutions and dealing with these institutions in financial distress. 
We have been making progress on these issues within EU, but more work is clearly needed within EU 
as well as at the more global level. In particular we have to think of ways to close the gap, on the one 
hand, between legal powers and mandates and, on the other hand, the abilities and responsibilities of 
the home and host supervisors. (These issues are already particular relevant for the Nordic and Baltic 
region where cross-border ownership of financial institutions is perhaps ahead of that anywhere else in 
the world.) 
National level 
There  are  some  issues  that  relevant  for  all  countries,  despite  big  differences  in  country-specific 
circumstances. 
First, there is a need to reduce fiscal vulnerability through sufficient fiscal consolidation and prudent 
debt  management  practices.  In  the  event  of  a  crisis,  fiscal  balances  could  be  hit  through  many 
channels: weaker economy, higher debt service as a result of higher interest rates and possibly also 
                                                      
3   Goodhart, C.A.E (2007) "Whatever became of the monetary aggregates?", National Institute Economic Review, 2007; 200; 
56. 
6 
 BIS Review 58/2007
weaker  currencies.  Moreover,  possible  problems  in  the  domestic  financial  systems  could  also  force 
governments to incur additional liabilities. 
Second, there is a need to reduce financial sector vulnerability through enhanced supervision. One 
key challenge related to the financial sector is to ensure that domestic private sector balance sheets 
are resilient enough to withstand interest rate shocks. 
Some  issues  are  of  particular  relevance  to  those  countries  that  are  still  in  the  process  of  fully 
integrating  to  the  global  financial  system.  In  other  words,  those  countries  whose  access  to  global 
financial system could be interrupted, or become severely constrained at a time of a crisis. 
The only way to fully and securely integrate into the global financial system is to build strong enough 
institutional infrastructure that ensures a well-functioning domestic financial system, even in times of 
stress. Rick Mishkin, who has worked extensively on globalization and financial development, put it 
well when he argued that the following steps need to be taken to ensure a well-functioning financial 
system:  i)  develop  strong  property  rights;  ii)  strengthen  the  legal  system;  iii)  reduce  corruption;  iv) 
improve the quality of financial information; v) improve corporate governance; and vi) get government 
out of the business of directing credit.4
Clearly,  many  countries  here  in  Latin  America  have  in  recent  years  made  impressive  progress  in 
implementing institutional reform on many areas mentioned in this list. For this, and for increasingly 
prudent  macroeconomic  policies,  the  markets  have  rewarded  them  handsomely  in  the  form  of 
declining cost of funding and more secure access to international and domestic capital markets. These 
achievements should be consolidated. 
Concluding remarks 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  have  discussed  the  important  role  of  uncertainty  in  the  interplay  between 
monetary policy and its economic and political operating environment. 
During the current phase of globalization central banks have benefited from a very benign economic 
and  political  environment.  This  benign  environment,  characterized  by  declining  risks  and  increased 
predictability, has underpinned and strengthened the trends toward more independent and transparent 
central  banks.  Current  economic  outlook  remains  generally  favorable  and  many  measurable  risks 
remain low or are even receding. However, I have argued that uncertainty, or those risks that cannot 
be readily quantified, may in fact be on the rise. 
If this uncertainty were at some point to translate into a more unpredictable and less benign operating 
environment,  we  could  expect  to  see  breaks  or  even  reversals  in  some  of  the  key  trends  I  have 
discussed.  This  could  apply  to  development  of  risk  premia,  evolution  of  central  banking,  and  the 
political support for domestic and multilateral institutions that have lent support to the current phase of 
globalization.  
This all emphasizes the need to take advantage of the current favorable conditions by solidifying the 
gains  made  by  strengthening  institutions  that  have  been  underpinning  the  favorable  developments, 
both at the global and national level. 
The founder of Intel, Andy Grove, titled his memoirs: "Only the paranoids survive" 
Central  banks'  operating  environment  appears  more  stable  and  predictable  than  that  in  the  IT 
business. Nevertheless, we have to avoid the risk of becoming complacent. Therefore, we have to be 
willing to continuously question and reassess our analysis and the way in which we conduct monetary 
policy. In this regard, events such as this where central bank practitioners, members of academia and 
representatives  of  financial  institutions  can  come  together  to  exchange  views  about  the  topical 
issues/challenges are most valuable.  
With these remarks I wish to conclude and thank our hosts for organizing this excellent conference.  
                                                      
4   See Mishkin F.S. (2006), "The Next Great Globalization, How Disadvantaged Nations Can Harness Their Financial Systems 
to Get Rich", Princeton University Press. 
BIS Review 58/2007 
 7
