Kazumasa Iwata: Housing and monetary policy in Japan 
Summary of a speech by Mr Kazumasa Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 
Panel Session "Housing and Monetary Policy" at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's 
Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 1 September 2007. 
 Housing and measurement of inflation rate 
1. There are four approaches to the treatment of housing, including owner-occupied housing, 
in  the  Consumer  Price  Index,  depending  on  whether  the  goods  or  services  are  "used", 
"consumed", "paid" or "acquired", namely (1) user cost, (2) rental equivalent, (3) payments, 
and (4) net acquisition methods. 
The  first  two  methods  seem  appropriate  for  the  measuring  of  the  "cost  of  living",  as  they 
cover the consumption of the service produced by housing. The payments method reflects 
the  actual  outlay  for  owning  a  dwelling  for  shelter  purposes;  it  can  be  regarded  as  a 
simplified version of the user cost method. The user cost method, as adopted by Canada and 
Sweden, includes the opportunity cost of owning a dwelling (the interest rate) and expected 
changes in house prices, in addition to relative price of houses, depreciation, tax, repairs and 
maintenance.1 There is an issue as to whether we should include the price of the land in the 
calculation of user cost, an issue which has important policy implications for the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy in the case of Japan. 
On the other hand, if we want "household monetary expenditure" to be reflected in the CPI, 
then  the  net  acquisition  method  (in  the  sense  of  excluding  the  transaction  of  existing 
dwellings)  may  be  preferred,  since  this  treats  the  purchase  of  housing  the  same  as  for 
durable  consumer  goods.  This  method  also  may  involve  including  the  asset  component  in 
the CPI, of particular relevance if the land is included (Eiglsperger (2006)). 
 
2. In Japan we adopt the rental equivalent method in the measurement of inflation rate, as is 
the case in the U.S. and five of the EU countries. The rental equivalent method estimates the 
costs  for  owner-occupied  housing  services  with  reference  to  rental  payments  for  similar 
rental  houses.  There  remains  an  issue  as  to  whether  the  paid  rent  is  considered  fully 
representative  of  the  imputed  rent,  because  of  the  difference  in  quality  and  floor-size 
distribution.2
Equivalent  rent  has  continued  to  decline  in  recent  months,  despite  the  recovery  in  land 
prices. The movement in housing rent seems to be associated more with sticky wages than 
with  flexible  land  prices  (Figure  1).  This  may  reflect  a  stable  share  of  shelter  costs  in  the 
household budget. Due to the large share of housing services in the consumer price index 
(17%) as well as the weak development in wages since the end of 2006 (Figure 2), service 
                                                 
1   The user cost of housing can be derived from the intertemporal maximization of utility function by households, 
whereby, the utility function comprises various goods and services, including housing services. However, it is 
somewhat uncomfortable for central bankers to include the real market interest rate in the measurement of 
inflation rate, as is the case of mortgage interest payment in the payments method. Further, the possibility of 
reselling  houses  makes  the  calculation  of  the  user  costs  of  housing  capital  more  complicated,  because  it 
involves the issue of the optimal choice of timing of reselling under the diversified tax system on capital gains. 
In addition, due to regulations and the different tax treatments for rental and owner-occupied houses, there is 
a selection bias in measuring the implicit rent of owner-occupied house. 
2  
BIS Review 96/2007 
 1
prices  have  moved  around  zero,  in  sharp  contrast  with  other  developed  economies  where 
they hover around 3-4%.3  
Asset price aspect: future price index or wealth price index 
3.  Housing  has  two  aspects  for  consumers;  it  renders  housing  services  like  other  durable 
goods, and at the same time, houses for rent or owner-occupied houses are held as assets. 
These  two  aspects  provide  us  with  an  interesting  insight  into  current  and  future  price 
indexes. 
 
4. Housing as an asset produces housing service for the future. Moreover, the fundamental 
price of housing is equal to the present value of future housing service stream. If we attach 
importance to the asset aspect of housing, it seems natural to ask whether we can extract a 
signal or guide to future price developments from the movement of asset prices. 
Alchian and Klein (1973) proposed the construction of an "intertemporal cost of living index", 
under the constant utility level, based on individuals' intertemporal optimization behavior, by 
using  the  data  on  all  tangible  and  non-tangible  assets  in  the  economy.  This  idea  of  an 
intertemporal  cost  of  living  index,  or  "wealth  price  index",  can  be  traced  back  to  I.  Fisher 
(1906). 
 
5.  Shibuya  (1992)  attempted  to  calculate  just  such  a  wealth  price  index.  He  named  it  the 
"dynamic equilibrium price index", based on the assumption that the economy moves along a 
balanced growth path (the "modified golden rule path"). After constructing the wealth price 
index as the weighted geometric mean of current product price inflation (GDP deflator) and 
future  price  changes  represented  by  aggregate  asset  price  of  the  national  wealth  in  the 
national accounts, he argued that the BOJ could have envisaged future inflation if the wealth 
price index had been employed in the mid-1980s, in addition to the conventional CPI (Figure 
3). 
Shiratsuka  (1999)  carried  out  the  Granger  causality  test  and  confirmed  the  result  of  the 
potential usefulness of the aggregate asset price index as an information variable, although 
he also reported that its usefulness depends on the sources of asset price changes and the 
macroeconomic environment. 
 
6. There are, however, a number of shortcomings with the dynamic equilibrium price index if 
we want to employ it as one of the important information variables in conducting monetary 
policy. 
First,  human  wealth  is  omitted  in  the  calculation  of  total  assets,  despite  the  fact  that,  in 
Japan, the total value of human capital is about three times larger than that of non-human 
capital (Iwata (1992)). 
Second, there is the problem of sizable observation errors with the aggregate asset price, as 
compared  with  the  CPI  or  the  GDP  deflator,  in  addition  to  the  two-year  delay  in  the 
availability of data. 
                                                 
3   The  weak  development  of  wages  in  recent  months  can  be  attributed  to  the  retirement  of  the  first  baby 
boomers, who number about 8 million and who are being replaced by young workers or reemployed as part-
time workers, public sector wage cuts introduced to consolidate the budget balance, and the restructuring at 
smaller  non-manufacturing  firms  with  low  productivity.  The  final  factor  is  related  to  the  distortion  of  relative 
wages,  which  Hayek  (1975)  described  as  "one  of  the  basic  elementary  connections  between  wages  and 
investment wholly overlooked in Keynesian economics". 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2007
Third,  the  wealth  price  index  is  constructed  based  on  two  assumptions,  namely,  that  the 
asset  price  is  equal  to  the  fundamental  price  on  a  balanced  growth  path,  and  that  the 
marginal  productivity  of  aggregate  asset  remains  constant,  disregarding  the  composition 
change  in  the  national  wealth.  If  these  two  assumptions  are  untenable,  then  the  index 
derived  may  fail  to  provide  useful  information  on  future  price  developments.  We  cannot 
escape from the identification problem associated with asset price bubbles. 
If we look at the calculated DEPI, we find that it is strongly influenced by movements in the 
price of land, because of the large weight of land value in the national wealth; it is about half 
of  national  wealth,  and  the  proportion  of  land  value  for  residential  use  is  about  four  times 
larger than the value of dwellings in 2005. 
Despite these shortcomings, it may be useful to carry out a model simulation of the balanced 
path  to  show  the  deviation  of  the  observed  DEPI  from  the  model  simulation  outcome. 
Furthermore, it seems to be important to observe directly the price of land, and examine the 
factors  and  sources  of  price  movements,  to  draw  useful  information  for  monetary  policy 
implementation. 
Land as collateral 
7. One of the important differences between housing and other durable goods is that the use 
of land is essential for producing housing services. In the case of Japan, the value of land 
accounts  for  a  larger  share  in  residential  property  and  the  national  wealth  than  in  other 
advanced economies. 
Land has been employed as the most important collateral for bank lending. It also constitutes 
one of the most popular properties for inheritance, due to the lower effective tax rate applied 
to land holdings than to other assets. 
 
8. Some economists have argued that the Japanese bank-dominated financial system was 
based on the "land standard" during the "high growth era", because of the importance of land 
as  collateral.  The  price  of  land  in  Japan  had  increased  persistently  in  the  period  from  the 
1950s to the bursting of the land-price bubble in the early 1990s, with a short interruption in 
the mid-1970s (Figure 4). The price of land has often deviated from the fundamental price, 
due to the lack of information, high transaction costs and the mistaken perception of land as 
an asset of ever-increasing value. 
The total land value became five times larger than nominal GDP at the peak of the bubble 
period  (Figure  5),  despite  the  fact  that  the  historical  average  of  the  ratio  is  about  2.  In 
addition,  the  insight  derived  from  the  neoclassical  growth  model,  including  land  as  a 
production factor, indicates a much lower ratio (Iwata and Hattori (2003)).4
Asset price bubble and option theory 
9. An asset price bubble will emerge through the financial accelerator mechanism based on 
various  frictions  and  the  incompleteness  on  the  financial  market,  combined  with  the 
excessive  provision  of  liquidity  and  the  euphoria  brought  about  by  expectations  of  higher 
                                                 
4   The  steady  state  ratio  of  total  land  value  to  nominal  GDP  can  be  expressed  as  the  product  of  the  time 
preference rate, the expected population growth rate and the share of land rent in national income. Given the 
values of 3% for the time preference, 1% growth rate for population and 5% land rent share, the steady state 
ratio is 2.5. Aging and a declining population suggest a much lower ratio, as compared with the high growth 
era (Iwata and Hattori (2003)). 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 3
growth. In addition, the mispricing of option values attached to land and mortgage loans may 
lead to an asset price bubble and aggravate the effect of an asset price bubble burst. 
 
10.  Land  itself  can  be  put  to  many  different  uses,  such  as  residential,  non-residential  and 
commercial  use.  Lax  zoning  regulation  creates  the  possibility  of  land  being  converted  to 
more intensive and profitable use. In this case, the price of land consists of the fundamental 
price and the option value of conversion to more profitable use. The option value resembles 
a convertible bond (Kanoh and Murase (1999)). If the option premium is overpriced under the 
perception of ever-rising land value, the option value for convertible use of land may give rise 
to accelerated land prices; it has in fact been observed that residential land prices follow the 
acceleration of commercial use land prices. The price of commercial land in Japan's major 
cities has risen more than 10% recently. 
 
11.  From  the  perspective  of  option  theory,  housing  loans  are  more  complicated  financial 
instruments  than  at  first  might  appear.  They  incorporate  call  options  in  the  case  of 
prepayment (to buy the asset), as well as put options in the case of bankruptcy (to sell the 
asset).5
Profs.  Pavlov  and  Wachter  (2006)  have  pointed  out  the  possibility  of  the  underpricing  of 
default  risk  in  all  non-recourse  asset-backed  mortgage  loans,  due  to  inappropriate  deposit 
insurance  schemes  and  the  asymmetry  of  information.  The  underpricing  of  default  risk  or 
distorted  put  option  values  may  lead  to  inflated  asset  prices  and  cause  far  deeper  asset 
market crashes. Moreover, default risk is easily underestimated against a backdrop of rising 
house prices. 
In addition, there is a risk that in the process of securitizing mortgage loans such as CDOs, 
the  default  risk  can  be  further  underpriced  by  rating  agencies  in  the  assessment  of 
correlation of default risks among the bundle of different mortgage loans. The use of mark-to-
model instead of mark-to-market in complex structured products may also lead to the wide-
scale underpricing. 
Inflation and asset price bubble 
12. On the relationship between the inflation rate and asset prices, the above-trend rise in 
land  value  relative  to  nominal  GDP  indicated  clearly  the  emergence  of  a  bubble  after 
1987. The weak corporate governance of borrowing firms, coupled with a weakening of the 
monitoring  function  of main  banks  which  were  relying  on  land  as  collateral,  gave  rise  to a 
positive association of asset price rise with higher leverage ratio. 
Yet at that time, core CPI (excluding fresh food) was close to zero. This is partly due to the 
sharp appreciation of the yen rate after the Plaza Accord in 1985, coupled with the oil price 
decline  (figure  6).  Further,  the  October  crash  in  1987  reinforced  the  need  for  international 
cooperation on the provision of liquidity for Japan as the largest creditor country. 
13. On the excessive provision of liquidity, we can say that the sustained deviation of actual 
real  money  stock  from  the  equilibrium  real  money  stock  (real  money  gap)  after  the  mid-
1980s, created the circumstances where the asset price bubble could easily emerge (Iwata 
(2006)). 
                                                 
5   The  housing  loans  provided  by  the  Public  Housing  Finance  Corporation  (PHFC)  suffered  losses  due  to 
massive  prepayment  during  the  periods  of  declining  interest  rates.  Iwata  and  Hattori  (1999)  estimated 
prepayment  costs  amounting  to  ¥215  billion,  based  on  the  model  of  the  call  option  premium  attached  to 
housing loans provided by the PHFC. Now the risk of prepayment is borne by investors, instead of taxpayers, 
through securitizing the housing loan by the new corporation after the abolition of the PHFC. 
4 
 BIS Review 96/2007
In addition, real estate-related loans by unsupervised non-banks (the special housing finance 
companies) increased massively. It seems noteworthy that the policy measure limiting real 
estate-related loans in 1990 ultimately put an end to the land price bubble. 
 
14. At this Jackson Hole conference in 1999, Chairman Bernanke and Prof. Gertler argued 
that  the  adoption  of  a  "flexible  inflation  targeting"  policy  may  have  prevented  both  the 
emergence of the asset price bubble at an early stage and the financial instability at a later 
stage,  even  though  the  monetary  policy  had  not  directly  targeted  asset  prices.  Former 
Deputy Governor Yamaguchi (1999) commented on their paper, saying that, "I don't see how 
a central bank can increase interest to 8 or 10% when we don't have inflation at all". 
Giavazzi and Mishkin (2006) also pointed out that, "the serious mistake that a central bank 
makes is not failing to stop a bubble, but is rather not responding fast enough after a bubble 
bursts".6
 
15. I feel inclined towards the indirect approach to asset prices; namely that monetary policy 
should be oriented toward enhancing price stability and smoothing fluctuations in GDP gap, 
while refraining from targeting asset prices directly, given the limited knowledge to correctly 
detect fundamental asset prices. 
There  are  a  number  of  hurdles  before  a  direct  or  preemptive  approach  can  be  adopted. 
These include the identification of a bubble, serious macroeconomic consequences (such as 
a severe financial crisis after the bubble bursts), the adequacy of using interest rate policy to 
deflate  the  bubble,  and  public  support.  However,  I  am  not  yet  fully  convinced  by  the 
argument  that  all  the  problems  Japan  faced  at  that  time  would  have  been  solved  by  the 
adoption of a flexible inflation targeting policy alone. 
Lessons from the asset price bubble of the 1980s 
16. Now let me draw several lessons from the boom and bust of asset prices in the latter half 
of the 1980s. 
First, we should give priority to price stability as a policy objective over the apprehension of 
exchange rate fluctuations and the external imbalance. At that time, Japan's current account 
surplus, coupled with the U.S. deficit, was perceived to be one of the major macro-economic 
policy issues, although the theoretical underpinning for rectifying the external imbalance was 
not  solid  enough.7  Moreover,  a  proposal  on  targeting  the  exchange  rate  was  seriously 
debated in an attempt to solve the current account imbalance.8
 
                                                 
6   Giavazzi and Mishkin further mentioned, as the second lesson, the procrastination on the part of the Japanese 
government in restoring the health of the financial system after the bubble burst. 
Iwata (1991) carried out a simulation exercise on the future development of the U.S.-Japan external imbalance 
based  on  the  overlapping  generations  model  in  an  open  economy.  The  simulation  results  showed  the 
possibility of long-sustained imbalance until the mid-2020s, mainly reflecting economic fundamentals such as 
the difference between the two countries in saving ratio, productivity and population growth rate. 
7  
8   According to Prof. Taylor (2007), the exchange rate policy of the U.S. government is today guided by several 
principles: (1) it must be supported by sound domestic policies, (2) it should rely on markets with a minimum of 
intervention, (3) it should minimize verbal intervention, (4) there is a need for a financial diplomacy strategy, 
and (5) it should take due account of international political and security issues. These principles, notably the 
second  principle,  seem  to  be  different  from  the  exchange  rate  targeting  proposal.  Prof.  McCallum  (2007) 
regards  the  separation  by  government  of  exchange  rate  policy  and  monetary  policy  as  an  anachronism, 
because of the linkage of exchange rate and interest rates within the general equilibrium framework. 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 5
17. Second, we should put emphasis on the need to deal with the euphoria brought about by 
higher expected growth and the sharp drop in "finance premium" during the bubble period. 
The  increasing  collateral  value  compressed  the  finance  premium  for  real  estate  and 
corporate borrowing. The aggressive risk-taking was facilitated by financial deregulation and 
the higher expected growth rate under price stability, in part due to mistaken perceptions of 
future technological progress (Figure 7). 
 
18. Today, we see a similar problem with low term- and risk premia, which constitute one of 
the causes of the "conundrum of global low long-term interest rates". We observe that the 
real  long-term  interest  rate  among  major  advanced  economies  has  tended  recently  to 
converge at around 2% (Figure 8). 
Given the low term- and risk premia across various financial markets, the low real long-term 
rate implies that any country which has higher expected growth rate, significantly above 2%, 
is liable to register the acceleration of asset prices.9
 
19.  Third,  it  may  be  useful  to  extract  a  signal  or  guide  to  future  price  developments  from 
asset price changes by examining the factors and the sources of asset bubbles, to the extent 
that there exist various distortions and imperfections in financial markets. Although it may be 
desirable  to  have  an  intertemporal  cost  of  living  index,  this  might  not  help  us  in  the  near 
future. It is possible instead to show the likely consequence of deviation of asset price from 
the historical trend or the simulated fundamental price based on models. It is interesting to 
note that the OECD (2005, 2006) identified the deviation of the actual rent-to-price ratio from 
the fundamental ratio based on the long-term historical average ratio, employing the inverse 
of user cost as a proxy to the price-to-rent ratio, as the user cost equates the expected cost 
of owning a house with the cost of renting. Further, the OECD estimated the nearing of a 
peak to real house prices, if interest rates were to rise further.10
 
20. Fourth, prudential policy is required in order to avoid the financial instability arising from a 
boom and bust in asset prices. Such policy can contribute to preventing excessive risk-taking 
by financial institutions; it may be appropriate to strengthen the monitoring of unsupervised 
non-banks.  In  the  case  of  sub-prime  loans  in  the  U.S.,  more  than  half  of  the  loans  were 
provided by unsupervised mortgage companies. 
The stress test on the  above-trend rise in land prices and the decline to the trend can be 
used  to  indicate  future  damage  to  the  financial  system.  The  credit  risk  was  estimated  to 
amount to about ¥22.8 trillion at the end of March 1990 under the assumption of a bursting 
bubble  and  a  deterioration  in  the  credit  situation  of  the  related  industries  (Shimizu  and 
Shiratsuka (2000)). The publication of "Financial System Report" may serve to send warning 
signals on excessive risk-taking by financial institutions. 
                                                 
9   An alternative explanation of the conundrum attributes it to the "global saving glut". The real long-term interest 
rate  largely  reflects  the  global  saving-investment  balance.  This  begs  the  following  question;  to  what  extent 
does the saving-investment balance deviate from the equilibrium balance? For instance, corporate managers 
in  advanced  economies  behave  rather  cautiously  on  the  expansion  of  business  investment  despite  ample 
corporate savings. China seems to expand fixed investment in an excessive manner, yet domestic savings 
exceeds domestic investment. In both cases it seems difficult to identify the degree of excess saving. 
10  On the relationship between real economic activity and asset prices, there is a tendency for the boom and 
bust in business fixed investment to be associated with boom and bust in land prices. Actually the elasticity of 
substitution of capital for land is greater than one in postwar Japan. Yet the movements in land prices explain 
little in the movements of business fixed investment (Kiyotaki and West (2004)). 
6 
 BIS Review 96/2007
Conclusion 
21. Given the asset price boom and bust in the latter half of the 1980s, and the subsequent 
persistent deflation after 1998, the "new policy framework for the conduct of monetary policy" 
was announced in March 2006. Aside from the first perspective, which examines the likely 
development  within  forecast  period,  the  new  policy  framework  incorporated  as  a  second 
perspective an examination of potential risks beyond the forecast period. Today, we observe 
that land prices have bottomed out with the significant rise in the price of commercial land, 
while the core CPI hovers around zero against a background of rising utilization ratio and a 
tightening of labor market conditions. We must recall that behind the aggressive risk-taking in 
the  latter half  of  the  1980s  there  was  the  market  perception  of  long-sustained low interest 
rates  for  the  future  under  price  stability.  It  may  be  useful  to  carry  out  an  exercise  to 
demonstrate  the  consequences  of  long-sustained  low  interest  rates  and  the  financial 
imbalance on the future development of economic activity and prices. This may further clarify 
the role and merits of the two perspectives in our new policy framework. 
References 
[1] Alchian, A., and B. Klein, "On a Correct Measure of Inflation," Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, February 1973, pp. 173-191. 
[2]  Bernanke,  B.,  and  M.  Gertler,  "Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Price  Volatility,"  Economic 
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Fourth Quarter, 1999. 
[3] Eiglsperger, M., "The Treatment of Owner-Occupied Housing in the Harmonized Index of 
Consumer Prices," ifc Bulletin, No. 24, August 2006, pp. 68-79. 
[4] Fisher, I., "Nature of Capital and Income," New York, 1906. 
[5] Giavazzi, F., and F. Mishkin, "An Evaluation of Swedish Monetary Policy between 1995 
and 2005," Report published by the Riksdag (Swedish parliament) Committee on Finance, 
2006. 
[6] Girouard, N., M. Kennedy, P. Noord and C. Andre, "Recent House Price Developments: 
The Role of Fundamentals," Economics Department Working Papers No. 475, OECD, 2006. 
[7] Hayek, F. A., "Full Employment at Any Price?" The Institute of Economic Affairs, 1975. 
[8]  Iwata,  K.,  "Budgetary  Balance,  Aging,  and  External  Balance:  The  Future  of  the  United 
States-Japan  External  Imbalance,"  Journal  of  the  Japanese  and  International  Economies, 
Vol. 5, 1991, pp. 473-497. 
[9] Iwata, K, "Stock Economy and the Tax System," (ed.) Yukio Noguchi, Economic Analysis 
of Stock Economy, Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha, 1992 (in Japanese). 
[10] Iwata, K., "The Role of Money and Monetary Policy in Japan," Remarks at the Fourth 
ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, November 10, 2006. 
[11] Iwata, K., and T. Hattori, "Prepayment and the Call Option Premium," Quarterly Journal 
of Housing and Land Economies, No. 32, 1999, pp.10-21 (in Japanese). 
[12]  Iwata,  K.,  and  T.  Hattori,  "Fewer  Children,  Aging  and  Land  Prices  Prepayment," 
Quarterly Journal of Housing and Land Economies, Vol. 50, 2003, pp. 2-7 (in Japanese). 
[13] Kanoh, S. and H. Murase, "On Land Price Formation: Bubble vs. Option," The Japanese 
Economic Review, Vol. 50, No. 2, 1999, pp. 212-226. 
[14]  Kiyotaki,  N.,  and  K.  West,  "Land  Prices  and  Business  Fixed  Investments  in  Japan," 
NBER Working Papers No. 10909, 2004. 
[15] McCallum, B., "Monetary Policy in East Asia: The Case of Singapore," IMES Discussion 
Paper Series, No. 2007-E-10, Bank of Japan, 2007. 
BIS Review 96/2007 
 7
[16]  Noord,  P.,  "Are  House  Prices  Nearing  a  Peak?  A  Probit  Analysis  for  17  OECD 
Countries," Economics Department Working Papers No. 488, OECD, 2006. 
[17] Pavlov, A., and S. Wachter, "The Inevitability of Marketwide Underpricing of Mortgage 
Default Risk," Real Estate Economics, Vol. 34, No. 4, pp. 479-496, 2006. 
[18] Shibuya, H., "Dynamic Equilibrium Price Index: Asset Price and Inflation," BOJ Monetary 
and Economic Studies, Vol. 10, No. 1, February 1992, pp. 95-109. 
[19] Shimizu, T., and S. Shiratsuka, "The Credit Risk of Japanese Banks during the Bubble 
Period: A Pilot Study of Macro Stress Simulation," IMES Discussion Paper Series, No. 2000-
E-31, Bank of Japan, 2000. 
[20]  Shiratsuka,  S.,  "Asset  Price  Fluctuation  and  Price  Indices,"  Monetary  and  Economic 
Studies, Vol. 17, No. 3, December 1999, pp. 103-128. 
[21] Taylor, J., "Global Financial Warriors," Norton, 2007. 
[22] Yamaguchi, Y., "Asset Price and Monetary Policy: Japan's Experience," Remarks at a 
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve of Kansas City in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
August 26-28, 1999. 
 8 
 BIS Review 96/2007
   9
BIS Review 96/2007 
    10 
 BIS Review 96/2007
   BIS Review 96/2007 
 11
 12 
 BIS Review 96/2007
