Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – changing risk management paradigm – 
perspective of the regulator 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the ACCA Conference 
“CFOs: The Opportunities and Challenges Ahead”, Karachi, 13 March 2007. 
 A paradigm shift has taken place in the banking sector of Pakistan in recent years. Today, the sector is 
relatively more robust, market based and highly profitable than it was ever before. The new paradigm 
has  emerged  largely  as  a  result  of  the  flexible  monetary  management,  adoption  of  market  oriented 
banking  sector  policies,  transfer  of  ownership  both  in  private  and  foreign  hands,  clean  up  and 
resolution of banks’ loan portfolios, and strengthening of regulatory and supervisory standards. In this 
session, I will discuss the (i) overall risks Pakistani banks face as a result of the changing economic 
and banking paradigm, (ii) identify the role bank regulations and supervision play in risk management, 
(iii)  share  perspectives  on  the  key  risks  facing  Pakistani  banks  and  briefly  touch  on  the  emerging 
trends, and (iv) highlight central bank and banking industry’s initiatives to strengthen the banks and 
system-wide risk management.  
Emerging challenges and risks from changing paradigm 
Most critical among this is recognition:  
• 
that  Pakistani  banks 
like  other  emerging  economies  have  benefited 
First, 
from 
macroeconomic  stability  and  resilience  of  the  economy,  there  is  ample  evidence  that 
emerging  economies,  including  Pakistan,  are  more  significantly  prone  and  exposed  to 
shocks than developed countries.  
Second,  Pakistani  banks  are  today  faced  with  new  forms  of  risks  which  have  altered  the 
nature and type of risk they are exposed to – aside from standard corporate assets whose 
credit  risks  is  changing  with  the  size  and  complexities  of  businesses,  banks  are  now 
engaging  in  diverse  businesses  and  sectors  and  are  now  extending  their  exposure  to 
household sector and growth in bank trading books has increased exposure to market risk – 
a recent phenomena in Pakistan. Concurrently, banks’ overall risk profile is also affected by 
the  complex  interdependencies  now  emerging  because  of  cross  ownership  of  financial 
institutions and corporate sector. 
Third, that enhanced risk exposures can, however, be well managed given that today world 
is  more  informed  about  what  drives  exogenous  and  endogenous  shocks  and  how  to 
effectively deal with them through improved measurement, management and mitigation of a 
wide array of risks i.e. macroeconomic risks, credit risk, liquidity risk, market risks, solvency 
risks and operational risks. 
Fourth, bulk of banks now being under private ownership can no longer count on taxpayer 
funds to rescue them and recognition that uncompetitive institutions have to be prepared to 
exit or to fast restructure.  
   Existing regulatory and supervisory framework – principles and approaches 
As a regulator, SBP has established a comprehensive and well balanced regulatory and supervisory 
system  to  inculcate  a  culture  of  sound  risk  management  within  banks.  Simultaneously  SBP’s 
capacities have been enhanced to effectively regulate and supervise banks and assess system wide 
risks,  both  on  a  quarterly  and  annual  basis.  Generally,  banking  regulations  have  been  designed 
keeping  in  perspective  Pakistan’s  economic  and  political  realities,  prevailing  banking  practices,  and 
environment for legal recourse and property registry systems all of which constitute integral elements 
of  the  risk  management  infrastructure.  Regulatory  framework  offers  guidance  on  risk  measurement 
and  management  and  its  tools.  After  being  overhauled  in  2004,  the  regulatory  framework  currently 
enforced  has  a  good  blend  of  conservatism  and  prescription  while  allowing  for  flexibility  and 
pragmatism  to  relax  exposures  when  banks  have  developed  effective  capacities  and  systems  to 
mitigate risks.  
BIS Review 38/2007 
 1
The main elements of regulatory framework are to;  
(i) 
Encourage  establishment  of  well  capitalized  banks  –  all  banks  are  expected  to  meet  the 
minimum  capital  requirements  of  $100  million  by  2009.  The  requirement  for  capital  has 
facilitated gradual consolidation and emergence of stronger banks, while allowing banks to 
take  greater  risk  exposures  to  the  extent  that  a  set  of  regulations  are  linked  to  the  equity 
base of banks. Currently, 8 banks are fully complying with these requirements and others are 
striving to accelerate compliance, 
Encourage  banks  to  contain  risk  exposures.  For  instance,  both  the  individual  or  group 
exposure  is  linked  to  borrowers’  capacity  as  well  as  bank’s  equity  base.  Similarly,  banks 
have to contain their trading books through a set of regulations that define the exposure to 
investment and lending in stock market (Prudential Regulation R-6), 
While  encouraging  sector  diversification  through  a  set  of  development  oriented  prudential 
regulations  for  agriculture,  small  and  medium  enterprises  and  microfinance  etc.,  the 
regulations  are  by  and  large  advocating  better  risk  management  and  controls  to  help 
diversify and extend bank’s outreach,  
Encourage  financial  stability  through  guidelines  on  corporate  governance,  anti-money 
laundering,  risk  management, 
internal  controls,  stress  testing,  on  country  risk 
management, information technology security etc, 
Encourage  financial  innovation  while  keeping  in  perspective  bank’s  capacity  to  manage 
risks.  Keeping  in  view  the  role  derivatives  play  in  risk  management,  SBP  formulated 
Financial  Derivatives  Business  Regulation  (FDBR  2004).  SBP  grants  Authorized 
Derivative Dealer (ADD) status to banks that has been assessed to have adequate systems 
and  expertise  to  conduct  derivatives  business.  Banks  which  are  now  allowed  to  sell 
derivatives not only to hedge for their customers’ interest rate and foreign exchange risks, 
but take on for the management of the risks in their own books, and  
Enhancement of Disclosure requirements:  The SBP  in  collaboration with  the  ICAP and 
the commercial banks has facilitated adoption of International Accounting standards (IAS) by 
the banks. In 2006, SBP revised the reporting formats for banks to incorporate the significant 
regulatory  developments  as  well  as  modifications  in  the  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards (IFRS). With these changes, the quality of disclosure in the Annual Accounts of 
Pakistani banks has become at par with international best practices. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
To ensure effective enforcement of regulations, besides day to day oversight, SBP has substantially 
enhanced  its  on-site  inspection  and  off-site  surveillance  capacity.  Regular  onsite  inspections  of  all 
financial  institution  provide  an  assessment  of  FIs/banks  overall  financial  condition,  evaluate  its 
management and Board performance and check compliance with legal and regulatory requirements.  
Keeping  in  view  the  developments  taking  place  in  the  financial  sector,  increase  in  its  size  and 
complexity  and  introduction  of  new  and  innovative  financial  products,  State  Bank  inspection  is  also 
updating its tools and methodologies. We have already realized that going forward specialized skills 
will  be  required  to  assess  and  evaluate  areas  like  consumer  financing,  Islamic  Banking,  treasury, 
foreign  exchange,  information  technology  etc.  We  have  also  identified  other  critical  areas  for  our 
supervisory focus like Basel II, Anti Money Laundering, internal risk models etc. and capacity building 
initiatives are being taken in these areas.  
In  line  with  practices  of  regulators,  SBP  has  introduced  IRAF  (Institution  Risk  Assessment 
Framework).  It  offers  a  composite  rating  drawing  from  offsite  and  onsite  feedback,  findings  of 
management of banks on board, to establish their rating regarding their compliance with standards, 
codes and guidelines issued by SBP. IRAF once fully operational will make the supervisory process an 
all-inclusive  and  comprehensive  exercise  which  includes  information  from  SBP,  Board  and 
Management as well as market vigilance regarding the health of banks.  
Perspective on key risks facing Pakistani banks 
Like all other regulators, SBP is encouraging banks to strengthen their risk assessment capability and 
testing  their  capacity  to  withstand  shocks  under  different  scenarios.  SBP  offers  its  perspective  on 
system  wide  risks  publicly  through  its  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Report  and  Quarterly  Banking 
Surveillance Reports. The findings of these reports confirm that thus far banks risks are diversified and 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2007
managed in line with the banking regulations. An analysis of trends in different types of risk would offer 
better appreciation and perspective on changes in banks’ risk profile:  
Credit risk: In Pakistani banks, credit operations remain the main source of banks income and have 
been supported by strong economic activity. Given its size, credit operations are a primary source of 
risk.  Supported  by  growth  in  businesses  and  gradual  improvement  in  internal  credit  reviews,  on 
balance credit risk have been well managed. The net NPLs to net loan ratio have declined in the last 
few years and fell to 1.8% by September 2006.  
In  recent  years,  the  macroeconomic  environment  has  been  supportive  of  the  growth  of  banking 
systems  but  the  growing  fiscal  imbalance  and  the  external  imbalances  have  enhanced  domestic 
demand pressures. While the vulnerabilities of banking system have been well managed, the shocks 
arising from external sources can be a cause of concern. Exposure to perceived risks arise from the (i) 
structural  problems  facing  the  real  sector  whose  resolution  is  critical  to  maintain  the  momentum  in 
credit  operations,  and  (ii)  high  domestic  asset  prices  given  high  interest  rates,  equity  prices  and 
property prices.  
Underlying the credit growth is altering risk exposures which need to be well tracked to ensure their 
effective  risk  management.  There  is  a  broader  concern  that  the  growing  domestic  demand  have 
impact on  bank  asset  quality  and  the  growing exposure of  household sector  to  consumer  financing 
could  have  their  attendant  risks.  Consumer  finance  has  risen  from  2.4%  in  2002  to  14.3%  by 
September  2006  and  number  of  borrowers  of  consumer  finance  from  0.25  million  to  2.6  million, 
respectively.  
Thus  far  credit  risks  on  the  banking  books  associated  with  some  assets  has  been  limited.  For 
instance,  the  housing  finance  is  barely  $1  billion  (or  2.3%  of  total  loan  outstanding)  and  mortgage 
business non-existent.  
Market risk: Banks market risk exposure largely stems from the interest rate risk as the equity price 
and exchange rate risks are not substantial given their exposure in balance sheet is limited. Interest 
rate  risk  emanates  from  movements  in  interest  rates,  which  are  determined  both  by  the  liquidity 
available and its response to short term rates and the future expectations of economy, the longer term 
yield curve. Interest rates in Pakistan have remained volatile in line with demand pressures during the 
past few years. After the 9/11, initially growth in liquidity resulted in fall in interest rates and by August 
2003 the interest rates reached lowest levels and the differential between the interest rates on Rupee 
and  Dollar  squeezed.  Low  interest  rates  added  to  the  revaluation  gains  especially  for  those  banks 
which  were  holding  longer  term  fixed  investment  securities  and  carrying  positive  duration  GAP. 
Subsequently, interest rates rose with the building up of inflationary pressures. Consequently, banks 
with significant interest rate exposures had to bear the risks related to their positions. The impact of 
these trends was manageable as banks were able to hedge their positions in response to the SBP 
clear monetary policy signals.  
To evolve better risk management, SBP has allowed derivatives to hedge the open positions of the 
banks. With the increased knowledge, and realizing the importance of managing the interest rate risks, 
large banks have established systems and models to better assess and manage interest rate risks. 
Banks use different quantitative techniques, like VaR models, to assess the risk of loss focusing on tail 
events.  Under  the  guidance  of  SBP,  they  recognize  the  duration  of  their  assets  and  liabilities  and 
conduct appropriate sensitivity analysis. With these analytical tools, banks have better understanding 
of their interest rate risk profile and accordingly better management of such risk exposures. However, 
banks need to move to more broad based and refined risk management systems so as to capture the 
right  risks  at  right  time.  Independently,  SBP  reviews  market  risk  profile  and  the  mismatches  in  the 
assets and liabilities of banks, which generally remain with in the acceptable limits.  
Liquidity risk: Banks need to be equipped to deal with the changing monetary stance which shapes 
the overall liquidity trends and the FIs/banks own transactional requirements and repayment of short-
term  borrowings.  In  the  modern  financial  markets,  banks  have  to  manage  their  liquidity  through 
money-market operations which offer a range of options and at any given point has ready providers 
and buyers of liquidity. In case of temporary liquidity squeeze banks can resort to discount window 
operation, and in situation where it threatens bank solvency they can resort to the lender of the last 
resort facility.  
As  highlighted  above,  from  1999-2003  banks  liquidity  position  was  comfortable  supported  by  easy 
monetary policy. With the growing monetary tightening the central bank has focused on strengthening 
its  capacities  for  liquidity  forecasting  and  management  and  conducted  effective  OMOs  to  ease  or 
BIS Review 38/2007 
 3
tighten liquidity pressures. In general banks have contained their liquidity risks, but liquidity position of 
banks has  been  tightened  as  evident from  rising  loans  to  deposits  ratio at  73.2%  with  some  banks 
reporting above these averages. Liquidity risks can, however, be effectively managed if banks address 
the fundamental problem of maturity mismatches stemming largely because of bank’s unwillingness to 
extend their deposit tenor which has limited bank’s capacity to lend long too.  
Operational  risk:  Growth  in  business  did  stress  the  individual  and  system  wide  financial 
infrastructure.  However,  industry  is  launching  initiatives  to  strengthen  its  operational  capacities  by 
augmenting its systems and processes & adapting information technology solution and outsourcing. 
Growing wave of mergers and acquisitions leading to conforming business practices have introduced 
fresh  complexity  in  the  operational  processes  and  procedures  of  the  financial  institutions.  Besides, 
introduction of new risk management processes and products and hedging strategies, which although 
reduce  credit  and  market  risk  but  may  create  additional  operational  risks,  which  are  on  the  rising 
trends. SBP is encouraging banks to adopt best practices to manage their operational risks and has 
issued guidelines on the areas of Business Continuity Plan, Internal Control, and IT Security.  
Operational risk was not effectively recognized and captured under the Basel I framework and as such 
there was no capital charge specifically prescribed for operational risk. Revised Basel Capital Accord 
(called Basel II), recognizes and defines the operational risks and its dimension and has prescribed 
capital charge for it to be calculated based on the gross income of the bank. Under Basic Indicator 
approach (BIA),  capital  charge  for operational risk  is  a  fixed  percentage of  average  positive  annual 
gross income of the bank over the past three years. Whereas, under the standardized approach all the 
business activities of the banks will be divided into eight business lines: corporate finance, trading & 
sales,  retail  banking,  commercial  banking,  payment  &  settlement,  agency  services,  asset 
management,  and  retail  brokerage.  The  capital  charge  for  each  business  line  is  based  on  gross 
income from that line, and ranges from 12% to 18% of the average gross income of last three years  
Despite increasing attention to operational risk, little systematic information exists on the extent and 
impact  of  operational  risk  as  the  losses  can  result  from  a  complex  confluence  of  events,  making  it 
difficult to predict or model contingencies. The biggest challenge for Pakistani banks is the availability 
of relevant and accurate data within the affordable cost to develop robust and solid operational risk 
measurement  systems  for  quantification  of  expected  and  unexpected  losses  resulting  from  people, 
systems, internal process, procedures and external events. 
Major initiatives underway to strengthen risk management of banking industry 
Besides  being  a  regulatory  tool  for  capital  adequacy,  the  new  Basel  II  accord  encompasses  a 
comprehensive  risk  management  system.  The  basic  philosophy  that  the  capital  should  be 
commensurate  with  the  level  of  risks  has  a  lot  of  merit.  There  is  a  direct  incentive  to  be  more 
discerning  in  identifying  risk  differentials  among  a  set  of  opportunities  and  going  about  managing 
these risks in a prudent manner. Efficient utilization of capital is the prime goal of Pillar I (MCR) of the 
accord. Once the Basel framework is in place, banks with superior risk management skills would be 
able to get a competitive advantage over their counterparts.  
Recognizing  this,  Pakistan’s  roadmap  for  implementation  of  Basel  II  Accord  advocates  that  banks 
adopt  the  standardized  approach  from  January  2008  –  progress  on  this  front  varies  from  bank  to 
banks. Bank’s ability to move towards Basel II would require them to address a number of challenges. 
There is, among others, need for;  
(i) 
Collective  action  to  encourage  corporate  sector  to  become  credit  rated;  as  in  absence  of 
recognized  credit  rating  of  borrowers,  banks  would  end  up  allocating  more  capital  than 
warranted and this would render them uncompetitive,  
Development of allied and support infrastructure that facilitates the process e.g. the internal 
control  and  IT  systems  within  the  banks  is  absolutely  imperative  if  the  framework  is  to 
succeed, 
Presently the Basel II framework requires banks to apply a capital charge of 15% of average 
positive gross income of last three years for operational risk (under BIA) there is a need to 
clearly distinguish between a strong versus weak operational risk environment,  
Availability of historical data, for the purpose of carrying out quantitative analysis, and  
Intensive capacity building of industry and SBP.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2007
To  discuss  these  and other challenges  SBP  has  set  up  a  working  group  to  first  assess  the  current 
state of preparedness of the industry on a standard and agreed template for Basel II compliance and 
identify  joint  collaborative  action  to  facilitate  smooth  transition.  Developing  rating  industry  and 
encouraging entry of raters which have been identified under Basel Accord-II would be critical for an 
effective  implementation  of  Basel  II  for  Pakistani  Banks.  SBP  would  have  to  draw  its  own 
understanding  and  linkages  with  the  raters  to  ensure  it  is  applying  standards  for  weighing  risks 
effectively across industry.  
SBP  is  in  the  process  of  developing  a  “Banking  Supervision  Risk  Assessment  Model”  (BSRA) 
which will help SBP to better quantify the credit and market risks of the individual banks in terms of 
“Value at Risk” and forecast banks’ position under various stress scenarios on a quarterly basis. BSRA 
model  would  use  information  from  the  Data  warehouse  (data  received  through  Reporting  Chart  of 
Accounts (ROCA)) for market risk and electronic Credit Information Bureau (eCIB) for credit risk. For 
operational  risk,  key  risk  indicators  (e.g.  frauds,  systems  breakdown  etc)  would  be  identified  and 
captured  and  processing  would  be  carried  out  after  a  sufficient  database  is  maintained.  Once  fully 
implemented  and  live,  the  risk  assessment  model  will  help  Banking  Supervision  Department  to 
strengthen its surveillance system through monitoring and measuring the risk profiles of the individual 
banks, even under stressed scenarios. The model will also help BSD to understand and monitor the 
credit  and  market  risk  appetite  of  the  individual  banks  and  proactively  take  corrective  measures,  if 
required. 
Conclusion 
The changing economic and banking paradigm has increased the complexities and risk facing banks. 
While the industry has been bracing up to face the changing risk paradigms which have included not 
only  enhanced  exposures  to  corporate  sector  but  now  banks  are  extending  their  outreach  to 
household  sector,  SME  and  microfinance  whose  exposures  need  to  be  better  managed  through 
effective risk management. SBP has adopted sound regulations and proactive supervision to ensure 
effective  surveillance  of  banks  and  is  advising  banks  to  manage  their  risks  prudently.  Despite  the 
growth  and  diversity  in  businesses  and  emerging  macroeconomic  pressures,  banking  system  has 
shown a degree of resilience. Results from latest stress tests for all Banks for Third Quarter of 2006 
while  applying  different  credit  and  market  shocks  to  calibrate  its  impact  on  solvency  i.e.  the  capital 
adequacy ratio of the banks indicates that after shock CAR of all banks remain above 11%. Like in 
previous years, credit risk weight remains high and is assigned bulk of the capital, while market risk is 
confined to largely interest rate risk with equity risk now being an emerging phenomenon. The liquidity 
shocks do reflect a decline in liquidity coverage ratio of varying order among different institutions – a 
5-10% decline in the liquid liabilities would lower liquidity coverage ratio by 3-7%.  
In  the  short  term,  while  banks  would  have  to  continue  effective  risk  management  through  better 
assessment  of  credit  and  market  risks,  but  going  forward  in  anticipation  of  Basel  –II  Accord,  more 
fundamental  changes  in  approaches  and  methodologies  of  both  individual  categories  of  risk  is 
required  and  extending  its  reach  to  operational  risk  which  is  currently  not  accounted  for.  SBP  will 
continue  with  its  close  consultations  with  the  banking  industry  to  get  aligned  with  the  international 
regulatory standards and solve the challenges arising out of these standards jointly with the industry in 
a congenial environment.  
BIS Review 38/2007 
 5
