Lim Hng Kiang: Trade links and business opportunities for Singapore 
Congratulatory  remarks  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Deputy  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore  and  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry,  at  the  Daiwa  Securities  Group  35th  Anniversary, 
Singapore, 25 June 2007. 
 Your Excellency Mr Takaaki Kojima, Ambassador of Japan to Singapore, 
Mr. Shigehara Suzuki, President & CEO Daiwa Securities Group Inc., 
Mr. Shin Yoshidome, President Daiwa Securities SMBC, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Good Evening, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  evening  for  the  joyous  occasion  of  Daiwa  Securities  Group’s  35th 
anniversary in Singapore. This marks yet another important milestone for Daiwa, and your continued 
commitment to Singapore.  
Daiwa’s growth story in Singapore 
Set  up  in  1972,  Daiwa  has  grown  from  strength  to  strength  over  the  years.  From  the  early 
collaboration in 1971 with Development Bank of Singapore to issue the first Asian Dollar Bond, Daiwa 
has  over  the  years  expanded  to  provide  a  full  spectrum  of  financial  services.  Today,  all  of  Daiwa’s 
major  business  units  are  represented  in  Singapore,  covering  securities  brokerage,  investment 
banking, asset management and more recently, wealth management as well.  
Singapore  has  also  grown  to  become  a  key  node  in  Daiwa’s  overseas  network,  managing  your 
business operations in South Asia & Oceania.  
I am encouraged to hear that on the occasion of Daiwa’s 35th anniversary celebrations, you have also 
announced  plans  to  boost  activities  in  Singapore  and  the  region.  I  understand  these  new  activities 
include M&A and private equity investments. These are all very positive developments and you will be 
joining a vibrant community of financial institutions here in Singapore. 
Japan and the region’s recovery and growth 
Daiwa’s increased focus in South Asia attests to the dynamism of the region. Not only has the region 
shown  resilience,  it  is  now  powering  ahead.  Led  by  ASEAN  economies  such  as  Vietnam,  which  is 
surging ahead strongly, India, Pakistan and the Middle East too are beckoning out to investors with 
their growth prospects.  
Trade and investments within the Asian region, and between Asia and the Middle East continues to 
grow. Notably, Japanese foreign direct investments into ASEAN has been increasing steadily again 
since 2003. In fact, it has reached more than US$6.4 billion1 which even outpaced that into China in 
2006.  
The  Japanese  economy  too,  continues  to  impress.  Economic  conditions  in  Japan  have  improved 
remarkably and the data released suggests a continued and sustained growth. Japanese corporates 
are  raking  in  record  profits  and  capital  investments  too  are  surging  ahead.  They  have  once  again 
begun to spread their wings overseas. Supporting these corporates, financial institutions like Daiwa 
too have benefited from this increased business activities. 
                                                      
1   Sources: Prepared by JETRO from Ministry of Finance Balance of Payments Statistics and Bank of Japan foreign exchange 
rates. 
BIS Review 72/2007 
 1
Partner to growth 
Where  does  Singapore  fit  into  this  climate  of  abundant  growth  opportunities?  Located  right  at  the 
confluence  of  trade  links  and  business  opportunities,  Singapore  has  become  a  valuable  partner  to 
corporates  and  financial  institutions  like  Daiwa.  With  more  than  2,500  Indian  companies,  2,300 
Chinese  companies,  and  2,000  Australian  and  New  Zealand  companies  in  Singapore,  corporates 
have made Singapore their location of choice to tap into this growth.  
However, Singapore’s value transcends our physical proximity to  the fastest growing regions of the 
world. Indeed, Daiwa’s extensive commitments and new activities in Singapore is the best testament 
of our successful efforts to create the best possible business environment. It highlights recognition of 
our  stable  and  trusted  environment,  supported  by  reliable  infrastructure,  highly  educated  workforce 
and consistent and transparent government policies.  
To further enlarge the market, Singapore has forged important linkages to the rest of the world. We 
have  built  up  a  network  of  Free  Trade  Agreements  with  many  of  our  key  trading  partners  such  as 
Japan, the US, India and Korea. Discussions are ongoing with the Gulf region and China for greater 
market  access  for  Singapore-based  entities.  A  Connectivity  Agreement  between  Singapore  and 
Vietnam  will  amongst  others,  deepen  collaboration  in  financial  services,  and  promises  greater 
opportunities for businesses from both countries.  
Conclusion 
On this note, I would like to convey my heartiest congratulations to Daiwa Securities Group on your 
35th anniversary in Singapore. The future of the region continues to shine bright and I encourage all to 
leverage on Singapore to tap into the region’s growth.  
I wish everyone a wonderful evening ahead. Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 72/2007
