V Leeladhar: India’s preparedness for Basel II implementation 
Address  by  Mr  V  Leeladhar,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  panel 
discussion during the “FICCI-IBA Conference on Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 
13 September 2007. 
 Dear Friends,  
It  is  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  be  here  with  you  this  morning  and  to  be  sharing  my 
experience and views with this august audience regarding India’s preparedness for Basel II 
implementation. I am very thankful to the organisers for having afforded me this opportunity 
today. As you are well aware, implementation of the new capital adequacy framework has 
been a long and exacting journey in most of the jurisdictions, and so is the case with India. 
The countries are at various stages of implementation. In India, having regard to the country 
context  and  in  tune  with  the  overall  approach  to  regulatory  reforms,  we  have  adopted  a 
calibrated approach for a phased implementation of Basel II so as to secure a non-disruptive 
migration to the new framework. In my remarks today, I would like to briefly touch upon the 
evolution of the revised framework, its broad structure, preparatory measures taken by the 
RBI  for  implementing  this  framework  and  the  challenges  that  will  need  to  be  tackled  in 
migration to Basel II. 
At the outset, let me hasten to add that while we are moving towards the Basel II Framework, 
the RBI has adopted a three-track approach to capital adequacy regulation in India, with the 
norms stipulated at varying degrees of stringency for different categories of banks. Similar 
differentiated approach has been adopted in some other jurisdictions also. This has been a 
deliberate choice for us having regard to the size, nature and complexity of operations and 
relevance  of  different  types  of  banks  to  the  Indian  financial  sector,  the  need  to  achieve 
greater  financial  inclusion  and  to  provide  an  efficient  credit  delivery  mechanism.  Thus,  the 
commercial  banks,  which  account  for  the  lion’s  share  in  the  total  assets  of  the  banking 
system,  will  be  on  Basel  II  standards  while  the  co-operative  banks  will  remain  on  Basel  I 
norms for credit risk with surrogate measures for market risk. The Regional Rural Banks, on 
the other hand, which have limited operations in rural areas, will be on non-Basel standards.  
Basel II 
The  attempts  at  harmonising  the  capital  adequacy  standards  internationally  date  back  to 
1988, when the “Basle Committee on Banking Regulations and Supervisory Practices”, as it 
was  then  named,  released  a  capital  adequacy  framework,  now  known  as  Basel  I.  This 
initiative set out the first internationally accepted framework for measuring capital adequacy 
and a minimum ratio to be achieved by the banks. This norm was widely adopted in over 100 
countries,  and  in  India, it  was  implemented  in  1992.  Over  the  years,  however,  the  Basel  I 
framework was found to have several limitations such as its broad-brush approach to credit 
risk,  its  narrow  coverage  confined  to  only  credit  and  market  risks,  and  non-recognition  of 
credit  risk  mitigants,  which  encouraged  capital  arbitrage  through  structured  transactions. 
Moreover, the rapid advances in risk management, information technology, banking markets 
and products, and banks’ internal processes, during the last decade, had far outpaced the 
simple approach of Basel I to measuring capital. A need was, therefore, felt to replace this 
Accord with a more risk-sensitive framework, which would address these shortcomings.  
Accordingly,  after  a  wide-ranging  global  consultative  process,  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  released  on  June  26,  2004  the  document  “International 
Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards : A Revised Framework”, which 
was  supplemented  in  November  2005  by  an  update  of  the  Market  Risk  Amendment.  This 
document,  popularly  known  as  “Basel  II  Framework”,  offers  a  new  set  of  international 
BIS Review 102/2007 
 1
standards  for  establishing  minimum  capital  requirements  for  the  banking  organisations.  It 
capitalises on the modern risk management techniques and seeks to establish a more risk-
responsive  linkage  between  the  banks’  operations  and  their  capital  requirements.  It  also 
provides a strong incentive to banks for improving their risk management systems. The risk 
sensitiveness  is  sought  to  be  achieved  through  the  now-familiar  three  mutually  reinforcing 
Pillars.  
The Pillar 1 stipulates the minimum capital ratio and requires allocation of regulatory capital 
not only for credit risk and market risk but additionally, for operational risk as well, which was 
not  covered  in  the  previous  Accord.  The  Pillar  1,  unlike  the  previous  Accord,  provides  a 
menu of approaches, from the simplified to the advanced ones, for determining the capital 
charge for each of the three categories of risks. The credit risk mitigants used by the banks 
have been specifically recognised to provide appropriate capital relief.  
The  Pillar  2  of  the  framework  deals  with  the  “Supervisory  Review  Process”  (SRP),  and  is 
probably not that well understood as the other two Pillars. In fact, this is the element which 
makes the revised framework very comprehensive in its sweep by addressing the entire risk 
domain of the banks. Let me elaborate a little. It requires the banks to develop an Internal 
Capital  Adequacy  Assessment  Process  (ICAAP)  which  should  encompass  their  whole  risk 
universe  –  by  addressing  all  those  risks  which  are  either  not  fully  captured  or  not  at  all 
captured under the other two Pillars – and assign an appropriate amount of capital, internally, 
for  all  such  risks,  commensurate  with  their  risk  profile  and  control  environment.  Under  the 
Supervisory Review, the supervisors would conduct a detailed examination of the ICAAP of 
the banks, and if warranted, could prescribe a higher capital requirement, over and above the 
minimum capital ratio envisaged in Pillar 1.  
The Pillar 3 of the framework, Market Discipline, focuses on the effective public disclosures 
to be made by the banks, and is a critical complement to the other two Pillars. It recognises 
the fact that apart from the regulators, the banks are also monitored by the markets and that 
the discipline exerted by the markets can be as powerful as the sanctions imposed by the 
regulator. It is premised on the basic principle that the markets would be quite responsive to 
the disclosures made and the banks would be duly rewarded or penalised, in tune with the 
nature of disclosures, by the market forces.  
Preparatory measures for Basel II implementation  
Let me now say a few words about the process adopted in India for implementation of Basel 
II. Though the Indian banks became fully compliant with Basel I Accord in March 2005, the 
RBI  had  initiated  preparatory  measures  even  prior  to  that.  In  August  2004,  soon  after  the 
new  framework  was  released  by  the  BCBS,  the  banks  were  advised  to  conduct  a  self-
assessment of their risk management systems and to initiate remedial measures, as needed, 
keeping in view the requirements of the Basel II framework. Further, to secure a consultative 
and participative approach for a non-disruptive migration to Basel II, a Steering Committee 
was constituted in October 2004, comprising senior officials from 14 select banks (a mix of 
public  sector,  private  sector  and  foreign  banks).  It  formed  several  sub-groups  to  address 
specific issues under Basel II and made its recommendations to the Reserve Bank. Based 
on these inputs, in February, 2005, the RBI issued the draft guidelines, for public comments, 
on implementation of Pillar 1 and Pillar 3 requirements of the Basel II framework. In the light 
of the feedback received from a wide spectrum of banks and other stake holders, the draft 
guidelines were revised and again placed in public domain on March 20, 2007 for a second 
round of consultations. Keeping in view the additional feedback received, the guidelines were 
finalised and issued on April 27, 2007. As regards the Pillar 2, the banks have been asked to 
put in place the requisite Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) with the 
approval of their Boards.  
I may mention here that even before the final guidelines were issued, the RBI had asked the 
banks in May 2006 to begin conducting parallel runs, as per the draft guidelines, so as to 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2007
familiarise them with the requirements of the new framework. During the period of parallel 
run,  the  banks  are  required  to  compute,  parallely,  on  an  on  going  basis,  their  capital 
adequacy  ratio  –  both  under  Basel  I  norms,  currently  applicable,  as  well  as  the  Basel  II 
guidelines  to  be  applicable  in  future.  This  analysis,  along  with  several  other  prescribed 
assessments,  is  to  be  placed  before  the  Boards  of  the  banks  every  quarter  and  is  also 
transmitted  to  the  RBI.  These  reports  received  in  the  RBI  indicate  that  implementation  of 
Basel II in the banks is in the process of getting stabilised.  
The minimum capital adequacy ratio prescribed under the Basel II norms continues to be at 
nine per cent, at solo as well as consolidated level. This, however, is subject to the stipulated 
prudential floors for the first three years of implementation to guard against any significant 
decline in the capital ratios of the banks arising from the capital relief that they might accrue 
to them under Basel II. The banks are, however, expected to operate at a level well above 
the minimum capital requirement. The banks are also required to achieve the Tier I capital 
ratio  of  six  per  cent  not  later  than  March  31,  2010,  both  on  solo  as  well  as  consolidated 
basis.  
A two-stage implementation of the guidelines is envisaged to provide adequate lead time to 
the banking system. Accordingly, the foreign banks operating in India and the Indian banks 
having  operational  presence  outside  India  are  required  to  migrate  to  the  Standardised 
Approach for credit risk and the Basic Indicator Approach for operational risk with effect from 
March 31, 2008. All other Scheduled commercial banks are encouraged to migrate to these 
approaches under Basel II in alignment with them, but, in any case, not later than March 31, 
2009. It has been a conscious decision to begin with the simpler approaches available under 
the  framework.  As  regards  the  market  risk,  the  banks  will  continue  to  follow  the 
Standardised-Duration Method, already adopted under the Basel I framework, under Basel II 
also.  
Thus,  reckoning  the  well-planned  and  carefully-sequenced  preparatory  work  already  done, 
the  choices  exercised  by  the  RBI  under  the  national  discretion,  coupled  with  a  phased 
implementation schedule, I am inclined to believe that the Indian banking system could be 
considered to be in a high state of preparedness and would be well poised for a seamless 
migration to Basel II next year, in tune with the envisaged timeframe. This, however, is not to 
say that the process would be a cake-walk – as there would be considerable challenges too 
that lie head for all of us, during the current phase of implementation as also for moving to 
the advanced approaches.  
The challenges ahead  
Let me now briefly outline some of the salient issues and challenges that might arise for the 
Indian banking system from the adoption of the Basel II framework. The list here is, however, 
by no means exhaustive.  
First,  the  new  norms  might,  in  some  cases,  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  overall  regulatory 
capital  requirements  for  the  banks,  particularly  under  the  simpler  approaches  adopted  in 
India, if the additional capital required for the operational risk is not offset by the capital relief 
available for the credit risk. This would of course depend upon the risk profile of the banks’ 
portfolios and also provide an incentive for better risk management but the banks would need 
to be prepared to augment their capital through strategic capital planning. 
Second,  the  Standardised  Approach  for  credit  risk  leans  heavily  on  the  external  credit 
ratings.  While  the  RBI  has  accredited  four  rating  agencies  operating  in  India,  the  rating 
penetration in India is rather low. Moreover, credit rating in India is confined to rating of the 
instruments and not of the issuing entities as a whole. Besides, the credit rating provides only 
a lagged indicator of the credit standing of an entity, and is not a lead indicator. The banks 
would, therefore, need to actively reckon this aspect in their ICAAP exercise.  
BIS Review 102/2007 
 3
Third, the risk weighting scheme under Standardised Approach also creates some incentive 
for some of the bank clients to remain unrated since such entities receive a lower risk weight 
of  100  per  cent  vis-à-vis  150  per  cent  risk  weight  for  a  lowest  rated  client.  This  might 
specially be the case if the unrated client expects a poor rating. The banks will need to be 
watchful in this regard.  
Fourth, the new framework could also intensify the competition for the best clients with high 
credit ratings, which attract lower capital charge. This could put pressure on the margins of 
the bank. The banks would, therefore, need to streamline and reorient their client acquisition 
and retention strategy.  
Finally, implementing the ICAAP under the Pillar 2 of the framework would perhaps be the 
biggest  challenge  for  the  banks  in  India  as  it  requires  a  comprehensive  risk  modelling 
infrastructure to capture all the risks that are not covered under the other two Pillars of the 
framework. The validation of the internal models of the banks by the supervisors would also 
be an arduous task.  
In  regard  to  adoption  of  advanced  approaches  available  under  Basel  II,  the  RBI  has  not 
stipulated  any  timeframe  for  adoption  of  these  approaches  but  a  migration  to  advanced 
approaches would certainly pose significant challenges to both – the banks as well as the 
supervisors.  In  this  case,  a  slightly  different  set  of  issues  and  challenges  is  likely  to  arise 
which would need to be kept in view in any decision to migrate to them.  
First and foremost, the banks will need to demonstrate to the supervisors that they meet the 
minimum  criteria  stipulated  in  the  Basel  II  framework  to  be  eligible  to  adopt  the  IRB 
approaches. This could require, inter alia, suitable adjustments in the risk-rating design and 
its  operations  for  various  product  lines  in  the  banks  as  also  the  governance  structure  to 
ensure the integrity of the rating process.  
Second, unlike the simpler approaches under Basel II, the advanced  approaches are very 
data intensive and require high-quality, consistent, time-series data for various borrower- and 
facility-categories for a period of five to seven years to enable computation of the required 
risk parameters (such as default probability and loss given default, etc.). The banks would 
perhaps  need  a  thorough  review  of  their  internal  processes  with  a  view  to  redesign  and 
upgrade  them  to  be  able  to  capture  the  information  needed  for  creating  the  requisite 
databases.  
Third, a robust risk management architecture, including a strong stress-testing framework for 
scenario analyses, would be a necessity under the advanced approaches. A system within 
the  banks  to  validate  the  accuracy  of  the  internal  rating  processes  would  be  an  essential 
element of the risk management set up.  
Fourth,  an  overarching  requirement  for  efficient  data  management  and  for  effective  risk 
management structures, would be an state-of-the-art technological infrastructure which might 
need  significant 
to  achieve  seamless  enterprise-wide 
integrated  risk  management,  for  which  sharply  focused  strategic  planning  would  be 
necessary.  
Fifth,  with  considerable  leeway  available  to  the  banks  under  the  advanced  approaches  in 
determining  the  regulatory  capital  requirements,  the  highest  standards  of  corporate 
governance would be critical for maintaining the integrity of the advanced approaches.  
Sixth,  the  complexity  of  advanced  approaches  requires  highly  skilled  staff  and  the  human 
resource management in the banking industry, particularly for the public sector banks, could 
emerge  to  be  a  binding  constraint,  in  adopting  advanced  approaches.  This  would  need 
innovative strategies and concerted efforts on the part of the banks to be able to attract and 
retain the right mix of talent in the organisation.  
Finally,  the  advanced  approaches  would  also  cast  an  onerous  responsibility  on  the 
supervisors  of  not  only  guiding  the  banking  system  through  the  implementation  phase  but 
investment  and 
improvement 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2007
also  of  validating  the  internal  models,  system  and  processes  adopted  by  the  regulated 
banks. This, needless to say, would require considerable capacity building and augmentation 
of  the  domain  knowledge  and  expertise  of  the  supervisors  themselves  to  ensure  a  non-
disruptive migration to the advanced approaches under Basel II. Let me hasten to assure all 
of you that we, in the RBI, are quite live to the issue and strategic interventions have already 
been planned in this regard.  
Conclusion 
I have provided a brief overview of the Indian approach to implementing Basel II framework 
and  the  state  of  preparedness  of  the  banks  in  India.  Let  me  conclude  by  reminding  those 
present here that the Basel II framework provides significant incentives to banks to sharpen 
their  risk  management  expertise  to  enable  more  efficient  risk-return  trade  offs;  it  also 
presents a valuable opportunity to gear up their internal processes to the international best 
standards.  This  would  require  substantial  capacity  building  and  commitment  of  resources 
through  close  involvement  of  the  banks’  Top  Management  in  guiding  this  arduous 
undertaking. It is, no doubt, a demanding and daunting task, both for the banks as also the 
supervisors, but I am sure that with concerted and dedicated efforts of all of us, we would be 
able to measure equal to the task and cross yet another important milestone in our journey of 
successfully implementing the regulatory reforms in the country.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 102/2007 
 5
