Helgi S Guðmundsson: Brief summary of the Central Bank of Iceland’s 
accounts 
Address  by  Mr  Helgi  S  Guðmundsson,  Chairman  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland, at the Bank's Annual Meeting, Reykjavik, 30 March 2007.  
 Honourable  Prime  Minister,  Ministers  of  the  Government,  Speaker  of  the  Althingi,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen:  
On behalf of the Supervisory Board of the Central Bank of Iceland I welcome you all to the Bank's 46th 
annual meeting and declare this meeting open. At the end of my address the Chairman of the Board of 
Governors,  Davíð  Oddsson,  will  deliver  his  report  on  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Governors.  The  Prime 
Minister of Iceland, Geir H. Haarde, will then address the meeting. When the meeting has completed 
its duties, I invite those attending it to a reception.  
At a meeting of the Supervisory Board today the Prime Minister ratified the Bank's financial accounts 
for 2006 with his signature. The Central Bank's Annual Report for 2006 is published today and will be 
available at the end of this meeting.  
The Central Bank's annual accounts are compiled on the basis of rules set by the Prime Minister, most 
recently in December 2005. According to its profit and loss account, the Central Bank of Iceland made 
a  net  profit  of  11.8  b.kr.  in  2006.  The  profit  is  explained  almost  entirely  by  exchange  rate  gain. 
Excluding  this,  the  Central  Bank  produced  a  profit  of  48  m.kr.  before  the  transfer  to  the  Treasury. 
Interest income grew by 162% over the year and interest expense by 178%. In total, interest income 
increased  by  15.6  b.kr.  and  interest  expense  by  13.7  b.kr.  to  leave  net  interest  income  of  1.9  b.kr. 
Operating expenses, i.e. salary and payroll expenses and other operating expenses, were 1.5 b.kr., 
depreciation 90  m.kr.  and  a  supplementary  contribution  to  the Bank  Employees’  Pension  Fund  386 
m.kr., in accordance with an agreement between the Fund and its member organisations. By law, the 
transfer to the Treasury is calculated as one-third of net profit, i.e. 16 m.kr. Profit after transfer to the 
Treasury but excluding exchange rate gain therefore amounted to 32 m.kr.  
In 2006, the Central Bank's balance sheet total increased by 159 b.kr. to almost 322 b.kr. at the end of 
the year. The main explanation is that total Treasury deposits in the Central Bank rose by 135 b.kr. 
over 2006 to 211 b.kr. at the end of the year. The balance on Government current accounts increased 
by 47 b.kr. and the deposit in the foreign currency account amounted to 94 b.kr. at the end of the year. 
Most  of  the  foreign  currency  deposit  is  accounted  for  by  the  €1  billion  loan  taken  by  the  Treasury 
towards the end of the year to boost the Central Bank's foreign reserves. Notes and coin in circulation 
grew by 10% to 14.5 b.kr. and the Central Bank's liabilities towards deposit money banks by just over 
10  b.kr.  On  the  asset  side,  the  Central  Bank's  claims  on  deposit  money  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions increased by 59 m.kr., and its foreign assets by 101 b.kr. The growth in foreign assets was 
largely the result of the Treasury's euro loan, but partly due to the impact of the depreciation of the 
króna on the nominal amount of the reserves denominated in domestic currency. At the end of the 
year, the Central Bank's equity amounted to 48.2 b.kr., an increase of almost 12 b.kr. from the end of 
the year before. In the budget for 2007, the Treasury was authorised to strengthen the Central Bank's 
capital position.  
The  Treasury  borrowed  €1  billion  in  international  capital  markets  in  2006  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
boosting  the  Central  Bank’s  foreign  reserves.  All  the  proceeds  from  the  loan  were  deposited  in  a 
foreign  currency  account  in  the  Central  Bank.  The  Treasury  earns  interest  on  the  deposit  at  a  rate 
matching that of the foreign loan.  
Here I have briefly summarised the highlights of the Central Bank’s accounts. The financial statements 
for the year are published in their entirety in the annual report with notes, and the Bank’s results and 
changes  in  its  balance  sheet  during  the  year  are  also  described  in  more  detail  there  than  I  have 
entered into here.  
In June 2006, Jón Sigurðsson stepped down as Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland when he was 
appointed Minister of Industry and Commerce in the government of Iceland. In formal terms he was on 
leave  from  the  Central  Bank  from  the  middle  of  June  until  the  end  of  August.  Jón  Sigurðsson  was 
appointed Governor from October 1, 2003. He therefore served on the Board of Governors for almost 
three years. Before that he was a member of the Supervisory Board for just over two years. On behalf 
BIS Review 34/2007 
 1
of the Supervisory Board I would like to thank Jón Sigurðsson for our pleasant work together during 
his terms as both a member of the Board of Governors and a member of the Supervisory Board.  
Ingimundur Friðriksson was temporarily appointed Governor from June 15 to August 31, 2006, then 
appointed Governor for a seven-year term from September 1, 2006. Ingimundur Friðriksson had been 
Assistant Governor since 1994 and held a temporary appointment as Governor for one year from 2002 
to 2003.  
A number of changes took place in Central Bank staffing during 2006. Fifteen employees left or retired 
from the Bank and ten were hired, so their number decreased by five during the year. At the end of 
2006  there  were  111  employees  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  while  the  number  of  full-time 
equivalent positions was just over 102. Among the retirees was Sveinn Erling Sigurðsson, Director of 
the Statistics Department. Lilja Steinþórsdóttir left the post of Chief Auditor during the year. The Chief 
Auditor  is  directly  accountable  to  and  appointed  by  the  Supervisory  Board.  On  behalf  of  the 
Supervisory  Board  I  would  like  to  thank  Lilja  Steinþórsdóttir  for  our  pleasant  work  together.  In  her 
place, the Supervisory Board appointed Stefán Svavarsson Chief Auditor.  
Financial institutions compete fiercely for talented employees, which is not surprising given the pace at 
which the Icelandic banks’ activities have expanded. It is vital for the Central Bank to have as capable 
employees as possible in its service. It must take prevailing conditions into account to ensure that this 
is the case.  
On the Supervisory Board in 2006, Ólafur G. Einarsson resigned from the post of Chairman which he 
held  since  1998.  Helgi  S.  Guðmundsson  was  elected  Chairman  in  his  place.  On  behalf  of  the 
Supervisory Board I would like to thank Ólafur G. Einarsson for his particularly successful leadership 
during his years as chairman. The Supervisory Board held 22 meetings during the year. I would like to 
thank the members of the Supervisory Board for their pleasant cooperation and fine work. I also thank 
the  Board  of  Governors  and  employees  of  the  Bank  for  their  very  good  work  during  the  year  and 
fruitful collaboration with the Supervisory Board.  
2 
 BIS Review 34/2007
