Ilmārs Rimšēvičs: Standing firm against manipulations with Lats' exchange 
rate 
Article  by  Mr  Ilmārs  Rimšēvičs,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia,  published  in  the  daily  Diena  on 
16 February 2007. 
 Economists  are  currently  discussing  ways  to  improve  the  ability  to  compete  of  the  Latvian 
economy and they are right to do so because it is being undermined by high inflation. Morten 
Hansen  from  the  Riga  School  of  Economics  has  also  devoted  this  issue  a  great  deal  of 
thought, sharing some of his insights with the readers of the newspaper Diena (10 February). 
The Latvian economy is still the fastest growing economy in the European Union and that should make 
us  happy  because  our  standard  of  living  is  raised.  The  downside,  from  the  macroeconomic 
perspective, is that the speed at which we are traveling can be compared to driving at 200 kilometers 
an hour, because it is accompanied by high inflation, record high prevalence of imports over exports 
(current account deficit), decreased ability to compete, a fast growing foreign debt. For quite a while 
now,  the  main  problem  of  the  Latvian  economy  has  been  the  overly  high  domestic  demand  that 
exceeds supply;  the  economists call  it “overheating”  of  the  economy.  The  budget  deficit  is  also  too 
high for this juncture in our economic development: we are not saving for the moment when the pace 
of  the  economy  will  abate.  Estonia,  where  the  situation  is  very  similar,  last  year  recorded a  budget 
surplus of 3% of GDP.) If we fail to have a firm grip on the steering wheel and we dismiss the danger 
of driving too fast, our breakneck speed can land us in a ditch! 
We can only regret that Mr. Hansen has not applied his theoretician’s savvy to come to the aid of the 
Latvian  economic  policy  makers:  to  specify  the  list  of  tasks  that  would  allow  the  excessively  rapid 
development  to  slow  down  so  that  Latvia  would  continue  to  develop  in  the  long  term  with  a  yearly 
growth of 6-7% instead of running the danger of overheating as is obvious from the estimates of the 
last quarter of last year. It would have been wonderful if Mr. Hansen had made use of his teaching 
skills,  which  involve  the  ability  to  get  things  across  with  ease,  to  remind  us  that  in  the  marathon 
distances – in our case, approximating the level of European standard of living – sprinter’s tactics are 
of no use. 
In such a list, there would be tasks that produce immediate results along with ones where the results 
would be seen after several years. As a Scandinavian, Mr. Hansen could have reminded us, inter alia 
of the unpleasant consequences – price adjustments – after the real estate bubble burst in the Nordic 
countries  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  He  could  have  reasonably  suggested  that  the  government 
agenda should include a surplus budget sooner than is currently planned and a balanced budget as 
early as 2008 instead of 2009-2010. By way of illustration, he could have shown the real possibilities 
for slowing down the growth rate of lending, one of the drivers of high inflation, as they have been 
used  in  other  EU member  states,  including  Ireland. Mr.  Hansen could surely have  talked about  the 
promotion of exports and strengthening of domestic competition, including increasing the number of 
small  and  medium  businesses  and  augmenting  their  efficiency  as  essential  for  the  stability  of  the 
economy  and  currency.  Finally,  he  could  have  discussed  restructuring  Latvian  exports  to  the 
advantage  of  goods  and  services  with  a  higher  value  added,  which  would  have  a  strong  beneficial 
impact on the ability to compete. 
Instead, the economist has regrettably chosen another route: to play with fire in the pages of Diena 
and  to  frighten  the  population  of  Latvia.  As  a  solution  for  the  loss  of  ability  to  compete  he  offers 
devaluing the lats, i.e. reducing its value. His pronouncements have not gone unnoticed in the public 
space and for that reason I will henceforth outline the central bank’s position on this issue. The loss of 
ability to compete is a factor that is unequivocally detrimental to the Latvian economy: we are in full 
agreement  here,  yet  I  categorically  oppose  his  suggestion  that  devaluation  would  be  the  right 
medicine here. It would be poison!  
What consequences would devaluing the lats produce? Reducing the value of the lats would drive the 
prices up even more and everybody would be affected. Imported goods, raw materials, energy would 
all  become  more  expensive.  The  potential  relief  to  entrepreneurs  would  thus  be  short  lived  or 
nonexistent.  The  rise  in  the  standard  of  living  would  become  more  remote  because  the  value  of 
savings in lats would decrease accordingly. In addition – and this is of crucial importance – confidence 
BIS Review 34/2007 
 1
in the lats as a payment and savings instrument, which has taken years to build, would disastrously 
diminish both in Latvia and abroad.  
About  75%  of  the  loans  granted  to  Latvian  households  are  in  euro  whereas  the  income  is  in  lats. 
Should  the  lats  be  devalued,  the  burden  on  those  loan  recipients  whose  liabilities  are  in  euro  but 
income  in  lats  would  increase  dramatically:  it  would  take  more  money  to  buy  a  euro.  Anyone  who 
speculates, albeit theoretically, about devaluation of the lats, should be aware that it would lead to a 
dead-end.  
Whereas foreign experts keep devaluation in mind as an instrument that can be applied if necessary to 
restore the ability to compete, my opponent goes much further than that: he claims that devaluing the 
lats is unavoidable under the conditions of excessive inflation and loss of ability to compete. On the 
contrary:  a  stable  and  unchangeable  lats  exchange  rate  in  under  such  conditions  serves  and  will 
continue  to  serve  as  an  automatic  stabilizing  and  inflation-suppressing  factor.  I  would  also  like  to 
remind  any  hotheads  that  only  the  Bank  of  Latvia  can  make  the  decision  to  devalue:  not  the 
government.  During  my  tenure  as  the  chief  officer  of  the  Bank  of  Latvia  it  will  not  happen.  On  31 
January, the foreign currency reserves of the Bank of Latvia amounted to 2.4 billion lats. The Bank’s 
foreign reserves exceed the amount of lats in circulation and thus we would be quite ready and able to 
exchange  even  the  entire  amount  of  lats  in  circulation  for  foreign  currency  in  accordance  with  the 
exchange rate as set by the Bank. Mr. Hansen is fully aware of this. 
In conclusion, I would like to express confidence that the discussion about balanced development of 
the Latvian economy in the long term will continue and that the set of measures that will be undertaken 
in  March  under  the  auspices  of  the  minister  of  finance  and  aimed  slowing  down  inflation will  prove 
successful. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2007
