David Dodge: A sound pension system – handling risk appropriately 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Conference Board of Canada 
2007 Pensions Summit, Toronto, 10 May 2007. 
 Good  afternoon.  I'm  happy  to  be  here  to  talk  about  the  importance  of  Canada's  pension  system.  It 
goes  without  saying  that  a  sound  system  of  private  pensions  is  important  from  the  perspective  of 
pensioners who rely on a given plan for their retirement income. For firms, a pension plan can help to 
attract and retain staff, and so the business community also counts on a sound pension system. And 
as  a  central  banker,  I  know  that  a  sound  pension  system  is  important  from  the  perspective  of 
economic and financial market efficiency. Given the significance of our pension system, policy-makers 
in Canada need to keep working on improving its operation. Ultimately, it is crucial for all Canadians 
that our pension system function as well as possible. 
But  what  is  it  that  makes  a  system  of  private  pensions  function  well,  or  not?  As  I  see  it,  a  key  to 
answering this question is understanding how pension plans deal with risk, in all of its many forms. So 
today, I want to spend some time discussing private pensions and risk, and suggest what needs to be 
done to make sure that those who have to bear risk also have the right incentives to deal with it in the 
most  appropriate  manner.1  I  will  focus  on  who  is  best  placed  to  bear  risk,  and  on  how  risk 
management can be better supported. 
Risks and challenges 
Let me start with a fundamental question: Why do people save for their old age? Essentially, people 
save during their working years so they can retire at some point and not suffer a precipitous drop in 
income  and  living  standards.  Economists  might  put  it  somewhat  less  elegantly,  saying  that  people 
save in order to smooth their lifetime consumption. 
In the absence of any kind of pension system, individuals, businesses, and society as a whole would 
all face a number of challenges and risks. I want to spend a few minutes talking about the challenges 
and risks from these three perspectives, beginning with individuals. 
First,  individuals  without  a  pension  plan  would  have  their  personal  savings  as  their  only  source  of 
retirement income, aside from income from the publicly funded Canada Pension Plan/Quebec Pension 
Plan and the Old Age Security/Guaranteed Income Supplement. And so, individuals would naturally 
be  exceedingly  cautious  with  their  investments,  particularly  as  they  approached  retirement  age.  In 
short,  individuals  without  pensions  would  likely  be  too  risk-averse  with  their  savings  to  generate  a 
sufficient rate of investment return. 
Second, individuals can recognize that they lack the expertise to handle their investments in the most 
effective  way,  and  so  will  try  to  acquire  this  expertise.  This  could  come  by  way  of  an  investment 
adviser, or by investing their savings in managed, diversified retail investment vehicles such as mutual 
funds.  The  challenge  posed  by  this  approach  is  that  it  can  be  costly,  since  individuals  outside  a 
pension  plan  have  to  purchase  investment  advice  and  ongoing  funds  management  retail,  not 
wholesale. 
Third, individuals without a pension plan face market risk in a couple of ways. Market conditions could 
be such that at the time of retirement, the value of their assets could be abnormally low. Or interest 
rates  could  be  abnormally  low  at  the  time  of  retirement.  In  either  case,  the  person  would  need  to 
spend  a  much  greater  amount  to  purchase  an  annuity  or  other  guaranteed  stream  of  income 
compared with a period when market conditions were more favourable. 
The  fourth  point  is  related  to  the  third.  Sellers  of  annuities  have  to  deal  with  the  risk  that  those 
individuals who expect to live much longer than actuarial tables would suggest are the ones who buy 
annuities. To deal with this adverse selection problem, sellers compensate for the risk by charging 
                                                      
1   For a broader discussion of pension issues, including public  pension plans, see my speech to l'Association des MBA du 
Québec on 9 November 2005 (http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2005/sp05-14.html). 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 1
significantly  more  for  the  annuity.  In  other  words,  the  cost  of  an  annuity  is  much  greater  for  an 
individual than it is for members of a group. 
Both  of  these  last  two  points  demonstrate  that  without  a  pension  system,  individuals  would  need 
significantly higher levels of savings to ensure adequate funding for their retirement. And all of these 
points I raised demonstrate that pensions generate enormous benefits by making it much simpler for 
individuals to successfully save for retirement. 
But while the benefits of pension plans are obvious for individuals, let's not lose sight of the benefits 
for  businesses  and  for  society  as  a  whole.  From  the  perspective  of  business,  pension  plans  are 
typically thought of as a recruitment and retention tool. But historically, pensions were also the way 
that good employers helped workers to save so that they could avoid penury in old age. And with a 
pension  plan,  older  workers  had  the  ability  to  retire,  and  thus  did  not  need  to  keep  working  well 
beyond the point of their greatest productivity. 
As for society as a whole, pensions provide a couple of important benefits. First, no society wants to 
see  large  numbers  of  its  senior  citizens  relying  entirely  on  government  transfers,  although  there  is 
fairly  universal  agreement  across  most  countries  that  it  is  desirable  to  have  some  degree  of  public 
income support for people in their old age. Beyond that, however, a well-functioning pension system is 
an important source of the long-term risk capital that is essential to finance growth.  
Mitigating risks – defined-contribution plans 
Most  of  the  challenges  and  risks  I've  mentioned  can  be  mitigated,  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent, 
through  the pooling  effect  that  a  pension  plan provides.  Of  course,  different  kinds  of  pension  plans 
deal with risks in different ways. First, let me briefly discuss defined-contribution plans and the way 
they deal with risks.  
A defined-contribution plan mitigates, at least partially, many of the challenges and risks I mentioned 
for  individuals.  For  example,  the  costs  of  funds  management  and  investment  advice  are  pooled. 
Further, pooling helps to mitigate the risk that individuals will not have saved enough to purchase an 
appropriate annuity.  
However, a defined-contribution plan leaves individuals completely exposed to market risk. The value 
of a member's contribution could fall sharply just before retirement, or an individual could retire during 
a period of abnormally low interest rates.  
Defined-contribution plans reduce, but do not eliminate, risks for employers.2 Because of market risk, 
this type of plan can fall short of the goal of ensuring adequate retirement income for all employees. 
The retirement incomes of two people with identical work histories can differ greatly, if they retire at 
separate times when the prevailing market conditions are very different. Finally, defined-contribution 
plans do significantly mitigate risks for society as a whole, but there may still be a less-than-optimal 
investment of the pools of contributions. I will come back to this point in a minute. 
In summary, defined-contribution plans can mitigate a number of risks to individuals, businesses, and 
society as a whole. However, appropriately structured defined-benefit plans can do better. 
Mitigating risks – defined-benefit plans 
Now let's turn to defined-benefit plans. I'll spend the balance of my remarks today discussing these 
plans and how they mitigate various risks. A properly structured defined-benefit plan mitigates all the 
risks for individuals that a defined-contribution plan does, for essentially the same reasons. But, in one 
crucial area, defined-benefit plans provide an important additional risk-mitigation benefit to individuals, 
because they are much better-structured to mitigate market risk. Since defined-benefit plans pool risk 
across all plan members – past, present, and future – the precise retirement income of a plan member 
can be defined in advance and does not depend on market conditions at the time of retirement. 
However,  defined-benefit  plans  do  not  eliminate  group-longevity  risk,  which  is  the  risk  that  all 
members of a pension plan could live longer than the actuarial tables predict. For individuals, there 
                                                      
2   This includes the legal risk associated with the advice implied by the way a plan is set up. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2007
also remains a risk that the plan sponsor will be unable, for some reason, to deliver on its promise to 
pay  the  defined  pension  benefit.  Still,  defined-benefit  plans  do  a  better  job  of  mitigating  risks  for 
individuals than do defined-contribution plans. 
For society as a whole, defined-benefit plans can also mitigate risks more effectively. While defined-
contribution  plans  typically  offer  members  a  limited  range  of  investment  choices,  the  managers  of 
defined-benefit pension plans have both the ability and the incentive to invest in the kinds of assets 
that the average individual investor might not normally consider. This helps to reduce the possibility I 
mentioned earlier that these pools of contributions could be invested in a less-than-optimal way; that 
is, that there could be a reduced supply of long-term risk capital for the economy. Further, pension 
managers are more likely to invest in alternative asset classes and to engage in arbitrage between 
markets.  All  of  these  activities  make  financial  markets  more  complete,  and  thus  enhance  their 
efficiency.  
But how do defined-benefit plans aid employers? They can serve as a powerful tool for attracting and 
retaining  staff.  And,  if  they  function  well,  defined-benefit  plans  can  eliminate  the  risk  of  employees 
retiring with very low incomes. But defined-benefit plans represent the transfer of a lot of risk to the 
plan sponsors. And for some sponsors, the liability associated with a defined-benefit plan can dwarf 
the  sponsors'  net  worth.  So  for  employees,  employers,  and  society  as  a  whole  to  fully  realize  the 
benefits of defined-benefit plans, three conditions must be met. First, sponsors need the ability and 
incentives to manage their risks appropriately. Second, the risk that a sponsor will be unable to fulfill 
its promise must be properly managed. And third, the group-longevity risk I spoke of earlier must be 
dealt with in some manner. 
Some  of  the  risks  I've  spoken  about  are  managed  according  to  laws  and  regulation.  For  example, 
there are laws that protect employees from the risk that a sponsor might be unable to pay a pension 
because  the  pool  of  contributions  was  used  for  some  other  purpose.  And  we  have  regulations  that 
prescribe how large these pools have to be relative to the benefits promised, and that place conditions 
on how they must be managed. Beyond the legal and regulatory frameworks, there are accounting, 
actuarial, and economic frameworks that support the management and assignment of various types of 
pension risk. And generally, Canada's legal and regulatory framework has served Canadian workers 
and employers well, certainly better than those in many other OECD nations. 
But there are some shortcomings in our frameworks today. And these shortcomings are putting a great 
deal  of  pressure  on  the  sponsors  of  defined-benefit  plans.  Sponsors  have  been  scaling  back  or 
restricting new entries into these types of plans, largely because they do not have the right incentives 
to maintain or operate defined-benefit plans. 
So  what  needs  to  be  done  to  improve  the  incentives  for  sponsors  of  defined-benefit  plans?  Going 
forward, how can we promote the proper assignment and management of risk? In answering these 
questions, we should keep in mind two principles of effective risk management. First, it's important to 
be  clear  about  who  bears  the  consequences  of  a  risk  and,  by  implication,  who  owns  that  risk.  The 
party that owns the risk needs to have the proper incentives to manage it. Second, the owner of the 
risk needs to have sufficient flexibility to effectively manage that risk. Let me underline six main areas 
of concern about the current incentives for the assignment and management of risks. In doing so, I will 
not be able to address all the issues facing defined-benefit pension plans. But I do want to touch on 
the issues I see as being most important. 
Getting the incentives right 
First,  Canadian  sponsors  of  trusteed  defined-benefit  plans  have  been  reluctant  to  make  special 
contributions to cover actuarial deficits. There are a number of factors at work here, but I will focus on 
just two of them. One is that there is often a great deal of uncertainty about the legal status of any 
actuarial surplus. While the ownership of any surplus depends on the specific wording of the rules that 
govern  a  given  pension  plan,  in  general,  provincial  and  federal  pension  law  has  evolved  to 
increasingly give employees rights to pension surpluses, even though employees typically bear none 
of  the  responsibility  for  any  deficit.  Another  factor  is  that  tax  regulations  discourage  sponsors  from 
building  surpluses  in  excess  of  10  per  cent.  Partly  as  a  result  of  these  two  factors,  sponsors  of 
defined-benefit plans have incentives to keep plans only minimally funded and to avoid surpluses. But 
it is entirely appropriate, from time to time, for defined-benefit plans to run significant surpluses – or 
deficits – given the way they pool risks across all members – past, present, and future.  
BIS Review 47/2007 
 3
Secondly, sponsors can be hampered by regulations that do not always take sufficient account of their 
ability to make contributions in the future. Regulators typically determine funding adequacy in one of 
two ways. One method assumes that the sponsor is a going concern and will be around to make up 
any  shortfall  in  pension  obligations  before  they  come  due.  The  other  method  assumes  that  the 
sponsor could become insolvent at any time, and so sufficient funds to cover actuarial liabilities must 
always be available to cover that risk.  
But  the  use  of  the  solvency  test  can,  in  some  circumstances,  place  an  inappropriate  burden  on 
sponsors  that  are  unlikely  to  become  insolvent.  Consider  what  happens  when  asset  values  are 
temporarily depressed relative to liabilities. In this case, the solvency deficit can be significantly larger 
than  the  going-concern  deficit.  This  would  require  the  sponsor  to  make  a  special  contribution  that 
should be reversed once asset values recover. But if the sponsor does not have access to the surplus, 
and  so  cannot  reclaim  this  special  contribution  once  asset  markets  recover,  then  the  sponsor's 
expected costs are raised inappropriately. 
The third area of concern relates to accounting rules, or perhaps more specifically, to our use of these 
rules.  This  area  is  becoming  increasingly  important  to  pension  plan  sponsors  because  international 
accounting  standard  setters  are  examining  a  move  to  unsmoothed,  so-called  "fair-value"  methods. 
These accounting rules are intended to replace rules that smooth changes in asset and liability values 
with rules that focus on values at a point in time. But it is not at all clear how useful or relevant it is to 
determine point-in-time values of assets and liabilities in a defined-benefit plan. For plans as a whole, 
what we are interested in is not today's values, but expected values far into the future.  
If this review results in changes to accounting standards, it could make sponsor balance sheets and 
income statements much more volatile. So sponsors will have an increased incentive to hold assets 
with low volatility. This incentive may make pensions more expensive because sponsors would be less 
likely to take on assets with higher expected returns. Put another way, plan sponsors could be given 
the  incentive  to  become  overly  risk-averse,  meaning  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  providing  for  future 
liabilities. 
A fourth concern relates to the group-longevity risk I spoke about earlier. It may seem odd to consider 
the  notion  of  people  living  longer  to  be  a  huge  problem.  Nonetheless,  increased  longevity  poses  a 
tremendous  risk  for  sponsors.  This  risk  can  be  mitigated  in  a  number  of  ways.  For  example, 
contribution  rates  can  be  adjusted  to  reflect  changes  in  average  life  expectancy.  Or,  the  level  of 
benefits can be adjusted, as can the date at which a person becomes eligible to collect a pension. 
Making  these  adjustments  is  often  unpleasant,  but  it  is  necessary.  And  so  sponsors  and  plan 
members both need to have the incentives to deal with group-longevity risk properly. 
The fifth concern relates to the fourth. In the past, there have been labour agreements that called for 
improvements to defined-benefit pensions, without matching funding provisions. How the cost of a new 
benefit promise will be covered should be made crystal clear to shareholders, workers, and regulators, 
at the time the change occurs.  
Finally, and very importantly, many sponsors may be too small to adequately manage the risks and 
costs  of  sponsoring  a  defined-benefit  plan.  But  risks  can  be  mitigated  by  sponsors  forming  multi-
employer plans, thus pooling risks across a number of plan sponsors. This is a very important point, 
because at the moment, smaller employers are simply unable to offer defined-benefit plans to their 
employees. If structures such as large multi-employer pension plans could be created, this could help 
them to pool both costs and risks, making it easier for smaller employers to sponsor defined-benefit 
plans. It could also provide a measure of increased pension portability for employees.  
Conclusion 
These are six areas of particular concern for the management of risk in defined-benefit pension plans. 
As I said, this is not an exhaustive list. But it does capture what I see as the most important challenges 
facing  defined-benefit  plans.  Now  to  conclude,  let  me  point  to  a  number  of  steps  that  should  be 
considered to address these issues. 
First, we should reduce the disincentives for sponsors to run actuarial surpluses in good times that will 
offset  actuarial  deficits  in  other  periods.  More  clarity  regarding  the  legal  ownership  of  surpluses  is 
needed,  so  that  the  sponsor  that  owns  the  risks  also  owns  the  benefits  from  taking  those  risks.  In 
addition, we should examine the rules governing the tax treatment of contributions when plans are in 
actuarial  surplus.  Second,  we  should  accept  the  fact  that  some  defined-benefit  plans  run  by 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2007
creditworthy sponsors will have substantial solvency deficits from time to time, and make these easier 
to  handle.  In  this  area,  I  would  note  that  there  has  been  real  progress  in  some  jurisdictions,  since 
sponsors are now allowed greater use of letters of credit to cover temporary solvency deficits. Third, 
we should ensure that our accounting rules – and most importantly, how we make use of these rules – 
are appropriate for defined-benefit plans. What we are interested in is not today's values, but expected 
values  far  into  the  future.  Fourth,  we  should  strengthen  incentives  to  share  group-longevity  risk 
between plan sponsors and members. Fifth, the costs of plan improvements should be made clear to 
shareholders and workers at the time they are promised. Finally, we could examine mechanisms that 
facilitate the formation of multi-employer plans so that risks can be pooled across a number of plan 
sponsors. After all, municipalities in Ontario pooled together to form OMERS, and we should examine 
ways to construct similar pension arrangements for private sector employers. 
As  I  said,  an  effective  defined-benefit  pension  system  is  a  tremendous  asset  for  individuals,  for 
employers,  and  for  our  society  as  a  whole.  Putting  these  plans  on  a  sustainable  footing  involves 
strengthening  the  legal,  regulatory,  accounting,  actuarial,  and  economic  frameworks  that  determine 
how these plans operate. If we get it right, these changes would give sponsors the appropriate degree 
of flexibility needed to manage risk effectively. And, ultimately, Canada can have a better-managed 
pension system that is good for members, good for employers, good for the economy, and good for 
Canadian society. 
BIS Review 47/2007 
 5
