Stanley Fischer: Labor relations in Israel 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Seventh  Hatikva 
Conference of the Histadrut in cooperation with the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, Tel Aviv, 17 April 2007.  
 I am pleased to stand here before you today, especially as this platform gives me an opportunity to 
speak about the important subject of labor relations in Israel, and in particular, labor relations in the 
public sector.  
Labor relations is not within my field of expertise in economics, but it has occupied much of my time in 
Israel since I took up office almost two years ago. It has done so not only because of the issue of 
salaries in the Bank of Israel. It occupies me  because I have the impression that we are unable to 
resolve  labor  disputes  without  going  through  strikes  and  industrial  action  and  turning  to  the  labor 
courts.  The  question  we  should  address  is  whether  we  can  manage  labor  relations  with  less 
confrontation and without wasting time and energy on avoidable clashes.  
On average, Israel loses more working days through strikes than do Spain, France, the UK, and in 
some years also more than the US. I am not speaking about the percentage of working days lost but 
their total number. The figures show that we have a serious problem in the area of labor relations. The 
fact that we have a very large number of strikes by international comparison is not the problem – it is 
the symptom. The damage caused by strikes is felt by all – the strikers, the employers, the general 
public and the whole economy. As an example, think of the harm caused to tourism because today 
every tourist who wants to visit Israel hesitates because of concern over whether his flight will be able 
to land or whether his return flight will be able to take off on the due date. We need only look at the 
newspapers of the last few days to get an idea of the number of strikes and instances of industrial 
action  
My remarks here are based on the reports of the Koberski Commission and the Zussman Committee 
at the end of the 1980s, the position paper by a team headed by Guy Mundlak, Industrial Relations in 
Times  of  Transition  (Israeli  Democracy  Institute,  2004),  the  work  of  my  colleagues  in  the  Bank  of 
Israel, especially the late Zvi Zussman, and of other experts outside the Bank of Israel who helped me. 
I will start by outlining briefly the wage system and labor relations in Israel’s public sector, and then 
indicate the main problems in the system, and will end with a very general description of some aspects 
of the reform required in this area.  
The wage system and labor relations in the public sector in Israel  
1.  
I will relate mainly to the public sector, which includes large companies some of which are on the way 
towards privatization and some of which have already been privatized. I will speak about the public 
sector  for  two  reasons  (a)  it  comprises  a  relatively  large  part  of  Israel’s  economy,  with  on  average 
about  30  percent  of  all  employees,  while  in  the  OECD  the  average  is  less  than  20  percent.  (b)  It 
seems that labor relations in the public sector are particularly problematic, and most strikes, of which 
there are many by international comparison as I said, take place in that sector.  
In general terms it can be said that the wage of a public sector employee in Israel is derived from a 
number  of  parameters,  chief  among  them  his  seniority,  i.e.,  years  of  service,  the  system  of  grades 
(according to different wage scales: Ahid, the basic or uniform scale; Mahar, the scale for university 
graduates; teachers; doctors etc.), and the grade within the scale.  
This  component  of  the  wage  is  the  basic  wage,  and  to  this  many  additional  payments  are  added, 
giving the total wage. By the way, the total list of such additional payments and benefits contains over 
1,000 items, not only making it very difficult to understand a pay slip, but even worse, causing lack of 
transparency. Instead of negotiating over wages in simple terms, negotiations take place in terms of 
benefits, with hardly anyone really understanding their true value, which may well be the reason for 
using them.  
Wages are adjusted generally once every few years in wage agreements following negotiations on a 
collective basis. This contrasts with the situation in the business sector where, at least in principle, the 
wage is derived from the employee’s output. And if in the private sector it is difficult to make a precise 
assessment of an employee’s output, in the public sector it is far more difficult to do so.  
BIS Review 37/2007 
 1
2.  
     The main problems in the wage system and labor relations in the public sector in 
Israel  
The basic wage described above, deriving from such factors as seniority, wage scale and 
grade, is only part of the gross wage, and in most cases does not constitute more than 50 
percent of it.  
It is worth noting that in the public sector wages are not necessarily based on employees’ 
output.  This  is  not  only  because  of  collective  granting  of  higher  grades  or  increases  in 
seniority,  for  instance,  but  also  because  it  is  difficult  to  pay  the  employee  suitably  on  the 
basis  of  his  knowledge,  responsibility,  or  generally,  his  performance.  This  can  reduce  an 
employee’s motivation to provide high-quality service efficiently. On the other hand, there is 
hardly any way to move an employee with low output to another position in which his output 
might increase, or to end his employment in cases where he is making no contribution or 
even causing damage.  
The wage-setting system has a chain of linkages.  
The  manager  has  very  little  authority  or  ability  to  reward  his  staff  according  to  their 
performance.  
Wage negotiations sometimes take place according to a party’s ability to exert pressure, and 
do not necessarily reflect labor-market conditions.  
The  public sector  is  beset  by  many  labor  disputes,  and  hence  many  strikes.  The  problem 
with  quick-fire  solutions  to  disputes  is  that  in  contrast  with  established  mechanisms  that 
create agreement and ongoing norms with regard to labor relations, strikes and courts just 
hasten the advent of the next dispute. This is an inefficient process that leads to a waste of 
time and resources in the economy  
3.  
Principles for reforming the wage system and labor relations in the public sector in 
Israel  
I will relate in broad outline to three aspects: the structure of wages, the recruitment and promotion of 
staff, and resolving labor disputes.  
(a) 
The  structure  of  wages:  this  should  be  simplified.  As  I  mentioned,  currently  there  are 
numerous  payment  items (more  than 1,000),  that  can  be  added  to  the  basic wage,  which 
constitutes about 50 percent of the total wage. These payments distort the wage structure, 
which  is  not  transparent  and  which  gives  rise  to  discussions  on  the  names  of  the  items 
instead of the actual bottom-line payment to the employee. This reminds me, and probably 
lots of you too, of the Gashash Hahiver “Israbluff”. It is important that an employee’s wage be 
real, open and transparent.  
Staff recruitment and promotion: it is important to implement the rule that new staff should be 
recruited  according  to  their  level  of  education  and  knowledge,  and  promoted  according  to 
their output. Therefore:  
i) 
The  period  of  classifying  a  new  employee  should  be  extended,  and  it  should 
include  examining  his  suitability  for  more  than  just  one  position;  the  trial  period 
should also be extended. In addition, wherever possible staff should be recruited to 
a career track, rather than for a particular job.  
To ensure that promotion is determined by output, there should be a mechanism 
that enables managers to assess an employee’s output; promotion should then be 
conditional on how well the employee carries out his assignments and meets his 
targets,  and  on  the  periodic  assessments  prepared  by  the  manager.  Also, 
outstanding  employees  should  be  given  special  bonuses  for  excellence.  At  the 
same time, grades should not be granted automatically with seniority, nor allocated 
collectively.  
Resolving labor disputes: the system of agreed arbitration should be strengthened, 
and  it  should  become  an  important  factor  in  settling  labor  disputes  that  are  not 
legal disputes, and it should be become an established part of the process in such 
cases. At the same time, wide room for manoeuvre should be left for negotiations 
ii) 
iii) 
(b) 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2007
with  representatives  of  the  employees  on  all  subjects  which  require  employee 
involvement.  Furthermore,  further  limitations  should  be  imposed  on  the  right  to 
strike,  provided  that  such  limitations  are  intended  to  protect  the  public  and  the 
economy  and  to  encourage  the  solution  of  disputes.  This  can  be  done  via 
injunctions and removing strikers’ protection against legal action.  
The changes I have suggested would benefit the general public, employees in the public sector who 
wish to contribute to the welfare of the public, and the public sector as employer. The outline I have 
presented is a very broad one, as I said, but the Bank of Israel will continue working on it. I hope that 
this will enable us to present a full, detailed, well formulated proposal that will lead to a change in this 
area. Although the task is not a simple one, it certainly needs to be undertaken.  
BIS Review 37/2007 
 3
