Shamshad Akhtar: Building inclusive financial system in Pakistan 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Financial 
Inclusion Conference, DfID & HM Treasury, London, 19 June 2007. 
 Introduction 
transformation 
A. 
Supported by high and sustainable economic growth during 2000-2007 Pakistan has made 
key inroads: poverty incidence has reduced by 10% down to 24%, per capita income doubled 
to  $925,  and  there  has  been  steady  progress  in  other  Millennium  Development  Goals 
(MDGs).  
Turnaround  and 
in  banking  sector,  supported  by  privatization  and 
restructuring and market oriented policies, has already shown visible results in broadening, 
deepening and diversifying financial services in the country. However, the growth of financial 
sector  has,  as  yet,  not  penetrated  across  all  segments  of  population  and  across  different 
regions. This is not unique to Pakistan as most countries have had to adopt explicit financial 
policies and affirmative action to redress the inequities and deficiencies of financial system 
which tend to disproportionately serve businesses and individuals with appropriate net worth 
backed by assets and collateral or located in prosperous areas.  
Recognizing  this,  the  central  bank  of  Pakistan  has  launched  a  broad  based  strategy  for 
enhancing access to development finance. In this paper, I propose to discuss the case for a 
holistic and broad based strategy for financial inclusion in Pakistan to achieve desired scale 
and sustainability. In doing so, I intend to first outline: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Impact of financial sector reforms in deepening access to finance; 
Identifying nature and intensity of financial exclusion; and finally  
Discuss  the  key  objectives,  goals  and  principles  and  major  elements  of  financial 
inclusion  strategy  –  The  strategy  is  anchored  on  developing  financial  and  socially 
sustainable  mechanism  of  credit  delivery  with  particular  focus  on  financially 
excluded population and regions. 
The  central  bank  of  Pakistan  (the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  (SBP))  has  now  assumed  a 
coordinating  and  supportive  role  with  the  alliance  of  Government,  private  sector  and 
partnership  with  development  assistance  to  evolve  and  implement  the  financial  inclusion 
strategy.  
Impact of financial sector reforms in deepening access to finance  
B. 
Over  the  last  seven  years,  Pakistan’s  banking  sector  landscape  has  changed  drastically. 
Principally  both  ownership  and  management  changed.  Financial  markets  have  been  fully 
deregulated.  Together  these  measures  resulted  in  remarkable  quantitative  and  qualitative 
change.  Growth  in  bank  assets,  deposits  and  advances  has  been  unprecedented. 
Profitability is high, and nonperforming loans are at the lowest etc. Most notable has been  
• 
• 
• 
Rise in private sector credit from Rs18 billion in FY00 to over Rs 400 billion in FY06  
SMEs accounted for 17.4% of the total outstanding advances by December 2006 
Consumer credit accounted for 12% of the total outstanding advances by December 
2006 from virtually negligible levels 
Rise in agriculture credit from under Rs40 billion in FY00 to Rs 168 billion in FY07 
Housing loans rose from negligible levels to Rs70 billion by December 2006 
 BIS Review 87/2007 
 1
  Microfinance loans increased from about Rs3 billion in 2003 to over Rs. 10 billion by 
December 2006 
Aggregate  number  of  borrowers  has  risen  from  2.7  million  borrowers  in  2003  to 
about 5.5 million by December 2006.  
Also,  now  banks  are  extending  their  business  focus  from  corporate  to  household  sector. 
About half of the borrowers have tapped consumer financing which is changing lives of low 
and middle income households that can now access credit (Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Distribution of Sector Lending 
31-12-2003 
31-12-2006 
Amount 
in Million 
Number of 
Borrowers 
17,743 
91,663 
1,411,508 
721,201 
NA 
135,561 
315,000 
2,692,676 
Sectors 
Corporate 
SMEs  
Agriculture  
Consumer Finance  
Mortgage Loans  
Others 
Microfinance Loans 
Total  
NA: Not Available 
Source: SBP except microfinance numbers are from Pakistan Microfinance Network 
 
Rs. 
606,500
215,009
104,676
61,437
4,114
169,035
3,150
1,163,922
Number of 
Borrowers
25,740
168,233
1,480,214
2,665,423
24,313
122,190
997,778
5,483,891
Amount in 
Million Rs. 
1,269,564
417,873
141,856
276,037
49,134
246,289
10,743
2,411,496
% Growth  
over Dec 03-Dec 06 
Borrowers  Amount 
45 
84 
5 
270 
- 
(10) 
217 
104 
109
94
36
349
1,094
46
241
107
Nature and intensity of financial exclusion 
C. 
Despite  the  progress  highlighted  above,  financial  penetration  in  Pakistan  is  quite  low. 
Pakistan has the highest number of people per bank branch among regional countries except 
Bangladesh (Table 2). 
Table 2. Regional Comparison: Bank's Branch Penetration 
Country 
Bangladesh 
India 
Indonesia 
Malaysia 
Pakistan 
Philippines 
Singapore 
Sri Lanka 
Thailand 
Source: World Bank and SBP calculations 
Number of People per Branch 
 22,348  
 15,864  
 11,845  
 10,208  
 20,450  
 12,773  
 10,954  
 14,551  
 13,929  
 
 
Thus  far,  37%  of  the  adults  have  bank  accounts;  the  number  of  borrowers,  at  5.5  million, 
constitutes only 3.5% of the population; there are only 171 deposit accounts per 1000 people 
and 30 loan accounts per 1000 people. Agriculture and SME credit reaches only to 1.5 and 
0.16  million  borrowers1,  respectively.  Furthermore,  outreach  of  documented  microfinance 
sector is 1.13 million as of March 2007.  
                                                 
1   December 2006 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2007
Financial exclusion exists in all economies and markets, whether developed or developing. 
However,  the  level  and  degree  of  financial  exclusion  is  far  more  in  developing  and  large 
countries  as  both  population  and  size  of  country  introduces  their  own  constraints  and 
challenges (Table 3).  
 Table 3. Financial Penetration: Rural vs Urban  
  
Population 
Poverty Incidence (as estimated by GOP) 
Bank Branches 
Total population having bank accounts 
Adult population (19+ years) having bank accounts * 
Rural  Urban 
67.0 
33.0 
14.9 
28.1 
67.0 
33.0 
6.0 
37.0 
75.0 
14.0 
Deposits (number) 
Deposits (amount) 
Advances (number) 
Advances (amount) 
*: this figure may be overstated due to multiple accounts. 
Source: SBP and Economic Survey 06-07 
25.0 
9.9 
17.0 
7.1 
75.0 
90.1 
83.0 
92.9 
Total 
100.0 
23.9 
100.0 
17.0 
37.0 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
 In Pakistan financial exclusion manifests itself in different forms: 
(i) 
Exclusion because of geographical constraints since a large proportion of population 
e.g. almost 67% lives in rural areas and there are pockets of population residing in 
difficult remote and disadvantaged terrain such as barani and arid areas and tribal 
areas; 
Exclusion because of lack of enabling environment at provincial level. For instance, 
banks find it difficult to intermediate agriculture credit in provinces where there are 
problems  such  as  lack  of  suitable  land  records  and  weak  law  and  order 
enforcement. Similarly, these problems hinder other sectors including microfinance 
institutions to increase their penetration which is highly desirable due to prevalence 
of high headcount poverty.  
Exclusion because of banking behavior and practices either because they are not 
servicing a large segment of population or they rely on traditional modes of lending 
which  require  collateral  or  documentary  requirements  or  they  impose  prohibitive 
transaction costs etc;  
Exclusion  because  of  poverty  or  illiteracy  or  cultural  and  language  barriers  as  a 
result of which population generally lacks awareness and understanding of financial 
services and products; 
Exclusion because of lack suitability of products like current accounts, which do not 
offer an overdraft and an easy route to borrowings; and  
Exclusion because of regulatory barriers, such as the money laundering guidelines 
requiring proof of identification which many poor and vulnerable people find difficult 
to provide.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Financial inclusiveness is critical as 42% of Pakistan’s population is under 15 years of age 
and about 24% of the population lives below poverty line, both these segments can benefit 
from  economic  empowerment.  Apart  from  banks’  loan  pricing  policy  and  lack  of  easy 
availability, financial institutions are reluctant to venture into new areas as they do not have 
the capacity to assess the demand and deliver their financial services. The lack of availability 
of  the  faith  based  system  of  financial  services,  lack  of  alternate  delivery  channels  and 
financial  innovation,  inadequate  database  and  information  on  borrowers,  and  weak 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 3
enforcement  of  contract  etc.  are  some  of  the  main  stumbling  blocks  that  prevent 
inclusiveness of financial sector.  
Pakistan – financial inclusive strategy  
D. 
Objectives,  goals  and  principles.  Recognizing  the  overwhelming  size  and  intensity  of 
financial exclusion in Pakistan, SBP in designing the second generation reforms for financial 
services  industry  is  placing  high  priority  on  developing  and  implementing  an  effective 
strategy for financial inclusion. This section offers some perspectives on this strategy.  
A key objective of the financial inclusion strategy of Pakistan is to support the Government’s 
target for halving the income poverty headcount by 2015 and to reduce eventually poverty to 
a single digit. To realize this objective, the Government and the SBP has for sometime been 
creating conducive policy, legal and regulatory framework across the board, while adopting 
multiple approaches and modalities to extend its net of financial services to larger segment of 
population.  
Keeping these perspectives in mind, Pakistan has adopted a holistic strategy for empowering 
and enhancing the capacity of poor to contribute and participate in economic growth. On one 
hand, the Government is focusing on enhancing public investment in education and health 
and a wide variety of poverty alleviation programs. On the other hand, the central bank has 
been steering a broad-based policy framework for promoting inclusive financial development.  
The principle thrust of the approaches and programs designed has been to shift emphasis 
from directed and subsidized credit to adopting best practices and market based approaches 
to promoting private sector in financial inclusion. Meanwhile, public expenditure is supporting 
selective and targeted interventions to stimulate and catalyze action and nurture institutions 
which leverage public: private partnerships to improve access to financial services for poor.  
Most prominent e.g. is the support for the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF) and the 
National Rural Support Program and the recent President’s Rozgar Scheme that offers credit 
to nations young and unemployed.  
The PPAF is sponsored by the Government of Pakistan and funded by the World Bank and 
other leading donors. The PPAF follows a model of public private partnership through lending 
of wholesale funds to civil society organizations committed to community outreach programs 
for enhancing income and economic welfare of the disadvantaged people. Specifically, the 
PPAF  provides  funding  for  projects  that  help  generate  income,  improve  physical,  social 
infrastructure, and skills of the vulnerable. On February 28, 2007 the PPAF had a resource 
base of US$ 826.17 million (Rs. 49,560.2 million)2.  
The NRSP is the largest Rural Support Programme in the country in terms of its outreach, 
staff and development activities. It is a not-for-profit organization with a mandate to alleviate 
poverty by helping people to harness their potential and undertake development activities in 
Pakistan. It has presence in all the four Provinces including Azad Jammu and Kashmir. The 
NRSP,  with  more  than  half  a  million  poor  households  organized  into  a  network  of  about 
29,000 Community Organizations (COs), manages one of the largest micro-credit portfolios 
in Pakistan, with 282,421 active loans as of March 2007; it holds 25% of the microfinance 
market. The NRSP provides various financial services to the members of COs in rural areas 
to help them implement their Micro Investment Plans (MIPs)3, including Micro Credit, Micro 
Insurance and savings products.  
                                                 
2   Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund 
3   National Rural Support Program and Pakistan Microfinance Network 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2007
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
The  National  Bank  of  Pakistan,  largest  nation-wide  bank,  is  offering  small  loans  to 
unemployed and poor to finance purchase of auto rickshaws, setting up utility stores under 
franchise  of  the  Utility  Corporation,  and  setting  up  public  call  office  etc.  Interest  on  these 
loans is fixed at 12%: 50% of interest charges are to be borne by the Government and the 
remaining  6%  by  the  borrowers.  The  Government  will  pick  up  first  10%  of  all  losses  and 
share  credit  risk  insurance.  External  and  internal  verification  of  borrowers,  references  and 
guarantees are handled by ICIL – a representative firm of Dun and Bradstreet. This scheme 
is anticipated to deliver over 5 years period about Rs105 billion (US $ 1.74 billion). Since its 
launch this year, the scheme has delivered Rs2 billion to about 22,136 borrowers4 .  
Recognizing  Pakistan’s  context,  and  drawing  from  other  country  experiences,  it  has  to  be 
acknowledged upfront that financial exclusion can only be tackled effectively: 
(i) 
If it is well conceptualized, well grounded and well integrated in the overall financial 
sector policy framework; 
If  it  is  backed  by  absolute  political  commitment  and  cooperative  stance  of  the 
federal,  provincial  and  local  government  and  relevant  sector  agencies  to  create  a 
healthy and conducive environment for financial intermediation at the lower end of 
population where risks are of different nature;  
If financial institution recognize their corporate social responsibility and work towards 
financial deepening and credit diversification that is key to financial inclusion as well 
as to managing banks’ health and its systemic risks; 
If  there  is  focus  on  provision  of  holistic  financial  services,  whereby  savings 
mobilization  is  perceived  critical  and  integral  to  establishing  the  client  on  a  sound 
footing and clients have collateral free access to financing with adequate provision 
for risks mitigated through credit enhancement mechanism and insurance; and 
Facilitating reliable and secure payment between different parties.  
(v) 
Major elements of financial inclusion strategy.  Drawing  from  considerations  highlighted 
above,  Pakistan’s  financial  inclusion  strategy  is  broad  based  and  flexible  that  aims  to 
encourage  partnership  and  social  cohesion  and  mobilization  with 
the  objective  of 
empowering and nurturing clients and their businesses. It engulfs all segments of population 
by offering them holistic and multiple services and products.  
Anchoring  and  weaving  these  objectives,  goals  and  principles,  the  SBP  and  the 
Pakistan  Microfinance  Network  (PMN)  have  developed  a  far  reaching  Microfinance 
Strategy  that  is  one  of  the  principal  driver’s  of  financial  inclusion  strategy5.  In  April 
2007,  the  Government  has  approved  this  Microfinance  Strategy  and  a  time  bound  Action 
Plan has been prepared to launch its implementation. Presently, the institutional framework 
of MF industry includes a set of (i) retail providers such as six MFBs (licensed only recently 
by  central  bank),  (ii)  the  national  and  provincial  rural  support  programs  and  charitable  or 
specialized  NGOs,  (iii)  the  wholesale  apex  institution,  the  principal  being  the  PPAF  which 
relies  on  donor  and  government  financing  support  to  refinance  community  organization 
whose number has reached 60,000; and (iv) the NGOs and the cooperatives – later are now 
mostly  closed  except  for  one  principal  operator,  the  Punjab  Cooperative  Bank  that  has 
managed to be proactive but it relies on SBP credit lines (quite an unsustainable approach) 
and provincial government support and has to be eventually restructure to be more financial 
viable.  
                                                 
4   National Bank of Pakistan. 
5   Expanding Microfinance Outreach in Pakistan, 
www.sbp.org.pk/about/speech/governors/dr.shamshad/2007/MF-PM-17-Apr-07.pdf. 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 5
Commercial  banks  have  selectively  provided  liquidity  support  to  few  MFIs.  In  the  last  six 
years,  MF  industry  and  beneficiaries  have  grown  (Table  4).  Currently  the  network  of  MF 
providers is 239 branches servicing about 1.1 million clients with about Rs5.6 billion portfolio. 
Among MF providers, Khushali Bank alone accounts for 47% of this network. However, MF-
loan  portfolio  is  higher  close  to  Rs73  billion  (as  of  December  2006)  if  one  adds  to  MF 
providers programs all the agriculture, National Bank of Pakistan and other banks’ small and 
micro lending.  
 Year 
Borrowers  
 Savers  
 Table 4. Growth in Microfinance (numbers in thousand) 
1998  1999  2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007 up to 
65 
240 
450 
998 
1000  1200  1400 
March 
1130 
1510 
315 
915 
210 
880 
100 
915 
64 
280 
67 
622 
609 
Source: Pakistan Microfinance Network 
Even  though  industry  has  grown  and  is  quite  vibrant,  its  limited  scale  (both  in  terms  of 
beneficiaries  and  region)  and  impact  has  recently  necessitated  stock  taking  of  where  we 
stand and how to transform this sector to meet more aggressively and swiftly country wide 
requirements.  The  MF-strategy  advocates  enhancing  scale  of  MF  operations  to  serve  3 
million within 3 years for it to be henceforth extended eventually to 10 million expeditiously. 
MF ought to provide multiple services and products and sector financing and should include 
support for the un-banked poor but also those above it. 
The strategy aims to encourage a change in vision and mission of MF operators from being 
charitable and social service providers to sustainable financial service providers. To achieve 
scale,  the  strategy  underscores  that  all  MF  business  need  to  position  themselves  for 
scalability and sustainability by augmenting their reach and developing alliances with other 
players, provision of wide ranging financial services and nurturing both financial and social 
sustainability. In addition, the strategy aims to unleash the potential of existing MF providers, 
while enhancing competition by allowing entry of new international players, exploiting greater 
synergies  between  public:  private  institutions  and  retail-wholesale  providers,  developing 
framework  for  piloting  credit  unions  and  developing  basic  infrastructure  for  enhancing 
capacities of industry and borrowers as well as developing credit information bureau.  
The  strategy  further  advocates  developing  effective  synergies  between  the  commercial 
banks  and  the  Microfinance  Banks  (MFBs)  and  between  the  Microfinance  Institutions 
(MFIs)/Nongovernmental  organizations  (NGOs).  This  interdependence  and  integration  is 
perceived  critical  to  encourage  commercial  banks  to  provide  the  desired  liquidity  to  MF 
providers  –  which  is  absolute  necessity  until  deposit  mobilization  at  MF  level  generates 
required surpluses. Alliance between formal institutions and MFIs/NGOs is intended to help 
them access client and achieve desired degree of social mobilization – not a forte of banks. 
The strategy recognizes that MF providers alone cannot reach the large proportion of poor 
and low income so proper synergies and partnership among financial institutions will facilitate 
swifter  extension  of  financial  services  to  the  small  and  micro  borrowers  across  different 
sectors.  The  MF  providers  would  have  to  reorient  the  way  they  do  business  and  provide 
different  products  including  loans,  saving  and  insurance  instruments  as  well  as  structure 
safety  net  schemes.  More  specifically,  MF  providers  would  need  to  develop  capacities  to 
deliver credit to different sector such as agriculture, housing etc. 
Furthermore, strategy recognizes that MFIs and MFBs would need to develop commercially 
viable  and  financially  sustainable  operation.  This  requires  appropriate  availability  and 
blending of financing: equity support, debt raising mechanisms, leveraging funding through 
credit enhancement, and exploiting more aggressively resource mobilization from depositors. 
Furthermore, MFIs need to enjoy flexibility in charging interest rates that fully recover costs – 
administration  and  supervision  as  well  as  risk  perceptions  –  public  acceptability  of  this  is 
6 
 BIS Review 87/2007
critical  as  eventually 
competition. To realize these goals, Government is 
(i) 
financial  services  would  be  priced  effectively  with  enhanced 
Introducing  level  playing  field  among  the  MFBs  by  bringing  all  MFIs  under  one 
legislative and regulatory framework – this requires bringing the Khushali Bank, the 
largest  branch  network,  established  under  special  ordinance  and  supported  by 
subsidized funding that distorts level playing field in the industry. 
Encouraging  MFIs  to  upgrade  themselves  to  a  full-fledged  bank  by  offering  a  5 
years tax break to MFBs. 
Developing  special  funding/financing  arrangements  for  MFIs  which  have  potential 
for  exploiting  scale  but  cannot  do  so  without  resource  constraints.  MFIs  (such  as 
NRSP) are facing difficulty in extending their reach in difficult terrain such as barani 
and un-irrigated areas and rural areas without effective liquidity to conduct business. 
To  address  this  issue,  central  bank  is  exploring  mechanisms  to  encourage 
relationships and alliance between the commercial banks and MF providers with the 
objective  of  former  providing  the  desired  level  of  liquidity  with  and  without  credit 
guarantees  or  acquiring  MFI  to  nurture  such  institutions.  At  the  same  time,  the 
NRSP will be transforming itself from MFI to MFB and is working on a strategy to 
restructure with the objective of achieving scale in its operations. 
Facilitating entry of new international players such as BRAC, Shore bank, etc. and 
encouraging setting up a Build-Own-Trust Model supported by the Grameen Trust.  
Encouraging restructuring of First Women Bank Ltd. to enhance its role in serving 
microcredit requirements of women. Restructuring would involve bringing in strategic 
partner  in  this  bank  and  encouraging  enhancement  of  its  capital  to  allow  it  to 
leverage itself properly for augmenting its outreach. 
Enhancement  of  capacities  of  PPAF  to  offer  credit  enhancement  to  leverage 
resources for microfinance industry and supporting other industry-wide initiatives.  
PMN  further  positions  itself  to  serve  as  a  think  tank,  advocacy  group  and  collate 
trends and analysis of industry and has played an instrumental role in steering the 
industry and strategy. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
Central bank’s special initiatives to enhance outreach and scale 
SBP’s  Annual  Branch  Licensing  and  Basic  Accounts  Policy.  SBP  has  introduced  the 
Annual Branch Licensing Policy with a road map for 2008 and beyond. This policy requires 
commercial banks with 100 branches or more to open at least 20% of their branches outside 
big cities and set up branches in Tehsil Headquarters where no branch of any bank exists.  
  Table 5. Proportion of Rural vs Urban Bank Branches 
 % age of Rural 
% age of Urban 
Branches 
Branches 
Total 
Branches 
Foreign Banks 
Five Big Banks 
Private Banks 
Islamic Banks 
Specialized Banks 
Source: SBP 
0 
41 
7 
0 
33 
100 
59 
93 
100 
67 
49 
5,448 
1,575 
93 
539 
The branch licensing policy has had a significant impact on braches of the five large banks 
with  more  than  40%  branches  in  the  rural  areas  (Table  5).  In  contrast,  the  private  banks, 
despite having a considerable number of total branches are lagging behind in rural branches 
leaving  much  to  be  improved.  This  could  be  due  to  the  fact  that  private  banks  mostly 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 7
comprise of smaller banks with less than 100 branches. Similarly, Islamic banks and foreign 
banks will have to open rural branches once they reach the threshold of 100 branches. 
In addition, SBP has allowed banks to establish sub branches, booth and service centre of 
commercial banks in inner regions where it is costly to maintain a full fledged branch. These 
sub branches can be managed by skeleton staff and can act as an extended arm of the near 
by branch for performing limited banking functions such as deposits, withdrawals, issuance 
of demand draft, telegraphic transfer etc. and also facilitate payment of home remittances to 
their beneficiaries. 
Since November 2005 all commercial banks operating in Pakistan are required to offer Basic 
Banking Accounts (BBA) to facilitate and provide basic banking facilities to the low income 
people in Pakistan. A typical BBA can be opened with a minimum deposit of Rs1000 carrying 
no fee, no limit of minimum balance and full ATM facility. As of March 2007, about 120,000 
BBAs were opened. 
Hesitation  in  mobilizing  BBAs  has  been  there  as  the  banks  complain  of  high  transaction 
costs associated with these accounts. While BBA is relatively a new product, the current and 
savings  account  are  almost  47%  of  total  deposit  base  and  remain  sticky  despite  the  low 
returns offered by the bank. Central bank has introduced substantive competition by allowing 
entry  of  new  and  foreign  banks  and  it  is  likely  that  this  competition  will  eventually  drive 
interest rates up for small depositors over time and would serve in turn as an incentive to 
clients to bank more aggressively. Special products offering different schemes for car loans 
and insurance etc. are already attracting urban small depositor, who were earlier out of the 
net, to bank. 
Promotion  of Post Office network.  SBP  and  Post  Office  (PO)  are  exploring  how  12,343 
field office network of PO can be used to provide financial services by encouraging alliances 
between MFBs/MFIs and PO. So far, PO manages over 4 million saving accounts with 70% 
of such accounts holding savings below Rs10, 000 (or $165). PO is now working with a few 
MFBs/MFIs to develop viable arrangements for PO to sublet premises to MF providers or to 
partner  with  them  to  launch  wide  range  of  financial  services.  PO  recognizes  that  it  would 
have  to  rely  on  MFIs  for  financial  intermediation,  though  local  POs  have  over  the  years 
developed an understanding of local communities that they service.  
SBP’s  Sector  Prudential  Regulatory  Framework  catalyzed  to  service  under-served. 
Dedicated  prudential  regulations  have  been  developed  for  specific  sectors.  In  2001  SBP 
issued Microfinance Ordinance and supportive Prudential Regulations as well as guidelines 
to  allow  setting  up  of  national  and  regional  MFBs  and  now  6  national  level  MFBs  are 
licensed. The MF ordinance has been amended last year to ensure that minimum loan size 
being  offered  by  MF  be  raised  to  Rs150,000  to  allow  providers  to  service  MF  business 
requirement  and  now  MF  are  allowed  to  engage  in  remittances  businesses.  Banks  are 
allowed to lend to small and medium enterprises clean i.e. without collateral up to Rs3 million 
and now SBP is considering broadening it to include small enterprises.  
In parallel, there are several initiatives to extend financial services to small borrowers. These 
include:  SBP’s-SME  financing  Strategy  that  advocates  promotion  of  Credit  Guarantee 
Schemes  and  Venture  Capital  Funds,  establishment  of  SME  training  centers  and  capacity 
building  of  banks’  SME  Loan  Officers,  SME  Credit  Risk  Scoring  and  Competitiveness 
Benchmarking and Triennial Survey on SMEs to estimate their demand for the financing. In 
tandem,  SBP  has  introduced  Prudential  Regulations  for  Agricultural  Financing  and 
Guidelines  for  Livestock  and  Fisheries  financing;  estimated  agricultural  credit  demand  for 
complete value chain from production to export by the farmers/growers; and simplified and 
standardized loan documents, and offered three years revolving credit scheme with one time 
documentation  and  automatic  renewal  on  annual  cleanup  of  principal  plus  markup  for 
production 
finance  against 
market/realizable/forced  sale  value  of  the  agriculture  land,  urban  properties,  gold/silver 
ornaments,  etc.  and  also  against  two  personal  sureties  (up  to  Rs.500,000  –  US$8,333)  in 
further  allowed  banks 
farmers.  SBP  has 
loans 
to 
to 
8 
 BIS Review 87/2007
addition  to  passbook  of  the  land  etc.  These  initiatives  have  contributed  significantly  in 
enhancing formal institutional agricultural credit disbursement for small borrowers.  
Besides  allowing  commercial  banks  and  removing  caps  on  house  loans  and  bank  based 
exposure limits for housing finance, the House Building Finance Corporation (HBFC) is being 
corporatized  to  deal  with  the  back  log  and  demand  for  new  housing  units  in  Pakistan, 
estimated at 19.3 million including back log of 6 million low income housing units. HBFC, with 
support  of  the  Government,  has  announced  to  promote  low  income  housing  on  sound 
banking principles. 
Islamic  banking,  which  carries  appeal  for  Shariah  compliant  clients,  is  being  promoted  to 
cater  for  underserved  sectors  such  as  SMEs,  agriculture  sector  and  micro  enterprises 
through Shariah compliant products. Besides six full fledged Islamic Banks and permission to 
conventional banks to render such services, a full fledged Islamic Microfinance Banks (IMFB) 
would be encouraged also. 
The  central  bank  is  working  with  the  Government  to  develop  adequate  and 
commercially  viable  credit  enhancement  mechanism  to  support  lending  to  MFIs  which 
have  now  developed  their  niche  and  have  potential  to  enhance  their  outreach  but  are 
constrained  because  of  lack  of  funding  or  financing  for  capacity  support.  Similarly  there  is 
need for credit guarantee mechanisms to support evolution of small businesses. For these 
areas  it  is  arranging  for  technical  support  from  international  service  providers  such  as 
Grameen  Foundation  of  USA  will  help  in  development  of  credit  enhancement  mechanism 
and establishing a poverty monitoring mechanism to assess the credit delivery to vulnerable 
population. 
The  central  bank  is  encouraging  promotion  of  insurance  products  to  support  micro 
and  small  lending.  For  instance,  SBP  plans  to  play  a  proactive  role  in  development  of 
Islamic  micro-insurance  products  and  has  already  worked  with  private  sector  insurance 
companies  to  develop  non  collaterized  lending  and  crop  loan  insurance  products  which 
should help leverage MFBs and other institutions interest in supporting agriculture lending for 
small borrowers.  
The central bank has promoted electronic banking which should lay the foundation for 
country  wide  connectivity  of  financial  institutions.  Already  about  half  of  the  bank 
branches are now engaged in electronic fund transfer which is eventually to be supported by 
the  legal  coverage  provided  by  the  Payment  and  Electronic  Fund  Transfer  Act,  2007.  In 
parallel, efforts are underway in collaboration with ADB to launch mobile banking. The central 
bank  has  already  laid  out  a  Policy  Paper  on  Regulatory  Framework  for  Mobile  Banking  in 
Pakistan for public comments. Under this, central bank will promote both branchless as well 
as bank and non-bank focused models of mobile banking.  
The  central  bank  has  restructured  itself  in  September  2006  and  established  a  full 
fledged Development Finance Group. This is now headed by an Executive Director – who 
is a important member of the Banking Cluster, with independent sector finance departments 
which steer and help implementation of policy, legal and regulatory framework for Small and 
Microfinance businesses, agriculture and rural credit, housing and infrastructure finance and 
Islamic finance. This Group has been entrusted with the Mission to steer and implement the 
financial inclusion strategy, launch development programs and analyze and monitor issues 
and  progress  in  access  to  development  finance  in  collaboration  with  the  stakeholders  and 
Government  agencies.  The  Banking  Services  Corporation  –  a  subsidiary  of  SBP  –  is  now 
being restructured to engage through Local Advisory Committees to disseminate the financial 
inclusion architecture at field level and to provide us feedback on problems of development 
access while raising awareness and understanding of financial solutions offered by various 
providers and providing feedback on the problems public faces. 
The central bank with the support of its two principal training institutions i.e. National Institute 
of  Banking  and  Finance  and  the  Institute  of  Bankers  Pakistan  is  implementing  financial 
literacy and capacity building for financial institution and public to leverage available financial 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 9
services  while  building  momentum  for  them  to  appreciate  that  pricing  of  formal  delivery 
channels while high would be competitive vis-à-vis informal and other lending opportunities 
they may have. 
Conclusion 
E. 
In  conclusion,  given  the  nature  and  intensity  of  financial  exclusion  in  Pakistan,  we  can  ill 
afford to delay sound and quick implementation of the financial inclusion strategy that has 
been developed by the central bank with support of all stake holders. It is critical to recognize 
that this broad based strategy aims to unleash the potential of both public and private sector 
financial intermediaries and agencies and channel them more coherently and systematically 
to launch an all round aggressive campaign on financial inclusion.  
The  central  bank  on  its  part  is  not  in  business  of  directing  or  supporting  itself  financial 
intermediation but is in the business of performing its public role and responsibility leveraging 
policy, legal and institutional standing and strength to act as a principal agent for motivating, 
mobilizing  and  using  moral  suasion  with  industry  to  serve  the  people.  Its  role  is  more  to 
empower  the  industry  and  its  agents  and  to  empower  public  through  financial  literacy  to 
position themselves to access wide range of financial services in a cost effective and efficient 
manner. Political commitment, the passion and power of MF providers and banks at large will 
be  able  to  help  us  reach  every  household  and  individual  to  transform  the  lives  of  those 
currently excluded from financial system.  
The central bank has entered into a partnership with DfID to coordinate and help implement 
this financial inclusion package. SBP will work with DfID to establish Financial Inclusion Fund 
to structure credit enhancement mechanisms and facilities for industry to develop required 
governance  structure,  infrastructure/IT  to  facilitate  MF  lending  and  provide  business 
entrepreneurial  development 
for 
accounting/financial literary, corporate governance and launching special studies/surveys to 
help support development of inclusive financial system groups and its impact.  
Finally,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  providing  poor  and  vulnerable  groups  access  to 
financially and sustainable development finance is the most effective and respectable way of 
poverty alleviation. 
including  development  of 
capacities 
support 
10 
 BIS Review 87/2007
