Panayotis Thomopoulos: Recent developments in housing finance 
Speech  by  Mr  Panayotis  Thomopoulos,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  European 
Finance Convention, Athens, 31 January 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure and an honor to address such a distinguished audience of practitioners in the 
area  of  finance  on  such  a  topical  issue.  Before  speaking  succinctly  on  the  housing  market  and  its 
interlinkages with the rest of economy, I would like to say a few words about long term issues and 
challenges.  In  particular  in  the  field  of  mortgage  lending  the  effects  of  today’s  decisions  will  be  felt 
during the next 25 or even 35 years, when the last installment of a 25 or 35-year loan is repaid. 
Today most analysts and market actors seem optimistic about future developments and this because 
markets are mainly preoccupied with the short term, and tend to project current trends into the future. 
And if you want to lengthen the time horizon, many analysts, traders etc. will cite the famous words of 
J.  M.  Keynes,  “over  the  long  run  we  are  all  dead”,  thus  bringing  the  discussion  back  to  current 
developments  and  a  focus  on  the  short-term.  Indeed  reading  the  figures  and  short-term  forecasts 
about the world economy presented by the OECD, IMF and others one cannot but be optimistic. The 
global economy has been growing at an average rate of almost 5% since 2001, and the short-term 
prospects point to a continuing high rate of growth. The world has not seen such a high long-term rate 
of growth since the 1950s and 1960s. Moreover, whereas in the past only a small proportion of the 
world population (1/4) were reaping the dividends of growth, nowadays nations accounting for almost 
¾ of the word population are benefiting from rising standards of living, though to varying degrees. 
Are these revolutionary developments and do they signal a new area of the world history? I believe the 
answer is yes and yes. The developed world, that is essentially EU, US & CND, Australia, N. Zealand, 
Japan  &  Korea,  are  no  longer  the  only  global  actors,  and  the  consequences  of  the  economic 
upheavals  are  being  felt  in  the  world  political  arena,  cultural  attitudes,  social  behaviour  and 
unfortunately the climate across the globe. Every year more than 50-60 million people from emerging 
market countries, essentially in China and India, are entering the market economy, both as consumers 
and as producers of tradeable goods and services. The previous great leaps were the absorption into 
the market economy of only 70 million people from Korea, Taiwan, H.K. and Singapore in the 1970s 
and 1980s, that is, over a 20-year period, and the absorption of an additional 30 or a little more million 
from the European transition economics over the last 10 years. But those leaps implied a very slow 
rate  of  absorption,  considerably  smaller  than  that  of  the  last  few  years  which  has  witnessed  the 
absorption into the market economy of large population categories from China and India. 
The  economic  growth  of  the  emerging  and  transition  market  economies,  though  a  positive  world 
development as it is associated with diminishing income inequalities among countries leading to more 
balanced world development, has, nonetheless, produced some major shocks as reflected not only in 
the rising trend in energy and raw material prices but, more importantly, in the increasing pollution of 
sea and land, global warming due to carbon dioxide emissions, etc. Indeed, if we want to prevent a 
major climatic catastrophe on a global scale, the waste of energy, water and other resources, not only 
by emerging economies but also by developed economies, will have to be reversed at a great cost in 
the  future.  Just  as  under  international  accounting  standards  future  liabilities,  such  as  companies’ 
pension liabilities, are deducted from company incomes, so the future cost of today’s actions should 
be taken into account. Accordingly today’s global and individual countries’ GDP growth rates, which 
supposedly measure the improvement in the standard of living, should be adjusted downwards. Such 
an  adjustment  is  necessary  as  there  is  too  much  complacency  and  the  hidden  economic  costs  of 
today’s actions are not properly taken into account. Any new era brings along new problems, requires 
new solutions and increases the range of potential crises and risks, which are not properly gauged, as 
they are not yet calibrated. 
Moreover,  by  projecting  today’s  favourable  trends,  financial  markets  often  generate  a  benign 
perception of future developments, which do not, however, reflect all the underlying forces at work. 
Indeed, the significant transformation of the financial environment has led to heightened and new risks 
associated  with  the  introduction  of  innovative  products  (e.g.  derivatives),  the  existence  of  highly 
leveraged  non-regulated  financial  institutions  and  markets,  combined  with  world  liquidity  increasing 
considerably  faster  than  the  value  of  the  underlying  real  assets.  Regarding  world  politics  most 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 1
probably China and later India will become great world powers but during the transitional period before 
a new world order is established the risk of political tensions cannot be ruled out, and their impact on 
the world economy and markets cannot be fully understood today. 
Another  area  of  concern  is  that  the  benign  inflation  trends  of  the  last  few  years,  which  are  almost 
exclusively due to moderate wage claims in the developed countries and which have more than offset 
the impact of the rise in energy and raw material prices, may not continue for ever. Indeed, over the 
last  5  years  average  real  wages  have  been  stagnant,  and  probably  more  than  one-half  of  wage 
earners have experienced real income losses, while profit margins have been rising strongly. Lately 
we  have  been  seeing  the  first  signs  of  a  change  in  labour  behaviour  and,  although,  over  the  next 
couple of years wage growth will probably continue to be about 2% in most developed economies, this 
cannot be taken for granted over the medium to longer run. 
To sum up there are risks in the horizon: a) steep rising costs from global warming, pollution and the 
quick rate of depletion of non-renewable resources; b) apart from the proximate concerns regarding 
the Middle East imbroglio there are political risks further down the road, which are associated with the 
emergence of new global powers during the transition to a multi-polar world; c) crisis in segments of 
the financial markets which may necessitate drastic measures at a high cost to prevent a spill over; 
and  d)  increasing  income  inequality  in  the  developed  world  may  trigger,  especially  in  Europe,  a 
backlash with sudden wage increases putting pressure on inflation. Seeing today’s 10, 20 and 30-year 
interest rates on mortgage loans, and low bond rates in general, I have the feeling that these risks are 
not fully reflected in interest rate spreads. 
Focusing more on the specific subject of interest today, I am afraid that, in addition to financial assets, 
some countries’ real assets, including housing are overvalued today, and a disorderly adjustment of 
asset values could have important effects. This is what has been called the $400 trillion question.  
Financing of the housing sector is an area of economic analysis that has come to prominence only in 
the  last  couple  of  decades.  Two,  perhaps  inter-related,  developments  have  contributed  to  this  new 
prominence, financial innovation and the wide gyrations in housing prices that have been observed in 
the last two decades, starting with the real estate collapses in Japan and other Asian countries. No 
one can claim that house prices never fall or that real estate is an area of boring stability. In recent 
years,  the  housing  sector  has  thus  emerged  as  a  major  channel  for  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy but also as a reason for concern regarding financial stability. 
Financial innovation has allowed financial intermediaries to structure their products more in line with 
consumers’  demands  and  to  take  on  more  risky  products  as  the  possibilities  of  securitizing  their 
exposure has increased. Since housing finance is normally very long-term – typically mortgages are 
for twenty to thirty years – the mismatch of maturities is correspondingly more acute. Securitization 
allows  financial  intermediaries  to  overcome  this  problem  to  some  extent  and  thus  facilitate  the 
extension of more credit in this market. However, transferring risks does not mean that nobody will pay 
the bill if conditions deteriorate and those who will pay the bill are usually also bank clients (or the 
banks may pay compensation to holders of securitized bonds in order to minimize reputational risks); 
thus “securitization does not completely insulate banks” and this simple maxim tends to be ignored 
today. 
Consumers for their part have a wider array of options to choose from and this has led to an increase 
demand  for  mortgages.  At  the  same  time,  the  removal  of  many  regulatory  restrictions  and  the 
increased  integration  of  markets,  especially  in  Europe,  have  led  to  increased  competition  and  an 
overall  reduction  in  interest  rate  spreads  to  the  benefit  of  consumers.  Many  borrowers  who  were 
previously excluded from the market now have access to affordable credit and can enter the housing 
market. A particular phenomenon that is widespread across the Atlantic but is starting to spread over 
here  is  equity  withdrawals,  whereby  homeowners  use  the  accumulated  equity  in  their  houses  to 
finance current expenditures. Whilst this may depress savings in an economy, it may also improve its 
resilience to shocks, as the interest rate on mortgage-backed loans is normally lower than for other 
forms of consumer credit.  
Another  issue  that  may  be  acting  toward  increasing  the  risks  in  the  economy  is  the  propensity  of 
market  participants  to  take  on  risks  which  they  do  not  fully  understand.  A  specific  example  is  the 
proliferation of mortgages in foreign currencies, which make borrowers vulnerable to little understood 
exchange rate risk and lenders to credit risk, which may remain hidden for a long period as long as 
everything goes well. Of course, extension of credit to new borrowers at a time of diminishing spreads 
coupled  with  little  understanding  of  risks  may  be  a  source  of  concern  regarding  financial  stability, 
especially if house prices become stretched. 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2007
This  brings  me  to  a  second  issue,  of  housing  finance  as  a  channel  of  monetary  transmission. 
Obviously, as households take on more housing debt, they react faster and more strongly to interest 
rate  movements,  thus allowing  the Central  Bank  through  their  interest  rate  policy  to have a  greater 
influence on macroeconomic activity. A faster and fuller pass-through of interest rates facilitates the 
conduct of monetary policy and enhances its effectiveness. In this context much depends on whether 
mortgages  are  with  fixed  or  floating  interest  rates.  Countries,  of  course,  differ  widely  on  this,  for 
historical, legal or other reasons.  
Whether  the  expansion  of  the  mortgage  market  is  responsible  for  the  often-observed  significant 
increases in housing prices is a moot point. There are many good reasons that support higher prices, 
such as demographic changes, as smaller families require more overall living space, expectations that 
real  and  nominal  interest  rates  will  remain  low,  and  regulatory  restrictions  that  curtail  land  supply. 
Surely,  the  ample  liquidity  that  has  been  pumped  into  the  markets  in  recent  years  has  created 
conditions conducive to speculative excesses. Most countries in the euro area have not yet had any 
experience of significant correction in nominal housing prices. It is possible that both borrowers and 
creditors have underestimated this possibility and in some cases both credit expansion and housing 
prices increases look questionable.  
Developments in Greece are a good illustration of the forces that operate throughout Europe. After the 
full liberalization of the financial sector we have seen a real revolution of housing finance. Since 1996, 
mortgages have more than doubled as a share of banks’ portfolios, while there was a fivefold increase 
of mortgage debt as a proportion of GDP. The first trend was the result of falling interest rates and 
increased competition that led banks to search for new areas of profitable expansion. Households, on 
the other hand, facing improved conditions, as exemplified by that fast growth of GDP and lower costs 
of borrowing, reacted quite rationally by increasing their indebtedness. The ratio of homeownership in 
Greece  has  been  among  the  highest  in  Europe,  fluctuating  around  80  percent  in  recent  years. 
Mortgage demand has probably been used to improve housing conditions rather than enter the market 
for  the  first  time.  Demand  from  economic  immigrants  has  supported  this  trend  by  allowing  existing 
homeowners to sell their entry-level properties in order to move to more expensive ones. As I see it, 
we are still in the process of stock level adjustment, as the level of mortgage indebtedness at 27% of 
GDP is still below the European average (of about 38%), though the gap is narrowing rapidly. 
House prices increased fast at the start of this period relative to disposable income, although we are 
seeing some leveling-off lately. Research conducted  at the Bank of Greece by Sophocles Brissimis 
and  Thomas  Vlassopoulos  shows  a  two-way  causal  relationship.  Increasing  house  prices  have 
allowed or forced households to borrow more, while at the same time the availability of housing credit 
has fuelled house prices.  
The steep increase in mortgage lending, starting from a very low level, did initially create problems for 
the quality of Greek banks’ portfolios. Initially, the ratio of non-performing mortgage loans appeared 
quite high, but over the last six years it has almost halved. With pressure from the Bank of Greece and 
following the development of more comprehensive credit control systems, the ratio of non-performing 
mortgage loans now stands at about 3½ percent down by 1 percentage point in two years, indicating a 
much better ability of Greek banks to manage their risks. This is reinforced by the fact that mortgages 
in Greece are normally lower as a percentage of market values than elsewhere. Moreover, Greeks are 
more sentimentally attached to their homes than are Americans and other Europeans, and therefore 
perceive house-eviction as a terrible social blow. It was useful that the rapid expansion of mortgage 
credit  took  place  at  a  time  of  high  growth  and  macroeconomic  stability  since  this  allowed  banks  to 
absorb the “growing pains” emanating from their entry in this market without impairing their stability. 
Developments in South-Eastern Europe in many ways resemble Greece’s experience in the preceding 
decade. One significant difference is the relatively low stock of existing housing units, which are often 
of  a  rather  low  quality  for  today’s  needs.  There  is  thus  a  much  more  urgent  need  to  upgrade  and 
expand the housing stock. Given the relatively benign climate in those countries recently, households 
may  be  inclined  to  overextend  themselves.  These  emerging  market  economies  are  starting  from  a 
very low level of financial development, which translates also into a very low level of housing credit. 
This low level of housing credit is more a result of financial under-development rather than of skewed 
credit policies on the part of financial institutions. It is to be expected therefore that housing credit will 
expand  quite  fast  for  the  foreseeable  future  as  the  financial  sector  expands  toward  advanced 
economies’ levels. This is quite a rational reaction of creditors and borrowers to the economic situation 
and may accelerate for those countries that join or are expected to join ERM II and later EMU. In those 
countries, the reduction of the risk premium and perceived policy stability will also encourage credit 
expansion.  While  from  a  macroeconomic  point  of  view  all  these  developments  may  seem  quite 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 3
predictable,  there  is  a  fear  that  both  borrowers  and  lenders  in  these  countries  may  not  have  an 
adequate  understanding  of  the  risk  they  are  taking.  Financial  institutions  may  lack  the  necessary 
expertise to manage a fast expansion of their housing loans portfolio, and in the rush to gain market 
share  they  may  extend  credit  to  ever-riskier  borrowers.  While  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans  in 
South  Eastern  European  countries  does  not  look  threatening  now  compared  with  other  emerging 
markets, one should note that overall household credit in these countries is much lower and thus more 
manageable than elsewhere and the macroeconomic situation has been quite propitious. 
Two  further  differences  are  worth  noting:  a  strong  penetration  of  foreign-owned  banks  and  a  large 
percentage  of  loans  are  in  foreign  currency.  The  first  special  characteristic  is  the  significant 
penetration  of  foreign  banks  in  these  countries,  which  typically  control  more  than  half  of  the  local 
market.  I  should  add  here  that  Greek  banks  are  quite  active  in  this  area  and  are  expanding  fast. 
Foreign banks may be a source of stability. They bring with them a much longer experience, direct 
access to the capital markets of mature economies and, last but not least, they are supervised by their 
home  country’s  supervisors  who  also  have  a  longer  experience.  In  the  particular  circumstances  of 
these  countries,  it  is  also  worth  noting  that  foreign  banks  and  their  supervisors  are  less  prone  to 
succumb to pressure from local politicians. The challenge for them is to adapt their experience to the 
realities in their host countries. 
The second interesting characteristic is that the highest rate of growth of loans in foreign currency is 
not in countries with a fixed exchange rate regime, like Bulgaria, but in countries that have a policy of 
inflation targeting coupled with a benign neglect of the exchange rate. It is true that in recent years the 
ample  supply  of  liquidity  internationally  has  combined  with  increased  risk  tolerance  on  the  part  of 
investors to support a rather stable external environment for emerging and transition economies and in 
particular  predictable  exchange  rates.  While  we  all  hope  it  is  going  to  continue,  we  should  be  well 
aware that recent years have been a departure from longer-term trends. In addition, in some countries 
in the region one suspects that a process of real appreciation is taking place, a process that will have 
to be corrected sooner or later. The current account deficits observed in many countries in the region 
raise concerns regarding their sustainability. Any loss of confidence on the external side may easily 
cause some upheaval in the domestic financial market.  
Countries  in  South-Eastern  Europe  have  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  learn  from  best  practices 
developed  in  more  advanced  countries  and  avoid  the  mistakes  of  others.  They  should  take  the 
opportunity offered now by a relatively stable international environment and their domestic fast growth 
to  put  mortgage  lending  on  a  stable  footing.  The  credit  information  infrastructure  should  be 
strengthened, the legal procedures for dealing with defaults should be simple, clear and transparent, 
and  both  banks  and  borrowers  should  realize  the  risks  they  take,  especially  as  they  move  to  more 
sophisticated instruments. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2007
