Paul Tucker: Macro, asset price, and financial system uncertainties  
Text of the Roy Bridge Lecture delivered by Mr Paul Tucker, Executive Director Markets and Member 
of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Bank  of  England,  London, 
11 December 2006. 
 It  is  a  great  privilege  to  give  this  lecture,  named  in  honour  of  Roy  Bridge,  for  many  years  a  very 
distinguished  head  of  foreign  exchange  at  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  first  President  of  your 
association, the ACI. 
The world in which Bridge worked was so very different from ours that, although my responsibilities 
cover the same part of the Bank, I cannot really imagine what he would have made of three striking 
features of the current environment which I plan to review this evening. 
First,  while  monetary  authorities  are  commonly  given  some  of  the  credit  for  the  return  of 
macroeconomic stability, central bankers themselves devote a great deal of effort to conveying what 
they  see  as  risks  to  the  outlook.  Second,  while  some  distinguished  commentators  see  a  puzzle  in 
lower  macro  volatility  not  having  been  matched  by  an  equally  large  decline  in  asset  price  volatility, 
central bankers by contrast worry publicly that many financial asset prices imply unusually low future 
volatility. And third, while central bankers and others in the official sector celebrate the gains in risk 
transfer and efficiency brought by recent changes in the structure of the financial system, they also 
issue warnings about associated threats to systemic stability. 
These three arenas of uncertainty – macroeconomic, financial asset pricing, and the financial system – 
are of course intertwined, but I shall initially find it convenient to unbundle them. 
Macroeconomic and monetary policy uncertainties 
The characteristics of the Great Stability, as some economists call it1, are by now familiar. Essentially, 
low inflation on average; much less persistence in deviations of inflation from central banks’ explicit or 
implicit  targets;  and  much lower  volatility  in  both  output  growth  and  inflation2.  Some  of  the  credit  is 
typically given to better monetary regimes, and I believe it should be. 
Yet policy makers also stress a wide range of uncertainties, threatening at least interruptions to the 
benign  conditions  of  the  past  decade  or  so.  This  is  not  just  an  occupational  disposition  of  central 
bankers.  To  varying  degrees,  these  uncertainties  do  feature  in  real-world  policy  debates.  I  have 
argued  previously3  that  some  risks  –  such  as  those  posed  by  global  current  account  imbalances  – 
could not sensibly be factored in to policy settings ahead of their crystallising. But uncertainties about 
the  structure  of  the  economy  and  how  monetary  policy  works  do  somehow  have  to  feature  in  our 
policy  judgments,  as  I  can  illustrate  with  the  thinking  behind  my  vote  at  the  MPC’s  November 
meeting4. Essentially, I balanced two quite different, but quite likely, views of the outlook, which I shall 
label Orthodox and Alternative. 
Under both stories, private sector demand growth has been reasonably robust and looks, according to 
surveys  and  the  Bank’s  regional  Agents,  to  continue  to  be  robust  for  a  little  while  at  least. 
Notwithstanding  the  US  slowdown,  world  growth  weighted  for  its  significance  to  UK  trade  has 
remained  solid,  due  largely  to  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  Business  investment  appears  to  be 
                                                      
1  
In the US, ‘Great Moderation’ is preferred, because low inflation had been achieved in an earlier decade. Bernanke, B S 
(2004), ‘The Great Moderation’, remarks at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington 2004. 
2   See Benati L. (2005), ‘The inflation-targeting framework from an historical perspective’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 
Summer 2005, pp 160 – 168; and Tucker P M W (2005), ‘Monetary policy, stability and structural change’, speech to the 
Confederation of British Industry, March 2005, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2005, pp 247-55. 
3   Tucker P M W (2006), ‘Reflections on operating inflation targeting’, speech at the Chicago Graduate School of Business, 
May 2005, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Summer 2006, page 217. 
4   This  lecture  is  being  given  before  publication  of  the  minutes  of  the  Committee’s  December  meeting,  and  so  I  am  not  at 
liberty to discuss my contributions to that meeting. 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 1
recovering.  And  consumption,  although  in  the  near  term  subject  to  upside  risks  from  the  housing 
market but downside risks from household debt, looks most likely to grow close to its average rate. 
Surveys and anecdotal information point to firms operating close to capacity, but profit margins have 
been squeezed in recent years, essentially by the rise in energy prices. There is some slack in the 
labour market. That is deliberately broad brush; the point is that it is common to both stories. 
On the Orthodox Story, in conditions of robust aggregate demand, firms operating close to capacity 
are  likely  take  opportunities  to  restore  their  margins  by  raising  prices,  pushing  upwards  on  CPI 
inflation. So the Orthodox Story commanded a policy response to prospective inflationary pressures 
from excess demand. 
Under the Alternative Story, the outlook for inflation may be quite different due to developments in the 
labour  market,  notably  from  inward  migration.  There  might  well be  more  slack  in  the  labour  market 
than allowed for in the Orthodox Story. And, most potently, if more workers were to be attracted in to 
the country as aggregate demand expands, the economy’s productive capacity would expand as well. 
In that case, it would probably be harder for firms to raise prices, although they may still be able to 
restore margins by bearing down on costs, especially labour costs. (That is in aggregate; we would 
probably  see  further  increases  in  skill  shortages  and  in  the  premium  for  highly  skilled  labour  in  the 
professions.) On the Alternative Story, the outlook for inflation is highly uncertain – and not necessarily 
weaker, although that may seem the most obvious implication. 
Indeed, under the Alternative Story, there could well be challenges for monetary policy, which in its 
modern  mode  operates  essentially  by  using  Bank  Rate  to  regulate  aggregate  demand  relative  to 
aggregate  supply,  exploiting  a  short-run  trade  off  between  growth  and  inflation  so  long  as  inflation 
expectations are well anchored. If aggregate supply were to become endogenous in the way I have 
described, the short-run trade off might well be less pronounced for a while. That would make it harder 
to judge inflationary pressures from gauging the amount of slack in the economy; and harder for the 
Bank  to  achieve  our  2%  inflation  target  by  broadly  steering  demand  conditions.  In  that  scenario,  it 
would matter enormously that wage and price setters continued to act on the basis that CPI inflation 
would remain in line with the 2% target over the medium term. 
For me, both the Orthodox and Alternative Stories are plausible. In that sense, I think the outlook is 
‘bimodal’ – in terms of there being two main stories. The Orthodox Story, to which I gave most weight 
in my November vote, required a small tightening. The implications of the Alternative Story for policy 
were less clear. I concluded that it was essential for the MPC to act in a way that was most likely to 
keep inflation expectations anchored. With headline inflation tangibly above target in the run up to the 
main, New Year wage bargaining season and with the market clearly expecting that policy would be 
tightened, a small increase in Bank Rate was, on balance, warranted to avoid any misperception that 
our reaction function had altered. 
Strategically, the significance of this account is in the uncertainty injected by structural change; in this 
case,  from  migration.  Of  course,  there  is  a  host  of  demand-side  uncertainties:  about  consumption, 
export growth and so on. But they fit comfortably into the MPC’s framework of producing a conditional 
forecast of probability ranges around a central projection. The supply-side uncertainties are something 
else – much harder to calibrate and potentially going to how we read and act on the economy. 
Inward migration is just the most obvious reason the monetary transmission mechanism might have 
altered.  In  reviewing  globalisation  more  generally,  others  have  described  how  the  short-run 
relationship between aggregate demand and inflation may be weakened by firms’ enhanced capacity 
to  switch  production  between  countries,  including  via  outsourcing,  in  the  face  of  capacity  and  cost 
pressures. 
As policy makers discuss these issues it could become a commonplace that, in such an environment, 
central  banks  would  have  no  choice  but  to  respond  more  aggressively  whenever  inflation  deviates 
from target; that, compared with the past, we would need to make bigger changes in interest rates, 
since bigger shifts in demand would be needed to bring inflation back to target. I should make clear 
that, as put, I would not go along with this completely. It would all depend on whether medium-term 
inflation expectations were well anchored. So long as they were, the central bank would have a wider 
choice than a one-item menu of having, putting it crudely, to generate a material downturn in the short 
term to contain inflation; or, symmetrically, a boomlet to raise inflation. Another possible choice might 
be  to  tighten  (loosen)  modestly  but  for  longer,  allowing  inflation  to  return  to  target  over  a  longer 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2007
horizon; and if the policy maker explained the considerations behind the likely path of policy, price and 
wage  setters  might  act  in  a  way  that  helped  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target5.  Acting  aggressively 
without need could endanger the political economy foundations of any central bank’s authority. It has 
to be a judgment based on the particular circumstances. 
In terms of my central theme this evening, this is a world in which monetary regimes truly are better, 
but in which policy makers are having to face some fresh challenges. 
Asset pricing uncertainties  
If  central  bankers  see  possible  interruptions  to  the  Great  Stability,  there  is  arguably  conflicting 
evidence as to whether financial markets are giving it insufficient weight or – at the opposite pole – 
taking stability for granted. 
In  an  intriguing  paper,  Ken  Rogoff  has  shown  that  output  and  inflation  volatility  have  declined  by 
considerably  more  over  recent  decades  than  the  volatility  of  returns  on  a  range  of  financial  assets 
(Table  1).6  As  Rogoff  discusses,  there could be a number  of explanations.  Financial  markets  might 
believe  that  the  Great  Stability  will  not  last.  Or  it  may  be  taking  them  a  while  to  price  in  lower 
macroeconomic volatility. Or the beneficial effects of macroeconomic stability may be being offset by 
something else. 
In the third category, Rogoff discusses the possibility that, with the lower level of risk-free rates that 
have  accompanied  the  Great  Stability,  a  given  change  in  the  yield  curve  now  has  a  bigger 
proportionate effect on asset prices. I am not sure this would be my own best bet. 
Common v. idiosyncratic volatility 
But first, some facts. In the case of equity markets, we need to separate the dominant common (or 
macro)  component  of  index  returns  from  that  attributable  to  variability  in  the  firm-specific  (or 
idiosyncratic)  component.  Comparing  the  period  from  1980  to  1992  with  that  since  1992,  when 
inflation  targeting  was  introduced  in  the  UK,  the  common  component  –  proxied  by  the  average 
correlation between returns on pairs of equity index components – has fallen by around 25%7 (Chart 
1). Forward-looking measures, derived from option prices, imply that these pairwise correlations are 
not expected to fall much further. All told, this seems consistent with some beneficial effect on asset 
volatility from the Great Stability, but with Rogoff’s puzzle intact.  
Possible explanations: risk premia 
Another vantage point can be gained from decomposing changes in the level of the equity market into 
changes in (estimates of) the risk-free rate, projected earnings growth, and the equity risk premium8. 
For both the FTSE100 and the S&P, this suggests that the decline in real rates has been an important 
driver of the rise in the equity market since the early 1990s, but that the market is not materially more 
sensitive to changes in real rates now than it was on average over the past 15-20 years (Chart 2). This 
may be because, as part of better monetary policy regimes, risk-free real rates have been slightly less 
                                                      
5   See  Woodford,  M.,  2003,  ‘Interest  and  Prices:  Foundations  of  a  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy’,  Princeton  University  Press, 
Chapter 7; Tucker P M W (2006), ‘Reflections on operating inflation targeting’, speech at the Chicago Graduate School of 
Business, May 2005, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Summer 2006, page 217. 
6   Rogoff, K. (2006), 'Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy, paper prepared for a symposium on 'The New Economic 
Geography: Effects and Policy Implications', Jackson Hole Wyoming August 2006. 
7   As for the volatility in individual-firm equity returns, some extreme episodes aside (for example, the 1987 Crash), the firm-
specific  component  inevitably  dominates.  For  the  UK  market,  the  common  component  seems  to  have  fallen  slightly,  on 
average, since 1992. The idiosyncratic component rose during the second half of the 1990s, but then fell back. On the face 
of it, that would seem to square with the dotcom/telecom boom and bust. At least for the UK market, it does not obviously 
lend  support  to  the  suggestion  in  some  earlier  papers  that  there  may  have  been  an  underlying  increase  in  idiosyncratic 
volatility.  For  example,  see  Campbell  J,  M  Lettau,  B  G  Malkiel  and  Y  Xu  (2001),  ‘Have  individual  stocks  become  more 
volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosynchratic risk’, Journal of Finance, vol 56, no. 1 pp 1-43, which covered the period 
from 1962 to 1996 for the US market. 
8   Using a Dividend Discount Model. Further information on the Dividend Discount Model can be found in Panigirtzoglou N. 
and R. Scammell (2002), ‘Analysts’ earnings forecasts and equity valuations’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring 
2002, pp 59-6. 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 3
volatile  than  in  the  past.  Another  candidate  explanation  is  related  to  the  possibility  that  the  other 
component of the discount rate – the equity risk premium – may have risen since the late 1990s. If, as 
a result, the overall discount rate were broadly unchanged, a given shift in the default-free curve would 
not necessarily have a greater proportionate effect on equity prices than in past decades.  
Indeed, a bigger question would seem to be how to square the possibility of a rise in the equity risk 
premium with apparent falls, since the turn of the century, in term premia on default-free government 
bond yields and in credit risk premia across a wide range of assets. It must be cautioned that the true 
equity risk premium is unobservable, and so estimates may well be wide of the mark. But there is a 
possible  story,  related  to  changes  in  the  global  distribution  and  management  of  savings.  The 
managers of the now massive official foreign exchange reserves in Asia have a clear preference for 
fixed-income securities, both absolutely and relative to say the US household sector. And in the West, 
defined-benefit pension fund trustees and managers have been placing greater weight on matching 
the  duration  of  their  quasi-fixed  income  liabilities  with  holdings  of  bonds.  In  both  cases,  there  may 
have been a de facto shift in global demand from equities to fixed-income securities of various kinds. 
That would tend to alter relative risk premia9. 
All told, this seems to reduce the candidate explanations for Rogoff’s puzzle. For equities, fluctuations 
in equity risk premia may have been a factor, driven by the dotcom/telecom fad and shifts in global 
investor  preferences.  For  financial  assets  more  generally,  perhaps  the  best  provisional  view  is  that 
volatility in asset returns may have been elevated for a while by the effect on prices of the reductions 
in default-free rates, term premia and credit-risk premia associated with the Great Stability. As well as 
adding to volatility temporarily, that will also have raised  ex post returns, in which case it would be 
important that market participants did not act on the basis that they were easily sustainable. 
Forward-looking uncertainty 
This  is  where  my  own  second  puzzle  kicks  in:  whilst  we  can  busy  ourselves  trying  to  identify  why 
realised  asset  price  volatility  has  not  fallen  more  over  the  past  decade,  central  bankers  seem  to 
expend quite a lot more energy worrying about the low level of future volatility implied by options on a 
range of financial assets. 
So, on the one hand, members of my community variously enumerate risks from low risk premia and 
the Search for Yield; global imbalances; energy prices; household balance sheets and house prices in 
a  number  of countries;  releveraging  of the  corporate  sector  via  Leveraged  Buy  Outs;  flatter  Phillips 
Curves; and so on10. On the other hand, implied volatilities derived from options, with a range of expiry 
dates, on long-term yields, equities, and exchange rates are all well below levels around the turn of the 
century (Chart 3). And in recent months, at least for short expiry options, they have dipped below the 
averages for the first part of the 1990s.  
But  implied  volatilities  may  not  be  the  best  measure of  the  market’s  forward-looking assessment  of 
risks.  They  represent  one  standard  deviation  (sd)  in  the  market’s  underlying  probability  distribution, 
whereas arguably central bankers are worrying about greater-than-one-standard deviation events. The 
market’s  assessment  of  such  risks  can  perhaps  be  gauged  by  looking  at  how  much  of  the  current 
option-implied  distributions  lie  beyond  one  sd  compared  with  option  markets  in  the  past,  and  with 
historical outturns. 
For bonds and equities, a little bit more of the probability mass implied by options11 is currently in the 
lower tail (beyond one standard deviation) than is the case over fairly long-runs of historical outturns12 
(Table 2). But for equities, bonds, and dollar exchange rates, the lower probability mass is pretty well 
in  line  with  the  average  ‘tail’  implied  by  options  markets  in  the  past  (Charts  4  -  5).  That  does  not 
suggest much sensitivity to the various risks preoccupying the official sector. 
                                                      
9   This is a different point from that, advocated for example by Chairman Bernanke, explaining a fall in long-maturity risk-free 
rates in terms of an ex ante imbalance of global savings and investment. The two explanations are not mutually exclusive, 
as the observed fall in yields on indexed government bonds could reflect a combination of a fall in the risk-free rate and falls 
in term premia. 
10   For example see Bank of England Financial Stability Report, Overview, July 2006, pp 5-13 and Bank of England Inflation 
Report, November 2006, Chapter 5. 
11   Using three-month expiry options. 
12   Since the 1930s for equities; 1960s for bonds; and 1970s for exchange rates. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2007
Market contacts offer various explanations for this – some of them, I should make clear, sceptically. 
One – and here bear in mind my earlier remarks – is that not much really nasty will happen given the 
collective  wisdom  of  the  world’s  monetary  authorities.  Another  is  that,  in  an  environment  where 
investors  are  chasing  yield,  collecting  the  premium  income  from  writing  options  has  become  a 
prevalent  way  of  sustaining  returns  in  the  hope  that  nothing  too  bad  happens;  and  that  if  it  does, 
today’s  liquid  capital  markets  will  contain  the  volatility  anyway.  In  other  words,  they  base  their 
explanation on what has been going in the financial system. 
Financial system uncertainties 
Big,  perhaps  fundamental,  changes  have  been  underway  in  banking  and  capital  markets  for  a  few 
years now, with implications for how we gauge money and credit conditions, and assess the resilience 
of the financial system as a whole. 
Discussions  typically  jump  to  the  second,  financial  stability  issue.  But  I  want  to  look  first  at  some 
monetary indicators in the light of these structural changes. 
Broad money growth 
As has recently attracted a good deal of attention, UK broad money is up around 15% on a year ago, 
and more than 25% since the beginning of 2005 – much more than elsewhere in the G7 (Chart 6). Of 
this increase, almost half – or around £140bn – is accounted for by the money holdings of so-called 
Other  Financial  Corporations13.  Central  bankers  have  to  ask  whether  that  represents  a  threat  to 
inflation and stability or, rather, a shift in the demand for money that is a symptom of structural change 
in the financial system. 
There  is  relatively  little  research  on  the  macroeconomic  significance  of  OFC  money.14  The  central 
question is typically seen as whether institutional investors, such as pension funds and life insurance 
companies, are holding an unusually large amount of money in their asset portfolios, in which case 
any ‘excess’ might be expected sooner or later to flow into financial markets, pushing up asset values, 
which in turn would tend to boost aggregate demand and so add to inflationary pressures.  
Well, since 2003, institutional investor M4 has accounted for less than a fifth of the near doubling in 
total OFC money holdings. And the share of money in their asset portfolios has remained in a 3-5% 
range (Chart 7). Moreover, some contacts have suggested that with pension funds and life companies 
making  greater  use  of  derivatives  to  manufacture  long-duration  assets,  some  cash  is  now  held  to 
manage  collateral  calls  or  to  generate  a  LIBOR-based  stream  of  payments.  Such  money  holdings 
would not be readily available to invest in financial assets. 
Over the past year, the largest contributions to OFC money growth have, in fact, come from two other 
groups  (Chart  8):  “securities  dealers  and  other”  (8pp)15;  and  what  the  statisticians  label  “Other 
Financial Intermediaries” (contributing a whopping 17 pp). 
I would hazard a guess that a significant portion of the money holdings of securities dealers stems 
from  their  so-called  ‘matched’  repo  books.  Although  technically  these  entail  secured  deposits  with 
banks, they are not money holdings that get spent (on assets or goods), and are matched pretty well 
by secured (repo) loans to other parts of the financial system. 
The  ‘OFI’  category  is  somewhat  amorphous,  including  for  example  both  private  equity  funds  and 
Special  Purpose  Vehicles.  Collectively,  their  holdings  of  bank  deposits  have  been  growing  at  an 
annual rate of over 40% for the past two years. It is extremely difficult to judge the macroeconomic 
significance of this, not least because no breakdown  is available of the money holdings of different 
types of ‘OFI’. On the one hand, it may be uninvested cash, reflecting for example the wave of fund 
raising by the private equity industry. That is most definitely cash to be invested in the equity market, 
but  such  fund  raisings  are  highly  publicised  and  conceivably  may  already  have  been  discounted  in 
                                                      
13   ‘Other’ in the sense of not being a member of the monetary sector (commercial banks and building societies). 
14   Chrystal K A and P Mizen (2001), ‘Other financial corporations: Cinderella or ugly sister of empirical monetary economics’, 
Bank of England Working Paper, No. 151. 
15   The other intermediaries grouped with securities dealers include financial leasing companies and bank holding companies. 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 5
equity prices via M&A speculation. As for SPVs, they are used for all sorts of purposes. Some effect 
transactions  within  banking  groups,  and  should  ideally  be  netted  off.  Some  are  used  for 
securitisations, where investors obtain returns linked to the credit risk on a portfolio of assets. Regular 
cash-market securitisations, with a full transfer of the underlying assets, shrink bank balance sheets. 
But synthetic securitisations, which have become prevalent over the past couple of years, can involve 
increased  money  holdings16.  It  is  not  obvious  that  such  deposits  would  be  of  macroeconomic 
significance over and above any effect on asset prices/risk premia stemming from the prior associated 
demand for (synthetic) credit. 
But we should pause before concluding firmly that the money data are benign. First, their counterpart, 
bank lending, has been growing at around 15% (although the 3-month annualised rate is somewhat 
lower).  Second,  the  money  holdings  of  non-financial  companies  have  recently  been  rising  rapidly, 
perhaps signalling on upside risk to the outlook for business investment in an environment of robust 
profits and aggregate demand. 
Third, looking at UK OFC money may be too narrow if we are trying to assess whether there is an 
upside risk to asset prices, and so to aggregate demand, from money growth. Given that asset prices 
are today determined in global capital markets, global rather than domestic money (and credit) growth 
may be just as relevant. On one measure, the rate of growth of ‘world’ broad money17 has slowed from 
around  15% to  around  8%  since  2003  (Chart 9), perhaps consistent with  the  gradual withdrawal  of 
monetary  accommodation  in  the  US  and  elsewhere.  However,  the  treatment  of  OFCs  varies  a  lot 
across  the  G718,  and  so  their  data  are  not  strictly  comparable  with  the  UK  M4  numbers.  More 
important,  so  far  as  I  can  tell,  most  current  calculations  of  world  money  growth19  simply  add  up 
domestic money supplies, and so leave out cross-border money holdings. That might be a material 
omission.  For  example,  external  holdings  of  sterling  deposits  with  the  UK  banking  system  have 
increased by more than domestic money since the late 1990s; and by around 15% over the past year. 
How  much  of  this  growth  is  attributable  to  non-bank  financial  groups,  whether  based  in  the  UK  or 
overseas, is not known.  
Like much of the monetary analysis of the early 1980s, I fear that this is rather inconclusive, other than 
underlining that one has to get one’s hands dirty in analysing the money numbers. It is plausible that a 
decent chunk of recent UK M4 growth should be seen in the light of structural change in the financial 
system. Essentially, some types of non-bank financial intermediation have become more significant, 
and seem to have entailed higher money holdings on the definitions currently employed. If so, recent 
OFC  money  growth  does  not  of  itself  obviously  have  malign  implications  for  money  spending  and 
inflation. 
Originate and distribute: what’s going on on bank balance sheets? 
Much of the debate about this renewed process of disintermediation has revolved around whether the 
burgeoning growth of, for example, structured credit vehicles and hedge funds increases or impairs 
the  resilience  of  the  system.  This  is  equivalent  to  asking  about  the  significance  to  stability  of  the 
pronounced shift in the business model of many large banks to ‘originate and distribute’. If they are not 
holding  on  to  the  loans  and  other  assets  they  originate,  one  might  draw  the  inference  that  bank 
balance sheets would have shrunk.  
Nothing could be further from the truth. The balance sheets of the largest and most complex financial 
institutions (LCFIs) have ballooned. Both in the US and in Europe (including the UK), their holdings of 
equities  and  of  debt  instruments  (bonds  and  loans)  have  grown  more  rapidly  than  the  underlying 
markets (Chart 10). That does not exactly look like disintermediation. 
                                                      
16   In a synthetic securitisation, the SPV still issues ‘cash’ securities to its investors, but rather than investing the proceeds in 
the credit portfolio, it holds a high-quality liquid asset, which can be a bank deposit. It gains its credit exposure via a credit 
default swap. In a recent speech, RG Rajan of the IMF attributed the compression in risk premia to a shortage of assets. 
The growth in demand for synthetic exposures is consistent with that. Rajan, R G (2006), ‘Is there a global shortage of fixed 
assets?’ remarks at the G-30 meetings in New York, December 2006. 
17   World broad money is a weighted average of individual country M2 or closest national substitute, using market exchange 
rates. 
18   Included in the Euro area; partly included in Japan; excluded in the US. 
19   See box on ‘Excess global liquidity, asset prices and inflation, Bank of England Inflation Report, February 2006, page 5. 
6 
 BIS Review 2/2007
How to square this with ‘originate and distribute’? Basically, in contrast to the pre-Big Bang world in 
the UK, today’s prevailing business model entails a significant commitment of capital by investment 
banks. This manifests itself in a wide range of on-balance sheet assets on top of the more traditional 
bond and equity books held as part of ‘market making’. For example, bridge loans are extended to 
finance Leveraged Buy-Outs prior to more permanent debt instruments being placed via the capital 
markets. Similarly, there is an intermediate stage between origination and distribution of securitised 
portfolios, during which they are warehoused on banks’ balance sheets. As I just described, synthetic 
securitisations, by contrast, can involve investment banks permanently holding corporate bonds and 
loans to hedge synthetic short positions, where the risk is transferred elsewhere. And loans against a 
very wide range of collateral are provided to finance hedge funds20; this effectively amounts to writing 
deeply  out-of-the-money  options,  where  the  risk  flows  back  to  the  financer  in  adverse  states  of  the 
world21. 
So investment banking does use balance sheets, but in non-traditional ways. Beyond that, there is an 
extra  ingredient  for  the  commercial  banks.  As  is  apparent  from  the  money  numbers,  they  are  very 
much still in the deposit-gathering business. On top of maintaining their central role in the payments 
system,  this  means  that,  even  if  operating  an  ‘originate  and  distribute’  model  in  their  investment 
banking business, commercial banks still have substantial funds to employ in asset portfolios. This can 
be achieved in a number of ways: for example, holding onto originated assets, buying assets after they 
have  been  securitised  by  other  banks,  or  entering  the  principal  investment  business.  All  three  are 
underway to a greater or lesser degree. In the UK, until quite recently large banks probably held on to 
more  loans  than  their  peer  group22.  In  the  US  and  parts  of  Continental  Europe,  the  commercial 
banking sector acquired massive portfolios of securitised assets in the first half of the decade, possibly 
diversifying  sectoral  or  geographical  exposures.  And  a  range  of  banks  have  been  entering  or  re-
entering the principal investment business. 
What to make of all this? Well it certainly underlines the difficulty of using the growth or composition of 
bank balance sheets as the sole basis for judging credit conditions. With so much credit distributed 
and  traded  via  capital  markets,  quantity  data  have  to  be  put  alongside  prices  (yield  spreads)  and, 
ideally,  qualitative  information.  It  is  in  that  context  that  the  Bank  is  planning  to  introduce  a  formal 
survey of credit conditions next year. This important initiative is designed to help us get behind the 
money and credit data. 
A  second,  rather  obvious  and  by  now  familiar  conclusion  is  that,  in  a  narrow  sense,  it  may  have 
become more difficult to identify where risk resides, although we should not make too much of that as 
interest rate, currency and equity risk has been transferred around the financial system via derivatives 
for almost two decades. For me, it is more interesting that, in big picture terms, many banks have in 
effect concluded that they are better at, or will be better rewarded for, managing market risk – and its 
sister, counterparty credit risk – than managing ‘buy and hold’ credit risk; and that if they are going to 
hold illiquid assets, they should provide a higher return than bog-standard loans. 
This suggests  that  stability  relies  on  the  liquidity  of capital  markets  –  primary  as well  as secondary 
markets – proving durable under stress. Indeed, contacts suggest that one of their main worries is that 
something – they don’t know what – could cause primary markets to shut for a few months, leaving 
them holding loans and warehoused portfolios needing to be marked down over quarterly reporting 
dates.  Another  theme  is  reliance  on  secondary  markets  to  shed  complex  forms  of  market  risk, 
especially when it is hard to be confident about the robustness of correlation assumptions incorporated 
into  some  pricing  models  and  risk  measures.  Although  there  is  a  spectrum  of  opinion,  many  take 
encouragement from the way the system has weathered a series of shocks in recent years, including 
lately the Amaranth episode. Its non-energy portfolios were liquidated smoothly; prime brokers largely 
released the resulting ‘excess collateral’ in a timely manner; and other parts of the hedge fund industry 
provided a pool of capital to take on the risk in the natural gas contracts. I would not want to play that 
down  but,  inevitably,  some  caution  may  be  warranted  too.  Amaranth’s  ability  to  build  up  highly 
                                                      
20   Synthetic  financing,  via  eg  Total Return  Swaps,  does  not  show  on  bank/dealer  balance  sheets  beyond  any  net  mark-to-
market derivative exposure. 
21   In really adverse states of the world, collateral values would not cover all of the bank/dealer’s exposure, and the net asset 
value of the hedge fund would have fallen too. 
22   ‘Private equity: a discussion of risk and regulatory engagement’, Financial Services Authority Discussion Paper No. 06/6, 
November 2006. 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 7
concentrated  positions  in  centrally  cleared  markets  was  a  reminder  of  some  earlier  lessons,  dating 
back to the 1987 stock market crash23, about the detection of large trader positions. More generally, 
this  year’s  Counterparty  Risk  Management  Group  Report,  produced  by  a  group  of  leading 
practitioners, identified a range of issues for the industry to tackle.  
Macro and financial market uncertainty  
As will have been apparent, the issues I have been discussing are not really separable. There are, to 
be clear, a lot of reasons for confidence in monetary and financial stability being sustained. Monetary 
regimes are much improved. Banks are generally regarded as well capitalised. Innovation has enabled 
risk  to  be  dispersed  more  widely,  including  outside  the  banking  sector.  And  capital  markets  are 
deeper.  
Nevertheless, it is a potential concern that, looking forward, financial markets may not be pricing for – 
which means that investors may not be insuring themselves against – the range of uncertainties that 
preoccupy the official sector. Maybe the official sector is wrong. Or may be there is an underestimation 
of risks in the market, perhaps associated with the widely discussed Search for Yield, and possibly 
also with overconfidence in the capacity of monetary authorities or liquid capital markets to smooth out 
all shocks. 
This  poses  three  questions.  Whether  the  risks  will  crystallise.  Whether,  if  they  were  to,  any  such 
crystallisation would be orderly or disorderly in financial markets. And whether if asset markets were 
disorderly,  that  would  feed  back  into  the  financial  system  in  ways  that  both  seriously  amplified  the 
adjustment and created serious threats to systemic stability. 
I fear that the answers are unknowable. But the task for central banks is nevertheless clear enough. 
Working  with  our  partners  in  regulatory  organisations  and  in  other  central  banks,  we  must  seek  to 
understand today’s global banking system and capital markets well enough to tell the difference, if and 
when called upon to do so, between a problem requiring solely a macroeconomic policy response and 
a  more  complex  financial  stability  problem.  And,  most  important  of  all,  central  banks  must  strive  to 
maintain the medium-term credibility of monetary policy, as an essential pre-condition for the stability 
in which both the real and financial economy can thrive. Not pretending that the world is simpler or 
safer than the reality is one small part of that endeavour. 
                                                      
23   See, for example, the US Brady Report, and the report of the Hong Kong Securities Review Committee, 1987. 
8 
 BIS Review 2/2007
 
Table 1: Macroeconomic and asset price annual volatility 
1951-59 1960-69 1970-79 1980-91 1992-2005
Percentage change 
between 60-69 and 92-05
Percentage change 
between 80-91 and 92-05
UK GDP
US GDP
UK Inflation (1)
US Inflation
S&P 500 (2)
1.5
3.3
1.8
14.0
FTSE All Share (2)(3)
10-year UST (2) 
3.4
10-year UK gilt (2)(4)
1.6
1.7
1.5
1.2
15.7
20.4
5.4
3.1
£ ERI (5)
$ ERI (5)
Yen ERI (5)
€ ERI (5)
2.2
2.5
5.5
2.0
19.1
43.3
7.8
11.2
6.9
5.4
9.9
1.8
2.3
2.5
3.4
2.3
12.0
12.1
15.4
7.7
4.5
4.4
4.3
3.0
0.9
1.1
1.0
0.5
15.2
15.2
9.6
4.9
2.3
2.9
4.0
3.0
-41.8
-36.4
-34
-55
-3
-25
78
57
-59
-56
-72
-76
27
26
-38
-36
-49
-34
-8
-3
Notes:
1. UK inflation is consumption deflator inflation; 1960-69 includes 1956-59
2. Nominal returns deflated by consumption deflators.
3. FTSE All Share starts in 1962
4. 1960-69 includes 1956-59
5. Trade weighted real exchange rate indices start in 1975
4. Volatility is calculated as standard deviation of annual growth rates.
5. UST and UK gilts are based on total return indices from Global Financial Database
 
Chart 1: Average pairwise correlation between historical returns of FTSE 100 constituents 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
 9
Jan-84
Jun-89
Dec-94
Jun-00
Nov-05
Source: Bank of England 
BIS Review 2/2007 
 Chart 2: DDM Sensitivity of S&P 500 to a 1pp increase in the risk-free real interest rate 
(Fixed, exogeneous real dividend growth rate of 
Average
Per cent change in 
S&P500
-20.0
-25.0
-30.0
-35.0
-40.0
-45.0
-50.0
991
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
 
 
 
Chart 3: Equity index 3-month option-implied volatility 
S&P 500
FTSE 100
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
Per cent
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
  Source: Bank of England 
 
 
 
Table 2: Probability masses in financial asset option-implied and historical distributions 
Asset
USD per GBP
JPY per USD
USD per EUR
SP500
10-y UST
Tail
upper ($ negative)
lower  ($ negative)
upper ($ negative)
lower
lower (10y yield negative)
Option-implied tail
Historical tail
Historical period
15
15
15
15
15
16
16
14
11
10
1971-2006
1971-2006
1971-2006
1931-2006
1960-2006
 Source: Bank of England 
10 
 BIS Review 2/2007
Chart  4:  S&P  500  returns:  probability  in  lower  implied  pdf  tail  more  than  one  standard 
deviation from the mean (3-month horizon) 
Per cent
18.0
17.5
17.0
16.5
16.0
15.5
15.0
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
Source: Bank of England 
Chart 5: JPYUSD: probability in lower implied pdf tail more than one standard deviation from 
the mean (3-month horizon) 
(downside risk for dollar)
Per cent
16.0
15.5
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.0
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Chart 6: Broad money across industrialized countries 
Source: Bank of England 
% change oya
Euro-area
UK
US
Japan
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
16.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
 BIS Review 2/2007 
 11
Chart  7:  Pension  fund  and  insurance  company  money  holdings  as  a  share  of  total 
financial assets 
Sterling deposits
M4
Percentages of ICPF assets
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
 
 
Chart 8: OFC’s M4 growth by sub-sector 
OFAs
OFIs
Securities dealers and others
Institutional investors
OFCs M4 growth
Percentage points
40.0
35.0
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
-5.0
-10.0
-15.0
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
   12 
 BIS Review 2/2007
 
Chart 9: World broad money (M2) growth (individual country M2 (or nearest equivalent) 
weighted by market exchange rates 
Per cent
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
 1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
 
 
Chart 10: LCFI's debt held for trading versus representative indices 
Index 31/12/2000 = 100
US LCFIs' Debt Holdings
European LCFIs' Debt Holdings
Global Broad Market Corporate Index
Mortgage-Backed Securities Index
Asset-Backed Securities Index
300
250
200
150
100
50
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
 Source: SEC Filings, Published Accounts and Merrill Lynch. 
BNP Paribas excluded due to lack of H1 interim data. 
 BIS Review 2/2007 
 13
