Amando M Tetangco, Jr: RBAP-MABS – providing wider and deeper access to 
microfinance 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  celebration  of  the  Rural  Banking  Industry’s  10  Years  of  Success  in 
Microfinance under the RBAP’s MABS Program, Manila 13 June 2007. 
 Hon. Secretary Cerge Remonde, Ambassador Kristie Kenney, General William Hotchkiss, members of 
the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines, fellow central bankers, special guests, good morning.  
On  behalf  of the  Bangko Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  I  congratulate  the rural  banks,  the  USAID, and  other 
enabling  institutions  represented  here  today  as  we  celebrate  ten  years  of  success  in  providing 
microfinance services under the Microenterprise Access to Banking Services Program.  
Indeed,  the  RBAP-MABS  partnership  is  a  successful  empowering  program  that  continues  to  bring 
much needed financial services to clients in the countryside.  
For  a  country  like  ours  where  roughly  99%  of  total  enterprises  are  micro,  small  and  medium 
enterprises or MSMEs, which in turn employ about 70% of our workforce, a successful program such 
as MABS is bound to have a significant impact.  
Beginning with the first loan disbursed by the Rural Bank of Sto. Tomas ten years ago, MABS banks 
have since disbursed more than a million loans to over 350,000 borrowers, spurring the growth and 
development microenterprises and, in the process, transforming lives and communities for the better.  
Surely, we should celebrate milestones such as this.  
At  the  same  time,  this  ten-year  milestone  compels  us  to  assess  how  we  can  deliver  appropriate 
microfinance  services  in  an  even  better  and  more  cost-efficient  manner  to  more  of  our  country’s 
entrepreneurial poor.  
Fortunately, recent developments in the industry are opening new opportunities and presenting us with 
interesting possibilities that can lead to revolutionary ways of providing better microfinance services.  
First among these developments is the changing face of microfinance itself. Gone are the days when 
microfinance was synonymous only to microcredit or small loans. Today, microfinance institutions are 
providing a wide range of financial services to their clients such as savings, remittances, transfers and, 
increasingly,  micro-insurance.  In  addition,  microfinance  institutions  are  also  capitalizing  on  proven 
technologies and methodologies of microfinance to conceptualize, design and deliver other types of 
financial products.  
One example of such product is the micro-agri product, or MAP, which was designed and pioneered 
by the MABS member banks present here today. You recognized the possibility of combining the best 
practices of microfinance with the salient features of agricultural finance, to develop a product that is 
responsive to the needs of the agriculture sector, specifically the poor farming households. 
The Bangko Sentral supported this innovation and, after a thorough product evaluation, allowed micro-
agri loans to be classified as microfinance loans. In so doing, micro-agri loans today enjoy the same 
benefits as microfinance loans… including no collateral requirements, cash flow and character based 
lending,  small  and  frequent  amortizations,  as  well  as  simple  documentary  requirements.  Through 
MAP,  therefore,  we  have  addressed  the  hurdle  typically  faced  by  small  farmers  when  accessing 
financial services to grow their production and expand their economic activities.  
Advances in technology are also providing new vehicles for the delivery of microfinance services. The 
use of mobile phones in select microfinance transactions is a specific example. Once again, our rural 
banks  are  at  the  forefront  of  this  undertaking,  developing  a  revolutionary  solution  for  low  value 
payments  that  characterize  microfinance  loans,  through  linkage  with  electronic  cash  platforms  of 
telecommunication companies.  
In  fact,  as  of  end  March  2007,  there  were  already  43  rural  and  cooperative  rural  banks  offering 
electronic  banking  services  particularly  mobile  phone  banking.  This  lowers  transaction  costs, 
increases  productivity,  minimizes  cash-on-hand  risk,  and  increases  over  all  accessibility  of  financial 
services. In a country like ours where mobile phone usage is one of the highest in the world relative to 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 1
population, the potential for revolutionizing electronic banking in the countryside could be dramatically 
significant.  
In fact, a concept paper of the MABS and Globe Telecom outlining the expansion and rollout of mobile 
banking applications to microfinance clients of MABs participating banks has been selected for support 
under  the Consultative  Group  to  Assist  the  Poor  Technology  Program.  The  President  of  the  Global 
Development Program at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation said that by “… supporting pilots with 
new  technologies  that  have  the  power  to  dramatically  change  the  business  model  of  delivering 
financial services, we can help expand access to financial services for hundreds of millions of poor 
people.” As proposed, the mobile phone banking applications will convert mobile phones into “virtual 
wallets”  for  receiving  and  paying  loans,  depositing  and  withdrawing  money,  sending  and  receiving 
remittances, purchasing and selling goods and services and making bills payments. The MABS-Globe 
Telecom proposal was one of nine selected from more than 70 projects submitted from 38 countries.  
Nevertheless, even as the Bangko Sentral is responsive to these new developments and technological 
innovations,  it  continues  to  ensure  that  attendant  risks  are  properly  managed.  Thus,  the  Bangko 
Sentral has set in place the necessary regulations and procedures that cover electronic banking risk 
management,  security  procedures,  internal  controls,  anti  money  laundering  regulations,  know  your 
client requirements, as well as consumer protection. We have even created, within our Supervision 
and Examination Sector, a Core Information Technology Supervisory Group (CITSG) to keep abreast 
with the latest developments in electronic banking.  
In parallel with the BSP’s liberalized branching regime, these technological innovations should enable 
banks to widen and deepen its reach to unserved and underserved bank clients in both rural areas 
and urban centers. 
There are other products using microfinance methodologies and technologies that are gaining interest. 
In our case, we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas are reviewing the provision of housing microfinance, 
which can boost the financing needs of the low cost housing sector.  
Finally,  we  recognize  the  increasing  participation  of  large  commercial  players  in  the  microfinance 
industry. We are seeing commercial banks and social investors providing loans, equity or assistance 
to retail microfinance institutions. These new linkages and partnerships should lead to a wider range of 
products, broader distributions systems, development of local currency capability and ability to hedge 
foreign  currency  by  MFIs,  local  capital  market  development  for  microfinance,  and  finally  put 
microfinance in the economic mainstream.  
At  the  BSP,  we  are  looking  at  various  ways  through  which  these  partnerships  can  be  fortified.  We 
have conducted networking meetings between commercial banks and retail institutions; we have also 
responded positively to requests from various interested parties to learn more about the intricacies of 
microfinance operations. And late last month, we issued Circular 570 which recognizes microfinance 
loans  of  commercial  banks  to  non-bank  microfinance  institutions  as  alternative  compliance  to  the 
mandatory  credit  allocation  of  6%  to  small  enterprises.  This  is  an  important  incentive  for  banks  to 
provide more wholesale loans that will increase the microfinance operations of retail institutions.  
Indeed,  exciting  developments  are  happening  in  the  microfinance  sector.  I  am  pleased  to  note  in 
particular that MABS banks have kept in step with the dynamism that has characterized this industry in 
the last decade. Together, you have achieved much; but you should not rest on your laurels. We still 
have  a  long  way  to  go  in  terms  of  reaching  out  to  many  more  of  our  entrepreneurial  poor.  The 
challenge  for  rural  banks,  therefore,  that  are  at  the  forefront  of  our  microfinance  movement,  is  to 
further widen and deepen the reach of microfinance to liberate our industrial entrepreneurial poor from 
poverty.  
This  challenge  can  be  surmounted  by  strong  and  vibrant  banks  that  are  committed  to  continuously 
upgrade their capacity, uphold performance standards, and adhere to best practices at all times. Key 
areas of governance, efficiency, risk management, sustainability and quality of operations should be 
continuously developed and strengthened. This should lead to sound and well-managed institutions 
that can take advantage of market opportunities while adequately managing associated risks.  
In this regard, MABS banks seem well positioned to take on this challenge. Anchored firmly on your 
commitment  to  sustainable  microfinance,  we  have  seen  how  your  policy  of  zero  tolerance  to 
delinquency,  emphasis  on  adequate  internal  controls  and  investments  in  systems  and  human 
capacities have resulted in positive gains for your member banks.  
2 
 BIS Review 77/2007
On the part of the BSP, we will continue to look at ways in which banks can have a wider scope for 
their microfinance operations. We will remain responsive to the changing demands of the industry by 
maintaining a positive enabling policy and regulatory environment for microfinance. In addition, we will 
continue  with  our  major  reforms  toward  a  more  robust  financial  system  and  in  fostering  greater 
competition  aligned  with  international  standards  within  our  banking  sector.  Our  regulations  will 
continue  to  focus  on  critical  areas  of  strengthening  board  and  institutional  governance,  improving 
bank’s balance sheets and upgrading risk management systems.  
We at the Bangko Sentral look forward to continuously working with RBAP to achieve our common 
goal  of  local economic  development  by  creating  opportunities  for entrepreneurship,  nourishing  local 
enterprises and building prosperity in the countryside through microfinance.  
Thank you all and good morning. Mabuhay ang microfinance! 
BIS Review 77/2007 
 3
