Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Key developments in Bahrain and the region  
Speech by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the 4th Annual Middle East Insurance Forum, Manama, 8 May 2007. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: good morning. 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the 4th Middle East Insurance Forum. This event has 
established  itself  as  one  of  the  region’s  leading  insurance  conferences,  and  my  thanks  go  to  the 
organizers,  sponsors  and  speakers  for  producing  what  promises  to  be  a  fitting  4th  edition  of  this 
conference. 
This year’s theme for the Forum – “Growth Opportunities in a Dynamic Region” – is particularly apt. 
We  are,  of  course,  experiencing  a  sustained  period  of  vibrant  growth  and  liquidity  that  hasn’t  been 
seen  in  over  twenty  years.  Underpinning  this  has  been  some  significant  developments  in  terms  of 
structural reforms, both political and economic. 
These  developments,  naturally,  have  not  gone  unnoticed  by  the  rest  of  the  global  business 
community. In particular, a number of international insurance groups have recently moved to establish 
regional offices, or to gear up their existing presences. 
We  welcome  this  trend,  and  look  forward  to  working  with  these  groups  in  further  developing  the 
region’s insurance markets over the years to come. 
By way of setting the scene for the presentations and discussions to follow, I propose this morning to 
spend a few minutes highlighting some of the key developments that have taken place in Bahrain and 
the  region  since  we  last  hosted  this  event.  The  key  message,  I  believe,  is  that  the  regulatory 
foundations built up by CBB are now beginning to bear fruit, and offer firms a solid base from which to 
tap into significant regional opportunities. 
For its part, the CBB has over the past year continued to refine and implement the completely new 
regulatory  framework  that  was  developed  following  the  creation  of  a  single  regulator  in  2002,  and 
implemented  from  2005  onwards.  Comprehensive  solvency  reporting  by  insurance  firms  has  now 
been rolled out, as have on-site examination visits. 
These  efforts  are  helping  raise  standards  in  the  local  industry,  and  will  help  strengthen  its 
competitiveness over time. They have also been achieved in a spirit of cooperation, and I should like 
to take this opportunity to thank the industry for their support. 
A  related  key  development  over  the  past  year  has  been  the  start  of  reporting  under  the  new 
International Financial Reporting Standard no 4, and the significant impact it has had on the insurance 
industry  in  terms  of  reporting.  The  CBB  worked  closely  with  the  Bahrain  Insurance  Association  in 
facilitating this process. 
These changes – which have only just begun – have had a significant impact, notably on the reporting 
of unit-linked products. Phase 2 of these changes will involve even more radical changes, including 
the elimination of key balance sheet items such as unearned premium reserves. 
Two  key  features  of  the  new  insurance  rulebook  the  CBB  introduced  in  2005  are  rules  for  Islamic 
insurers,  as  well  as  rules  specifically  catering  to  captive  insurers.  The  results  of  these  initiatives  – 
regional firsts, and probably a world first with respect to rules for takaful firms – are now beginning to 
bear fruit. 
Over the past year, we have seen a number of leading international insurance companies establish 
their  takaful  and  re-takaful  operations  in  Bahrain,  further  consolidating  Bahrain’s  global  profile  as  a 
centre for Islamic finance. And recently, we also licensed the region’s first captive insurer, established 
by the UAE company Tabreed. 
It was pleasing when the CBB’s initiatives in this area were publicly acknowledged, when it received 
the Regulator Initiative of the Year award at the Insurex 2007 conference, which took place last month. 
Of  course,  some  established  insurers  may  fear  that  new  entrants  mean  increased  competition. 
However, I do firmly believe that there is room for expansion, and scope for generating new business. 
New players can help make the insurance cake bigger: it is not a zero sum game. 
BIS Review 45/2007 
 1
Already, we are seeing the profile of the industry as a whole increasing, and greater awareness of the 
range of risk protection and investment products that the industry can offer. 
The low levels of insurance penetration rates in this region, when compared to most other markets, 
and the lack of regional capacity in various products and services, both suggest to me that there is 
significant scope to move the industry onto a higher plane. 
The huge increase now taking place in infrastructure projects, and the associated insurance needs of 
such developments, is clearly one source of significant potential growth. Another area is with respect 
to private pensions and medical insurance. 
Here  in  Bahrain,  the  finishing  touches  are  now  being  put  on  plans  for  introducing  private  health 
insurance for expat workers, and recent legislative changes with respect to pensions mean that some 
employees now have to consider their need for supplementary private pensions. 
Similar  reforms  are  likewise  being  examined  or  have  been  introduced  in  other  GCC  countries, 
reflecting the trend in favour of structural reforms that I mentioned at the start of my speech. 
An  encouraging  feature  of  these  reforms  has  been  the  gradual  opening  up  of  markets  across  the 
region  –  which  will  allow  insurance  providers  to  capitalize  on  these  opportunities.  In  addition,  the 
Bahrain-US Free Trade Agreement also marks an important step in deepening cross-border trade. 
Collectively, the GCC countries now represent a population of some 35 million and the world’s 13th 
largest economy. It has also been generating current account surpluses larger than China’s in recent 
years.  In  short,  the  GCC  markets  offer  significant  potential  for  insurers,  considering  that  for  many 
products, this is largely untapped territory. 
To  conclude,  therefore,  we  believe  that  strong  regulatory  foundations  have  now  been  built  for  the 
insurance industry in Bahrain, and that this provides a sound basis upon which its potential can be 
fulfilled. I wish you all a productive conference. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2007
