David Dodge: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press  conference 
following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 26 April 2007. 
 Today, we released the April Monetary Policy Report, which discusses current economic and financial 
trends in the context of Canada's inflation-control strategy. 
Growth of the Canadian economy has been essentially in line with the Bank's expectations as set out 
in  the  January  Monetary  Policy  Report  Update.  But  inflation  has  been  higher  than  expected.  After 
considering  the  full  range  of  indicators,  the  Bank  now  judges  that  the  Canadian  economy  was 
operating just above its production capacity in the first quarter of this year.  
Over the projection horizon, domestic demand continues to be the main driver of growth in Canada. 
With the U.S. slowdown now expected to be somewhat more prolonged than previously projected, net 
exports should exert a slightly greater drag on growth in 2007. The Canadian economy is projected to 
grow  by  2.2  per  cent  in  2007  and  2.7  per  cent  in  both  2008  and  2009,  returning  to  its  production 
capacity in the second half of 2007 and remaining there through 2008 and 2009.  
Core inflation should remain slightly above 2 per cent over the coming months, given pressures on 
capacity  and  the  impact  of  higher  core  food  prices.  But  with  the  economy  projected  to  return  to  its 
production capacity in the second half of this year and with further easing of pressures from housing 
prices, upward pressure on core inflation is expected to moderate, bringing core inflation back to 2 per 
cent by the end of 2007.  
Total CPI inflation is projected to rise above the 2 per cent inflation target in the second half of this 
year, peaking below 3 per cent near the end of 2007 before returning to the target by mid-2008.  
The  Bank continues  to  judge  that  the risks  to  its  inflation  projection  are  roughly  balanced,  although 
there is now a slight tilt to the upside.  
On  Tuesday,  the  Bank  left  its  key  policy  rate  unchanged  at  4 1/4 per cent.  The  current  level  of  the 
policy interest rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the 
medium term. 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 1
