Njuguna Ndung’u: The vision of the Monetary Affairs Committee of the East 
African Community 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
10th meeting  of  the  East  African  Community  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  (MAC),  Kenya 
School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 24 May 2007. 
 Mr. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor, Bank of Uganda;  
Mr. Francois Kanimba, Governor, National Banque du Rwanda;  
Mr. Juma Reli, Deputy Governor, Bank of Tanzania;  
Mr. Leonard Sentore, Vice Governor, Banque de la République du Burundi;  
Mrs. Jacinta W. Mwatela, Deputy Governor, Central Bank of Kenya;  
Distinguished Delegates;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
On behalf of the Central Bank of Kenya, and on my own behalf, I take this first opportunity to 
warmly welcome each and every one of you to Nairobi, Kenya, and to the Kenya School of 
Monetary Studies (KSMS), in particular. I wish to particularly welcome and thank Governor 
Francois Kanimba of the Banque Nationale du Rwanda and Vice Governor Leonard Sentore 
of the Banque Nationale du Burundi, and their respective delegates, who are attending this 
meeting for the first time.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
To begin with, let me say that I am greatly honoured to attend and chair this meeting for the 
first time. I will therefore be falling back on the institutional memory of my brother Governors 
who have been here long before me and who have a greater wealth of experience and an 
edge on monetary integration matters than I have.  
Fellow Governors, Distinguished Participants,  
You will agree with me that the coming on board of our two partner states of Rwanda and 
Burundi will foster the  achievement of a large, powerful integrated East African economic 
bloc. This will of course be in accordance with Articles 6(2) and 44 of the Abuja Treaty that 
recognizes  that  achievement  of  the  objectives  of  harmonisation  of  monetary,  financial  and 
payment  systems  and  boosting  intra-community  trade  in  Africa  would  be  predicated  on, 
among others, the strengthening integration efforts of the regional economic community and 
enhance  monetary  cooperation  among  member  states  for  the  eventual  establishment  of  a 
Monetary Union in Africa. We look forward to sharing our experiences in Kenya, Uganda and 
Tanzania with Rwanda and Burundi in the next two days.  
Fellow Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
The  Committee  of  Experts  have  utilised  their  energies  and  minds  for  three  solid  days  to 
discuss  agenda  issues  before  our  meeting  as  Governors.  They  have  considered  the 
background 
including  Governors’  previous  decisions  and  made  observations  and 
recommendations for our consideration and action. I wish to thank them for a job well done.  
I need not over-emphasise the importance of this meeting. As you are aware, the vision of 
the Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC) of the East African Community is to have a Monetary 
Union as a precursor to a political federation.  
Full implementation of the EAC convergence criteria and finalisation of harmonisation cannot 
be done without sufficient empirical studies to support our decisions. In view of this, I am glad 
to note that a number of studies are currently being undertaken by all the partner states to 
inform our decisions. I therefore urge you all to deliberate on the findings of these studies 
and the progress made so far by the respective partner states in achieving the convergence 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 1
indicators. Assessing how far we have gone in meeting the requirements of the convergence 
criteria is important as it will help us deliberate on areas where we still lag behind and also 
seek solutions on how to move ahead to create one strong economic and political block.  
Fellow Governors, Distinguished Participants,  
Before  I  conclude  my  remarks,  allow  me  to  highlight  a  few  challenges  which  we  have  to 
address and resolve in order to make monetary and fiscal policy harmonisation in the region 
successful.  
1. 
First, there is need to minimise slippages and inconsistencies in the performances of 
member  countries  regarding  attainment  of  the  stipulated  macroeconomic  targets. 
The  report  of  the  Committee  of  Experts  before  us  indicates  that  slippages  and 
inconsistencies  still  exist  in  the  performance  and  attainment  of  the  stipulated 
convergence  criteria.  A  major  militating  factor  across  virtually  all  our  countries  is 
expansionary fiscal policies that complicate implementation of monetary policies in 
our  central  banks.  We  therefore  need  to  advise  and  advocate  for  greater  Fiscal 
Rectitude and Discipline. We should urge and persuade the respective Treasuries to 
contain  their  financing  gap  within  sustainable  levels  and  to  emphasise  more  on 
efficiency and productivity of the public sector.  
For our respective central banks, the challenge is to remain focused on our primary 
goal  of  maintaining  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation,  in  addition  to  improving 
efficiency in monetary management and the requisite infrastructure for transmission 
of monetary policy actions.  
We  need  to  work  on  ensuring  stability  of  the  financial  systems.  One  way  of 
addressing  this  problem  is  to  strengthen  the  supervision  of  the  banking  sector, 
particularly with a view to reducing the level of non-performing assets in the books of 
commercial banks. It is incumbent upon us to ensure that appropriate institutions, 
technical capacity and legal frameworks exist to support the process. We have to 
take steps to promote effective competition in banking sector by setting appropriate 
minimum  conditions  by  way  of  legislation  on  capital  and  technical  capacity,  and 
adherence to industry standards to ensure that individual banking institutions offer 
meaningful competition. Related to this is the challenge to deepen and broaden the 
financial  markets  and  improve  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  payment 
systems.  
Second,  currently  there  seem  to  be  differences  in  computing  macroeconomic 
convergence  indicators,  such  as  inflation,  thus  making  it  difficult  to  compare 
performance  across  countries.  It  is  therefore  incumbent  upon  us  to  come  up  with 
standard  definitions  of  these  variables  to  allow  a  more  accurate  comparison  of 
performance. Of course, this harmonisation will be possible once methodologies and 
data bases used are also harmonised.  
Third, whereas full convertibility of our currencies is a critical element towards the 
establishment of a single currency, very few of our currencies are convertible even 
within  the  existing  regional  economic  communities.  We  are  therefore  faced  with  a 
big challenge of how we can promote the convertibility of our currencies amidst low 
volume of cross border trade and investment flows which in turn requires adoption of 
a  regional  approach  to  structural  reforms.  The  key  areas  of  reforms  are  tariff 
reduction  and  harmonisation,  legal  and  regulatory  reform,  payment  systems 
modernization  and  rationalisation, 
investment 
incentives, tax system harmonisation and labour market reforms.  
Finally,  the  issue  of  political  commitment  is  yet  another  key  concern  in  our 
continuing endeavour towards a Monetary Union. I have in mind the need to give 
political issues relating to regional integration the requisite weight. We need to draw 
firm  timetables  for  the  pending  reforms  and  the  establishment  of  the  required 
financial  sector  reorganisation, 
BIS Review 78/2007
2. 
3. 
4. 
2 
 institutions.  Above  all,  we  need  political  will  and  commitment  to  evolve  national 
macroeconomic  policies  that  are  consistent  with  the  requirement  for  regional 
integration. One  important  issue  that  is  negatively  perceived  is  the impact  of  tariff 
reduction and removing non-tariff barriers. The negative perception has prevented 
some member countries from moving forward. We need to allay such fears and help 
members to move forward.  
Fellow Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen, before I conclude please allow me to pose a few 
questions for the 10th Meeting of this Committee. What is it that we set out to achieve at our 
inception? What have we achieved so far? What have been the challenges? What remains to 
be done? And how do we move forward? I believe that these are critical questions that we 
should ponder over in the next two days.  
In the meantime, I urge you please to spare time to visit our beautiful city and sample what 
Nairobi has to offer.  
Thank you for your kind listening.  
BIS Review 78/2007 
 3
