Shamshad Akhtar: Monetary policy in Pakistan 
Speech  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  Federation  of 
Pakistan Chambers of Commerce & Industry, Karachi, 30 April 2007. 
 Mr. Tanvir Ahmed Sheikh, President FPCCI, Mr. Zubair Tufail, Vice President FPCCI and Mr. Sheikh 
Amjad Rasheed, Chairman FPCCI Committee on Banking, Credit, & Finance 
Background 
Monetary  policy  management  and  financial  sector  stability  are  two  primary  roles  of  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan (SBP). Monetary policy and process of its formulation in Pakistan has undergone changes 
with the evolving economic dynamics within the country and the improved empirical and theoretical 
understanding of the monetary policy across the world.  
Monetary  policy  in  Pakistan,  in  line  with  SBP  Act,  has  been  supportive  of  the  dual  objective  of 
promoting economic growth and price stability. It achieves this goal by targeting monetary aggregates 
(broad money supply growth as an intermediate target and reserve money as an operational target) in 
accordance with real GDP growth and inflation targets set by the Government. Over the years, while 
maintaining the broad legal mandate, SBP has improved the quality of monetary formulation and its 
process quite significantly.  
This morning, I propose to first outline measures taken by the Government and SBP to strengthen the 
monetary policy management. Second, I will discuss the rationale and key elements of SBP current 
monetary  policy  stance  which  I  believe  is  helping  bring  down  inflation  without  stifling  credit  or 
economic  growth.  Finally,  I  will  discuss  the  impact  of  SBP’s  policy  actions,  and  challenges  in  its 
implementation.  
Changes in monetary policy management 
SBP shifted its reliance from an administered monetary policy regime governed by ad hoc changes in 
reserve ratio’s, directed credit and regulated interest rate policies in mid 1990s to a liberal and market 
oriented monetary policy management. Abolishing sector and bank credit limits, central bank adopted 
“3-day  SBP  discount  rate”  as  a  major  policy  instrument  to  signal  easing  or  tightening  of  monetary 
policy which essentially responded to the demand pressures of the economy in line with the growth 
trends in monetary liabilities and monetary assets – with former capturing the growth in currency and 
deposit  base  and  latter  the  growth  in  domestic  credit  (including  both  government  borrowings  and 
private sector credit).  
Generally  monetary  module  of  the  economy  is  the  least  understood  area.  This  is  largely  because 
monetary segment of the economy deals with on one hand the changes in stocks and flows of money 
supply and on the other hand trends in it subsumes and defuses the impact of developments of fiscal 
and  balance  of  payments  accounts.  Notwithstanding  both  sides  of  the  balance  sheet  of  monetary 
accounts impact price behavior.  
As highlighted above, broad money supply growth has to be consistent with the targets of growth in 
real GDP and inflation rate. However, if there are excessive demand pressures either because of high 
fiscal deficit or because of the excessive foreign inflows money supply grows faster than the growth in 
productive sectors and generates demand pressures which manifests itself in rise in inflation rate.  
Despite  all  contests  and  debates,  inflation  is  primarily  a  monetary  phenomenon.  To  keep  it  under 
control  it  is  critical  that  macroeconomic  imbalances  are  kept  within  the  permissible  limits.  Fiscal 
profligacy in the past has resulted in Government’s unlimited recourse to low and fixed interest rate 
financing.  While  interest  rates  were  kept  low  to  nurture  private  sector  credit  growth  –  this  did  not 
traditionally happen as private sector investment remained subdued due to host of structural problems 
facing  the  economy.  Instead  low  interest  rates  nurtured  fiscal  indiscipline  as  the  Government 
continued to borrow at cheaper rates to finance expenditures.  
BIS Review 42/2007 
 1
Recognizing this dilemma, qualitatively monetary policy formulation and its implementation underwent 
profound changes. In 1997, SBP and its Central Board were empowered to formulate, conduct and 
implement monetary policy and a Monetary and Fiscal Coordination Board was established to ensure 
fiscal  policy  is  well  coordinated  with  the  monetary  policy  –  specific  provision  of  SBP  Act  mandates 
Central  Board  to  impose  limits  on  Government’s  central  bank  borrowing.  In  2005,  the  Fiscal 
Responsibility and Debt Limitation Act 2005 requires Government to reduce its revenue deficit to zero 
by 30th June 2008 and maintain it thereafter, and concurrently reduce public debt to sixty percent of 
GDP by 2013 and below that limit thereafter. Compliance with the two pieces of legislation has been 
underway and over the period will help in eventually curbing more effectively Government’s recourse 
to central bank borrowing – which traditionally has complicated monetary policy management.  
With  greater  powers  to  formulate  monetary  policy,  SBP  moved  to  market  oriented  monetary  policy 
where it relied more on interest rate to serve as a policy fulcrum and developed its capacity to manage 
financial  markets  and  related  activities  effectively.  Proactive  conduct  of  monetary  operations  and 
management of market volatility has helped improve market flows. The Open Market Operation (OMO) 
process has been institutionalized with better flexibility vis-à-vis tenors and frequency.  
In  2005,  SBP  introduced  the  Money  Market  Computerized  Reporting  System  (MM-CRS)  for  banks 
which helps in assessing the market liquidity. SBP’s treasury operations and gradual improvements in 
its liquidity management have together helped OMOs and money market development.  
Current monetary policy stance 
Public,  businesses  and  market  needs  to  develop  understanding  that  monetary  policy  does  indeed, 
over the long run, determine the behavior of the price level. While inflation is precipitated by supply 
shocks,  hoarding,  official  restrictions,  import  prices,  and  so  on,  but  these  influence  price  level  in  a 
given year. However, it is monetary policy that can  prevent an effect on the rate of inflation over a 
more extended period. That is, following the initial price level shock, an appropriate adjustment of the 
interest rate (if necessary) can stop a potential second round of repercussions on wages and prices. 
Specialists use measures of core inflation, which exclude volatile prices, as a way to see through one-
off shocks. Core inflation is very useful to the central bank itself, as a guide to the appropriate setting 
of  its  monetary  policy  stance.  Unexpectedly  low  (high)  core  inflation  usually  indicates  the  need  for 
easing (tightening) in the policy stance.  
The ultimate objective of a central bank, and the measure of success of its policy, is in terms of overall 
(i.e.  headline)  inflation.  In  this  context,  the  way  to  deal  with  price  level  shocks  is  to  stress  their 
temporary nature with respect to the inflation rate. This involves: ensuring that the effect on inflation is 
only temporary – this may or may not require a policy action, and realizing that as monetary policy 
influences the trend of prices with a lag of at least a year and a half, headline inflation should return to 
its pre-shock rate not within not 1 year but 2 years. 
Price signals in a market economy operate less effectively when the price level is unstable; in addition, 
resources are diverted to unproductive speculation and hedging. Thus, countries with unstable price 
levels  –  high  inflation  or  deflation  –  almost  always  experience  weak  output  and  growth.  Thus,  low 
inflation is not merely an end in itself, but also a means to good overall economic performance. 
The  main  cause  of  high  interest  rates  is  high  inflation,  through  the  expected-inflation  premium. 
Conversely,  the  best  prospect  for  low  interest  rates  is  a  stable  environment  of  low  inflation.  In  this 
context,  the  relatively  high  interest  rates  that  may  be  necessary  to  achieve  a  desired  disinflation 
represent  “short-term  pain  for  long-term  gain”.  SBP,  therefore,  has  a  current  focus  on  anti-inflation 
policy which will ensure steady growth in the long run. 
Since April 2005 in response to the headline inflation reaching 11.3%, SBP has been and remains in 
monetary  tightening  phase.  It  has  to  be  recognized  that  the  inflationary  pressures  build  up  in  2005 
because of the preceding few years of easy monetary policy. While SBP addressed this overhang by 
raising  policy  discount  rate  from  7  to  9%  in  April  2005,  there  were  renewed  demand  pressures  as 
fiscal  and  external  account  deficits  rose  in  wake  of  both  international  oil  price  increase  as  well  as 
unforeseen spending demands triggered by the earthquake. To offset additional demand pressures, 
SBP had to further raise its policy discount rate by 50bp in July 2006 along with 4.5 percentage point 
upward revision in reserve ratios. 
In line with the evidence observed for developing countries, impact of monetary tightening on curbing 
inflation started to be visible after 12-18 months or so. As aggregate demand pressures moderated, 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2007
CPI fell to 7.9 percent in FY06 (remaining well within the annual target of 8%) and CPI continued to 
decline to 7.7% in March 2007 with core inflation being still low at 5.4%. However, CPI remains above 
annual target of 6.5% largely because of a number of factors that disrupted the impact of monetary 
tightening: 
(i) 
(ii) 
food prices remained quite volatile during FY07 due to supply disruptions; 
higher  fiscal  pressures  resulted  in  greater  than  planned  recourse  to  the  central  bank 
borrowing. More specifically, government has borrowed Rs. 180 billion for budgetary support 
by 14 April 2007 compared with only Rs. 37 billion during the same period last year. During 
the later part of FY the Government has been retiring part of the central bank borrowing and 
financing its deficit by external flows or commercial bank borrowings; 
heavy  borrowing  from commercial  banks  seems  to  have  been crowding  out  private  sector 
borrowing  for  long-term  investment  as  banks  find  it  convenient  to  park  their  funds  in 
government securities rather than lending; 
SBP  being  mandated  to  provide  higher  than  projected  refinancing  for  the  textile  sector  – 
besides  its  high  borrowing  to  meet  working  capital  requirements  through  EFS,  textile 
exporters were allowed debt swap and new long term borrowings which ranged around Rs50 
billion; and  
higher than expected foreign inflows are expected to enhance the levels of net foreign assets 
and result in monetary expansion. 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Together these factors have resulted in 16.9% YoY growth in reserve money by 14 April (compared to 
11.2%  last  year)  which  has  translated  into  broad  money  supply  growth  of  17.3%  by  14  April  07  – 
higher than the monetary policy statement’s original projection of 13.5%.  
To avoid adverse impact of monetary tightening on investment demand in the economy and the long-
run growth momentum, SBP has ensured proper liquidity management. Not only have the overnight 
rates been kept close to the discount rate, but the volatility in the short-term interest rates also reduced 
during H1-FY07. 6-months KIBOR rose by 58 bps to 10.2% during July-April 07 and banks weighted 
average (marginal) lending rate has increased from 9.9 % in June 2006 to 10.5 % in February 2007.  
During July-April 14, net credit to private sector grew by Rs266.4 billion (or 12.6 %) against Rs 339.7 
billion (or  19.8  %)  in  the corresponding  period  of  FY06.  Despite  liquidity  in  the  system,  commercial 
banks are not able to lend because of low demand for private sector’s credit that has borrowed quite 
heavily  in  last  few  years.  While  there  has  been  growth  in  working  capital,  the  demand  for  fixed 
investment has been subdued. In some cases, corporate sector is further meeting their demand either 
from retained earnings or foreign borrowings. In some sectors, banks have deliberately slowed down 
to now assess and develop their own capacities to lend more prudently. The process of mergers and 
acquisition in a number of banks also impact private sector credit as most “acquired banks” slowed 
down their business.  
Trends  in  key  macroeconomic  variables  indicate  that  SBP  monetary  policy  stance  has  proved 
successful  in  striking  the  required  balance  between  curbing  the  demand  side  inflationary  pressures 
and supporting the growth momentum. Indications are that the economy continues to grow at a robust 
pace  on  account  of  acceleration  in  Large-scale  Manufacturing  (LSM)  and  agriculture,  and  the 
persistently strong performance of services sector.  
More  importantly,  core  inflation,  which  had  registered  a  sluggish  decline  in  FY06,  has  already 
witnessed a substantial deceleration during the first nine months of FY07. By March 2007, YoY core 
inflation has come down to as low as 5.4 percent, which is 1.25 percentage points lower than the 6.7 
percent level recorded during the corresponding period last year, 0.9 percentage points less than the 
level  observed  in  June  2006.  This  comforting  decline  in  core  inflation,  however,  is  eclipsed  by  the 
persistently  high  food  inflation  stemming  principally  from  supply  side  disturbances.  In  totality,  the 
average consumer price index (CPI) saw a rise of 8.0 percent during July-March FY07 relative to the 
annual target of 6.5 percent for FY07.  
With inflation in Pakistan being relatively higher compared to its competitors and trading partners, the 
Relative  Price  Index  (RPI)  increased  by  5.8  percent  during  first  three  quarters  of  FY07.  Higher 
domestic  inflation  has  offset  the  gains  emanating from  nominal depreciation and  the real exchange 
rate, measured in terms of the real effective exchange rate (REER) index, appreciated slightly by 2.5 
percent during first three quarters of FY07.  
BIS Review 42/2007 
 3
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  so  far,  the  current  monetary  policy  posture  appears  to  be  striking  the  balance  of 
gradually  reducing  the  excess  demand  pressures  from  the  economy,  without  prejudice  to  the  high-
growth  prospects.  In  the  short-term,  SBP  will  need  to  maintain  its  monetary  tightening  stance  and 
enhance  its  communication  to  influence  inflation  expectations,  and  effectively  communicate  that 
concerns about the adverse effects of higher interest rates on competitiveness and/or growth are ill 
founded as the real interest rates in Pakistan are low relative to its competitors.  
However, it is important to recognize that monetary policy alone will not be able to contain the rise in 
inflationary  pressures.  The  Government  will  need  to  continue  to  alleviate  supply-side  constraints 
because  of  problems  of  market  structure  and  distribution  system.  Success  in  containing  inflation 
further  depends  on  continued  effective  monetary  management  which 
requires  minimizing 
Government’s recourse to central bank borrowing, mitigating the monetary pressures arising from the 
surge  in  capital  flows  ensuring  that  these  are  sterilized  and  keeping  refinancing  within  manageable 
limits, while complementing these measures with check and vigilance on food prices.  
Going forward, SBP will be launching preparatory work on inflation targeting. There will be need for 
introducing  supportive  legal  and  regulatory  framework  which  allow  for  targeting  inflation  and  allow 
greater  operational  independence  to  the  central  bank,  while  ensuring  that  SBP  has  the  desired 
transparency  and  communication  strategy  critical  for  transition  to  an  eventual  adoption  of  inflation 
targeting. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2007
