Ingimundur Friðriksson: Monetary policy and its implementation 
Speech  by  Mr  Ingimundur  Friðriksson,  a  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  a  Roundtable 
meeting held at the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavik, 20 February 2007. 
 The interest rate decision on February 8, 2007 
On  Thursday,  February  8  this  year  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  announced  that  the  Board  of 
Governors  had  decided  to  leave  the  policy  interest  rate  unchanged  at  14.25%.  A  press  release 
announcing the decision stated that inflation had slowed down and the short-term inflation outlook had 
improved beyond what was expected in the Central Bank’s most recent forecast.1 However, inflation 
was  still  significantly  in  excess  of  target.  The  current  interest  rate  might  suffice  to  bring  inflation  to 
target within an acceptable period of time, but significant macroeconomic imbalances were still present 
that posed a risk of rising inflation. If the inflation outlook took a turn for the worse, the Central Bank 
would respond. 
Monetary policy and macroeconomic developments 
In the joint declaration by the Government of Iceland and the Central Bank of Iceland on March 27, 
2001, the Bank was assigned the main objective of promoting price stability. This was defined as a 
rate of inflation, measured as the twelve-month increase in the CPI, of as close to 2½% as possible. 
Broadly speaking, central banks have only a single instrument, i.e. their policy interest rate, and can 
therefore only attain one macroeconomic goal in the long run. Internationally, a wide consensus has 
been achieved between governments and economists that price stability is the most appropriate main 
objective of monetary policy. 
The  Icelandic  economy  has  witnessed  turbulent  times  since  2001  and  undergone  major  structural 
changes, particularly in the financial sector. Iceland moved on to an inflation target under conditions of 
strong macroeconomic imbalances, one result of which was a depreciation of the króna by one-third 
over  a  period  of  eighteen  months  until  near  the  end  of  2001.  This  development  led  to  a  shortlived 
inflationary  episode  which  peaked  in  January  2002.  Afterwards  inflation  slowed  down  sharply  and 
moved below the 2½% target before the end of 2002. It remained below or close to the target into the 
second half of 2004, but has been above target since then. In the current episode, the twelve-month 
inflation  rate  peaked  in  August  2006  at  8.4%.  Since  then  it  has  been  decelerating  and  the  twelve- 
month increase in the CPI measured 7.4% in February 2007. However, the rise in the core indices 
remained above 8%. Cuts in indirect taxation will bring down headline inflation very rapidly over the 
next few months, although the reduction in underlying inflation will be slower. 
The Central Bank has explained in detail the reasons for the inflation target overshoot over the past 
two to three years. Suffice it to mention here that the episode of overheating that now appears to be 
coming to an end originated in large-scale investments [in the power and aluminium sectors] in east 
Iceland  and  elsewhere.  This  was  compounded  by  unforeseen  changes  in  the  credit  market  when 
banks  began  offering  mortgage  loans  in  competition  with  the  state-owned  Housing  Financing  Fund 
[HFF],  after  the  latter  announced  a  substantial  increase  in  its  loan-to-value  ratio  and  mortgage 
amounts.  
Another unexpected event was the issue of króna denominated Eurobonds [glacier bonds], one side-
effect  of  which  was  to  delay  the  transmission  of  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  rate  hikes  across  the 
domestic yield curve. The background to these transactions is a global glut of savings which has led to 
exceptionally low international interest rates, coinciding with unusually high interest rates in Iceland. 
One consequence was to divert much of the monetary policy impact into the exchange rate channel. 
                                                      
1  The press release is posted on the Central Bank’s website, www.sedlabank.is 
BIS Review 16/2007 
 1
Another more positive consequence was a surge in turnover in the domestic financial markets, which 
deepened them by bolstering price formation and enabled them to handle much larger trading volume 
smoothly, without significant price volatility. 
Policy rate changes are only passed through in full to domestic demand with a sizeable lag. In a small, 
open economy like Iceland, the impact is initially reflected in the exchange rate. Other things being 
equal,  a  rise  in  the  policy  rate  causes  a  temporary  appreciation  of  the  króna,  which  squeezes  the 
export and traded goods sectors and also channels demand out of the economy. The banks’ surprise 
entrance  into  the  domestic  mortgage  market  made  it  difficult  for  the  Central  Bank  to  respond 
effectively. This spurred a surge in household borrowing and private consumption funded by credit. 
For an extended period the Central Bank’s policy rate hikes primarily impacted the exchange rate and 
had a more subdued effect on other domestic interest rates, partly because of the glacier bond issues. 
Fierce competition in the mortgage market between the banks and HFF also undoubtedly delayed the 
force of the impact that the policy rate increases should have had on mortgage lending rates, including 
those of the HFF. 
It should be added that changes in economic aggregates are more difficult to measure in the national 
accounts  during  rapid  growth  episodes,  as  shown  by  sizeable  revisions  to  leading  preliminary 
estimates.  When  the  Central  Bank  raised  its  policy  rate  in  2004  and  2005  to  counter  mounting 
inflationary pressures, it did so on the basis of available data on macroeconomic conditions that later 
turned  out  to  give  a  misleading  picture  of  real  developments.  Revised  statistics  published  last  year 
showed that the economy expanded by much more in 2004 and 2005 than could be read from data at 
hand when the Central Bank hiked its policy rate during those two years. When the real outcome was 
known, it was obvious that the Central Bank should have raised its policy rate by more and faster than 
it  did  at  the  time.  Monetary  policy  faces  the  challenge  that  the  best  available  data  are  always 
imperfect, but especially so during periods of rapid change. 
As I mentioned earlier, the Central Bank left its policy rate unchanged on the last interest rate decision 
date, February 8. In December it raised the rate to 14.25%. This was the eighteenth hike since May 
2004; prior to that, the policy rate had been held at 5.3% for more than a year. The Central Bank noted 
that its December hike seemed to come as a surprise. The introduction to Monetary Bulletin, which 
was published on November 2, stated that a reduction in the policy interest rate was still not in sight, in 
spite of substantially brighter inflation prospects. On the contrary, it was impossible to rule out a further 
policy rate hike in order to attain the inflation target within an acceptable timeframe, and the analysis 
presented  then  implied  that  there  were  still  grounds  for  tightening  the  monetary  stance  further. 
However, the Board of Governors had decided to postpone such a measure for the time being. The 
next interest rate decision, to be announced on December 21, 2006, would be based on the analysis 
in  the  November  Monetary  Bulletin  and  additional  data  that  became  available  by  that  time.  The 
Chairman of the Board of Governors underlined this message from Monetary Bulletin in a speech a 
few days later when he described the decision to leave the policy rate unchanged on November 2 as a 
deferral of an increase rather than the end of the tightening of the stance. 
When it was decided to raise the policy rate on December 21, it was known that inflation had slowed 
down  to  considerably  below  the  midyear  forecast  rate.  Inflation  was  mainly  brought  down  by  lower 
energy  prices,  the  impact  of  the  appreciation  of  the  króna  since  the  middle  of  the  year,  less-than-
expected wage drift and a slowdown in house price inflation. Domestic demand in Q3 was broadly in 
line with the Central Bank’s November forecast. It was also known that the current account deficit was 
wider than expected in Q3 and would significantly overshoot the forecast for the year as a whole. No 
indications of easing labour market pressures could be seen. Unemployment was negligible and there 
was a large influx of foreign labour. Despite lower inflation than in the Bank’s July forecast, there was 
still  no  sign  that  the  target  would  be  attained  within  two  years  if  the  effect  of  indirect  tax  cuts  on 
headline CPI in the first half of 2007 was ignored. Furthermore, the wide current account deficit and 
tight  labour  market  aroused  suspicions  that  pressures  in  the  economy  were  underestimated,  and 
thereby inflationary pressures as well. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  policy  rate  hikes  primarily  impact  the  exchange  rate.  The  króna  appreciated 
substantially until near the end of 2005. By then it was considerably stronger than was compatible with 
external balance in the economy, as the Central Bank had explained in detail, among other things in 
its December Monetary Bulletin that year. So it was not surprising that the króna depreciated. What 
was  unexpected  was  how  soon  and  how  fast  the  króna  fell.  It  depreciated  by  19%  against  the 
exchange rate index over 2006 as a whole and all the weakening was confined to the first half of the 
year.  So  far  in  2007  the króna  has  been  roughly  15%  weaker  on  average  than  at  the  beginning of 
2006.  By  comparison,  the  US  dollar  depreciated  against  the  euro  by  almost  11%.  For  most  of  the 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2007
period since the middle of 2006, the króna has fluctuated within a fairly modest range. Since the end 
of the sharp depreciation in the first half of last year the króna can be described as relatively stable 
and  marginally  above  its  long-term  average  value.  At  present,  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  is 
slightly stronger than on average over the last quarter of a century. 
A wide current account deficit could potentially erode confidence in the króna. The Central Bank has 
underlined the importance of restoring macroeconomic balance by realigning domestic demand with 
output capacity, and of establishing a sustainable external balance by such means rather than through 
a sharp currency depreciation that would fuel inflation and other instabilities. Inflation developments 
depend heavily on the króna not slipping much from its level over the past few months, at least for as 
long as pronounced macroeconomic imbalances remain. Confidence in the exchange rate will be a 
crucial factor over the coming months. It should also be pointed out that exchange rate movements 
can  be  the  result  of  external  events  or  changes  beyond  our  control,  such  as  a  sudden  shift  in 
international  investors’  risk  perceptions  or  global  credit  supply.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  is 
closely linked to developments in capital markets elsewhere in the world, especially while the current 
account deficit is as large as at present. 
indication  about 
in  aggregates.  They 
therefore  provide  a  sufficiently  good 
Inflation and macroeconomic forecasting 
The  Central  Bank  bases  its  monetary  policy  formulation  and  implementation  on  the  inflation  and 
macroeconomic  forecast  that  it  prepares  three  times  a  year  and  publishes  in  Monetary  Bulletin. 
Forecasts are always uncertain and by definition can never state precisely what will happen over the 
forecast horizon. The Central Bank forecasts are based on extensive research and analysis, and on 
models that have been developed to simulate how events are likely to unfold. A major advance was 
made  in  2006  with  the  introduction  of  a  new  macroeconomic  model  designed  by  Central  Bank 
economists. The Central Bank has always expressed qualifications about the accuracy of its forecasts, 
and readers of Monetary Bulletin will be familiar with the risk profiles that draw attention to forecasting 
uncertainties. Another uncertainty is the output gap at any time, which is an important determinant of 
the  inflation  outlook.  However,  the  economic  laws  are  known  and  are  the  same  as  everywhere. 
Forecasts are prepared on the basis of the best available information and known correlations between 
changes 
future 
developments  to  enable  the  Board  of  Governors  to  make  decisions  on  the  basis  of  them.  Better 
forecasts have not been available. 
Nonetheless, the Central Bank has frequently been criticised for the quality of its forecasting and the 
allegedly  incorrect  monetary  policy  decisions  based  on  them.  For  example,  the  Bank  came  under 
harsh fire for raising the policy rate in the second half of 2006. It was claimed that the forecasts were 
wrong and the hikes therefore unnecessary. In some cases, critics selected limited and minor areas of 
Central Bank forecasts which they considered to be based on incorrect assumptions, and dismissed 
the entire forecast as a result. 
Now  that  the  year  is  over,  it  is  obvious,  of  course,  that  the  Bank’s  forecasts  did  not  fully  hold.  For 
instance,  in  July  2006  the  Bank  forecast  higher  second-half  inflation  than  proved  to  be  the  case. 
Explanations for the deviation include the appreciation of the króna after the middle of the year, the 
effect of lower global fuel prices on the price level, and the fact that wage settlements made in the 
middle of the year did not provoke wage drift on the scale that the Bank had forecast in July. The first 
two  factors  were  hardly  foreseeable,  and  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  the  Bank’s  overforecast  for 
wage drift was not far from that made by the social partners themselves when the wage settlements 
were signed. Be that as it may, the economy was no less overheated than forecast in mid-2006, as 
witnessed by the current account deficit and tight labour market. Thus it is untenable to claim that the 
Central Bank’s policy rate hikes in 2006 were unwarranted. On the contrary, a higher policy rate was 
the  main  precondition  for  the  króna  to  hold  relatively  strong,  and  contributed  to  subduing  demand 
growth.  Had  the  Central  Bank  not  raised  its  policy  rate,  there  is  little  doubt  that  inflation  would  be 
higher than at present. 
Some commentators who were surprised by the December policy rate hike apparently considered that 
the Central Bank had underestimated the scope of the turnaround in the economy in the second half 
of  the  year.  National  accounts  statistics  for  Q3  that  were  published  in  mid-  December,  supposedly 
showing a substantial slowdown in economic activity, were repeatedly cited as evidence. The Central 
Bank  considers  it  imprudent  to  draw  sweeping  conclusions  solely  from  preliminary  estimates  in  the 
quarterly  national  accounts,  which  tend  to  undergo  sharp  revisions.  For  this  and  other  reasons,  a 
BIS Review 16/2007 
 3
broader  range  of  indicators  contributed  to  the  December  policy  rate  decision,  including  the  current 
account deficit and labour market conditions. 
The scenario today is that commercial bank analysts expect the cycle of policy rate cuts to begin later 
this year than they were forecasting towards the end of 2006. In other words, they consider that more 
underlying pressures remain in the economy than they may have thought at the time. 
Interest rate assumptions in Central Bank forecasts 
Various  changes  have  been  made  to  the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rate  assumptions  behind  the 
Central Bank’s forecasts in recent years. In the early years of inflation targeting, forecasts were based 
on  the  assumption  of  an  unchanged  exchange  rate  and  unchanged  policy  rate  over  the  forecast 
horizon. By showing how developments would unfold if the Bank left the policy rate unchanged, they 
indicated whether it needed to be changed. In December 2004, the first alternative scenarios to the 
baseline forecast were presented which assumed changes in the exchange rate and interest rate over 
the forecast horizon. In December 2005 the same baseline forecast was used, but in the alternative 
scenarios, the policy rate path followed financial market analysts’ forecasts and the exchange rate was 
extrapolated from uncovered interest rate parities. These approaches were developed further in 2006 
and  the  baseline  forecast  in  July  and  November  was  based  on  a  policy  rate  path  calculated  from 
forward interest rates and analysts’ expectations. The alternative scenarios assumed, respectively, an 
unchanged  policy  rate  and  a  policy  rate  path  that  would  bring  inflation  to  target  within  the  forecast 
horizon.  
Earlier  forecasts  based  on  an  unchanged  policy  rate  across  the  horizon,  in  an  environment  where 
there  was  an  obvious  need  for  a  sharp  hike,  produced  a  misleading  picture.  They  presented 
developments that the Bank had to explain would never materialise. The baseline forecast in Monetary 
Bulletin  in  November  2006  represented  an  enhancement  insofar  as  it  was  based  on  market 
expectations  about  policy  rate  changes.  The  Central  Bank  incorporated  these  expectations  into  its 
baseline forecast, even though it considered them unrealistic. They assumed rapid cuts in the policy 
rate commencing early this year. The Central Bank considered neither assumption to be compatible 
with the inflation outlook. Thus the forecast lacked credibility, in the Bank’s own opinion. 
This prompts the question of what assumptions it is natural for the Central Bank to make about the 
policy rate in its baseline macroeconomic and inflation forecasts. 
Iceland is not the only country whose central bank has faced such a challenge. Several years ago, the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand responded by using its own policy rate forecast as an assumption. The 
Bank of Norway followed suit two years ago and now uses a future interest rate path forecast by its 
Executive Board for its baseline forecast. Sweden’s Riksbank recently announced that it will use its 
own  forecast  for  the  repo  rate  path  as  an  assumption  in  its  inflation  forecast.  These  banks  have 
followed a similar course to the Central Bank of Iceland in developing the interest rate assumptions 
behind their forecasts. They have now opted to use the path that is forecast by those who actually 
determine  the  policy  rate,  partly  because  they  did  not  consider  market  agents’  forecasts  and 
expectations sufficiently credible. At the same time, these central banks have firmly stated that their 
policy rate forecasts entail no commitment to hold their rates to that path. The policy rate must always 
be decided on the basis of the best available information at any given time. Experience shows that 
paths  change  sharply  from  one  forecast  to  the next and  the central  banks explain  the  assumptions 
behind  such  changes  thoroughly.  Above  all,  these  central  banks  aim  to  exert  a  specific  effect  on 
expectations,  which  is  the  principle  behind  a  successful  monetary  policy.  This  appears  to  have 
produced results in New Zealand and Norway. 
Another option is for the baseline forecast to assume a policy rate path calculated from a monetary 
policy rule that steers inflation to target within the forecast horizon. This was done in the alternative 
scenario published in the November 2006 Monetary Bulletin. 
Other  inflation-targeting  central  banks  take  different  approaches,  including  the  assumption  of  an 
unchanged policy rate as the Central Bank of Iceland initially did after moving onto an inflation target. 
The choice of assumptions for the Central Bank’s next macroeconomic and inflation forecast has yet 
to be decided. It is still under consideration and discussion in-house. What is crucial for the Central 
Bank is the credibility of its forecasting and the ability to exert the impact on expectations that it deems 
necessary. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2007
Conclusion 
It is not the Central Bank of Iceland’s policy to maintain high interest rates. However, this is necessary 
for  as  long  as  the  recent  macroeconomic  conditions  prevail.  High  interest  rates  subdue  private 
consumption  and  investment.  The  impact  of  interest  rate  changes  is  transmitted  with  a  lag,  but 
monetary policy gradually delivers results, now as ever. Reducing imbalances and restoring stability is 
in  everyone’s  interest.  Some  strain  is  inevitable  during  an  adjustment  from  heavy  imbalances,  so 
complaints come as no surprise. But this does not mean that the wrong monetary policy measures are 
being applied – it could even mean quite the opposite. 
The Central Bank’s policy rate is high. The press release announcing the Board of Governors’ decision 
on February 8, which I quoted earlier, stated that the current interest rate may suffice to bring inflation 
to target within an acceptable period of time. It is impossible to state this categorically now, because it 
depends on the inflation outlook. What is certain is that the policy rate will be lowered as soon as the 
Central Bank deems this compatible with the inflation target. It is wrong to claim that this is ruled out 
because  the  interest  rate  differential  with  abroad  must  be  maintained  to  prevent  turbulence  when 
glacier bonds mature. However, an untimely reduction in the policy rate will benefit no one. 
It has been claimed that the Central Bank is undermining the króna with its interest policy, which will 
cause businesses and households to abandon the currency. In this context it must be remembered 
that  without  a  tight  monetary  stance  and  high  interest  rates,  the  króna  would  probably  have 
depreciated by more than it actually did, demand would have grown faster and inflation moved much 
higher. This would have had serious consequences for indebted households and businesses, as well 
as causing turmoil in the labour market and, ultimately, even more instability in the economy. 
Other  central  banks  have  periodically  needed  a  very  tight  monetary  stance  to  bring  inflation  under 
control. For example after 1980, roughly a quarter of a century ago, the US federal funds rate was 
significantly higher for a while than Iceland’s current policy rate. This proved necessary in order to rein 
in inflation that was also higher then than in Iceland today. This policy was successful and the US has 
not faced a serious challenge from inflation since. 
Ideas for an economic panacea have also been aired, typically involving the adoption of the euro. The 
Central Bank has already stated its view that adopting the euro would be imprudent except by joining 
the EU. Even though Iceland were to decide to apply for EU membership, it would not be able to enter 
into the Monetary Union until several years later, after fulfilling all the accompanying conditions which 
include  criteria  for  inflation,  interest  rates  and  exchange  rate  stability.  Experience  shows  that  no 
concessions are made from these conditions. It is also important to remember that membership of a 
larger currency area does not eliminate the need for sensible economic policy. What changes is that 
monetary policy independence is lost. Decisions on consumer prices and unit labour costs relative to 
abroad  would  be  transferred  to  the  respective  markets.  This  would  make  fiscal  and  wage  flexibility 
even more vital in order to tackle cyclical fluctuations. In the current adjustment of the economy, the 
exchange  rate  of  the  króna  has  played  a  key  role.  Without  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  the  crucial 
instruments for tackling prevailing economic conditions would have been tight fiscal restraint, cuts in 
public  spending  and/or  higher  taxes,  to  help  ensure  that  sharp  rises  in  wages  and  prices  did  not 
excessively weaken the competitive position of Iceland’s trading sectors. 
Exchange rate volatility in the recent term was fuelled by the overheating of the economy, which is 
now  cooling  once  more.  The  crucial  factor  for  near-term  exchange  rate  developments  is  to  restore 
economic stability  in  Iceland with  inflation  on  target,  and  to secure  it  in  the  longer  run with  prudent 
economic policies. It is doubtful whether claims that economic policy would necessarily become more 
prudent, if Iceland switched to the currency of a larger currency area, are justifiable. 
BIS Review 16/2007 
 5
