Irma Rosenberg: Monetary policy with our own interest rate path 
Speech by Ms Irma Rosenberg, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a lunch meeting 
arranged by Öhmans, Stockholm, 8 June 2007.  
 Introduction 
Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here and speak about monetary policy. Today 
I would like to take the opportunity to talk about some issues that are important to me. I would like to 
explain why I considered that the repo rate should be kept unchanged at the most recent monetary 
policy  meeting.  I  shall  also  comment  on  some  of  the  views we  at  the  Riksbank  have  received  with 
regard to our forecast of the interest rate path. But I intend to begin with a few words on the changes 
in our monetary policy communication which were decided by the Executive Board recently. 
Changes in the monetary policy communication 
Since  the  inflation  target  was  introduced,  the  Riksbank  has  tried  in  different  ways  to  become  more 
open and clear with regard to how monetary policy is conducted. We have gradually published more 
and more of the background information used for our decisions, in particular the forecasts for inflation 
and economic developments in general. The decision to publish our own forecast for the repo rate, 
which we took at the beginning of the year, was a natural continuation of this process. In mid-May we 
decided  to  implement  some  further  changes  to  become  even  clearer  in  our  monetary  policy 
communication.  
From now on, we will hold press conferences after each monetary policy meeting, regardless of what 
decision has been taken. Until now we have only held a press conference if the repo rate has been 
adjusted  or  if  we  have  published  a  Monetary  Policy  Report.  But  to  understand  the  monetary  policy 
conducted, it is equally important to explain why the repo rate has been held unchanged as to explain 
why the repo rate has been changed. By publishing our own interest rate forecasts and by holding 
press conferences after each monetary policy meeting we will provide more detailed and more regular 
information on the considerations taken by the Executive Board. 
We  have  also  decided  to  make  changes  in  our  way  of  signalling.  By  signalling  I  mean  how  we 
communicate  our  monetary  policy  intentions.  Previously,  when  we  Executive  Board  members  have 
gone out and talked about the current economic situation between the monetary policy meetings we 
have sometimes given indications of how we consider the repo rate should be set at the next meeting. 
This  has  been  on  the  condition  that  it  is  clear  that  the  points  of  view  expressed  are  the  individual 
member’s.  The  idea  was  that  when  the  interest  rate  decision  was  taken  at  the  monetary  policy 
meeting,  enough  information  on  the  different  Executive  Board  members’  views  would  already  have 
been  given  by  degrees  so  that  the  decision  would  not  surprise  market  agents.  We  have  now 
concluded  that  there  is  not  normally  reason  to  indicate  prior  to  the  monetary  policy  meetings  in 
speeches and press releases how our views of the repo rate path have changed. Our assessment is 
that it is enough to signal our intentions clearly in connection with the seven monetary policy meetings 
held every year. In connection with three of these meetings we will publish our own forecast for the 
future repo rate, and our Monetary Policy Report will show clearly why we have chosen this particular 
path.  On  the  other  four  occasions  we  will  make  a  qualitative  assessment  of how  the  most  recently 
published interest rate forecast relates to the new information received. Even if the interest rate path 
forecast is only a forecast and not a promise, a central bank can hardly be clearer than this with regard 
to its views on economic developments and the consequences for the interest rate. 
There may also in exceptional cases be justification for some signalling between two monetary policy 
meetings. If, for instance, something occurs to radically alter the economic situation, while there is a 
long time until the next meeting, it may be necessary to make a comment in order to avoid the risk of 
unnecessary uncertainty in the financial markets. It should then be clear whether the entire Executive 
Board supports this view or whether it is the opinion of an individual member.  
I  and  my  colleagues  on  the  Executive  Board  will  thus  continue  to  go  out  and  talk  about  monetary 
policy and financial stability, but there will be no signals regarding coming interest rate decisions. We 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 1
will each express our own assessments, but this will be a case of justifying and explaining our own 
considerations after a meeting and not of signalling a stance to be taken at a coming meeting.  
The  third  change  we  decided  on  was  to  state  our  names  in  the  minutes  of  the  monetary  policy 
meetings, with effect from the meeting to be held in June, so that it is possible to see who said what. 
Previously, we have only named members who have entered a reservation against the decision. This 
change will make differences of opinion between Executive Board members even clearer. It means 
that it will become easier both to predict how monetary policy will be conducted in future and to assess 
it. This change is also a step towards increased openness and clarity. 
The monetary policy decision on 3 May 
This naturally leads me on to the stance I myself took at the most recent monetary policy meeting in 
early  May.  My  assessment  was  then  that  the  new information received  indicated  that  the  repo  rate 
should  be  raised  more  during  the  forecast  period  than  was  implied  by  the  forecast  in  the  February 
Monetary  Policy  Report.  This  is  to  ensure  an  inflation  rate  in  line  with  the  target  and  a  balanced 
development in the real economy. But at the same time I considered that the changes in the economic 
picture were not so great that the interest rate needed to be raised immediately. Let me explain why. 
In February we believed that growth would continue to be good, although it was expected to be slightly 
lower  than  last  year.  We  estimated  that  cost  pressures  would  rise  during  the  forecast  period  as 
employment was expected to increase and wages were expected to rise faster. Higher cost pressures 
could  also  lead  to  inflation  rising,  but  we  estimated  that  the  favourable  supply  conditions  would 
contribute  to  a  relatively  modest  rate  of  increase.  At  the  same  time,  we  pointed  out  that  the 
assessment of wage developments was uncertain. For instance, the rapid upturn in employment and 
the increased labour shortage implied more rapid wage increases, while the increase in labour supply 
and  continued  price  pressures  from  abroad  indicated  slower  wage  growth.  The  assessment  in  the 
main  scenario  was  that  the  repo  rate  should  be  raised  at  a  fairly  slow  pace.  We  also  presented  a 
number of alternative scenarios and the consequences they would have for monetary policy. In one 
such scenario we investigated the consequences of more rapid wage increases than calculated.  
At  our  monetary  policy  meeting  in  May  we  were  able  to  observe  that  the  new  information  received 
since the publication of the Monetary Policy Report in February indicated higher inflationary pressures 
than we had predicted. One reason was that the result of the spring wage bargaining rounds indicated 
that wages could increase more quickly during the forecast period than we had estimated in the main 
alternative in the report published in February. The motive for high wage increases not being part of 
our main scenario was that we considered that the spare capacity in the labour market still appeared 
substantial, which would slow down the rate of wage increase. 
How high wage increases will be in total will depend not only on the collective wage agreements, but 
also on how much wages rise outside of the agreements. As I mentioned in May, it is reasonable in 
the  currently  strong  labour  market  situation  to  count  on  wage  increases  outside  of  the  agreements 
being higher than they have been in recent years. How high will depend on how well the labour market 
functions. I pointed to a number of important questions then. Will the labour supply increase to the 
extent expected? Will the matching of demand for and supply of labour function? How will the stronger 
labour market situation affect wage negotiations? 
At  the  May  meeting  we  were  also  able  to  observe  that  the  statistics  received  for  the  first  quarter 
showed  a  slightly  more  strained  labour  market  situation  than  we  expected  to  see  in  February. 
Employment had developed roughly in line with our forecast, while the labour supply appeared to have 
increased  slightly  less  than  expected.  Unemployment  was  therefore  a  little  lower  than  we  had 
predicted  in  the  February  report.  Shortages  in  the  business  sector  continued  to  increase.  But  my 
assessment was nevertheless that there was still plenty of spare capacity, if not yet to the same extent 
as we expected in February. A further reason why we foresaw higher inflationary pressures was that 
the Government’s Spring Budget Bill appeared likely to stimulate demand slightly more, at least next 
year, than we had previously estimated.  
As I said earlier, I drew the conclusion from this that the repo rate needed to be raised more during the 
forecast period than we believed in the February report. But my assessment was that the economic 
picture on the whole had not changed so much that the repo rate needed to be raised immediately. 
Inflation was low, and it appeared, as I saw it, reasonable to assume that it would rise fairly slowly. 
The reason for this was that there were still several factors holding back prices. I pointed out that the 
important  thing  was  to  balance  the  pace  of  the  interest  rate  increases  so  that  inflation  does  not 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2007
accelerate more rapidly than expected, but so that growth in production and employment is not slowed 
down  too  soon.  How  these  considerations  will  be  transformed  into  a  new  interest  rate  forecast  is 
something we will return to in our next Monetary Policy Report in June.  
Views on our interest rate path 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  experiences  thus  far  of  publishing  our  own 
interest rate path. It is still too early to draw any definite conclusions about how this has functioned, but 
some reflections may be worthwhile. 
The debate after our monetary policy meeting in February, when we presented our own interest rate 
forecast for the first time, was very lively. This was not because we chose to raise the repo rate by 
0.25 percentage points – this decision was hardly discussed at all. What attracted attention was the 
fact  that  the  forecast  for  the  repo  rate  that  we  published  differed  from  the  average  expectations 
prevailing  at  the  time.  This  applied  both  to  the  expectations  that  could  be  interpreted  from  market 
pricing and to the average of the interest rate forecasts made by other forecasters. But there were also 
fairly substantial differences between market analysts. There were those whose views were relatively 
close to ours and there were those whose views differed substantially from ours. I do not consider it 
strange that such differences of opinion should arise. They reflect in part differences in the view of 
economic developments and how inflationary pressures may develop. For instance, in February we 
considered that the new information received since our previous monetary policy meetings in October 
and  December  did  not  justify  the  relatively  large  upward  adjustments  in  the  interest  rate  forecasts 
made by some other market analysts. 
The  fact  that  other  agents  make  their  own  assessments  of  how  the  interest  rate  will  develop  is 
essentially very positive. One of the arguments put forward against a central bank presenting its own 
forecast for the interest rate path was that the agents in the financial market would then stop making 
their own analyses of interest rate developments. However, these misgivings have proved unjustified. 
Opinions  on  the  interest  rate  and  future  economic  developments  still  differ,  which  is  a  natural 
consequence of the uncertainty regarding the future development of the economy. In particular those 
who operate in the financial markets know that we live in an uncertain world and for this reason the 
assessments of interest rate developments will continue to differ.  
Another argument against a central bank presenting its own forecast for the interest rate is that the 
central bank would lose credibility if the forecast proved to be wrong. It has also been speculated in 
various  market  comments  that  it  would  entail  a  loss  of  prestige  for  the  central  bank  to  revise  its 
forecasts and that the central bank should therefore by wary of doing so. But it is no stranger that we 
should revise our view of the future development of the repo rate than that we should revise our view 
of growth, employment or inflation when new information is received that changes the outlook. Nor is it 
stranger for the central bank to revise its forecasts than for other analysts to do so. What is important 
is that we can motivate why we are revising our views and that we can do so in an understandable 
manner.  
This is linked to the fact that it is difficult to make forecasts, not merely for interest rates, but also for 
other macro economic variables. The fact that it is difficult to make forecasts for the interest rate is 
illustrated  clearly  in  the  development  of,  for  instance,  forward  rates  over  time.  The  figure  (figure  1) 
shows  implied  forward  rate  curves  calculated  on the  basis  of bank  papers  from  the  middle  of  each 
quarter. Expectations of the development of the repo rate have varied substantially over time when 
measured  in  this  way.  During  the  years  the  interest  rate  has  gradually  been  cut,  expectations 
according to implied forward rates have substantially overestimated the level of the repo rate. After we 
began to raise the interest rate one and a half years ago, there has rather been a tendency for the 
repo rate path to be slightly underestimated.  
It can thus be noted that market agents have had difficulty in forecasting interest rate developments. 
The fact that forecasters revise their assessments is not at all strange, as new information is received 
all the time. This indicates that as the conditions for the real economy change and new information is 
received  the  forecasts  for  the  repo  rate  path  need  to  be  adjusted.  There  is  nothing  particularly 
dramatic about this. It applies to all market agents, to the major banks, to the Ministry of Finance and 
also to us at the Riksbank. The great uncertainty factor means that all forecasters should be humble, 
but this should not prevent them from making forecasts.  
I  would  therefore  like  to  emphasise  once again  that  the repo  rate  path  we  present  in  the Monetary 
Policy  Report  is  a  forecast  and  not  a  promise.  The Riksbank  cannot  undertake,  regardless  of  what 
BIS Review 62/2007 
 3
happens in the economy, to follow the path published. The interest rate path is quite simply the best 
assessment we can make at a given point in time, given the information that is then available. New 
information may change the picture of the economy and then the Executive Board will have to rethink 
how we set the repo rate.  
The reason why we have chosen to publish our interest rate forecast despite the uncertainty over the 
future is largely because we believe this is the best way of explaining our thoughts on monetary policy. 
It also makes it easier for us to justify forecasts and interest rate decisions and to outline alternative 
scenarios for the repo rate. It will also be easier to evaluate monetary policy. The debate has not been 
slow in coming. Analyses and discussions on monetary policy are now being conducted outside of the 
Riksbank in a way that would not have been possible if we had not presented our own interest rate 
path.  It  is  not,  as  before,  primarily  the  current  interest  rate  decision  that  is  discussed,  but  more  a 
question  of  the  monetary  policy  fluctuations  throughout  the  entire  forecast  period.  The  fact  that  the 
interest  rate  forecast  may  later  be  changed  is  a  different,  and  quite  natural,  matter.  Withholding 
information on how we view the future development of the interest rate merely because this view may 
need to be revised would make us a less open bank. 
 
Figure 1. Is the market always right?
Repo rate expectations according to implied forward 
rates
Per cent
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 4 
 7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
Source: The Riksbank
 BIS Review 62/2007
