Amando M Tetangco, Jr: A tipping point and a rising tide is lifting up the 
Philippine economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Philippine Economic Briefing, Central Bank of the Philippines, Makati City, 
20 February 2007. 
 Thank you Rene. Ladies and gentlemen, welcome and good afternoon.  
Last year, the Government set out to “make things happen” and in the end, as you all know, it did. 
Many  positive  things  happened.  And  while  I  wish  I  could  be  publicly  swept  up  by  what  former  Fed 
Chairman Alan Greenspan famously called "irrational exuberance," in my button-down role as Central 
Bank Governor, I have to settle for "rational exuberance" instead!  
I'll leave any irrational comments to others who feel less constrained… but let me say this… 2006 was 
a good year, and 2007 promises to be even better. 
I believe our economy has reached a tipping point and, to mix metaphors, the rising tide will lift up, not 
capsize,  our  boat.  With  some  of  the  most  stable  macroeconomic  fundamentals  we  have  seen  in  a 
decade,  including  a  much  improved  fiscal  position,  single  digit  rate  of  inflation  with  a  downward 
trajectory – despite volatility in oil prices – a healthy external position, a strong peso and a substantial 
level of foreign exchange reserves, the rising tide of economic and fiscal reforms paired with sound 
monetary and external sector policies will continue to lift the boat of the Philippine economy. 
Last year, these efforts earned us five credit rating outlook upgrades, double digit growth in portfolio 
and foreign direct investment and new heights for investor confidence. Most importantly, it is a clear 
sign  that  we  are  on  our  way  to  achieving  further  economic  progress  that  will  benefit  domestic  and 
foreign investors alike. 
But the tide has not been raised enough to benefit all sectors of our economy. Our goal for 2007 is to 
build  on  our  macroeconomic  strengths  to  allow  a  broader  base  of  the  economy  to  experience  the 
positive impact of our economic gains. But the Government’s efforts alone are not enough.  
As  reflected  in  the  theme  of  this  year’s  economic  briefing,  ensuring  the  sustainability  of  economic 
momentum is a shared responsibility between the public and private sectors. This collaboration should 
focus on the exchange of new ideas to propel our economy forward, which is why we have invited 
business  leaders  to  join  us  today  in  an  open  discussion  to  explore  the  areas  where  we  can  work 
together to build a stronger nation. 
But actions speak louder than words. We call on the Philippine business community to take a bigger 
stake  in  the  country’s  development.  …Build  on  the  reform  platform  and  favorable  economic 
environment that we have worked hard with the Government to create by taking the next steps where 
entrepreneurial dynamism drives greater economic gains.  
In summary, economic and fiscal achievements in 2006 have created a positive momentum for our 
country. A consistent implementation of reform measures by the Government, particularly in the area 
of  revenue  generation  and  debt  and  expenditure  management,  coupled  with  a  stable  monetary 
environment and healthy banking sector, will support the government’s fiscal, growth and other macro 
and microeconomic targets for 2007. 
The tide is rising and I believe it will continue to do so for some time. Now we must all row together in 
the same direction to ensure steady progress and a forward direction, even if the currents try to move 
us in a different direction or hinder our forward progress. We have a unique opportunity to make sure 
the tipping point lifts the boat, not tips it over. I am confident we are sailing in the right direction. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 19/2007 
 1
