Sheryl Kennedy: Adjusting to economic change 
Remarks by Ms Sheryl Kennedy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Greater Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 22 February 2007.  
 It's a pleasure to be here in Saskatoon. 
The last time someone from the Bank of Canada spoke to this Chamber of Commerce was five years 
ago, when Governor Dodge discussed "Inflation Targeting During a Difficult Year." Just five years ago, 
but what a different world it was then. The world economy wasn't nearly as strong. Commodity prices 
were soft. From that vantage point, it would have been difficult to predict what happened over the next 
five years. Who could have foreseen the price of potash rising 50 per cent, oil prices going up about 
200 per cent, or the price of uranium appreciating fivefold? Who could have known that the Canadian 
dollar  would  appreciate  by  more  than  a  third?  More  importantly,  who  could  have  predicted  that  the 
Canadian economy would fare so well in dealing with these significant changes? 
The past five years have indeed been a period of great and relatively rapid economic change, both 
here in Saskatchewan and across the country. In my remarks today, I'd like to describe this change 
and discuss its significance to our economic well-being. Then I'd like to look at some of the factors that 
explain the success of the adjustment process thus far. Finally, I'd like to suggest what needs to be 
done to ensure that we'll continue to be up to the task of meeting the challenges ahead.  
Changes in the economy since 2002 
Let's  start  by  turning  back  the  clock,  and  looking  briefly  at  what  was  going  on  five  years  ago.  Of 
course, the big news five years ago this month was the Olympics in Salt Lake City. There, the fastest 
woman on ice, Saskatoon's Catriona LeMay Doan took gold – again, as she'd done in 1998 – in speed 
skating. And the women's hockey team, led by another Saskatchewan athlete, Hayley Wickenheiser, 
won all five games they played, and also took home the gold medal.  
Now, how was the economy faring? Well, it wouldn't have won a gold medal, but the economy wasn't 
doing too badly, especially considering the slowdown that occurred in the wake of 9/11 in 2001. The 
world economy was growing at just over 3 per cent, and the Canadian economy at just under 3 per 
cent.  The  national  unemployment  rate  was  7.7  per  cent.  And  inflation,  at  just  over  2  per  cent,  was 
under control.  
Let's turn now to what has happened since 2002. In each of the four years that followed, world GDP 
growth  has  been  over  4  per  cent  in  real  terms.  Last  year,  it  was  5.2  per  cent.  In  fact,  the  world 
economy has grown more during this period than in any other five-year period since the second world 
war.  
Of  course,  strong  non-inflationary  growth  of  the  global  economy  is  desirable  and  good  for  most 
countries.  But  it  is  particularly  true  for  Canada,  given  that  so  much  of  our  economic  well-being  is 
derived  from  trade  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  strength  of  the  global  economy  has  had  the 
important  effect  of  increasing  the  demand  for  –  and  raising  the  prices  of  –  many  commodities  that 
Canada exports, including oil and natural gas, copper and nickel, potash and uranium. At the same 
time, the prices of many imports have fallen, owing in part to global competition. This has resulted in 
what  is  called  a  "positive  terms-of-trade  shock"  –  the  prices  we  get  for  our  exports  have  increased 
relative to the prices we pay for our imports. As a result, we are richer as a country.  
In tandem with this improvement in our terms of trade, we've seen a major rise in the external value of 
our dollar. In February 2002, the Canadian dollar was at a historic low. Today, at around 85 cents, the 
dollar is worth about 37 per cent more against the U.S. dollar than it was then, and about 30 per cent 
more  against  a  trade-weighted  basket  of  currencies.  This  rapid  and  substantial  movement  in  the 
exchange rate reflects fundamental changes in the economy. But that doesn't mean that adjusting to it 
has been easy. Adjusting to such an appreciation in the external value of the dollar can be difficult for 
many companies and workers, especially when competition is fierce, as it is now. But a strong dollar 
also  presents  opportunities.  Businesses,  for  example,  can  more  easily  buy  productivity-enhancing 
machinery and equipment from abroad, and the evidence is that they are doing just that. Consumers 
benefit because the prices of imports are lower when they're bought with a stronger dollar. 
BIS Review 17/2007 
 1
Changes  in  our  terms  of  trade  also  have  implications  for  the  allocation  of  resources  within  our 
economy. The strong commodity prices I mentioned have led to increased profitability in mining and oil 
and  gas  extraction.  This,  in  turn,  has  prompted  strong  gains  in  both  investment  spending  and 
employment in those sectors of the economy. Most sectors with a low exposure to international trade 
(such  as  personal  services)  have  also  experienced  relatively  strong  levels  of  profitability  and  solid 
gains in employment. On the other hand, with the substantial rise in the exchange rate and increased 
competition from many of the Asian economies, many industries with a high exposure to international 
trade – typically manufacturers – have faced difficult adjustments since the end of 2002. This has been 
reflected in lower rates of profitability, modest gains in production, and declines in employment. 
But overall, Canada has adjusted well to the challenges of the past five years. Since 2002, our labour 
markets have performed well – the unemployment rate is now close to a 30-year low. And our average 
annual economic growth rate has been greater than the average growth rate of the G-7 countries as a 
whole. 
That's  the  national  picture.  In  many  respects,  Saskatchewan  is  a  microcosm  of  these  trends.  Real 
provincial GDP growth is solid and close to the national average. In the past five years, Saskatchewan 
has seen its labour participation rate increase significantly – from 65.7 to more than 70 per cent – and 
the unemployment rate has dropped from 5.4 per cent in February of 2002 to 4.1 per cent last month, 
indicating  a  robust  labour  market.  Of  course,  Saskatchewan  has  been  helped  a  good  deal  by  the 
increase  in  world  commodity  prices  that  I  mentioned  earlier  –  especially  for  energy,  potash,  and 
uranium,  while  manufacturers  here  have  faced  challenges  similar  to  those  faced  by  manufacturers 
elsewhere in Canada. 
To  summarize,  the  past  five  years  have  been  a  time  of  large  and  significant  economic  adjustment. 
Despite the stresses and strains that such a change can cause, Canada has done very well, all things 
considered. The economy is strong, Canadians are working, and they have seen increases in wealth 
and income.  
What are some of the factors that explain this successful adjustment? 
What explains the success of the adjustment process? 
In  an  open  economy  like  Canada's,  the  most  important  factor  is  flexibility.  By  flexibility,  I  mean  the 
ability of the economy to adjust to changes in circumstance – that is, for resources to shift from areas 
of  weakening  demand  to  areas  of  strengthening  demand  –  and  for  the  economy  to  return  to  its 
production potential quickly, with as little cost as possible. But flexibility doesn't just happen – it's a 
function of structural policies, human capital, and our business culture. And flexibility is facilitated by 
two other elements that are required for success in economic adjustment – sound monetary and fiscal 
policies. Let's look at monetary policy first. 
The  two  key  components  of  our  monetary  policy  framework  are  inflation  targeting  and  a  floating 
exchange  rate.  These work  together  and  reinforce  one  another  to  promote stability  and  to  facilitate 
economic adjustment. How does this happen? Let's look first at inflation control. 
Low, stable, and predictable inflation provides many benefits. It helps people deal with change. One 
way  it  does  this  is  by  allowing  prices  to  send  clear  signals,  which  in  turn  help  individuals  and 
companies  to  make  sound,  long-term  economic  decisions.  In  addition,  and  very  importantly,  when 
inflation  is  contained,  monetary  policy  can  be  set  to  keep  the  economy  running  close  to  capacity, 
acting as an automatic stabilizer, so the economy can more effectively absorb shocks. 
These  benefits  are  complemented  by  our  flexible  exchange  rate.  A  floating  dollar  also  acts  as  an 
automatic stabilizer, helping the economy to absorb shocks – especially external shocks that affect our 
economy differently than the economies of our major trading partners. Movements in the exchange 
rate  are  also  important  for  the  information  they  contain.  They  send  signals  to  businesses  and 
consumers about where to make investments and purchases, thus helping them adjust to the shifting 
currents of the global economy. 
But monetary policy cannot do its job well if it's not accompanied by sound fiscal policy. The federal 
government has had a budget surplus every year since 1997-98, and since 1999-2000, the provinces 
and territories as a whole have, more often than not, also been in a surplus position. Fiscal discipline 
is important, first, because it frees resources – resources that would otherwise be required to service 
debt – for more productive uses, and second, because it gives governments room to manoeuvre to 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2007
deal with unanticipated events. Our sound fiscal situation has clearly helped Canada to weather the 
changes of the past five years. 
But  sound  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  are  not  enough  to  explain  the  success  of  the  adjustment 
process.  The  flexibility  of  our  economy  has  also  been  extremely  important.  When  I  say  flexibility,  I 
mean  first  and  foremost  the  ingenuity  and  skills  of  our  workers  and  business  leaders.  That's  why 
education and training are so vital. Of significance for Saskatchewan's future well-being is the recent 
rise in what is called the "educational attainment" of its labour force. But flexibility is also a function of 
the  ease  and  speed  with  which  resources  can  be  reallocated  in  an  open  economy.  That's  why  we 
need  to  ensure  that  there  are  no  unnecessary  structural  impediments  to  economic  adjustment  – 
impediments such as barriers to investment, to labour mobility, and to trade. In the past five years, the 
Canadian economy has demonstrated increased flexibility. But, as I'll explain in a moment, more can 
be done.  
Finally, I should point out that the adjustment process in the past five years has been helped a good 
deal by the favourable backdrop of strong growth in the global economy. Robust demand for Canadian 
goods has helped to offset some of the stresses and costs of adjustment. With this in mind, I think it's 
useful to point out that while Canadians can control their monetary policy and fiscal situation, and can, 
through various measures, encourage flexibility, we have less control over the external environment. 
And it's only prudent to keep in mind the possibility that the external environment may not always be 
favourable. So, the question arises: what do we need to do so that Canada remains able to respond 
effectively to the challenges of the future, in both good times and bad?  
Meeting the challenges of future economic change 
All Canadians have a stake in the national economy. And we all have a role in helping to promote 
policies and actions that foster sustainable economic growth – whatever the backdrop. For its part, the 
Bank of Canada will continue to work toward the goal of keeping inflation low and stable, and we will 
do our part in promoting a sound and efficient financial system.  
Indeed, all policy-makers have a key role in promoting efficiency, productivity, and further economic 
flexibility.  In  an  increasingly  competitive  world,  the  bar  is  always  rising,  so  we  cannot  rest  on  our 
laurels.  The policy  areas  in  which  we  have  more  work  to  do  will  be  familiar  to  you.  In  the  financial 
sector,  which  I  know  best,  securities  regulation  needs  to  be  made  simpler  and  more  efficient.  And 
generally,  many  business  regulations  need  to  be  harmonized  across  Canada  and  some  across  the 
NAFTA region. And barriers within Canada to the free movement of goods, services and labour need 
to  be  removed.  Tackling  this  issue  is  especially  important  now,  as  shortages  of  skilled  labour  are 
becoming  more  pronounced.  And  it  will  become  even  more  important  as  demographic  challenges 
begin to intensify. It would be helpful if trades and professional designations were recognized and fully 
transferable  across  the  country,  and  if  we  could  resolve  the  difficult  issue  of  recognizing  the 
qualifications  of  many  talented  immigrants.  A  related  policy  area  that  supports  productivity  and 
flexibility is education and training. Canadian workers benefit – indeed, the whole economy benefits – 
when they have the knowledge and skills required to take advantage of change and opportunity. 
As I have already said, much of Canada's prosperity depends on active engagement with the wider 
world. The recently re-started World Trade Organization talks to reduce barriers to international trade 
are particularly important to us, and need to be brought to a successful conclusion. In addition, further 
action should be taken to promote the orderly resolution of global financial imbalances – which refers 
to the large U.S. current account deficit, mirrored by large surpluses in Asia and in major oil-exporting 
countries.  The  United  States  needs  to  increase  its  savings  rate,  while  Asia  and  the  OPEC  nations 
need to increase their domestic consumption. And some countries, particularly China, need to develop 
more flexibility in their currency arrangements. 
So  that's  the  challenge  for  policy-makers.  Business leaders  and workers  also  face  the  challenge  of 
adapting and prospering in a rapidly changing global economy. They have a stake in, and can lend 
support to, initiatives in the policy areas I have just mentioned. But businesses also need to innovate 
and aggressively tap new markets. They can invest in efficient machinery and equipment, and they 
can invest in their employees. And workers do their part when they invest in themselves – by learning 
and acquiring new skills. 
BIS Review 17/2007 
 3
Recent economic developments 
Before  I  conclude,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  how  the  Bank  of  Canada  sees  the  Canadian 
economy adjusting to the changes that have been taking place in the world. As stated in the January 
Monetary Policy Report Update, the economy is judged at this time to be operating at, or just above, 
its production capacity at the end of 2006, following weaker-than-expected growth in the second half 
of the year. While the global economy has been expanding in a robust fashion, U.S. economic growth 
slowed in 2006, with weakness concentrated in the housing and automotive sectors. This weakness 
does  not  appear  to  have  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  U.S.  economy,  and  with  signs  that  a  significant 
amount of the adjustment in these sectors has already taken place, U.S. economic growth is expected 
to pick up through 2007. With continued solid growth in the rest of the world, the global economy is 
expected to grow by 4.7 per cent in 2007, and 4.5 per cent in 2008. Non-energy commodity prices are 
expected to decrease modestly from the very high levels reached toward the end of 2006. 
This global outlook bodes well for Canada. Real GDP growth should average about 2 1/2 per cent in 
the first half of 2007, rising to about 2 3/4 per cent in the second half of the year. In 2008, growth is 
projected to stay in line with the growth of potential output, estimated to be 2.8 per cent, keeping the 
economy operating near its full production capacity. The underlying trend of inflation, as measured by 
core  CPI  inflation,  should  be  close  to  2  per  cent  through  2008.  Total  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to 
average just above 1 per cent in the first half of 2007, returning to the 2 per cent target in 2008. In line 
with  this  projection,  in  January  we  judged  the  current  level  of  the  policy  rate  to  be  consistent  with 
achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. 
The  risks  to  this  outlook  for  the  Canadian  economy  are  reasonably  well  balanced.  The  biggest 
downside risk is sharper or more prolonged weakness in the U.S. economy, and the upside risk comes 
from  the  strength  of  the  Canadian  housing  market  and  credit  growth  putting  upward  pressure  on 
demand and inflation. In addition, there remains a small possibility of a disorderly resolution of global 
imbalances, particularly if policy-makers fail to take appropriate actions. 
I'll conclude now, and then I'd be happy to hear your comments and answer your questions. 
Conclusion 
The  past  five  years  have  been  a  period  of  significant  economic  adjustment.  Canada  is  a  wealthier 
country as a result of this change. We will continue to prosper, whether the external environment is 
favourable or not, provided that we learn the larger lesson – that it is essential to be flexible and adjust 
effectively to changes in economic circumstance. 
The  current  favourable  outlook,  for  both  Canada  and  the  global  economy,  should  not  lead  to 
complacency.  We  all  have  a  stake  in  meeting  the  challenge  of  adjustment.  As  citizens,  business 
leaders,  workers  and  policy-makers,  we  all  have  a  role  in  ensuring  that  Canada  can  respond 
effectively to changes in the economic landscape, and that Canadians can seize the opportunities that 
such changes often bring. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2007
