James D Rogers: Liquidity forecasting for monetary and fiscal management in 
West Africa 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  James  D  Rogers,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone,  at  the  opening 
ceremony  of  the  Regional  Course  on  Liquidity  Forecasting  for  Monetary  and  Fiscal  Management, 
organised by WAIFEM, Bank of England and UK Treasury Department, Freetown, 17 April 2007. 
 Director General of WAIFEM, Dr. Chris O. Itsede,  
Distinguished facilitators from the Bank of England and the United Kingdom Treasury Department,  
Distinguished Course Participants,  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Introduction  
1.0  
On  behalf  of  the  President,  His  Excellency,  Ahaji  Dr.  Ahmed  Tejan  Kabbah,  the  Government  and 
people of the Republic of Sierra Leone, it is indeed a pleasure to welcome you all to Freetown on the 
occasion  of  the  regional  course  on  Liquidity  Forecasting  for  Monetary  and  Fiscal  Management 
jointly  organized  by  WAIFEM,  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  Treasury 
Department. l invite you to take some time off your crowded programme to visit tourist attractions and 
appreciate the recovery the country has achieved since the ruins of the civil war. The smiles are back 
on  the  faces  of  Sierra  Leoneans,  and  visitors  now  have  the  peace  of  mind  to  savour  the  beautiful 
scenery of Freetown.  
On behalf of the Board of Governors, I wish to register our profound gratitude to the Centre for Central 
Banking  Studies  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  UK  Treasury  Department  for  collaborating  with 
WAIFEM  to  build  capacity  for  macroeconomic  management  in  the  West  African  sub-region.  Our 
particular  thanks  go  to  Messrs.  Simon  Gray  and  Tony  Smith,  who  represent  these  collaborating 
institutions at this course, for taking time off their busy schedules to share their wealth of knowledge 
and experience with us.  
The need for liquidity forecasting  
2.0  
This course could not have come at a more auspicious time than now when all the countries in the 
West  African  sub-region  are  operating  the  indirect  approach  to  monetary  management  and  for  that 
purpose  most  have  instituted  monetary  policy  committees  (MPCs).  MPCs  bring  together  the  major 
stakeholders in monetary and fiscal management with responsibility, among other things, to derive the 
quantum of liquidity for mop up from, or injection into, the economy through Open Market Operations 
(OMO). The overriding objective has been to keep inflation at low and stable level. In recognition of 
those  objectives  this  course  augurs  well  in  filling  the  capacity  gaps  in  liquidity  forecasting  as  an 
essential input in the design of sound monetary policy administration in countries of WAIFEM member 
banks.  
BIS Review 45/2007 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Problems of liquidity forecasting  
3.0 
Liquidity forecasting is largely forecasting the monetary aggregates to obtain a reliable target of banks’ 
idle reserves thereby ensuring an efficient management of bank resources through the weekly conduct 
of Open Market Operations (OMO). Two main components of the OMO forecast come to the fore: the 
optimal level of demand for total bank reserves (ODR) and the estimated level of supply of total bank 
reserves on the day of OMO (OSR).  
FOMO = ODR 
- OSR
t 
 
t 
where  
FOMO = the OMO forecast for the day of trading.  
In making forecasts of the monetary aggregates, ODR and OSR, in efforts to derive the OMO forecast, 
the authorities face a number of problems. Permit me to highlight a few of them:  
  Difficulty with forecasting base money (monetary base)  
Since total bank reserves (ODR) must always be consistent with the ultimate objectives of 
monetary policy, its computation begins with a forecast of the desired demand for and supply 
of  money.  However,  while  the  computation  of  the  demand  for  money  is  a  fairly  straight 
forward  affair,  that  of  the  supply  of  money  is  problematic.  Herein  lies  the  concept  of  the 
monetary  base:  the  supply  of  money  is  a  function  of  the  monetary  base  adjusted  by  the 
money multiplier. Too often, some of the components of the monetary base are outside the 
control  of  the  monetary  authorities.  For  example,  as  long  as  net  credit  to  government,  a 
component  of  monetary  base,  remains  outside  the  control  of  the  central  bank,  it  will  be 
difficult  to  achieve  a  stable  monetary  base,  and  hence  a  stable  money  supply.  Again,  the 
requirement  of  the  central  bank  to  underwrite  the  issue  of  government  debt  instruments 
deprives the bank of the control over its portfolio of government securities or NCG, another 
component  of  monetary  base.  Of  course,  the  bank  has  little  control  over  the  net  foreign 
assets,  a  major  determinant  of  monetary  base,  especially  where  it  is  unable  to  sterilize 
capital inflow. Thus liquidity forecasting is made difficult in circumstances where the central 
bank exercises weak control over the components of monetary base and therefore money 
supply.  
Difficulty with forecasting total bank reserves (R)  
Total bank reserves is also a component of monetary base, B, where  
B = Currency outside banks (COB) plus bank reserves (R)  
R = vault cash (VC) + bank balances with the central bank (BDCB)  
Again to forecast the components total bank reserves (R) efficiently, there is need to understand the 
intricacies of monetary survey sufficiently well, understand the financial environment, know the stance 
of current monetary policy and the short-term outlook of financial developments.  
 Data constraints  
The data used in forecasting the monetary aggregates are too often not firm, or where firm, 
data are characterized by breaks in series. Such data include those of real gross domestic 
),  inflation,  revenue,  expenditure,  float  items  etc.  These  data  series 
product  (GDP
sometimes are constructed using different base years, making comparisons of series even of 
the same variable problematic.  
R
Besides  weak  data  series,  there  is  also  the  problem  of  coping  with  lags  in  monetary  data.  The 
computation of the estimated supply of total reserves (OSR), on the day of OMO market often involves 
several days lag. This means that to be able to obtain OSR, where “t” is the OMO market day, the 
compiler must be able to project both the sources and uses of monetary base, several days prior to 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2007
the  OMO  market  day  say  OSR
WAIFEM constituent countries.  
t-3
.  The  techniques  for  doing  this  are  yet  to  be  fully  developed  in  all 
  Determination of public sector borrowing requirement  
The primary target for OMO is the difference between the estimated supply and demand for 
money  under  equilibrium  conditions.  But  in  arriving  at  the  ultimate  target  for  OMO,  the 
excess supply needs to be adjusted to accommodate public sector borrowing requirement in 
the period. Thus there would be need to make the problematic forecasts of government cash 
revenue and expenditure, including float items. In this regard some of our member countries, 
notably Ghana have taken considerable strides through the application of some appropriate 
software.  
Capacity for econometric forecasting  
Familiarity with the use of econometric techniques is a sine qua non for liquidity forecasting. 
Too  often,  WAIFEM  has  had  to  run  courses  in  econometric  modeling  and  forecasting  in 
order  to  bridge  these  gaps  and  it  has  resorted  to  improved  monetary  and  fiscal  policy 
formulation in the sub-region.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Lessons in capacity building needs  
I  have  not  made  any  pretensions  to  proffering  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  problems  of  liquidity 
forecasting.  I  believe  the  expert  faculty  at  your  disposal  will  do  just  that.  However,  from  the 
presentation thus far, it is clear that a lot of capacity gaps will need to be filled if member countries 
must conduct monetary and fiscal policies at the cutting edge of best practices. An articulation of the 
gaps is therefore in order.  
    Capacity for analysis of monetary survey  
Staff  in  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  departments  must  be  familiar  with  the  intricacies  of 
monetary survey – a consolidation of both the balance sheets of central banks and deposit 
money banks. The monetary aggregates are summarized in the assets and liabilities sides of 
the  survey.  The  financial  database  for  liquidity  forecasting  is  contained  in  the  monetary 
survey.  
Training in macroeconomic relationships  
The staff of the relevant departments of Central Bank and Ministries of Finance and National 
Planning  Commission  should  be  familiar  with  macroeconomic  relationships  and  financial 
programming. To this end, an advantage should be taken of WAIFEM/IMF annual courses in 
financial programming.  
Training in econometric modelling and forecasting  
Familiarity  with  econometric  methodology  is  critical  to  effective  conduct  of  liquidity 
forecasting for sound monetary policy. Again WAIFEM’s courses in Econometric Modelling 
and Forecasting is a welcome initiative to bridge capacity gaps.  
Understanding the macroeconomy  
Finally, liquidity forecasting cannot be effectively done without sufficient understanding of the 
macroeconomy, stance of demand management policies and outlook for the future. All this 
constitutes the environment in which forecasting takes place.  
BIS Review 45/2007 
 3
Conclusion  
4.0 
In this address, I have sought to sensitize you about some of the critical issues in liquidity forecasting. 
I believe that the expert faculty placed at your disposal, will give you an exhaustive treatment of the 
subject matter. At this juncture, permit me to express our sincere appreciation to Messrs Simon Gray 
and  Tony  Smith  of  the  Centre  for  Central  Banking  Studies  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  UK 
Treasury Department, respectively for taking up our call to facilitate this course.  
I  would  like  to  take  the  liberty  to  invite  you  to  avail  yourselves  of  this  opportunity  provided  by  this 
course. Once more I enjoin you to feel at home here in Freetown and enjoy the warmth and hospitality 
of our people.  
On this note, it is my singular honour and privilege to declare open the Regional Course on Liquidity 
Forecasting for Monetary and Fiscal Management.  
I thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 45/2007
