Ardian Fullani: Bank of Albania – 2006 Annual Report 
Address by  Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the  Bank of Albania, at the presentation of the 
2006 Annual Report of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 10 May 2007. 
 Honourable Mr. Chairman, 
Honourable ladies and gentlemen, members of the Economy and Finance Commission, 
It  is  a  special  privilege  for  me  to  present  to  you,  pursuant  to  law  requirements,  the  2006 
Annual Report of the Bank of Albania. 
This report provides a summary of the Bank of Albania activity in implementing the legal and 
constitutional obligations. First of all let me focus on the national economy performance, and 
then on more specific parts related to the institutional responsibilities and direct contributions 
of  the  Bank  of  Albania  to  subduing  inflation,  maintaining  financial  stability,  enhancing  the 
financial infrastructure and on our role to European and regional integration. 
Economic developments over 2006 
1.  
The  country’s  economic  development  over  2006  has  generally  complied  with  its  medium-
term  development  plan.  The  overall  Albanian  economy  has  undergone  comparably 
satisfactory growth rates, due to the private sector’s dynamism, macroeconomic stability and 
the  fruits  of  the  so-far  structural  reforms.  The  banking  system  has  provided  a  powerful 
incentive to economic activity sustainability and to growth of credit to the economy by about 
ALL 70 billion or above USD 700 million. 
Based on available economic indicators, the growth rate is estimated at about 5 percent. This 
growth has been associated with price stability, reflected in an annual average inflation rate 
of 2.4 percent. The monetary conditions, characterised by historically low interest rates and 
exchange  rate  stability  have  favoured  the  rise  of  investments  and  consumption  in  the 
economy.  In  particular,  they  have  also  been  reflected  in  rapid  credit  growth,  by  further 
sustaining  the  economy  growth.  The  fiscal  developments  have  taken  place  within  the 
programmed limits, contributing to further consolidation of public finances and budget deficit 
control. 
However, the realization of capital expenditures requires a larger focus on the programmed 
level, as concerns the pace these expenditures have been carried out. 
The economic growth has been reflected also in the labour market. The number of employed 
persons in the country has boosted, though it has not yet fully reflected the developments in 
other  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  country’s  economic  activity  extension  has  been 
associated  with  increased  foreign  trade  exchanges.  The  balance  of  payments  has  been 
closed in positive terms, thus supporting the exchange rate stability. 
The  quantitative  and  qualitative  indicators  of  economic  performance  show  a  satisfactory 
growth, based mainly on the activities of services and industrial production. The sales carried 
out  by  economic  enterprises  during  the  first  nine-month  period  accounted  for  about  11 
percent higher than in 2005. The fact that the first quarter recorded a high annual growth of 
sales  shows  that  services  and  production  enterprises  overcame  the  problems  entailed  by 
power  supply  constraints  at  end  of  2005.  The  industry  sector,  particularly  the  process 
industry  has  recorded  positive  developments.  The  country’s  trade  activity  continues  to 
ensure the majority of sales, and to record significant annual growth rates. 
It is estimated that construction sector has performed almost at the same level with that of 
the  previous  year.  Direct  and  indirect  indexes  of  this  sector  impose  the  necessity  for  a 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 1
broader  attention,  particularly  to  a  better  allocation  of  private  or  public  financial  resources. 
Construction developments over the recent years, and particularly the extreme concentration 
of constructions on certain territories, prove the lack of efficient urban development policies, 
without  guaranteeing  long-term  sustainability  of  the  branch.  Furthermore,  construction 
continues to be dominated by housing buildings, lagging behind other strategic items, such 
as investments in road infrastructure, in industrial constructions, in land improvement and in 
agricultural  infrastructure,  as  well  as  other  investments  directly  related  to  the  standard  of 
living of small urban and rural communities. 
Agricultural production during 2006 partly recovered the growth rate decline noticed in 2005. 
The sector growth projection stands at 2.5 per cent for 2006, higher than the growth of 2005, 
but  lower  than  the  average  growth  rate  noticed  over  five  latest  years.  Investments  in 
agricultural sector and financing by the banking system will increase in accordance with the 
potential of this branch, providing that hurdles arising from various structural problems are 
eliminated. 
Agricultural land is not used at maximum, because of external and internal migration and the 
problems  with  ownership  titles.  The  relatively  underdeveloped  rural  infrastructure  makes 
more difficult the emerging of products in the market. The parcelling out of agricultural land 
impedes  the  effective  organisation  of  production,  decreases  the  profitability  and  raises  the 
agricultural mechanics utilization cost. 
The Bank of Albania deems that energy remains our main challenge in the short-run and in 
the medium-run. 
We  have  been  faced  with  underlined  power  supply  constraints  for  about  a  decade.  The 
current  crisis  coincidence  in  time  with  a  global  environment  that  is  rather  sensitive  to  this 
problem has relatively increased the energy import costs, which could be unsustainable in 
the long run. It has resulted out of Bank of Albania surveys that the negative consequences 
arising from this situation are numerous and directly related to the economic activity of the 
productive  sector,  in  both  levels,  corporate  and  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises.  The 
frequent  recurrence  of  such  situation  poses  the  risk  that  periods  of  significant  power 
constraints  are  no  longer  regarded  as  accidental  shocks,  but  they  are  more  and  more 
classified as permanent factors that should be factorised in the production cost, and hence 
should be taken into account in pricing policies and their expectations. 
To  this  end,  the  Bank  of  Albania  estimates  that,  starting  from  2007,  all  the  respective 
decision-making  stakeholders  should  apply  a  new  concrete  management  policy,  different 
from the 15-year practice. An integral part of it should be not only the management of current 
energy  resources,  but  also  concrete  steps  in  the  distribution  network,  as  short-term 
measures to pass to long-term operations, which would imply the establishment of alternative 
energy sources. The solution of the energy situation at the soonest time possible will provide 
positive impacts on the Albanian business, the soundness of public finances, the country’s 
sustainable economic development and the macroeconomic stability.  
Concluding  this  part,  I  would  like  to  point  out  some  other  issues,  which  I  think  should  be 
encompassed  in  the  priority  list  of  the  country’s  medium-term  economic  and  financial 
development.  The  Albanian  economy  is  leaving  the  status  of  a  transition  economy  and  is 
approaching  to  that  of  a  developing  economy.  This  qualitative  step  requires  further 
deepening of structural reforms, enhancement of effectiveness of development policies and 
enlargement  of  the  country’s  absorbing  capacities  in  terms  of  fostering  the  Albanian 
economy competitiveness at regional context and beyond it. 
I  would  highlight  the  constant  trade  deficit  deepening,  as  an  issue  of  the  present  and  the 
future. Even though the current cross-border position of the country is not problematic, being 
materialised in such indicators as external debt, foreign reserve level or overall balance of 
payments position, I would point out that the rise of exports is not sufficient, particularly in the 
context of high reliability of the Albanian economy on remittances. The relatively high current 
deficit, around 7.6 percent of GDP, is another argument in this regard. The latter one, also in 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2007
the presence of a fiscal deficit, increases our economy’s exposure and makes necessary the 
provision of foreign currency inflows of a more steady nature. This would be translated into a 
need  for  more  qualitative  foreign  direct  investments,  which  in  turn,  would  contribute  to  a 
steady growth of exports. 
To this end, taking advantage of the global environment, which is constantly searching for 
new markets, I would suggest a more qualitative national marketing strategy. This strategy 
should highlight professionally and contemporarily, all the recent incentives and the multiple 
opportunities  Albania  provides.  Also,  I  think  it  is  just  the  time  to  integrate  even  the  joint 
regional  projects  into  our  long-term  development  plans.  Road  infrastructure,  energy, 
communication, tourism and other areas are still underdeveloped in regional level. Therefore, 
I assess that regional projects of strategic nature raise the interest of domestic and foreign 
investors. If taken separately the economies of the region are relatively small, but altogether 
they form an attractive market, with more investment opportunities. 
In  recent  years,  it  is  noticed  that  the  penetration  of  foreign  investments  in  our  region  is 
relatively small and mainly, it reflects the privatization process of important public properties. 
The  same  thing  has  occurred  to  the  Albanian  economy.  More  concretely,  during  2000  – 
2006, the overall foreign direct investments, according to the balance of payments statistics, 
are estimated to about USD 1.45 billion, about 3.5 percent of GDP realised over the same 
period. 
If  we  would  identify  the  reasons  why  FDIs  inflows  are  so  modest,  we  might  mention  the 
complex  problems  characterising  our  region,  while  different  reasons  that  reduce  the 
absorbing capability of our economy exist even in the national plan. 
The Bank of Albania deems that the country’s current stage of development creates great 
possibilities in this regard. The experience of the newly acceded countries has indicated that 
the  signing  of  the  Stabilisation  and  Association  Agreement  and  the  following  negotiations 
have  been  associated  by  high  FDI  inflows.  However,  we  can  not  assume  that  this 
phenomenon will be automatically present even in Albania. Therefore, the Bank of Albania 
deems that further deepening of structural reforms is necessary and that this process should 
be followed by improvements in the business climate and by enhancement of the degree of 
law enforcement. 
The  last  but  not  the  least,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  degree  of  economic  activity 
coverage with statistics is still low. The monetary policy that we are following is an as much 
dynamic as visionary process. Besides the existence of efficient markets, it also needs to be 
supplied with new and methodologically accurate statistics. 
Besides our constant efforts and good understanding with INSTAT, we find it necessary to 
appeal for a greater attention of the whole society and of respective institutions in particular, 
to  increasing  statistical  information  and  further  consolidating  the  existing  one.  It  is  just  the 
time  that  all  the  monitoring,  licensing  and  decision-making  institutions,  including  also  the 
numerous nongovernmental organisations, must feel a great responsibility in this regard. It is 
just the moment that they develop indirect measuring and estimating approaches for many 
demographic, economic, social and financial indicators. 
Let me now present another important issue in my speech, which has to do with one of the 
main legal responsibilities of the Bank of Albania, i.e., consumer price stability. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
2.  
Consumer  goods  price  inflation  over  2006  was  generally  within  the  Bank  of  Albania’s 
targeted range of 2 to 3 percent. Year-end recorded a 2.5 percent annual inflation rate. It was 
almost similar to the 2005 annual inflation rate of 2.4 percent. Inflationary pressures, though 
moderate, have been increasing over 2006. The average annual inflation rate amounted to 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 3
2.7 percent during the second six-month period of the year, from 2.0 percent it was in the first 
half of the year. 
In general, the annual average inflation steadiness during the recent years, speaks for the 
inflation  rate  stability,  in  spite  of  the  fluctuations  in  time  and  size  of  the  factors  that  have 
conditioned the consumer price performance. Developments on the demand and supply side 
of the economy have been balanced, without creating premises for inflationary pressures. 
The  fiscal  policy  has  observed  the  programmed  indicators  on  annual  basis,  stabilizing  the 
impact of the public sector component on the aggregate demand. Also, the monetary policy 
has  controlled  liquidity  conditions  and  interest  rate  developments,  and  has  attended  the 
exchange rate performance, monitoring through them the economic activity financial stimuli. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  low  inflation  rates  in  the  recent  years  have  been  reflected  in 
anchoring  the  inflationary  pressures  of  the  economy  close  to  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target. 
The  latter  might  have  contributed  to  constraining  the  second-round  effects  that  may  be 
caused  in  the  Albanian  economy  by  some  supply  shocks,  such  as  high  oil  prices  and 
managed price rises, with which the Albanian economy was faced. 
Monetary conditions and monetary policy decisions 
Monetary policy decisions on the key interest rate in the economy have been taken on the 
basis  of  constantly  analysing  the  current  and  expected  developments  of  the  demand  and 
supply factors springing from internal and external environment. Under the conditions when 
an enlivening of inflationary pressures was evidenced and in the presence of a number of 
factors expected to further favour this situation, the Bank of Albania decided on changing its 
monetary policy stance, at the beginning of the third quarter of 2006. This change occurred 
after a neutral period that had lasted about one year and a half. The monetary policy change 
was materialised in raising the key interest rate twice during the second half of 2006. In July 
and November 2006 the one-week repo rate was lifted respectively by 0.25 percentage point. 
The maturity in monetary policy decision-making was reflected in the time lag between both 
tightening movements in the interest rates. 
In  July-November  2006,  many  assessments  have  been  made  on  the  degree  of  banking 
market response and sensitivity to monetary policy stance on interest rates. The interest rate 
rise  by  0.5  percentage  point  is  estimated  to  have  normalised  the  annual  monetary  supply 
growth rates, fully responding to the public and private sector demand for monetary assets. 
Monetary  policy  operations  have  assisted  in  stabilizing  inflationary  pressures  of  economic 
agents in the medium run.  
Fiscal policy 
The Bank of Albania has estimated that during 2006, the fiscal policy provided a satisfactory 
support  to  inflation  developments.  Fiscal  indicators  were  realised  in  accordance  with  the 
budgetary program, preventing premises for inflationary pressure rise in the economy. During 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2006,  a  high  concentration  of  budgetary  spending  was  noticed.  The 
budget  deficit  realization  as  of  year-end,  estimated  at  about  3.2  percent  of  GDP  or  0.7 
percentage  point  less  than  that  of  the  previous  year,  has  influenced  on  the  contraction  of 
inflationary pressures and control of monetary expansion. 
Demand factors 
During  2006  domestic  demand  has  significantly  sustained  the  positive  economic  growth 
rates.  Good  performance  of  the  domestic  demand  has  been  indicated  by  a  number  of 
economic activity indicators. Hence, the sales index for the first nine-month period of the year 
recorded an annual growth of 12.4 percent. In particular, the rise of imports of machinery and 
equipment  and  the  real  estate  credit  growth  are  indicators  of  investment  expansion  in  the 
country.  The  domestic  demand  has  been  increasing  also  due  to  rapid  growth  of  lending 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2007
activity, which recorded a 57 percent increase in annual terms. Notwithstanding the positive 
effects  of  investment  expansion,  the  domestic  demand  growth  exercises  pressure  on  the 
overall price rise. 
In absence of any obvious inflationary pressures on the demand side, it is estimated that the 
Albanian economy is making use of free capacities without raising the costs and final prices 
of goods and services. Also, it should be highlighted that part of this domestic demand has 
been  met  by  rise  of  imports  and  trade  deficit,  thus  mitigating  the  pressure  on  consumer 
prices. 
Supply factors 
Import prices 
The Albanian economy is a relatively open economy and therefore, import prices constitute 
an important element of the country’s inflation. Generally speaking, the economic conditions 
of  trade  partner  countries  of  Albania  have  been  favourable  during  this  year,  easing  the 
control on supply side pressures and enabling the observance of inflation target. 
Oil prices 
Consumer  prices  during  2006  were  influenced  by  a  stressful  situation  in  the  interbank  oil 
price market. The impact of this factor, as concerns the intensity of operation in inflation rate, 
was not uniform, being higher during the first nine months of the year and recording a decline 
during the last quarter. 
Exchange rate 
During  2006  exchange  rate  developments  have  dampened  inflationary  pressures  of  the 
supply  side.  The  national  currency  has  been  appreciated  against  the  American  dollar  and 
has maintained unchanged its position vis-à-vis the euro. The lek’s appreciating tendencies, 
though weakened in the recent months, have led to the decline of import price in domestic 
currency.  In  this  way,  the  exchange  rate  has  contributed  to  containment  of  the  high 
international oil price effect and to maintaining a low inflation rate. 
Agricultural production 
Agricultural  production  is  one  of  the  main  domestic  factors,  which  condition  the  consumer 
price developments. The quantity of domestic agricultural production influences instantly on 
foodstuff price level. During 2006, the seasonal effect of agricultural production rise appeared 
later than in the preceding years, leading to foodstuff price decreases only in September and 
October. 
Production prices 
During 2006 the production prices continued the downward trend noticed since April 2005. 
However,  the  concentration  of  production  price  index  on  the  productive  sector  of  industry 
makes difficult its comparison to consumer price index. Also, the domestic production share 
is  not  yet  a  determinant  component  of  goods  supply  in  the  domestic  market,  thus  not 
affecting the consumer prices. 
Wages and unemployment 
The  good  performance  of  the  economic  activity  during  2006  was  also  reflected  in  labour 
market indicator, and particularly in unemployment rate. New employment possibilities were 
created, making unemployment rate continue its downward trend observed since more than 
two years ago. Improvements have also been made in terms of incomes. So, government 
sector  wages,  the  minimum  wage  and  pensions  have  increased  in  accordance  with  the 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 5
budget plan. The so-far inflation performance shows that Albanian economy does not suffer 
from any significant discrepancy between wage rise and productivity. 
Inflationary expectations 
The business and public expectations in short- to medium-term have fluctuated around the 
inflation  rates  recorded.  According  to  Bank  of  Albania  periodic  estimates,  the  public 
expectations  have  converged,  mostly  around  1-3  percent.  In  the  meantime,  the  business 
expectations on price performance have reflected a high volatility. The monetary policy and 
the consolidation of macroeconomic stability have played an important role in anchoring the 
expectations of public at large to Bank of Albania’s inflation targeted rate. 
Money supply 
3.  
During the major part of 2006, monetary indicators have reflected the stabilised demand for 
monetary  assets.  The  average  M3  growth  rate  resulted  to  12  percent.  The  demand  for 
money of the public sector grew by 3.3 percent during 2006. This relatively low borrowing 
has  balanced  the  high  lending  rates  of  the  private  sector,  positively  impacting  on  the 
maintaining of monetary stability. In compliance with the trend noticed over the latest years, 
monetary developments have been characterised by shifting to longer-term monetary assets. 
Currency  outside  banks  has  followed  the  general  trend  of  the  demand  for  money.  The 
currency outside banks to M3 stood at 24.2 percent at year-end or 1.7 percentage points less 
than in the previous year. In nominal terms, the currency outside banks grew by ALL 13.6 
billion or 9.1 percent. 
The macroeconomic environment during 2006 has been favourable for a steady growth of 
banking  system  lek  deposits.  The  positive  real  interest  rates  have  been  associated  with 
further rise of lek deposits. They rose by 38 billion during 2006, satisfying the needs of the 
economy for ALL 35.9 billion and the needs of the government for credit in ALL. 
In  2006  foreign  currency  deposits  rose  by  about  29.4  percent.  The  higher  growth  rate  of 
foreign  currency  deposits  versus  the  money  supply  growth  rate  led  the  ratio  of  foreign 
currency deposits to M3 to about 29 percent. The share of foreign currency deposits to total 
deposits rose to 38.5 percent, against 35.5 percent in 2005. 
Demand for money 
4.  
The increase in the demand for money reached its peak in December, by an annual rise of 
16.7 percent. The main contribution to the increased demand for money throughout the year 
was  rendered  by  credit  to  the  economy.  This  contribution  recorded  its  maximum  in  June, 
being  mitigated  during  the  coming  months  due  to  growth  of  public  borrowing.  Foreign 
currency position has maintained a relatively steady weight in establishing monetary assets 
during the year. 
the 
increased  role  of  banks  as 
Credit to the economy 
The  banking  system  developments  and 
financial 
intermediaries, have led to significant expansion of lending activity during the recent years. 
The loans portfolio amounted to ALL 191.2 billion or 21.3 percent of GDP at end of 2006. 
The loans portfolio for the economy constituted 31.3 percent of total banking system assets 
and about 37.4 percent of the banking system deposits. 
During  2006,  credit  to  the  economy  increased  by  ALL  69.3  billion  in  absolute  terms, 
compared to ALL 52 billion in 2005. During two latest years, commercial banks have better 
met the increasing demand for ALL loans, which at end of 2006 constituted 29 percent of the 
loans portfolio, thus evidencing a moderate extension of its share. 
6 
 BIS Review 80/2007
Corporate credit constitutes the main share of banks’ portfolio, amounting to 66.5 percent of 
the total at end 2006. In annual terms, corporate credit increased by 52 percent. The credit 
distribution structure by use has tended to be more uniform in comparison with the previous 
year. Most of corporate loans (34.5 percent) have been used for purchasing machinery and 
equipment,  while  23.2  percent  of  corporate  loans  portfolio  has  been  used  for  financing 
investments in activity area expansion. 
In  2006  the  household  credit  was  7  percent  of  GDP,  or  33.5  percent  of  the  total  loans 
portfolio.  More  than  half  of  loans  to  households  (59.3  percent)  have  been  extended  for 
financing real estate purchases, while the financing of consumer goods purchases has also 
increased. The ratio of consumer loans to total household portfolio is 27.3 percent, from 20 
percent  in  the  previous  year.  In  particular,  consumer  loans  increased  obviously  during  the 
summer holidays and during the end-year celebrations. 
Concerning lending to specific sectors, it should be underlined that trade remains the sector 
mostly  credited  by  the  banking  system,  by  22.4  percent  of  the  loans  portfolio.  The  growth 
rate  of  credit  to  construction  has  been  inhibited  during  2006.  This  sector  presented 
temporary improvement signs during the summer, then turned back to the downward trend. 
In  the  meantime,  the  low  volume  of  credit  to  agriculture  speaks  for  constant  structural 
problems that inhibit lending to this sector. 
Given the geographical coverage with loans, it is observed that 68 percent of the portfolio is 
concentrated in Tirana. Durrës and Vlora come afterwards, by respectively 8 and 4 percent 
of the loans portfolio. This reveals the high economic importance of Tirana, and the need for 
improving the economic infrastructure in the rest of the country. 
Net foreign assets 
The  foreign  currency  position  of  the  banking  system  improved  during  2006.  Net  foreign 
assets of the banking system amounted to US$ 2.4 billion at yearend, recording an annual 
growth of about US$ 440 million. 
Government demand for money 
The  government  account  has  had  an  unusual  performance  during  2006.  During  the  major 
part of the year, the government demand for money was negative, concentrating the planned 
domestic  borrowing  on  two  last  months  of  the  year.  The  overall  deficit  financing  for  2006 
resulted to about ALL 22.6 billion. 
Financial market and interest rates 
5.  
Year 2006 was characterised by an increased activity in money and capital market, while the 
interest rate performance was generally oriented by the Bank of Albania’s monetary policy. 
Under the conditions of excess liquidity, the interest rates had a downward trend during the 
first half of the year. The interest rates went upward after the tightening signal of monetary 
conditions in the second half of the year. 
The  interbank  market was  more  active  during  2006,  thus  ensuring  a  more  efficient  way  of 
banks’ excess liquidity management. The average daily volume of transactions amounted to 
All 1.6 billion or ALL 0.2 billion more than the previous year average. The interbank market 
was  characterised  by  narrowing  the  interest  rate  spread  according  to  maturities  and  their 
positioning  close  to  key  interest  rate.  The  average  overnight-weekly  interest  rate  spread 
dropped to 0.7 percentage point in 2006, from 1.6 percentage points in 2005. 
In the first half of 2006, there was a constant decline in treasury bills yields and government 
bonds, due to low government demand for funds. In the second half of 2006, following the 
Bank  of  Albania’s  tightening  signals  and  the  increased  demand  for  liquidity  in  the  system, 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 7
there was a gradual rise of these yields. The yields increased respectively by 0.83, 0.45 and 
0.98 percentage point in comparison with the previous year. 
The  government  bonds  issues  has  increased  compared  to  the  previous  year,  making  the 
banks’  portfolio,  as  the  sole  participants  in  this  market,  increase  to  ALL  37.0  billion.  The 
share of bonds to total government securities increased 22 percent in 2006 from 12 percent 
in the previous year. Their maturity structure varies from 2 to 5 years. Five-year bonds were 
issued  for  the  first  time  in  November  of  this  year,  for  the  amount  of  ALL  6.3  billion.  The 
demand for them resulted higher than the issued amount. 
Lek deposit interest rates went down during the first half of 2006, and up after the tightening 
monetary  policy  signals.  The  interest  rates  were  raised  faster  for  long-term  maturities, 
reflecting the adjustment of their term to long-term government debt rise. 
Lek  credit  interest  rates  went  down  for  all  maturities  during  2006.  The  weighted  average 
interest in December 2006 fell to 12.92 percent, from 13.50 percent it was in the previous 
year. Though the intermediation cost declined in comparison to the previous year, the spread 
level is still high. It is influenced by imperfect competition in this market and by higher risk 
nature of loans extended in ALL. 
The interest rates of deposits denominated in lek and euro continued to go up, as a result of 
monetary  policy  tightening  by  the  Fed  and  the  European  Central  Bank  during  2006. 
Simultaneously,  the  interest  rates  of  loans  extended  in  these  currencies  went  up.  The 
interests of six-month to one-year loans in Euro and six-month loans in USD underwent the 
highest rise. At end of 2006, the weighted average interests of loans in USD amounted to 
9.42 percent and interests of loans in Euro amounted to 8.17 percent, from 8.47 percent and 
7.95 percent they were respectively at end of the previous year. 
Exchange rate 
6.  
During  2006,  the  Albanian  lek  has  maintained  its  appreciating  trend  against  the  principal 
foreign currencies, though at a low intensity. In effective nominal annual terms, the lek has 
been  appreciated  on  average  by  1.1  percent  during  2006.  During  the  previous  year,  this 
appreciation  was  2.8  percent.  The  lek-foreign  currency  interest  rate  spread,  though 
downward during three latest years, continued to be at positive levels. 
Economic developments during 2006 have sustained a stable domestic currency. The lek’s 
appreciating  pressures  have  been  concentrated  mainly  on  July-August  and  December. 
Besides  the  seasonal  entry  of  foreign  currency,  which  is  the  main  factor  of  the  lek’s 
appreciation  over  this  period,  the  key  interest  rate  increase  has  also  been  reflected  in  the 
market. The high foreign currency supply over this period has been absorbed partly by the 
Bank  of  Albania’s  interventions,  in  respect  of  the  target  on  the  rise  of  net  international 
reserve and in compliance with the country’s overall macroeconomic program. 
Monetary policy instruments 
7.  
Fixed-price one-week repurchase agreement is the main instrument employed during 2006. 
According  to  the  liquidity  situation,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  switched  from  repurchase 
agreements  to  reverse  agreements,  while  the  maturity  term  has  changed  from  weekly  to 
quarterly. This spectre of movements has been imposed by seasonal factors, by the budget 
behaviour and by the need to reveal certain monetary policy signals. 
To meet longer-term needs of the market for liquidity during the four last months of 2006, 
four Treasury bill outright purchase transactions were carried out, at a total nominal value of 
ALL 3.2 billion. 
8 
 BIS Review 80/2007
During 2006 commercial banks employed the overnight deposit facility for investing their free 
liquidities with the Bank of Albania, on average at ALL 1.6 billion a day or ALL 0.82 billion 
more than in 2005. 
Overnight credit has been employed only in seven cases, despite the lack of liquidity over the 
third quarter of the year. For the fourth consecutive year, the final lending facility of the Bank 
of Albania, i.e., the Lombard loan was not employed at all. 
The required reserve instrument was used constantly even during 2006, for withdrawing the 
banking system liquidity. The monthly pace of ALL required reserve rise during 2006 was on 
average  higher  than  in  2005,  0.92  percent  versus  0.76  percent,  reflecting  the  rise  in  the 
respective categories included in the required reserve account. 
Foreign reserve management 
8.  
During 2006 the gross foreign reserve, estimated and reported in USD, has been increased 
by USD 368.06 million, recording the value of USD 1,793.12 million as at end of December. 
Out  of  this  growth,  about  USD  205  million  is  accumulated  from  Bank  of  Albania’s 
interventions in foreign currency. They were intended at meeting the quantitative target for 
these assets and mitigating the volatility over the peak periods of foreign currency supply. 
While the exchange rate effect has been positive, at USD 106 million, the rest of the growth 
has been contributed by receipts from foreign disbursements. 
Banking system performance 
9.  
The banking system continued its stable development during 2006. The net banking system 
result for 2006 stood at a profit of ALL 7.45 billion, about 12.9 percent more than in 2005. 
Revenues from the principal activity (net income from interest) resulted to 31.2 percent more 
than  in  the  previous  year,  reflecting  the  banking  system  orientation  to  activities  of  higher 
return and a rise in the overall volume of assets. 
At end of 2006, the net income from interests was 92.6 percent of the gross banking system 
incomes,  compared  to  84  percent  at  end  of  2005.  This  indicator  has  recorded  constant 
growth, particularly over three last years, reflecting the overall net income sustainability for 
the banking system. 
During 2006, the banking system assets grew by All 127.7 billion, or about ALL 57.6 billion 
more than the growth of assets noted in 2005. The main contribution to the growth of banking 
system assets was given by large banks, though their share in the market is downward. The 
estimates show that the lending activity concentration level is lower than that of assets and 
deposits concentration. 
The  significant  growth  of  lending  has  been  associated  with  increased  share  of  non-
performing  loans  portfolio,  by  about  ALL  3.1  billion  compared  to  end  of  2005.  The  loans 
portfolio quality indicator, expressed as a ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans portfolio 
in gross terms, is estimated at 3.1 percent as at year-end, against 2.3 percent as at year-end 
2005. 
The banking system capability of covering loss loans with capital has been downward, but 
still  at  good  levels.  The  “non-performing  loans  to  outstanding  loans  (net)”  indicator,  which 
estimates the net size of exposure to credit risk, continues to be at low levels, by 1.4 percent 
as at year-end 2006. 
Compared  to  year-end  2005,  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  the  system  decreased  by  0.5 
percentage  point  down  to  18.1  percent  at  end  2006.  The  capital  adequacy  ratio  for  2006 
continued  to  maintain  the  downward  trend  reflected  in  the  preceding  years.  Large  banks 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 9
the  banking  system  underwent 
have recorded a rise of capital adequacy indicator, mainly due to increased regulatory capital 
at end of the year, by about 62.3 percent. 
At end of 2006, the ratio of liquid assets to total assets of the banking system recorded 57.6 
percent, compared to 62.6 percent it was at end of December 2005. 
During  2006 
important  qualitative  and  quantitative 
developments. At end of 2006 the Albanian banking sector consisted of 17 banks, of which 
three  are  of  fully  Albanian  private  equity.  At  the  beginning  of  2006  the  Union  Bank 
commenced its activity. On May 2006, there was approved the selling of the Italian-Albanian 
Bank’s 80 % stake, which belonged to the Ministry of Finances of the Republic of Albania 
and to Capitalia S.A., Italy, to the new stockholder SanPaolo IMI S.p.A., Italy. At the same 
period,  there  was  also  approved  the  60  percent  (plus  2  shares)  ownership  transfer  of  the 
National  Commercial  Bank’s  stake  from  Kent  Bank/Bayindir  Bank,  to  the  new  Turkish 
institutional stockholder, Çalik-Seker Konsorsiyum Yatirim Anonim. 
On August 2006 the ownership transfer of 11.25 percent of the ProCredit Bank’s stake, from 
EBRD to ProCredit Holding AG (existing shareholder) was approved. On October 2006, the 
71.97 percent transfer of the stake of Emporiki Bank S.A. of Greece to Credit Agricol S.A., 
France shareholder was approved. This transfer influenced also the indirect participation of 
Credit Agricol S.A. to the Emporiki Bank of Albania’s equity, to the same extent. 
During 2006, the banks’ network was extended also by 62 new branches and agencies, in 
the  whole  territory  of  Albania  and  abroad,  having  the  highest  share  in  Tirana,  with  the 
establishment of 30 new branches and agencies. Also, the opening of two branches outside 
the territory of Albania was approved and the opening of two other new branches is under 
the process of approval. 
10.  
New activities of the Bank of Albania 
Payment system 
From  the  regulatory  and  operational  point  of  view,  the  payment  system  in  Albania  has 
already  created  the  physiognomy  of  a  modern  system.  The  number  of  transactions 
processed during 2006 has increased by 13 percent, compared to 2005. In the meantime the 
value of transactions has increased by 21 percent during 2006, amounting to ALL 2,664.43 
billion.  Compared  to  2005,  the  daily  average  number  of  payments  (in  both  systems)  has 
increased from 312, to 352 or 40 more transactions per day. In 2006, a new bank was added 
to the payment system, leading the number of participants to 17 banks. 
On  March  2006  the  e-payment  settlement  by  VISA  cards  started.  Currently,  this  scheme 
counts 6 member banks. The number of cards in circulation has increased by 9 times during 
2006, compared to 2004. The addition in cards number counts 127,552 cards compared to 
2005, i.e., about 56 percent. Parallel to increased number of cards, the number of ATMs and 
POSs has also increased, respectively by 130 and 404. 
International integration and cooperation 
The  Bank  of  Albania’s  obligations  stemming  from  the  SAA  relate  to  the  meeting  of  the 
economic  criteria  of  Copenhagen,  guaranteeing  the  right  of  establishment  and  freedom  of 
services for banks and other communautaire financial services, liberalizing capital movement 
and current payments between Albania and the EU, and approximating Albanian legislation 
to that of the acquis communautaire in these areas. 
One  of  the  most  important  developments  during  2006  regarding  the  approximation  of 
national  legislation  to  that  of  the  acquis  was  the  drafting  of  the  Law  “On  Banks  in  the 
10 
 BIS Review 80/2007
Republic  of  Albania”.  This  Law  has  adopted  the  largest  part  of  the  provisions  of  the 
2000/12/EC Directive, with regards to initiation and continuation of credit institutions activity. 
On  8  November,  2006,  the  European  Commission  published  the  Albania  2006  Progress 
Report. The European Commission evaluated in the report the policy followed by the Bank of 
Albania  in  terms  of  cooperating  with  international  financial  institutions  and  maintaining 
inflation under control, contributing to keeping a steady macroeconomic environment in the 
country. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Commission  also  evaluated  the  reliable  monetary  policy  followed, 
highlighting  particularly  the  measures  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  terms  of  gradually 
changing  its  monetary  policy  strategy  towards  explicit  inflation  targeting  regime,  aiming  at 
enhancing transparency and credibility of its monetary policies. 
The report highlighted also the positive developments in the banking sector of the country 
and assessed the progress achieved regarding the establishment of the loans register, free 
movement of banking and financial services, freedom of establishment of foreign banks and 
further liberalization of capital movement. 
On 27 January, 2006, the Executive Board of the IMF adopted the three-annual agreement 
with Albania, at SDR 17.045 million. The main targets of the new program have to do with 
the maintaining of macroeconomic stability, as a prerequisite for economic growth, and the 
improvement of financial institutions. 
Under Reserves Advisory and Management Program (RAMP), during 2006 the World Bank’s 
group provided consulting and technical assistance to the Bank of Albania for foreign reserve 
management. 
During  2006  the  Bank  of  Albania  established  constant  contacts  with  the  EBRD,  mainly  in 
terms of providing information and statistics for the development of the Albanian economy in 
general and financial sector in particular. The Transition Report 2006 assessed positively the 
maintaining  of  inflation  within  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target  and  the  consolidation  of  the 
banking system over 2006. 
The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  is  another  institution  with  which  the  Bank  of 
Albania kept close contacts during 2006. The BIS has been particularly active in providing 
technical  assistance  to  the  Bank  of  Albania,  through  workshops  and  training  courses 
organised  by  the  Institute  of  Financial  Stability,  which  promotes  the  international  financial 
stability through information sharing and cooperation in financial system supervision area. 
During 2006 the Bank of Albania enhanced the mutual relations with the central banks of the 
region  and  beyond  it.  Personally,  I  have  paid  official  visits  to  many  central  banks  of  the 
region  and  Europe,  discussing  about  latest  developments  in  the  Albanian  economy  and 
further  extension  of  mutual  cooperation  and  technical  assistance  that  these  banks  can 
provide to the Bank of Albania. In June the Governor of the Bank of Greece, Mr. Nicholas C. 
Garganas paid a two-day official visit to Albania. It took place in the light of mutual relations 
between both institutions, laying special emphasis on sharing of information and experience 
in banking supervision area. 
Enhancing relations with central banks of the region reached the peak in the round table of 
October 2006 held in Tirana, where the governors of the central bans of Rumania, Serbia, 
Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo discussed about financial stability of the 
region. 
In  the  framework  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  objective  to  benefit  from  the  experience  of  the 
central  banks  of  the  CEE,  recently  acceded  in  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks 
(ESCB),  during  2006  the  cooperation  relations  with  the  Central  Bank  of  Poland,  National 
Bank of the Czech Republic and the National Bank of Bulgaria have been intensified. 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 11
Currency issuing 
The increase of currency in circulation over 2006, by ALL 14, 7 billion is a response to the 
balanced  macroeconomic  development  of  the  country.  The  commercial  bank’s  receivables 
by the Bank of Albania during 2006 stood at ALL 105 billion, remaining almost at the same 
level  with  that  of  2005.  Concerning  cash  payments,  from  Bank  of  Albania’s  cash-boxes  to 
commercial banks, the supply was carried out according to their requests, and intending, at 
the same time, to maintain the currency in circulation structure within the projected limits for 
year-end 2006. 
The velocity of money circulation over 2006, for the shortened cycle of circulation, totalled 
almost at the same level as in 2005. However, the velocity of circulation underwent changes 
for certain denominations of banknotes and coins. Hence, a significant increase of velocity of 
circulation  was  proved  in  the  5.000  lekë,  1.000  lekë  and  500  lekë  denominations, 
respectively by 13.3 percent, 38.9 percent and 8.3 percent. 
Changes in banking legislation 
During  2006,  further  to  the  signing  of  the  Stabilization  and  Association  Agreement  on  12 
June, 2006, the banking legislation was amended and improved substantially once the Law 
“On  the  Banks  in  the  Republic  of  Albania”,  No.  9662  of  18.12.2006  was  passed  by  the 
Assembly of the Republic of Albania, which shall become effective on 1 June, 2007. 
The  Law  “On  the  Banks  in  the  Republic  of  Albania”  enables  the  European  Union  member 
states  banks  and  all  foreign  banks  to  provide  banking  services  to  Albania,  through  their 
branches  or  subsidiaries,  without  making  any  distinction  in  the  licensing  terms  for  their 
branches  and  subsidiaries  and  for  Albanian  banks.  Furthermore,  in  line  with  the  SAA 
provisions, the adopted law requires their treatment as Albanian banks in every aspect, once 
they are granted the licence to carry out banking business and financial activity. 
The new law provides for clearer rules on management of risk the banks may be faced with 
while  carrying  out  their  activity,  in  order  to  guarantee  and  strengthen  the  protection  of 
depositors  and  investors  and  to  maintain  banking  system  stability.  Given  the  current 
conditions  of  rapid  credit  growth  in  the  banking  system,  the  new  law  treats  fully  the  other 
types of risks as well, other than that of credit risk, with which banks may be faced, and the 
permitted exposures of the latter ones when faced with such risks. 
The law requires for the first time, inter alia, the establishment and maintaining by the Bank 
of Albania of the loans register. Under the conditions of a rapid credit growth, the purpose of 
establishing  such  a  register  is  to  assist  banks  in  making  well-informed  decisions  when 
extending loans to their clients, as well as to strengthen the Bank of Albania’s supervision on 
the Albanian banking system. 
During  2006  the  Bank  of  Albania  started  examining  the  prerequisites  and  implementation 
conditions  over  a  mid-term  period  (year  2009),  of  a  new  monetary  policy  regime.  In  this 
context, analyses are carried out about the possibilities of improving the legal infrastructure 
for  the  creation  of  such  conditions  in  compliance  with  international  standards  in  this  area. 
Also, the possibility of improving the organic law of the Bank of Albania has been considered, 
coinciding with the prediction of its alteration as a mid-term priority of the National Plan for 
the Implementation of the SAA. 
It is forecasted that these alterations will stipulate clearly the competences and procedures 
for the decision-making process of the Bank of Albania and the transparency of this process, 
which constitutes also a substantial precondition for the compilation and implementation of 
an effective monetary policy. 
In  the  framework  of  the  legal  reforms  undertaken  by  the  Ministry  of  Justice  for  the 
amendment  and  improvement  of  the  Civil  Procedure  Code,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been 
12 
 BIS Review 80/2007
fully  committed  to  cooperating  with  the  banking  sector  for  the  completion  and  accuracy  of 
mandatory execution procedure of executive titles.  
The Bank of Albania proposals have aimed at improving the legal base on the application of 
procedures for the execution of acts that constitute executive titles. The main purpose is to 
cut the time for the execution of those acts, aiming to increase security in the lending activity, 
thus reducing the credit risk the banks are faced with. 
At  end  of  2006,  the  Bank  of  Albania  closely  cooperated  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  in 
compiling  the  draft-law  “On  Preventing  Money  Laundering  and  Terrorism  Financing”.  In 
accordance  with 
international 
recommendations,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  being  the  supervisory  authority  of  the  banking 
system,  regards  with  priority  the  legal  framework  improvement  for  preventing  the  use  of 
banking system for laundering money and wealth that derive from criminal activities. 
During this year, with the assistance of the World Bank, the drafting and completion of the 
regulatory  framework  for  foreign  reserve  management  was  carried  out  successfully, 
reviewing the Bank of Albania’s policy on the management of such reserve, the management 
criteria  and  terms,  as  well  as  the  decentralization  of  decision-making  competences  during 
this process. 
the  respective  European  Union  directives  and  other 
Internal audit 
In 2006, 44 audits and 3 verification procedures were carried out. The inspectors presented 
269  findings  and  197  recommendations  out  of  these  audits,  which  were  carried  out  at  the 
Bank of Albania and at its five district branches, the Printing House included. 
Bank of Albania balance sheet 
11.  
During 2006, the Bank of Albania assets further increased, totalling ALL 255.5 billion, about 
14 percent higher than at end 2005. 
The constituent groups, both foreign currency and domestic assets, have reflected growth, 
while the first group occupies about 68 per cent of total assets, the same level as that of the 
previous year. On the liability side, foreign currency liabilities fell slightly (from 8 to 7 percent 
of the total) in comparison with the previous year, whereas domestic liabilities increased by 
16 percent. Currency in circulation is the indicator that bears the main weight in this growth 
(about  45  percent  of  the  growth),  followed  by  the  “due  to  the  government”  item  (about  29 
percent of the growth) and “due to banks” item (about 26 percent of the growth). 
In  general,  the  accounting  balance  sheet  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  the  income  and 
expenditure statement reflect some basic developments that have occurred in the economy, 
where the Bank of Albania plays an important role. 
The revenues realised during 2006 outstripped the level of the previous year only by about 5 
percent. The main impact on this growth was given by income on foreign currency interests 
(about  20  percent  more  than  in  2005).  This  reflects  the  performance  of  interest  rates  in 
foreign exchange markets. This effect absorbs the reduction of “income from ALL interests” 
item (about 7 percent less than in 2005), which reflects an average interest rate below that of 
2005, irrespective of the upward trend at year-end. 
On the other hand, interest expenses outstrip the previous year level by about 25 percent, 
reflecting the positive phenomena of the increased level of deposits and liquidity position in 
the  banking  system.  Foreign  currency  interest  expenses  have  been  outstripped  by  64 
percent compared to the previous year, whereas ALL interest expenses have increased by 
14 percent. Other (operational and amortization) expenditures are almost at the same level 
with that of the previous year. 
BIS Review 80/2007 
 13
Finally, the almost full compensation between increase of incomes and expenditures makes 
the net profit of the Bank of Albania for 2006 be in the same level with that of the previous 
year, at about ALL 5.16 billion (or 99.6 percent of the profit for 2005). 
Honourable deputies, 
Concluding  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  underscore  that  during  2006  the  Bank  of  Albania 
included  in  its  agenda  all  the  recommendations  given  by  the  Albanian  Parliament  in  its 
resolution adopted on 25 May, 2006. I would also like to assure you that even in 2007, the 
same philosophy will characterise our work. Understanding correctly the role and mission of 
our institution, on behalf of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, I declare that the 
Bank of Albania will continue to be an accountable institution, deeply committed to fulfil its 
obligations vested by the Law and the Constitution. 
We have many priorities for 2007, but let me highlight the most important ones: 
• 
the  country, 
financial  development  of 
Maintaining  consumer  price  stability  remains  the  main  legal  target  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania.  We  are  confident  that  the  decisions  taken  in  2006  were  appropriate  and 
have served to orient inflationary expectations to the targeted range. Based on our 
forward-looking philosophy, we will prudentially evaluate all the risk factors, so that 
we operate on due time and intensity. 
Macroeconomic stability is of primary importance, but definitely the financial stability 
is also of as much crucial importance. Given the importance and the current level of 
economic  and 
this  priority  assumes 
extraordinary  importance.  Furthermore,  the  rapid  credit  growth  is  an  argument  for 
more prudence, particularly with regard to its quality. Being fully aware of our role as 
a decision-making and regulatory institution, we have decided to raise our vigilance 
in this regard, establishing the Financial Stability Department as a first step. 
Once more, the Bank of Albania emphasises its objective for further consolidation of 
the  banking  system.  This  process,  which  was  present  during  2006,  should  further 
continue  in  the  current  year.  Our  intention  is  that  the  banking  system  becomes  a 
unity of sound institutions: that are supported by powerful shareholders, experienced 
in banking industry; that apply best standards of accountability in management; that 
carry out a balanced activity with well-managed risks; that are able to be faced with 
and develop under the open market competition provided by an open and integrated 
market 
the  economic 
development  of  the  country  and  that  transparently  provide  efficient  and  qualitative 
banking products and services to the public. 
financial  market; 
that  support 
international 
into 
the 
  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Albanian  Parliament  once  more  for  the  good  understanding  and 
constant support it has given to the Bank of Albania. 
Thank you for your attention. 
14 
 BIS Review 80/2007
