Nout Wellink: A changing financial landscape – two of the key challenges 
facing supervisors in Europe 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Foreign  Bankers  Association, 
Amsterdam, 15 May 2007. 
 It is a great pleasure to speak here, at the Annual General Meeting of the Foreign Bankers Association 
(FBA).  The  FBA’s  mission  statement  is  “to  protect  and  promote  the  interests  of  foreign  banks 
operating in the Netherlands”. Looking at recent developments, I think it is fair to say that your mission 
will become a whole lot bigger, and, for that matter, so will DNB’s interest in the soundness of foreign 
banks operating in this country. As both DNB and the FBA strive for a robust and efficient financial 
system,  the  rapidly  changing  financial  landscape  offers  us  opportunities  as  well  as  challenges  and 
uncertainties. Addressing these in a market-friendly way is essential, yet certainly not easy, and from 
time to time even mind-bending. Fortunately, we – supervisors and market participants – are in this 
together. 
I  would  like  to  address  two  of  the  key  challenges we  presently  face.  One  of  these  challenges  is  to 
ensure  an  effective  and  efficient  framework  for  the supervision of  cross-border  financial  institutions. 
Given  that  financial  integration  in  Europe  and  beyond  will  continue,  it  is  essential  that  supervisory 
structures, which  traditionally  have  been  organized  along  national  lines, remain  viable  in the  longer 
run. Another challenge relates to the growing role of unregulated players such as hedge funds and 
private  equity  in  the  financial  sector.  Hedge  funds  and  private  equity  have  enriched  the  financial 
system. At the same time, these unregulated players are rapidly growing and, with that their activities 
are getting more relevant from a systemic point of view. Before going into these important challenges 
and  their  implications  for  supervision,  let  me  first  sketch  the  major  developments  in  the  financial 
system in the recent past. 
Changing financial landscape 
The  European  financial  landscape  has  changed  to  a  great  extent  over  the  past  years.  Indeed, 
numerous measures have been taken to deregulate and liberalize the financial sector, although much 
remains  to  be  done.  The need  for  these  changes  is  evident:  a  market-oriented  and  liberal financial 
sector fosters an efficient allocation of scarce resources and thereby promotes economic prosperity. In 
addition, the financial sector has witnessed rapid technological innovations, facilitating an increase in 
new services and products and a growing sophistication in the way financial institutions manage risks. 
Deregulation,  liberalization  and  technological  innovation  have  greatly  changed  the  financial  system. 
Four key interrelated trends can be distinguished.  
• 
First, the traditional demarcation between banks and other financial institutions has blurred. 
Large  and  complex  financial  institutions  are  the  most  evident  example  of  the  increasing 
interwovenness within the financial system.  
Second,  financial  institutions  themselves  have  become  increasingly  market-dependent. 
Financial innovations, such as credit risk transfer and derivatives, enable financial institutions 
to  manage  and  spread  their  risks  more  effectively.  Although  risk-sharing  has  come  at  the 
expense  of  transparency,  risks  today  are  now  more  widely  spread  to  those  willing  and 
hopefully able to bear them.  
Third,  financial  institutions  are  moving  more  easily  across  national  boundaries.  They  have 
increasingly  embarked  on 
international  operations  and  cross-border  mergers  and 
acquisitions,  so  becoming  more  integrated  in  other  countries.  In  light  of  recent  events 
surrounding ABN AMRO, this process seems set to accelerate. This is not only reflected in 
the  growing  share  of  banks’  foreign  operations,  but  also  in  the  expansion  of  institutional 
investors’  holdings  of  foreign  paper.  Interbank  markets,  derivatives  markets  and  payment 
systems are becoming more internationally integrated too.  
Finally,  the  financial  system  has  become  more  complex,  partly  because  of  the  rapidly 
increasing  role  of  unregulated  financial  entities.  Regulated  institutions  are  now  more 
   BIS Review 51/2007 
 1
exposed to hedge funds and private equity, while these new players also foster the transfer 
of risks inside and outside the financial sector. Problems in these unregulated industries can 
have a larger potential impact on the regulated financial system than before.  
Prompted by the first two trends – the blurring of financial products and markets and the increasing 
market-orientation  of  financial  institutions  –  the  set  up  of  financial  supervision  has  already  been 
reorganized in many countries. Nowadays, the majority of Europe's supervisors operates on a cross-
sectoral basis, and in an increasingly risk-oriented manner. In this respect, supervisors have taken a 
big step towards delivering more effective and more risk-based supervision. However, what constitutes 
an adequate regulatory response to the last two trends – the cross-border consolidation of financial 
intermediaries  and  the  expansion  of  unregulated  parts  of  the  financial  sector  –  is  still  an  open 
question. Let me elaborate on these two challenges, starting with how to ensure effective and efficient 
supervision of cross-border financial institutions in Europe. 
Ensuring effective and efficient supervision in Europe 
The  internationalization  of  financial  services  in  Europe  is  steadily  progressing,  even  though  some 
degree of national segmentation remains. Having said this, it is a fact that both the number and the 
value of cross-border mergers and acquisitions is rising and, as mentioned, will continue further; at 
least there is absolutely no reason to assume that the rise in cross-border mergers and acquisitions 
will abate any time soon. A direct result of these cross-border deals is that the share of foreign banks 
in domestic European markets has increased substantially, from 20% of total assets in 1999 to 26% in 
2005. There are several catalysts for the internationalization of European financials, most notably their 
growth opportunities. Indeed, international expansion is one of the most attractive growth opportunities 
for the profitable, capital rich European banks. 
With the ongoing integration of European financial institutions and markets, the conduct of financial 
supervision  in  Europe  has  moved  beyond  its  primarily  national  orientation.  Supervisory  rules  and 
regulations are progressively internationally harmonized – Basel II is in this respect a leading example. 
Of  course,  the  implementation  of  these  rules  is  predominantly  performed  at  the  level  of  national 
supervisors. The practical consequences of this discrepancy are interesting. Let us look at, say, an 
internationally active bank with subsidiaries in ten other EU countries. Such a bank has to deal with at 
least one home supervisor and ten foreign supervisors. Although all these supervisors apply the same 
general,  internationally  agreed  standards,  they  may  impose  their  own  specific  requirements,  for 
example  with  regard  to  a  firm’s  internal  control  system.  The  process  of  financial  integration  across 
Europe  thus  suggests  we  should  keep  thinking  about  whether  the  model  underlying  financial 
supervision in Europe remains adequate. 
Given  that  financial  integration  and  consolidation  in  Europe  is  desirable  and  will  continue,  it  is 
essential that supervisory structures remain viable. I therefore believe that further steps are needed to 
achieve  more  convergence  of  supervisory  practices  in  Europe.  National  supervisors  are  already 
moving, albeit slowly, towards more convergence of their supervisory practices. This is supported by 
the Approval Procedures for Basel II-Model Validation under the Capital Requirements Directive, Art. 
129. However, a single European supervisor should not be considered a panacea for the cross-border 
challenges  being  faced  by  Europe’s  supervisors.  I  do  not  need  to  remind  you  that  many  European 
banks with large cross-border activities have their largest exposures outside the EU – predominantly in 
North  and  South  America  –  rather  than  within  the  EU.  Besides,  large  institutional  differences  exist 
between  European  countries.  Legal  frameworks,  deposit  guarantee  schemes  and  even  aspects  of 
fiscal regimes must be harmonized before substantial integration of supervision can be realized. One 
can imagine the technical and political complexity of such a process. 
A major step forward in the convergence of supervision in Europe can be achieved through the Lead 
Supervisor  model.  As  you  will  know,  the  Lead  Supervisor  model  was  launched  by  the  European 
Financial  Services  Roundtable  in  2003/2004.  Under  this  model,  the  home  supervisor  is  made 
responsible  for  supervision  of  an  entire  financial  firm,  including  its  foreign  subsidiaries,  while 
recognizing  the  need  for  an  important  role  for  the  host  supervisor.  Indeed,  in  my  view  the  Lead 
Supervisor model requires a close working relationship between the host and the home supervisors so 
as to achieve effective supervision. The home supervisor, referred to as the lead supervisor, is given 
final authority to set the reporting requirements for the entire group, to coordinate the validation of its 
internal  models  at  the  group  and  local  levels,  as  well  as  the  planning  of  on-site  bank  inspection 
regimes,  and  to  co-ordinate  the  authorisation  process.  The  concept  of  Lead  Supervision  promotes 
greater efficiency. Moreover, the Lead Supervisor model also fits in with the continuous integration – 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2007
or perhaps I should say globalization – of the financial sector. After all, Europe is part of the global 
financial market, and many large financial players, notably also in the Netherlands, have expanded far 
beyond  the  European  frontiers.  DNB  believes  the  Lead  Supervisor  model  can  properly  support  the 
interests  of  market  participants,  which  should  be  carefully  weighed  when  deciding  upon  the  future 
architecture of financial supervision in Europe. 
An  illustration  of  how  the  Lead  Supervisor  model  can  work  is  the  preliminary  high  level  agreement 
between DNB and the United Kingdom Financial Services Authority (FSA) regarding the supervisory 
consequences of a possible merger between ABN AMRO and Barclays. In this specific case, we have 
been able to come to good, pragmatic and transparent agreements. It has been agreed that decisions 
will  be  taken  on  a  consensus  basis  where  material  issues  affecting  the  combined  group  are 
concerned. In the unlikely event that the supervisors do not agree, the lead supervisor, the FSA, will 
have the final power of decision making.  
Addressing the rise of hedge funds 
A second challenge facing supervisors today is to deal with concerns that unregulated parties such as 
hedge funds and private equity constitute a potential source of systemic risk. Before I discuss these 
concerns, let me stress that both hedge funds and private equity have enriched the financial system in 
many  ways.  Hedge  funds  provide  liquidity  and  price  discovery  in  many  markets  and  have  fostered 
financial  innovation,  so  facilitating  the  distribution  of  risk  within  the  financial  system.  Private  equity 
mobilizes  risk-bearing  capital  for  investments  in  companies  and  generally  helps  to  sharpen  a 
company’s strategic goals. As such, it is beyond dispute that hedge funds and private equity contribute 
to the functioning of the economy. In what follows, I am restricting myself to hedge funds. 
For three reasons there are concerns that hedge funds may exert a destabilizing influence:  
• 
The first concern is the potential impact on regulated firms of a sudden collapse of highly 
leveraged hedge funds. Banks and other regulated financial institutions are heavily involved 
in investing and extending credit to hedge funds. This exposure implies that large losses at 
one  such  institution  could  have  knock-on  effects  for  institutions  closer  to  the  heart  of  the 
financial system. In times of market stress, such effects may even threaten the stability of the 
financial system, as illustrated by the LTCM case in 1998. There is no certainty that such an 
event will not happen again.  
The second concern relates to market dynamics associated with the potential for large and 
concentrated  positions  or  "crowded  trades"  that  can  seriously  amplify  market  pressures. 
Crowded trades can arise when hedge fund managers take similar investment positions on a 
large scale. Especially in combination with high leverage, this concentration could contribute 
to  price  instability  if  market  conditions  force  hedge  funds  to  unwind  their  positions 
simultaneously.  
A  third  concern  relates  to  the  intense  form  of  shareholder  activism  associated  with  some 
hedge  funds.  The  prominent  role  of  shareholders  today  is  a  direct  result  of  two 
developments; the first is the deregulating measures that have been taken in recent years by 
regulators. The second development concerns the changing corporate governance structure 
at private firms, including the relaxation of protection constructions. Amid the ensuing public 
debate, regulators and supervisors are being called upon to assess the risks associated with 
shareholder activism, such as the potential violation of market integrity and uncompromising 
behaviour with the sole aim of maximizing shareholder value. Particularly the latter may have 
broader  financial  stability  implications  in  so  far  as  a  single-minded  pursuit  of  shareholder 
maximization  may  in  some  cases  undermine  the  stability  of,  and  public  confidence  in,  a 
financial institution, such as a bank. Such institutions do after all also provide a public good, 
which  should  be  taken  into  account  when  deciding  upon  the  future  strategy,  and  which 
explains why they are subject to supervision.  
  These  examples  illustrate  that  hedge  funds  are  generally  beneficial  but  may  under  certain 
circumstances  have  a  destabilizing  influence.  Therefore,  the  call  is  on  those  responsible  for 
safeguarding financial stability to ensure that checks and balances are in place to limit the risks these 
entities pose, while avoiding restrictive measures that may prevent them from playing their beneficial 
role in today’s markets. So far, the common view amongst supervisors is that the first concern posed 
by hedge funds is best addressed through indirect supervision, via their regulated counterparties. For 
BIS Review 51/2007 
 3
that  reason,  many  of  the  regulatory  initiatives  since  the  near-collapse  of  LTCM  were,  and  still  are, 
aimed at improving the counterparty risk management practices at regulated institutions. Effective risk 
management depends, however, on reliable and timely information. Supervisors have therefore also 
made  recommendations  to  bolster  market  discipline  and  improve  information  flow  between  market 
participants.  In  fact,  much  has  been  achieved  to  date  in  containing  hedge  fund  related  macro 
prudential  risks.  Yet,  in  a  continuously  changing  financial  environment  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency.  New  categories  of  financial  products  have  rendered  the  credit  relationship  between 
regulated institutions and hedge funds more challenging. In addition, the recent protracted period of 
abundant  liquidity  and  low  volatility  has  increased  the  exposure  of  hedge  funds  to  riskier  assets. 
Finally,  the  attractiveness  of  doing  business  with  hedge  funds  is  a  constant  temptation  for 
counterparties  to  relax  their conditions,  such  as  the  haircuts applied  to collateral. Hence,  there  is  a 
continuous  need  to  assess  ongoing  market  developments  and  address  any  weaknesses  in 
counterparty risk management and market discipline. 
Indirect supervision, although essential, will not mitigate all the risks associated with hedge funds. For 
instance,  given  the  importance  of  hedge  funds  in  some  markets,  any  abrupt  liquidation  of  their 
positions could have implications for market stability. In addition, indirect supervision may not be in a 
position  to  address  the  concerns  related  to  shareholder  activism  I  mentioned  earlier.  In  order  to 
address these concerns, additional measures may have to be considered. I hasten to add, however, 
that tight regulation of hedge funds – such as we know for banks – is undesirable. In order to preserve 
the beneficial role that hedge funds play in today’s market, I would prefer a lighter approach. Greater, 
market-driven  transparency  could  provide  markets  and  firms  with  a  better  sense  of  the  build-up  of 
large, concentrated positions or crowded trades. Of course, I also recognize that there are limits to 
providing data, if only given the speed at which hedge funds’ positions change. Secondly, there should 
be  better  access  to  information  on  shareholder  positions  and  strategies,  including  those  of  hedge 
funds. Such an approach could limit risks of market integrity and behaviour that does not consider the 
stability of financial firms and the financial system as a whole as a precondition. Improved disclosure 
along these lines could be linked to the supervisory reporting requirement on shareholding in financial 
firms, for which the threshold could be lowered. Finally, an additional option is to register the operating 
managers of hedge funds. It should be kept in mind, however, that these managers are often already 
registered  elsewhere  and  operate  internationally,  making  such  registration  on  a  national  level  less 
useful.  In  a  nutshell,  hedge  funds  have  enriched  our  financial  system,  but  they  also  pose  some 
systemic concerns. The job of the supervisors is to ensure that appropriate checks and balances are 
in place. Further transparency and disclosure could be helpful in facilitating this process, as it would 
enhance market surveillance. 
Conclusion 
I  spoke  to  you  about  recent  trends  in  the  financial  industry  and  the  challenges  these  pose  to 
supervisors. I believe that a further convergence of financial supervision in Europe is desirable and 
indeed already progressing. In this respect, as DNB believes that the interests of market participants 
should be carefully weighted when deciding upon the architecture of European supervision, the Lead 
Supervisor  model  is  a  possibility.  Regarding  hedge  funds,  I  stress  that  indirect  supervision  is  a 
necessary but not sufficient condition for mitigating the risks they could pose to financial stability. For 
that reason, further transparency and disclosure by hedge funds is essential in limiting risks of market 
integrity and uncompromising behaviour that potentially could damage the stability of financial firms. In 
addressing these important challenges, co-operation amongst market participants and supervisors is 
key. Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2007
