Ranee Jayamaha: Moving from informal to formal in the provision of 
remittances 
Speech  by  Dr  Ranee  Jayamaha,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the  Global 
Payments Week, Sydney, 3-6 October 2006. 
 Let me begin by thanking the World Bank, IMF and BIS officials for giving me this opportunity to speak 
on the Worker Remittances in Cross Border Payment Flows.  
Most of what has to be said on this topic has already been articulated by the previous speakers. Let 
me  therefore  be  very  brief.  I  intend  to  make  this  presentation  in  three  parts.  Part  I  deals  with  an 
overview of remittances. Part II elaborates the importance of remittances in the Sri Lankan economy 
and Part III discusses possible solutions to issues relating to remittances at macro and micro levels.  
Part I – Global overview 
In terms of magnitudes, worker remittance has become a significant component in foreign inflows and 
balance  of  payments  in  developing  countries.  The  statistics  presented  here  are  largely  estimates. 
According  to  the  latest  reporting,  worldwide  remittances  during  2005  had  been  approximately 
US$ 250 bn and it is likely to increase further. In 2005, developing countries appear to have received 
US$ 167 bn from about 175 migrants. It is also estimated that around 500 mn of the world population 
is dependent on remittances. 
Formal institutional channels 
It  is  important  to  highlight  some  key  points  on  the  formal  institutional  mechanism/channels  of 
remittance flows. Traditionally, the banks collected and disbursed remittances. Now there are many 
agencies involved in the remittance industry, but banks continue to play a lead role. Having realized 
the increasing volume of cross-border remittance flows and the importance of remittances in the world 
economy,  the  institutional  channels  have  increased  and  they  have  begun  to  use  technological 
innovations  to  speed  up  the  delivery  of  remittances.  Remittance  transfer  services  such  as  Western 
Union,  Eurogiro  and  Moneygram  are  well-known  for  cross-border  transfers.  More  recently,  SMART 
Card companies and telephone companies have also begun remittance transfers with or without links 
with banks. These new agencies have helped to speed up remittance transfers and provide alternative 
delivery mechanisms, but remittance transfer prices remain at high levels. It is also noteworthy that 
governments as well as the formal financial institutions are keen to ensure that remittances are used 
effectively  and  prudently  by  the  recipient  countries  as  well  as  the  individual  recipients.  The  word 
'effectively' refers to the use of foreign exchange inflows by the countries for its development activities, 
while 'prudently' refers to the use of remittances by the recipient in a meaningful manner. From the 
institutional  point  of  view,  ‘prudently’  also  means  risk-mitigating  mechanisms  placed  by  the  formal 
financial sector in remittance transfers. 
All  remittance  flows  are  cross-border  transfers  and  they  take  the  form  of  large  value  transfers  or 
individual low value transfers. In the past, the formal institutional mechanisms concentrated heavily on 
disbursing  funds  to  the  recipients.  Given  the  heightened  importance  of  remittances  in  national 
economies  and  the  promotion  of  smooth  remittance  flows  between  countries  by  the  international 
organizations, the formal financial sector has now begun to pay greater attention to the initial point of 
remittance collection (capturing). This means that the institutional mechanisms are focusing on both 
capturing as well as disbursing of remittances. The international cooperation and coordination is very 
important at the point of capturing because the banks and formal financial institutions in the country of 
origin  should  facilitate  cross-border  transfers  of  remittances  without  placing  prohibitive  rules  and 
regulations and pricing on the remitter.  
Payment system and technological advances 
As  you  are  aware,  technological  advances,  partnerships  and  improvements  in  the  payments 
infrastructure  have  significantly  contributed  to  enhance  remittances  on  a  worldwide  basis.  In  that 
sense, the payment system improvement is a key to the enhancement of remittance transfers. The 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 1
technology  advances are intended  to  facilitate  automation,  reduce costs,  provide  additional  delivery 
channels and mitigate risks involved in cross border transfers. However, the reduction of costs and the 
introduction of additional delivery channels are yet to be developed to a satisfactory level by the formal 
institutional network, not only by introducing enhancements to the payment infrastructure, but also by 
making a concerted effort to reduce cost on remittance transfers.  
Several international banks and money transfer systems such as Eurogiro, Western Union have taken 
the  initiative  to  target  both  blue  and  white  collar  workers  at  reduced  transfer  prices.  Despite  the 
facilities  offered  by  these  money  transfer  systems,  there  still  remains  a  significant  portion  of 
remittances of un-skilled workers that are not captured by the formal money transfer systems.  
Enabling regulatory environment  
An enabling regulatory environment is necessary to enhance cross-border remittance transfers. While 
recognizing the need to deter money laundering and terrorist financing through cross-border transfers, 
laws  relating  to  this  type  of  activities  should  not  discourage  genuine  remittance  flows  through  the 
banking  system.  Nor  should  they  be  discriminatory  or  prohibitive  to  remitters  or  receivers.  Most 
countries with fully open current and capital accounts have facilitated cross-border transfers than the 
countries  with  capital  controls.  The  situation  is  expected  to  be  improved  with  the  relaxation  of 
exchange controls in both the remittance originating country and the recipient country. There is also a 
need to monitor and regulate the agencies and other service providers which recruit migrant workers. 
It is reported that, in some instances, the agencies tend to persuade migrant workers to go for lower 
wages and salaries or employ them under harsh working conditions. There have also been instances 
where the agencies or agents take money upfront from workers and have left them in the lurch.  
Remittances through informal channels  
According  to  estimates,  still  30–40  percent  of  remittances  are  transferred  through  the  informal 
institutional  networks  and  private  channels.  In  some  instances,  informal  systems  do  not  transfer 
foreign currency from the origin/host country to the recipient/home country. Arrangements are made to 
provide  funds  in  local  currency  at  the  recipient's  end.  For  example,  if  a  migrant  worker  in  the  US 
wishes to transfer USD 500 to his family in Sri Lanka, he prefers to go to informal systems like Hawala 
and  Undial  because  of  the  high  charges  and  commissions  in  the  formal  banking  sector.  Under  the 
informal money transfer systems, the dollars may stay in the US or get to Sri Lanka at a later time. The 
Hawala agent's representatives in Sri Lanka provide Sri Lankan rupees to the migrant's family speedily 
and  at  a  relatively  low  cost.  If  dollars  are  retained  with  the  Hawala  agent  in  the  US,  Sri  Lanka's 
banking sector lose the opportunity of using foreign currency and, therefore, the country does not gain 
any  benefit  from  the  worker  remittance.  If  the  Hawala  agent  sends  dollars  at  a  very  later  date  to 
replenish  the  equivalent  of  Sri  Lankan  rupees,  again  there  is  an  opportunity  cost  to  the  country  as 
foreign currency is not available when needed. There is also a possibility of the Hawala agent sending 
dollars to Sri Lanka through an un-known courier service, but such dollars may not get to the banking 
sector at all.  
It  is  difficult  to  institutionalize  remittances  of  illegal  immigrants  as  such  immigrants  do  not  wish  to 
identify  themselves  to  the  formal  banking  and  financial  institutions  in  the  host  country.  Hawala  and 
Undial  systems  are  popular  among  illegal  immigrants.  It  is,  therefore,  important  for  the  remittance 
receiving countries, where possible, to compete with informal systems and divert remittances to the 
formal  banking  channels.  Banks  and  financial  institutions  should  be  more  innovative  and  make 
arrangements to collect/capture remittances from legal/illegal migrants at the field level and coordinate 
with  the  host  country’s  banking/financial  institutions  to  transfer  monies  to  remitter's  home  country 
speedily and at a reduced cost. Informal transfers largely take the form of cash. The absence of an 
efficient  financial  infrastructure  at  the  remitter's  end  as  well  as  receiver's  end  is  also  found  to  be  a 
discouraging factor that contribute to the use of informal channels. In some destinations, there is no 
access to sophisticated infrastructure in the host countries for cross-border transfers. Migrant workers, 
therefore, depend heavily on informal systems.  
In this context, a global attempt should be made to facilitate cross-border remittance transfers as such 
transfers have a significant impact on the development of many nations. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2007
Part II - Importance of remittances in Sri Lanka's economy 
I now proceed to illustrate how dependent Sri Lanka is on worker remittances. Over the last couple of 
years, worker remittance has been the single largest inflow of foreign exchange after exports in Sri 
Lanka.  Remittances  have  played  a  significant  role  in  financing  the  widening  trade  deficit  and 
maintaining balance of payment surpluses. During 2005, over 75% of the trade deficit was financed by 
worker remittances.  
 
Export Earnings (Goods) 
Textile and Garments 
Tea 
All Other Exports 
 
Export Earnings (Services) 
Worker Remittances 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Foreign Loans and Grants 
Worker Remittances, as a % 
of Total current account 
Inflows 
Trade balance 
Loans and grants 
Total imports 
GDP 
(a) Provisional 
1980 
1,065
110
373
582
1985 
1,315
293
442
581
1990 
1,984
628
495
862
1995 
3,807
1,853
481
1,474
279
152
43
307
9
15
50
7
4
329
292
24
517
14
40
56
14
5
531
401
34
526
13
57
76
15
5
821
790
28
847
21
53
93
15
6
2000 
5,522 
2,982 
701 
1,839 
 
953 
1,160 
175 
422 
 
15 
65 
275 
16 
7 
2005(a) 
6,347
2,895
810
2,642
1,540
1968
272
972
19
76
197
22
8
 
As  shown  in the  table  above,  in  2005, remittances  increased  to US$  1,968  mn,  indicating a  22.6% 
growth  compared  to  2004.  The  remittance  flows  have  further  increased  to  US$  1,726.7  mn  by  end 
September 2006 and a 20% increase is expected by the year end. 
Remittances  provide  income  support  to  families  and  opportunities  for  un-skilled  workers  to  travel, 
improve skills, earn foreign exchange and engage in self-employment afterwards. It is estimated that 
about  1.3  mn  Sri  Lankan migrant  workers  are  employed  in different  countries  in  various capacities. 
The  banking  sector,  the  government  as  well  as  the  country  as  a  whole  benefit  from  worker 
remittances.  The  country  uses  remittances  for  payment  of  imports,  goods  and  services  while  the 
banks  invest  remittances  in  foreign  currency  bonds  issued  by  the  government.  That  helps  the 
government's  foreign  borrowing  programme.  More  recently,  the  government  resorted  to  issuing  of 
foreign  currency  denominated  bonds  and  attracted  a  significant  part  of  worker  remittances  through 
banks.  In  addition,  the  banks  also  use  worker  remittances  for  their  foreign  currency  trades  and 
investments. If not for remittance inflows, Sri Lanka would have been severely affected by the increase 
in  oil  prices  that  raised  the  oil  bill  by  three  times  in  2006.  The  enhanced  remittance  inflows  also 
reduced pressure in the foreign exchange market and hence on the exchange rate.  
The geographical distribution of remittance inflows to Sri Lanka during 2005 has been as follows: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
57% from Middle Eastern region 
18.5% from European Union 
6.5% from other European countries 
6.5% from North America 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 3
 4.5% from Far East-Asian countries 
Government policy 
Successive governments in Sri Lanka have encouraged and promoted Sri Lankans to work abroad, 
both  in  skilled  and  un-skilled  categories.  The  workers  are  permitted  to  open  tax-free  Non-Resident 
Foreign Currency (NRFC) Accounts which facilitate the receipt and retention of remittances in foreign 
currencies.  Expatriates  and  workers  are  also  allowed  to  have  Resident  Foreign  Currency  (RFC) 
accounts  after  their  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  Taking  the  deposits  in  these  accounts  as  collateral,  low 
interest  housing  loans  have  been  provided  to  the  remitters  and  their  families.  The  government  has 
introduced  “Sri  Lanka  Nation  Building  Bonds”  to  enable  Sri  Lankan  migrant  workers  and  other 
expatriates to participate in the Nation Building programme.  
In  addition  to  government,  the  Sri  Lanka  Foreign  Employment  Bureau,  Association  of  Licensed 
Foreign  Employment  Agencies,  the  Commercial  Banks,  Specialised  Banks,  money  changers  and 
money transfer systems are key players in the remittance industry in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lanka Foreign 
Employment Bureau continues to hold awareness programmes to educate remitters to channel funds 
through formal institutions and also look into the welfare aspects of migrant workers. The banks have 
now  taken  the  initiative  to  establish  links  with  migrant  workers  prior  to  their  departure.  The  Central 
Bank  of  Sri  Lanka  has  permitted  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  establish  exchange  houses  in 
several countries to enhance accessibility by remitters. More recently, the Central Bank has taken a 
keen interest to enhance remittance flows into the country. 
From  a  payment  system  improvement  point  of  view,  it  is  essential  for  Sri  Lanka  to  consider  using 
wireless ATMs and E-Banking systems in rural areas to facilitate speedy disbursement of funds. As 
has been the case in the Philippines, Mobile Commerce (MCom) through SMART Padala (Philippines) 
and  global  G-Cash  services  should  be  introduced  in  Sri  Lanka.  In  the  meantime,  internet-based 
transfer  services  such  as  wire  transfers,  automated  clearing  house  transfers  and  cheque  transfers 
should be further facilitated. Sri Lanka should take steps to reduce high remittance fees from remitting 
countries, such as Japan, Italy and the US by building up partnerships with banks in these countries 
as  well  as  money  transfer  companies.  In  Sri  Lanka  too,  Telecom  services  and  Dialogue  GSM  are 
planning to introduce SMART Cards to connect remittance receivers and their bankers. As the SMART 
card system may require the use of agents in outstations, the banks involved should register these 
agents  and  provide  on-line  banking  facilities  to  them.  While  the  telephone  company  ensures  the 
security of money transfers, the agents and banks should attempt to reduce cost of money transfers 
as well as mitigating risks involved in this activity.  
In addition to the banking sector, Sri Lanka should speed up the linking of Sri Lanka's postal system 
with the global postal network. 
Eurogiro, based in Europe offers several products for payment transfers through the Eurogiro system 
to accounts of postal members or to the accounts of third party banks. In addition, Eurogiro provides 
cash and money order services, Western Union urgent cash, cash on delivery, cheque payments and 
also bulk and pension payments. The Eurogiro postal network uses Tele Money Order (TMO), which is 
linked  to  a  two-day  cash  project  using  Eurogiro  bulking  principles.  Among  their  products,  cash 
transfers, card payments and direct debits are also popular. In addition to the postal service, Eurogiro 
connects  with  banks,  other  alliances  and  financial  institutions.  Sri  Lanka's  postal  service  should 
explore the possibility of partnering with post office members in the remittance originating countries.  
Issues relating to remittance transfers 
Despite  the  promotional  activities,  institutional  arrangements,  favourable  legal  and  regulatory 
framework, improved payment infrastructure, there still remains several un-resolved issues relating to 
remittance transfers. The lack of awareness of facilities available through formal channels is a prime 
factor.  The absence  of,  or  ineffective  links  between  banks/financial  institutions  and migrant  workers 
prior to their departure is another factor, which persuade migrant workers to use informal channels. 
The lack of transparency of full knowledge of the pricing at the point of sale or at the time of delivery of 
remittances is another important factor that needs to be addressed early by the formal channels. High 
charges  and  commissions  and  the  use  of  cheque  float  by  banks,  despite  the  introduction  of  the 
Cheque Imaging System, which aimed at preventing paper cheques from being transported to different 
destinations, are clear deterrents in disbursing funds at the recipient’s level. Similarly, the delays and 
paperwork  involved  transactions  through  the  formal  sector  has  been  a  deterrent.  The  distant  work 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2007
sites in some of the Middle Eastern countries with no access to banking facilities has been reported as 
another factor which provides opportunity for informal channels to capture remittances.  
On the recipient's sides too, the unnecessary expenditure incurred on their savings through purchases 
of  non-priority  consumer  items  has  been  cited  as  an  imprudent  way  of  spending  valuable  foreign 
currency.  In  addition,  migrant  workers  are  faced  with  numerous  social  issues  due  to  family 
breakaways  and  health  hazards  through  consumption  of  liquor  and  drugs  etc.  by  remitter's  family 
members.  This  is  not  the  forum  to  discuss  these  issues,  although  they  are  also  important  factors 
affecting the remittance industry.  
Part III - possible solutions 
Macro level  
In discussing possible solutions to improve remittance flows across countries, it is important to refer to 
the General Principles for International Remittance Services prepared by the WB and the BIS. These 
guidelines are prepared at a global level and require both host/home country support to implement the 
recommendations  underlying  these  principles.  In  summary,  at  macro  level,  the  principles  are  as 
follows: 
Principle I : The market for remittances should be transparent and have adequate consumer 
production 
This requires transparency by individual remitting countries about their services as far as possible. The 
global price including fees at both ends, the exchange rate and other transfer fees should be made 
known  to  the  remitter.  Equally,  the  time  it  takes  for  transfers  and  accessing  locations  should  be 
reduced. The receiver should be encouraged to provide bank account details to the formal channels to 
avoid delays. 
Principle II: Improvements to payment system infrastructure that has the potential to increase the 
efficiency of remittance services should be encouraged.  
This  principle  involves  both  domestic  payment  infrastructure  in  the  remittance  receiving  countries, 
cross-border payment  infrastructure  in both  home and  host countries,  including  the  infrastructure  of 
corresponding  banks.  There  is  a  role  to  be  played  by  the  central  banks  of both  remitter  as  well  as 
receiver's  country  in  improving  the  cross-border  payment  infrastructure.  Many  central  banks  have 
taken the lead in facilitating the payment infrastructure, but there still seems to be gaps in the use of 
electronic  networks  in  semi-urban  and  rural  areas.  The  central  banks  and  other  relevant  agencies 
should encourage the operators to increase interoperability of electronic networks. Similarly, the postal 
service should be encouraged to play a bigger role in transmitting remittances on a cross-border basis. 
The postal network is well known in semi-urban and rural areas and they are in a position to provide 
remittance services at competitive prices.  
Principle III: Remittance services should be supported by a sound, predictable, non-discriminatory and 
proportionate legal and regulatory framework 
The implementation of this principle requires special laws and regulations for remittances, while the 
existing or new laws should be sound, predictable, non-discriminatory and proportionate. Specially, for 
remittance  corridors,  (e.g.  US-Mexico,  US-Brazil,  the  Middle  East-Philippines)  both  sending  and 
receiving  countries  should  cooperate  with  each  other  to  sort  out  legal  obstacles  in  transferring 
remittances.  It  is  also  noteworthy  to  consider  avoiding  dangers  of  over-regulation  in  remittance 
transfers.  The  Money  Laundering  and  Terrorist  Financing  Acts  can  also  deter  some  of  the 
cross-border  money  transfers.  The  authorities  responsible  for  implementation  of  these  legislation 
should be mindful of the need to use judgment in dealing with genuine remittances. 
Principle IV: Competitive market conditions, including appropriate access to domestic payment 
infrastructures, should be fostered in the remittance industry.  
This requires the avoidance of exclusivity conditions as imposed on an agent choosing to offer only 
one remittance service and to promote several direct /indirect access to domestic payment systems in 
the country. Here too, the central banks have a role to play. The central banks and supervisors should 
BIS Review 3/2007 
 5
work  with  competitive  authorities  to  ensure  consistent  approaches  and  discourage  exclusivity 
conditions.  It  is  also  important  for  supervisors  to  ensure  that  money  transfer  systems  are  not 
unnecessarily anti-competitive.  
Principle V: Remittance services should be supported by appropriate governance and risk 
management practices 
Good governance and risk management practices by all stakeholders make remittance service safer 
and  help  protect  consumers.  This  requires  the  remittance  industry  developing  guidelines  for  good 
governance and risk management. Similarly, authorities should give guidance on how to meet anti-
money laundering and combating terrorist financing activity requirements in a manner that such laws 
do not deter genuine remittance transfers.  
Global and regional payment groups' support 
In  implementing  the  general  principles  for  the  international  remittance  services,  the  multilateral 
organizations,  such  as  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB),  World  Bank,  International  Monetary  Fund 
(IMF), European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and Inter-American Development 
Bank (IADB) jointly have developed guidelines, of which the final report is expected to be released by 
end 2006. The host/home country authorities should then evaluate their remittance systems against 
each  general  principle  and  foster  dialogue  within  and  among  countries,  where  possible,  through 
regional  initiatives  in  payment  systems,  such  as  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programs  (FSAPs), 
Arab  Payments  Initiatives  (API),  Commonwealth  of  Independent  States  Payment  Initiatives  (CISPI) 
and Western Hemisphere Fund (WHF). Behind the general principles, the critical elements are greater 
competition, high service level risk mitigation, appropriate regulations and enhancement of payment 
infrastructure on domestic as well as cross-border.  
In  implementing  the  general  principles,  it  is  also  important  for  governments  in  both  host/home 
countries to recognize remittance service as part of public policy. Similarly, under the provisions of the 
General Agreement on Trade for Services (GATS), opportunities should be sought for movements of 
natural persons for delivery of services. Many countries, including Sri Lanka, attempt to re-orient their 
policies to encourage skill migration under GATS.  
Regional  and  international  bodies  should  play  an  active  part  to  resolve  some  of  the  cross-border 
money  transfer  issues.  International  money  transfer  services  should  offer  enhanced  services  at 
reduced costs. International message services, such as SWIFT, should facilitate the remittance flows 
through  innovative  products  and  technology  link-ups  between  central  banks  and  other  stakeholders 
involved in remittance transfers. 
Micro level initiatives 
In addition to the macro level global principles, at micro level, the formal financial institutions should 
make all efforts to enhance accessibility to remitters and receivers. It is also necessary to recognize 
the remittance collectors, such as Hawala and Undial and for formal financial institutions to establish 
agency links with them. The moneychanger system should be streamlined, monitored and geared to 
attract remittances. In speeding-up delivery at low cost, the postal network should be strengthened. 
Both the postal network and the formal banking institutions should deliver remittances at doorstep. The 
banks and financial institutions in the home country should provide a package of facilities to migrant 
workers,  prior  to  their  departure.  Opening  of  bank  accounts,  granting  of  housing  loans  are  key  to 
attract remittances to the formal channels. Banks and other formal financial institutions should display 
their charges and commissions on remittance services and be more transparent in their dealings with 
remittances.  These  are  some  of  the  steps  that  should  be  taken  by  remittance  recipient  countries, 
including Sri Lanka, in enhancing remittance inflows while making the remittance industry a sound and 
safer one.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2007
