Audrey E Anderson: Effective conglomerate and consolidated supervision in 
the Caribbean 
Opening  remarks  by  Mrs  Audrey  E  Anderson,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at  the 
Caribbean  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors/Financial  Stability  Institute  seminar  “Conglomerate  and 
Consolidated Supervision”, Kingston, 11-13 April 2007. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure for me to welcome you, both on behalf of the 
Bank  of  Jamaica  as  well  as  the  Caribbean  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors  to  this  seminar  on 
“Conglomerate and Consolidated Supervision” being facilitated by the Financial Stability Institute of the 
BIS.  
I would wish to extend a warm Jamaican welcome to all our visitors from overseas, and especially to 
Mr.  Amarendra  Mohan,  Senior  Financial  Sector  Specialist  with  the  Financial  Stability  Institute. 
Mr. Mohan  is  the  primary  coordinator  of  this  seminar  and  will  also  be  sharing  with  us,  on  some 
from several overseas jurisdictions who have accepted the FSI’s invitation to address the seminar. 
technical and practical aspects of the supervision of banking groups.  
We are also very pleased to have the privilege of the participation of a team of specialist presenters 
We have with us this morning: 
• 
Mr.  Denis  Sicotte,  formerly  of  OSFI  and  now  a  colleague  of  Mr.  Mohan  at  the  Financial 
Stability Institute. 
Mr.  Christian  Otto,  Head  of  Group  at  the  Frankfurt  Regional  Office  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank responsible for internationally active banks. 
Mr.  Steven  P  Merriett,  Senior  Supervisory  Financial  Analyst  for  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board’s Division of banking Supervision and Regulation. 
Mr. Thordur Olafsson of CARTAC who is no stranger to members of the Caribbean Group 
of Banking Supervisors, having participated in our Annual conference in 2006 and who also 
acted as facilitator through the agency of CARTAC, for specialized bank supervision training 
programs  and  other  technical  assistance  in  the  region.  Thordur also  has  the distinction  of 
having  been  Legal  Counsel  and  later  Head  of  Bank  Supervision  for  the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland, proving as we have done at the Bank of Jamaica with our own Legal Counsels, that 
lawyers can make excellent bank supervisors. 
Mrs.  Greta  Mitchell  Casselle,  Senior  Financial  Sector  Expert  with  the  International 
Monetary Fund, and formerly a Senior Advisor at the U.S. Office of the Comptroller of the 
Currency  and  the  U.S.  Treasury.  Greta  is  also  not  a  stranger  to  the  Caribbean,  having 
served  on  several  IMF  missions  to  Jamaica  and  elsewhere  in  the  region,  took  part  in 
Jamaica’s initial Core Principles Review and later our 2005 FSAP, as well as participated in 
several CGBS conferences.  
    There are also other speakers whom we anticipate hearing from over the next few days, who are not 
here this morning but who I would also wish to recognize at this time. 
• 
Mr.  Franz  McConney  the  Regional  Head  of  Operational  Risk  at  the  FirstCaribbean 
International  Bank  who  will  be  providing  some  industry  perspectives  on  risk  management 
and governance in a financial group; and 
Mr. Gregor Heinrich, the Chief Representative at the BIS Americas office located in Mexico 
City, who will be joining us on Friday and will address the seminar on the on the role and 
work of that office.  
 We welcome and thank all the speakers for joining us this week and look forward to your respective 
contributions to the subject at hand. 
To our supervisory colleagues from across the Caribbean, … and I note that we have representatives 
from nine regional jurisdictions (other than Jamaica) – we are pleased to be your hosts over the next 
few days and trust that the dialogue, experiences and approaches shared will serve to advance our 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 1
individual  and  collective  efforts  to  enhance  our  framework  and  capability  to  conduct  effective 
conglomerate and consolidated supervision. 
The matter of consolidated supervision is very much at the forefront of the supervisory agendas of our 
member countries. In recent years we have seen growth in financial groups not only in our domestic 
markets but also in our regional markets, as institutions have sought to defend and increase market 
shares,  gain  competitive  edge  and  increase  margins.  This  growth  has  accelerated  significantly  in 
recent years, facilitated in particular, by technological innovations and the lowering of trade barriers.  
Most  notably  for  us  here  in  the  Caribbean,  the  advent  of  the  Caribbean  Single  Market  and  the 
prospect of the eventual Single Economy, has seen the removal of certain legal, economic and trade 
barriers,  making  it  a  bit  easier  for  regional  financial  integration.  Over  the  past  decade  a  number  of 
large regional groups have emerged:  
• 
• 
• 
First Caribbean International Bank readily comes to mind as one such group, as does RBTT/Guardian 
Life,  Sagicor/Life  of  Jamaica,  National  Commercial  Bank/  AIC  to  name  some  –  all  regional 
conglomerates with a presence in several regional markets and with product offerings spanning the 
gamut of financial operations …. here I speak of not only banking, but securities dealing, insurance, 
money services, pension fund management, and mutual funds. 
…. And even as we gather here this morning, there are reports of the possibility of further mergers and 
acquisitions. 
This trend in cross border expansions and conglomeratisation (if I dare to coin such a word), poses a 
number of challenges and concerns to us supervisors in the region. Primary among these are:  
• 
through diversification into non-deposit financial services;  
through mergers and acquisitions of banking and non banking financial entities; as well as 
through cross border forays.  
increasingly integrated and interconnected; and also as  
the markets become increasingly concentrated, with fewer and larger institutions. 
A heightening of systemic risk domestically and regionally, as financial systems become: 
o 
o 
Secondly, this trend underlines and emphasizes the need to establish effective mechanisms 
for  information  sharing  between  supervisors,  so  as  to  facilitate  the  monitoring  and 
assessment of potential contagion risks that may originate with entities outside the purview 
of the domestic authorities. 
And  of  course,  we  are  faced  with  the  even  greater  potential  for  regulatory  arbitrage 
becoming not only a domestic, but a real regional issue. 
  Against the background of this regional integration of our financial markets, and recognizing that the 
effective  implementation of  Consolidated  Supervision  cannot  be the  responsibility  of  one  Caribbean 
Island  but must  be collectively  assumed  by  the  region  –  the  Caribbean  Group  of  Bank  Supervisors 
(CGBS)  has  adopted  a  collaborative  approach  to  this  issue.  In  fact,  some  years  ago,  the  CGBS 
established  a  special  Technical  Working  Group  with  the  specific  mandate  to  address  the  issues  of 
concern. These, in particular include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The necessary harmonization of laws and supervisory standards across the region  
A harmonized approach to the restructuring of Financial Groups 
A standardized accounting and reporting framework  
Information Sharing between regional regulatory agencies, and 
Critical training of bank examiners in the region (hence our request for a seminar such as the 
current one.) 
Although  much  has  been  accomplished  through  cooperative  efforts,  much  remains  to  be  done.  A 
significant achievement has been the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding during 2004, initially 
by those 8 jurisdictions in which the FirstCaribbean International Bank operates. However, in light of 
the potential for broader application of the MOU, some other CGBS jurisdictions have subsequently 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2007
become signatories to this MOU. Additionally, a number of individual jurisdictions also have bi-lateral 
agreements in place both within and outside the region. 
These Information Sharing Agreements have in some instances, also facilitated the conduct of joint 
examinations of some entities.  
Towards, harmonization of supervisory standards, the CGBS Technical Working Group has also been 
looking at the minimum features to be embodied in respective legislation and supervisory frameworks. 
A number of proposals have been put forward and have received the endorsement of the Group of 
CARICOM Central Bank Governors. These include: 
• 
The  need  to  have  cross  jurisdictional  consistency  in  regulatory  reporting  and  definitions, 
inclusive  of  the  definitions  of  what  constitutes  “capital  base”  and  “acceptable  group 
structures”, in order to avoid regulatory arbitrage.  
The  need  for  regulators  to  have  the  ability  to  prescribe  in  legislation,  the  accounting 
treatment  to  be  used  for  reporting  to  the  regulator  for  prudential  purposes  (especially  in 
instances  where  conventional  accounting  treatment  or  IFRS  standards  are  at  variance  or 
inconsistent with more stringent prudential standards promoted for deposit taking entities).  
The need to ensure that the approach taken in amending legislation to conduct consolidated 
supervision, is consistent with the revised Basel Core Principles. 
The  need  to  further  enhance  the  relationship  between  the  Regulator  and  the  External 
Auditors if risk based supervision is to be conducted efficiently, since regulators must be able 
to place reliance on the work of the external auditors.  
And finally, the need for the development of legislation to address the entry protocols and 
scope  of  foreign  regulators  who  wish  to  perform  on-site  examinations  in  member 
jurisdictions.  
While  the  region  remains  fully  committed  to  applying  international  best  practice  standards  within 
respective supervisory frameworks, and is working collaboratively in this regard, the Group however, 
remains concerned that: 
• 
Small,  emerging  economies  with  inchoate/nascent  financial  markets  such  as  ours,  are 
expected to implement the same international standards developed within the context of, and 
for  application  in,  large  developed  economies  with  sophisticated  and  highly  developed 
financial systems;  
Multilateral agencies (such as the IMF and World Bank under their Financial Sector Stability 
Assessment  Programmes  (FSAPs),  assess  the  region’s  financial  system  framework  and 
infrastructure on the basis of the standards designed for more developed markets, and these 
assessments  inform  international  opinion  on  our  financial  systems  and  supervisory 
framework, with significant implications for foreign investment; 
Furthermore, while the best practice standards are established in the Core Principles by the 
Basel Committee, there is not always the requisite technical guidance needed to interpret the 
application  of  the  standards.  I  make  specific  reference  here  to  the  principles  that  address 
consolidated supervision of a banking group where a banking group is defined as the bank 
and its offices, subsidiaries, affiliates and joint ventures, both domestic and foreign. Where I 
believe  further  guidance  is  needed,  is  in  case  of  group  structures  such  as  several  in  our 
Caribbean region, that do not fit the classical banking group structure – where for example, 
the bank is neither parent nor the dominant or significant member of the group, (but which 
may include other types of regulated financial activities).  
The need for this guidance from Basel assumes even greater significance within the context 
of  recommendations  being  made  under  FSAP  reviews, 
full 
implementation of consolidated and conglomerate supervision.  
the  prompt  and 
for 
      We therefore, would wish to use this forum to urge the international standard setters and assessors to 
immediately  take  on  board  the  need  to  provide  detailed  and  specific  guidance  with  regards  to  the 
conglomerate supervision of such group structures, within the context of the Core Principles. In fact, it 
is  our  hope  that,  in  the  interim,  this seminar  will  serve  to clarify several of  the  practical  issues with 
which we are grappling and provide us with clear pointers as to the way forward. In a sense we have 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 3
had  to  break  new  ground  on  this  issue,  developing  methodology  that  is  underpinned  by  the 
fundamental prudential principles, but which seek to address our unique situation.  
I  would  wish  to  share  with  you  this  morning  some  of  the  specific  initiatives  in  which  the  Bank  of 
Jamaica  (BOJ)  has  been  involved  in  recent  years  towards  the  ultimate  aim  of  a  having  a 
comprehensive framework in place for consolidated supervision. These have included: 
• 
Establishment  of  a  Financial  Regulatory  Council  (FRC)  in  1999,  Chaired  by  the  Bank  of 
Jamaica and with representation from the Financial Services Commission – the supervisory 
authority with oversight responsibility for the non-deposit taking financial sector in Jamaica 
(i.e. securities dealers, insurance companies, pension funds, unit trusts and mutual funds). 
This Council was determined necessary to ensure that the necessary legal channels exist for 
critical  communication,  collaboration  and  information  sharing  especially  as  regards  dually 
licensed  institutions,  but  more  generally,  to  ensure  a  coordinated  policy  approach  to 
regulation  of  the  entire  financial  system  and  so  also  reduce  the  potential  for  regulatory 
arbitrage. To ensure full coverage of all critical issues impacting the system, the Council’s 
membership also includes representation from the Jamaica Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(JDIC), the Ministry of Finance and the Solicitor General.  
The  BOJ  also  proposed  legislative  amendments  which  were  passed  in  2002  which  have 
enhanced our powers to more effectively carry out consolidated supervision of any corporate 
group  which  includes  a  deposit-taking  licensee.  These  amendments  allow  for  supervisory 
reach to holding companies, thus enabling such entities to be monitored on a similar basis 
as  its  subsidiary  banking  entity,  specifically  as  it  relates  to  the  management  of  risks  and 
assessment of capital adequacy requirements across the entire group.  
These statutory amendments also prohibit the existence of “mixed” conglomerates. Where 
such  groups  do  exist,  the  BOJ  now  has  the  power  to  direct  a  restructuring  in  order  to 
facilitate the establishment of a financial holding company, to which the banking entity would 
report.  In  exercise  of  such  powers,  the  BOJ  has  required,  and  is  currently  monitoring, 
restructuring  exercises  being  undertaken  by  some  of  our  licensees.  The  focus  of  our 
restructuring requirements has of course been to have, in the final analysis, “supervise-able” 
groups, with ownership and corporate structures which are not opaque, are fully regulated, 
and where non-financial risks issuing from other commercial undertakings are kept separate 
from the financial group.  
Audited financials of all group entities are also required to be provided to the BOJ, and in 
addition to its rigorous “fit and proper” due diligence on the principals of licensees, the BOJ 
now also conducts similar due diligence exercises on the principals of holding companies. 
The legislation also allows for BOJ to undertake examinations of the bank holding company 
and to require information of any other group member as determined necessary. 
Further  legislative  review  is  underway  –  in  particular  an  Omnibus  statute  is  intended  to 
amalgamate the various existing pieces of legislation governing banking type entities, into a 
single  overarching  statute  to  create  a  level  playing  field  across  all  deposit-taking  entities, 
while preserving the peculiarities of each sub-sector (in the main in the building societies and 
credit unions sub-sectors). Very significantly, this legislation will also incorporate operational 
financial holding company regulations which will establish very specific prudential principles 
for such entities. 
   I know that several of the jurisdictions represented at this seminar, also have legislation under review 
or legal amendments already in train to expand their powers for consolidated supervision. I trust that 
as  you  interact  over  the  next  three  days,  with  supervisors  of  differing  backgrounds  and  industry 
practitioners,  this  will  be  found  to  be  mutually  beneficial  in  informing  further  development  of  our 
respective supervisory frameworks and practices. 
In closing, let me once again express our appreciation to the Financial Stability Institute for its support 
of training for senior level supervisors in this region, and also to the other organizations, that have so 
willingly provided facilitators for this seminar.  
I  wish  for  all  our  participants,  a  very  productive  week,  as  you  draw  on  the  wealth  of  experience 
represented in this room.  
4 
 BIS Review 41/2007
We are very pleased to be your hosts and hope that in the near future, you will have the opportunity to 
again visit our island, but this time to relax and possibly take in the Semi-finals of the Cricket World 
Cup, and more fully enjoy the hospitality and culture that is so uniquely Jamaican.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 41/2007 
 5
