T T Mboweni: Risks and challenges facing the global economy  
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Mail and Guardian 
Business Breakfast, Johannesburg, 4 May 2007. 
Honoured guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
 Introduction 
1.  
Thank you for the invitation to address the Mail and Guardian business breakfast this time round. As 
you are all aware, South Africa is very much part of the global economy. This is particularly, evident on 
the economic front, where foreign investment and trade flows have increased quite significantly since 
the  advent  of  democracy.  For  example,  the  ratio  of  exports  and  imports  as  a  percentage  of  GDP 
increased from 42 per cent in 1994 to 63 per cent in 2006. Thus, it goes without saying that South 
Africa is not insulated from developments in the rest of the world. On the contrary, we are constantly 
reminded,  almost  on  a  daily  basis,  of  our  links  with  the  global  community  of  economies,  as 
developments on world financial markets feed through to our domestic markets. 
In  my  remarks  to  you  this  morning  I  will  look  at  recent  international  economic  developments  and 
consider  the  risks  and  challenges  facing  the  global  economy  and  their  implications  for  the  South 
African economy. 
Recent global economic developments and prospects 
2.  
The  world  economy  has  been  expanding  at  a  strong  rate  over  the  past  few  years.  According  to 
estimates by the IMF, the world economy grew by 5,4 per cent last year, following the 4,9 per cent 
recorded in 2005. In fact, the growth rate during the last five years averaged 4,5 per cent making it the 
highest in more than three decades. 
There  are  some  important  characteristics  of  the  recent  growth  performance  of  the  global  economy. 
Firstly,  it  is  clearly  evident  that  world  growth  is  now  less  dependent  on  the  US  economy.  This  is 
particularly  the  case  when  one  considers  the  economic  performance  of  the  developing  world.  The 
average growth rate for developing and emerging countries as a group increased to around 7 per cent 
in the last five years from an average of 4,5 per cent in the preceding period. Growth performance in 
sub-Saharan Africa has also improved. The region recorded growth of 5.7 per cent in 2006, marking 
the third consecutive year of growth in excess of 5 per cent. Secondly, despite the pickup in economic 
activity,  inflation  trends  have  been  fairly  subdued  across  most  countries  of  the  world.  Part  of  the 
explanation  for  this  development  rests  with  the  increased  levels  of  globalisation  that  currently 
characterise the global economy. There is little doubt that the integration of countries like China and 
India into the world economy has not only had a positive effect on overall global growth, but has also 
had a dampening effect on global inflation. 
Current  projections  show  that  macroeconomic  developments  in  general  are  expected  to  remain 
favourable.  For example, world  growth  is expected to  moderate somewhat  to  4.9  per  cent  over  the 
next two years and inflation is expected to remain under control with world inflation approximating 3,5 
per cent over the next two years. There are some risks and challenges however, accompanying these 
favourable projections. Let me now briefly turn to some of these issues. 
Global inflation risks 
3.  
While the risks to world inflation may have moderated somewhat over the last six months, there are 
indications that renewed inflationary pressures could stem from capacity constraints in many countries 
as output gaps narrow. Although productivity growth has helped to dampen inflationary trends in many 
countries,  the  significant  increases  in  economic  activity  over  the  last  couple  of  years  have  led  to 
production in many countries being close to, and in some cases exceeding the potential output level. 
The South African economy has grown by 5 per cent in each of the last three years, a level that we 
BIS Review 44/2007 
 1
consider  to  be  slightly  above  potential.  In  addition,  capacity  utilisation  rates  in  manufacturing  have 
increased to levels of around 87 per cent. Thus, all indications are that domestic capacity constraints 
have increased recently and when coupled with the narrowing of the output gaps internationally, the 
impact of these developments on the domestic inflation outlook requires close monitoring. 
The price of crude oil has increased quite significantly over recent years. The average price of North 
Sea  Brent  crude  increased  from  US$38  in  2004  to  US$55  in  2005,  reaching  US$65  for  2006. 
Increased global demand and the perceived impact of geopolitical influences on global supply have 
been  the  dominant  factors  influencing  oil  prices.  Geopolitical  tensions  have  renewed  in  early  2007 
thus  causing  a  rebound  in  the  price  of  brent  crude  oil  from  around  US$58  per  barrel  in  January  to 
around US$68 per barrel in April thus, underscoring the volatile nature of the market. 
High and volatile oil prices pose a significant risk as is clearly evident from recent inflation outcomes in 
South  Africa.  Petrol  price  changes  over  the  past  few  months  have  mainly  reflected  the  volatility  in 
international  oil  prices  and  exchange  rates.  Petrol  price  developments  are  currently  playing  an 
important  role  in  the  less  favourable  outlook  for  domestic  inflation.  Persistently  high  and  rising  oil 
prices could cause higher inflationary expectations to become more entrenched, thus increasing the 
probability  of  a  further  tightening  of  monetary  policy.  While  recent  surveys  indicate  that  inflation 
expectations remain relatively well anchored at levels consistent with the inflation target band in South 
Africa, we cannot afford to become complacent, vigilance is required of a central bank at all times. 
While oil prices have received much of the attention, the prices of other commodities, most notably 
metals and minerals have been much stronger over the last year. Last year saw a strong upward shift 
in the prices of both precious metals (gold, and the platinum group) and base metals (all the others, 
but especially copper, aluminum, iron, zinc, nickel, tin, and refined products such as steel). The price 
of  base  metals  continued  to  increase  more  significantly  in  2007  with  copper,  aluminum  and  zinc 
reaching 7, 11 and 3-month highs respectively, while lead and nickel touched new all-time highs in 
April this year. 
Commodities are increasingly being seen as a beneficial addition to traditional diversified investment 
portfolios. This is due to the fact that it has generally been uncorrelated to other asset classes while 
healthy growth in China and other developing economies, is expected to keep prices strong. In short, it 
would appear that commodities have become a much more sought after “new” asset class for many 
portfolio managers. This has led to robust commodity returns, but has also left commodities prey to 
herding behaviour, making them more volatile and in fact, more correlated with other asset classes. 
However, commodity price increases are somewhat of a double edged sword for South Africa. On the 
export  side,  it  contributes  to  increased  exports  and  economic  growth.  On  the  other  hand,  rising 
commodity  prices  could  offset  the  positive  terms  of  trade  effect  and  lead  to  an  increase  in  import 
prices and hence domestic inflation. 
A  further  threat  to  the  inflation  outlook  emanates  from  buoyant  housing  markets  in  many  countries 
which  have  also  served  to  fuel  domestic  demand.  There  have  been  significant  increases  in 
consumption expenditures as a result of increased wealth effects emanating from rising house prices. 
South Africa is no exception. It is true that the low global interest rate environment has had much to do 
with  these  developments.  However,  the  current  tightening  of  monetary  policy  has  given  rise  to 
concerns that a decline in residential investment could have wider adverse impacts on the rest of the 
economy. More specifically, problems related to the sub-prime mortgage market in the US have raised 
concerns about the probable adverse impacts of developments in the housing market on the rest of 
the US economy and on the rest of the world. While current indications are that these concerns may 
have  dissipated  somewhat,  policymakers  need  to  remain  vigilant  given  the  impact  of  asset  price 
movements on macroeconomic developments. 
Global financial market developments 
4.  
Against the background of favourable global economic developments over the past few years, global 
financial  markets  have  experienced  a  sustained  rally.  Global  equity  markets  in  particular  have 
performed  strongly,  with  markets  in  Japan  and  Europe  outperforming  those  in  the  United  States. 
Emerging  markets  also  benefited  from  continued  inflows  into  their  financial  markets,  and  spreads 
continued to tighten while equity prices rose further. The EMBI+ spread has witnessed a steep decline 
over the past year, having broken below the record low 160 basis points threshold not too long ago. 
While the spread has spiked in times of increased risk aversion, it has in all the cases moved back to 
the pre-volatility levels, even surpassing previous lows. The MSCI emerging market equity index rose 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2007
by almost 30 per cent in 2006 and by approximately 7 per cent thus far in 2007. Emerging market 
credit ratings have also improved since the end of 2004, marginally to below BB+, while there were 38 
sovereign rating upgrades compared to only two downgrades. 
Despite this positive view of emerging markets, risks remain as markets have been prone to contagion 
effects  and  reversals  in  response  to  various  developments.  There  has  been  a  fair  amount  of 
turbulence  in  financial  markets  over  the  past  year,  the  causes  of  which  have  varied.  In  May  2006, 
concerns surrounding inflationary pressures in the US economy caused a sell-off in emerging markets. 
At that time, the market seemed to be of the view that central banks in general were behind the curve 
when  it  came  to  fighting  inflation.  As  a  result,  expectations  of  a  more  aggressive  monetary  policy 
tightening by the major central banks removed some of the allure of emerging market assets. It also 
resulted in an unwinding of the so-called carry trades. 
This unwinding of so-called carry trades gained momentum again in February and March 2007. This 
time it occurred against the background of concerns surrounding a possible recession in the US while 
the Bank of Japan’s interest rate increase in February 2007 also resulted in investors unwinding their 
short yen positions. The abrupt decline in the Shanghai stock market, following speculation that China 
may  introduce  a  capital  gains  tax  on  shares  and  expectations  of  tighter  monetary  policy  in  China 
propelled the sell-off to gain momentum. 
Fortunately, these periods of increased risk aversion and sell-offs in riskier assets, including emerging 
markets, have been relatively brief with markets rebounding soon thereafter. This can most likely be 
ascribed to the fact that many regions, with the exception perhaps of the US, are experiencing much 
improved and healthy growth environments, driven to a significant degree by China and India. With the 
prolonged  period  of  healthy  global  growth,  strong  capital  inflows,  substantial  increases  in  foreign 
exchange reserves and improving terms of trade, emerging markets have witnessed robust expansion 
with limited inflationary pressures. Emerging markets have exploited the opportunity to expand their 
share  of  the  global  economy  and  become  less  dependent  on  the  US.  Nevertheless  the  bouts  of 
volatility indicate the vulnerabilities and risks to which these countries are exposed. 
Domestic financial market developments 
5. 
On the domestic front, the equity market has exhibited phenomenal performance over the past few 
years, with the South African All-share Index (Alsi) increasing from around 10 500 at the start of 2002 
to over 28 000 in April 2007. Equity prices were mainly driven by rising commodity prices, especially 
gold, platinum and copper, which resulted in increases in the resources, gold and platinum indices. 
However, good economic fundamentals including steady interest rates in a low inflation environment 
and strong economic growth also played a major role in the demand for equities by nonresidents and 
contributed  to  broad-based  increases  in  share  price  indices  across  all  sectors.  In  comparing  South 
Africa’s equity market with the MSCI emerging market index, the Alsi follows much the same path as 
the emerging market index. 
The domestic  bond  market  has  also  rallied significantly  over  the  past  few  years,  despite  the  recent 
increases in the repo rate. Domestic government bonds have been supported by the exchange rate of 
the rand, low international bond yields, inflation remaining within the target range and a general lack of 
supply of government bonds in the market. The yield on the R157 bond declined from 12 per cent in 
2002 to under 8 per cent in April 2007. 
South  Africa’s  foreign  currency  denominated  debt,  as  measured  by  the  South  African  EMBI+  sub-
index narrowed from over 270 basis points in 2002 to its current level of approximately 70 basis points. 
South  Africa’s  individual  foreign  currency  denominated  bonds,  have  all  witnessed  a  significant 
narrowing in spreads from time of issuance. The 10-year global bond, for example, which was issued 
at a 195 basis points in May 2005, is currently trading at around 80 basis points. 
The rand has been influenced positively by the substantial inflows into the bond and equity markets, 
and the significant improvement in South Africa’s foreign exchange reserves position. However, the 
combination of being one of the most liquid of the emerging market currencies and having a relatively 
wide  deficit  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  has  meant  that  the  rand  remains 
vulnerable  to  changes  in  international  developments  and  sentiment.  Nonetheless,  demand  for  rand 
remained strong as reflected in the strong increase in turnover in the foreign exchange market. The 
average  daily  turnover  against  rand  doubled  since  2002  from  USD6  billion  to  over  USD12  billion. 
According to the latest BIS Triennial Survey, the rand’s share of total currency distribution in global 
currency markets increased from 0,5 per cent in 1998 to almost one per cent in 2004. Volatility in the 
BIS Review 44/2007 
 3
domestic currency market has been on a declining trend since 2001 – implied volatility declined from 
almost 50 per cent in 2002 to 13 per cent in March 2007. 
The outlook for global growth and markets 
6.  
So  far,  financial  market  corrections  have  been  relatively  well  contained  and  brief,  even  against  the 
background of a slowing US economy. This can most likely be attributed to what appears to have been 
a rebalancing of global growth and the adoption of appropriate economic policies. With regards to the 
latter  aspect,  there  is  little  doubt  that  monetary  policy  has  been  fairly  successful  in  containing 
inflationary pressures across the globe. 
Strong growth elsewhere is expected to partly shelter emerging markets from a US slowdown. The 
effects are likely to be less severe than have been in the past, as the rest of the world has become 
more resilient to a US slowdown with reduced dependence on the US consumer. However, adverse 
developments in the US could affect equity markets, particularly investor sentiments towards emerging 
market assets. 
A  further  risk  to  global  markets  is  that  of  the  unwinding  of  yen  carry  trades.  As  noted  earlier,  in 
February 2007 markets reacted adversely to the Bank of Japan’s decision to raise interest rates by 25 
basis points. In particular, the high-yielding currencies suffered the most, as investors unwound their 
long positions in these currencies and reduced their short positions in the yen. However, at this stage, 
the  market  is  pricing  in  a  modest  scenario  of  interest  rate  increases.  Similarly,  in  China,  with  fixed 
investment  and  economic  growth  exceeding  expectations,  the  authorities  have  signaled  their 
intentions  of  cooling  down  the  economy.  However,  there  are  market  concerns  that  further  policy 
tightening could adversely impact on Chinese and world economic growth. Given the prominent role of 
China in the world economy today, investor perceptions about Chinese prospects have implications for 
global markets. Thus, it is becoming evident that Chinese economic policy is no longer about China 
but the global economy. This was evident during the third week of April 2007 when global markets 
came under renewed pressure, albeit briefly, following the fourth increase in China’s banking sector 
cash  reserve  requirement  this  year.  The  People’s  Bank  of  China  increased  the  cash  reserves 
requirement from 10,5 per cent to 11,0 per cent, in addition to three interest rates increases effected 
over the past year. 
Of  course,  global  imbalances  remain  a  key  challenge.  The  April  2007  World  Economic  Outlook 
published  by  the  IMF  projects  that  imbalances  are  unlikely  to  fall  much  over  the  short  term,  and 
therefore continued large cross-border net capital flows will be needed to finance the current account 
imbalances at their present levels. A disorderly adjustment of these imbalances could result in a sharp 
depreciation in the US dollar, thereby impacting negatively on global economic growth. It is not clear 
whether under these circumstances the rand would find itself moving with the dollar, or in the opposite 
direction. Much will depend on how world growth and risk perceptions are affected in such a scenario. 
However, at this stage a disorderly unwinding of these imbalances appears unlikely. 
Conclusion 
7.  
Currently  the  world  economy  is  characterised  by  generally  strong  growth  and  low  inflation.  This 
favourable scenario has also benefited emerging markets, which are now starting to play a larger and 
more crucial role in the global economy. Nonetheless, as we have seen on a number of occasions, 
markets  are  susceptible  to  changes  in  sentiment.  Thus  far,  negative  developments  stemming  from 
changes  in  sentiment  has  generally  been  brief.  However,  sustained  market  moves  could  lead  to  a 
deterioration  of  growth  prospects.  Global  imbalances  and  the  unwinding  of  these  remain  a  key 
concern.  The  resilience  of  markets  to  these  imbalances  has  continued  to  confound  many  analysts, 
with participants still debating how and when these imbalances will correct and the impact thereof on 
financial markets and the global economy. 
From  a  South  African  perspective,  the  sustainability  of  our  current  positive  growth  experience  is 
dependent  in  part  on  this  positive  international  environment.  Sound  macroeconomic  policies  are 
essential in ensuring the continued attractiveness of South Africa as an investment destination, and 
monetary policy will continue to play its role in this respect. While exogenous factors are outside the 
direct  influence  of  domestic  monetary  policy,  their  impact  through  second  round  effects  cannot  be 
ignored. We have to remain alert to the risks inherent in the international environment and retain the 
flexibility to react appropriately to global and domestic challenges.  
I thank you. Are there any questions? 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2007
