Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening the financial infrastructure for SMEs in 
Malaysia 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
Strategic  Partnership  between  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  Berhad  and  the  Islamic  Financial 
Institutions, Kuala Lumpur, 6 February 2007. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  witness  the  launch  of  the  strategic  partnership 
between  the  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  (CGC)  and  Islamic  financial  institutions.  This  strategic 
partnership  will  provide  an  important  platform  to  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  expand  lending 
activities to the small and medium scale enterprises (SMEs). It therefore, marks an important initiative 
in the efforts to provide an increased range of financing products to SMEs in addition to enhancing the 
access to financing. 
A  key  national  agenda  of  the  Government  is  to  promote  a  strong  and  dynamic  SME  sector  which 
would contribute to ensuring sustainable and balanced economic development. The development of 
diverse and competitive SMEs will also promote greater resilience of the economy. The SMEs also 
represent  important  "incubators"  of  entrepreneurial  talents  that  will  provide  for  the  potential  for  the 
development  of  larger  Malaysian  corporations.  The  SMEs  can  expect  to  represent  an  increasingly 
important source of endogenous growth and employment. The importance of the SME sector to the 
national  economy  is  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  it  constitutes  99.2%  of  the  total  business 
establishments,  employs  about  5.6  million  people,  and  contributes  about  32%  of  gross  domestic 
product. 
In  view  of  the  potential  of  SMEs  in  the  economy,  significant  emphasis  has  been  accorded  by  the 
Government in developing and strengthening the capacity of the SMEs to contribute to the economy. 
Twelve Government Ministries and 38 Agencies are involved in supporting the development of SMEs. 
To  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  the  strategies  to  support  SMEs,  the  Government  established  the 
National  SME  Development  Council  in  June  2004.  The  Council,  chaired  by  the  Prime  Minister, 
provides  the  policy  direction  of  the  programmes  to  support  the  SMEs,  and  to  ensure  that  these 
programmes are implemented effectively. Bank Negara Malaysia is the Secretariat to the Council. 
The Government's commitment to promoting the role of the SME sector in the economy has been to 
provide  an  enabling  environment  for  their  development.  A  comprehensive  approach  has  therefore 
been  adopted.  In  2007, a  total  of 190 key  programmes,  involving  a  financial commitment of  RM3.7 
billion, is being implemented by the Government, to strengthen the enabling infrastructure, to build the 
capacity and capability of the SMEs, and to enhance SME access to financing. Indeed, for access to 
financing, several key strategies and measures have already been implemented to ensure that SMEs, 
at different stages of the business life cycle, have adequate access to financing. 
The  banking  system  continues  to  be  the  most  significant  source  of  financing  in  the  economy.  An 
important strategy to ensure access to financing by the SMEs has therefore been to increase access 
to  financing  from  the  banking  institutions.  Attention  therefore  was  given  for  banking  institutions  to 
accord  a  special  focus  on  providing  financial  services  to  SMEs,  in  particular  in  strengthening  their 
facilities, outreach and services to SMEs. Today, all commercial banks have dedicated SME divisions 
and  Bumiputera  Development  Units  that  are  responsible  for  providing  lending  as  well  as  ancillary 
support and advisory services to the SMEs. The commercial banks also have a specific client charter 
for SMEs, providing the necessary information to facilitate SMEs in applying for financing. 
The strategy to provide increased access to financing is also reinforced by the provision of information 
and  financial  advisory  services  to  SMEs.  In  2005,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  established  Laman 
Informasi, Nasihat dan Khidmat (or the LINK), as a one-stop centre for SMEs to obtain information and 
raise matters on access to financing directly with Bank Negara Malaysia. The LINK has dedicated staff 
that provides financial advisory services including for dealing with problems of obtaining financing and 
for restructuring of existing loans. To date, about 11,000 SMEs have sought assistance from the LINK. 
Another  important  initiative  in  disseminating  information  to  the  SMEs  is  the  establishment  of  the 
SMEinfo  Portal,  an  information  gateway  for  SMEs.  The  Portal  provides  comprehensive  information 
required  by  SMEs,  including  details  on  the  Government's  financial  and  non-financial  assistance, 
financing products for SMEs by the financial sector, training programmes as well as advise on how to 
start and manage a business. The Portal also provides a platform for SMEs to advertise their products 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 1
and services. To date, more than 14,000 SMEs have registered in the SME Business Directory of the 
Portal. 
In strengthening the financial infrastructure for SMEs, Bank Negara Malaysia has also established the 
Small Debt Resolution Scheme where viable SMEs that are constrained by non-performing loans are 
assisted through loan restructuring and the provision of additional funding. In addition, through EXIM 
Bank, two new trade financing products for SMEs have been introduced in 2006. 
The Census that was completed in 2005 had however, indicated that about 80% of SMEs are micro 
enterprises  which  had  limited  access  to  financing  from  the  formal  financial  system  to  maintain  and 
expand  their  businesses.  To  meet  the  financing  needs  of  this  key  segment  of  the  SMEs, 
microfinancing has now been established in our financial system. A number of financial institutions are 
participating  in  providing  fast,  flexible  and  convenient  access  to  financing  to  individuals  and  micro 
enterprises for their business activities. 
The various measures that have been undertaken have now already yielded positive results. SMEs 
today  have  had  greater  access  to  financing,  with  the  banking  institutions  being  the  main  source  of 
financing. In 2006, RM40 billion in new loans was approved to more than 84,000 SME accounts. Of 
this, the Islamic banking institutions provided RM5 billion in new financing, compared with RM3 billion 
in 2005. The share of SME loans of the banking institutions has increased from 30% of total business 
loans at end-1999 to 45% at end-2006. Total SME outstanding loans of the banking institutions have 
now breached the RM100 billion level in 2006. 
The Credit Guarantee Corporation is a key institutional arrangement in facilitating greater access to 
financing by the SMEs. By providing guarantee to loans obtained by SMEs, CGC addresses one of the 
main  constraints  of  SMEs  that  is  the  lack  of  collateral.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  as  the  largest 
shareholder  of  CGC,  is  committed  to  ensure  that  CGC  is  in  a  position  to  have  an  effective  role. 
Towards achieving this, RM1 billion was injected into CGC in 2000 to enhance its financial capacity to 
provide  guarantees.  In  2005,  a  process  to  transform  CGC  was  initiated  to  enhance  its  role  and  to 
expand its range of products and services offered. 
The aim is to position CGC as not only a provider of credit guarantees, but as an important institution 
that  enhances  the  ability  of  SMEs  to  obtain  financing  from  the  financial  institutions,  in  particular, 
through  the  provision  of  wider  credit  enhancement  products,  advisory  services  on  financial  and 
business  development  and  credit  information  services.  In  2006,  CGC  has  shown  commendable 
progress in this transformation process. Indeed, the strategic partnership that is being entered today 
between CGC and Islamic financial institutions is part of the initiative for CGC to expand the outreach 
of its products. 
This strategic partnership between CGC and Islamic financial institutions is an important milestone as 
it brings together the two important objectives of the Government, namely enhancing SMEs' access to 
financing and promoting the growth of Islamic finance. Islamic finance has now not only experienced 
significant  growth  but  is  becoming  more  internationally  integrated.  This  is  underpinned  by  its  great 
potential as a competitive form of financial intermediation. In Malaysia, the Islamic banking system has 
evolved into a dynamic, competitive and internationally integrated industry. In this recent five years, 
the Islamic banking industry has continued to record double-digit growth rate of about 20 percent. It is 
also  an  important  contributor  to  the  strong  levels  of  profitability  recorded  by  the  banking  groups.  In 
terms of assets, the Islamic banking sector now accounts for 12 percent of the total banking system. It 
is envisaged that by year 2010, the Islamic banking industry will constitute 20 percent of the overall 
banking industry market share. 
Financing extended by the Islamic financial institutions to SMEs has shown an encouraging upward 
trend, growing at an average annual rate of 34.2% for the period 2001-2006. As at end-2006, Islamic 
financing to SMEs reached RM10 billion, accounting for 9.6% of total SME loans outstanding of the 
banking system. This is a significant increase compared with the amount of Islamic financing extended 
to  SMEs at  end-2000, which was only RM1.7 billion  or 2.4%  of  total  SME  loans outstanding  of  the 
banking system. 
Indeed,  there  is  great  potential  for  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  play  a  more  significant  role  in 
providing  greater  choice  to  SMEs  to  meet  their  financing  needs.  Increasingly  now,  SMEs  from  the 
different  sectors  require  more  customised  and  differentiated  financial  products  and  services  that 
accommodate  their  unique  requirements.  This  reflects  the  more  highly  diversified  nature  of  the 
Malaysian  economy.  Islamic  financial  institutions  therefore  need  to  understand  these  requirements 
and  be  able  to  provide  not  only  new  innovative  products  but  also  attractive  financing  packages.  In 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2007
addition, Islamic financial institutions need to intensify efforts to create greater awareness amongst the 
SMEs  on  the  unique  features  associated  with  Islamic  products  and  services.  Enhanced  financial 
literacy  on  Islamic  financial  products  will  facilitate  the  process  for  SMEs  to  make  informed  and 
effective decisions on their financial transactions. 
Today's  event  that  marks  the  establishment  of  strategic  partnership  between  CGC  and  the  Islamic 
financial institutions augurs well for SMEs. It provides a platform for the Islamic financial institutions to 
extend  greater  financing  to  SMEs.  For  CGC,  this  is  an  opportunity  to  expand  the  scope  of  its 
guarantee  beneficiaries  to  include  Islamic  financial  institutions.  The  real  beneficiaries  would  be  the 
SMEs. 
On this note, it is my pleasure to once again congratulate CGC and the Islamic financial institutions for 
this initiative to forge this strategic alliance and collaboration to maximize the potential opportunities in 
SME financing. I wish every success in this strategic collaboration. 
BIS Review 13/2007 
 3
