Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The 5th Microentrepreneur of the Year Awards 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines  (Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Launching of the Microentrepreneur of the Year Awards Program, Manila, 
11 May 2007. 
 Magandang umaga po sa inyong lahat! 
Ladies and gentlemen. The video we just watched and the inspiring message of our 2006 National 
Winner Ms. Jennilyn Antonio serve as further validation of the power of microfinance to liberate people 
from  poverty  and  to  transform  them  into  industrious  and  self-reliant  microentrepreneurs.  These  are 
microentrepreneurs who overcome challenges to become employers themselves and in the process 
become agents for economic development in their respective communities. Again, let us give them a 
big hand!  
Today’s event is special therefore as this is a gathering of our microentrepreneurs and advocates of 
microfinance, including the members of the board of judges of the Citi Microentrepreneur of the Year 
Awards,  representatives  from  the  Microfinance  Council  of  the  Philippines  headed  by  Ms.  Mila 
Mercado-Bunker, executives of Citi – Mr. Sanjiv Vohra and Mr. Robert Morse, fellow central bankers, 
my  colleagues  at  the  Monetary  Board,  our  guests  from  the  media,  and  other  special  friends  of  the 
microfinance sector.  
This is the fifth Microentrepreneur of the Year Awards (MOTY) and the third time I am participating as 
co-Chairman of the National Selection Committee. Together with the other members of the board of 
judges, I have had a front row seat, so to speak, in watching microenterprises evolve and develop in 
various ways, in the different parts of our country.  
I  have  also  seen  this  Awards  program  evolve  and  improve  in  accordance  with  its  objectives  of 
recognizing  outstanding  microentrepreneurs  and  highlighting 
the  role  of  microfinance  and 
entrepreneurship  in  poverty  alleviation  and  economic  development.  Now,  we  have  higher  prize 
awards, more nominees, wider geographical representation and new award categories. Credit for this 
goes to Citi, the Citi Foundation, the Microfinance Council of the Philippines and the Bangko Sentral 
ng Pilipinas. Friends, let’s give them a well-deserved round of applause!  
Much like this Awards program, the microfinance industry in the Philippines also continues to evolve, 
grow and break new grounds.  
At the Bangko Sentral, the challenge is for us be responsive to the changing demands of the industry, 
specifically in areas of policy, supervision and regulation.  
Last  year,  for  instance,  the  Bangko  Sentral  approved  the  Micro-Agri  Product  (MAP)  to  address  the 
financing needs of small farmers. Under this program, banks with microfinance operations are allowed 
to extend credit to clients with small agricultural activities using microfinance methodologies. In effect, 
these micro-agri loans are given the same regulatory treatment as microfinance loans, including the 
no-collateral provision.  
Nevertheless,  while  the  Bangko  Sentral  is  open  to  innovations,  it  continues  to  be  prudent  as  the 
agriculture  sector  has  its  own  unique  intricacies  and  risk  profile.  Accordingly,  we  have  set  in  place 
certain parameters to ensure that risks associated with agriculture finance are properly managed.  
There  is  also  growing  interest  in  providing  housing  microfinance  and  even  micro-insurance,  using 
microfinance methodologies and technologies. For instance, one of the country’s leading microfinance 
institutions  –  the  Center  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  or  CARD  –  has  formed  a  Mutual 
Benefit Association which offers micro-insurance to over 300,000 clients. This is yet another tool that 
minimizes  vulnerabilities  from  poverty.  I  have  been  informed  that  the  Insurance  Commission  has 
recognized CARD for its significant contribution in increasing the number of insured Filipinos.  
In addition to product development, the microfinance industry is also working on more efficient delivery 
channels to lower costs and increase its reach.  
One  delivery  channel  that  is  gaining  much  interest  is  the  use  of  mobile  phones  for  selected 
microfinance transactions. Through electronic cash platforms – such as Smart Money and Globe G 
Cash  –  mobile  phones  are  able  to  make  payments  and  transfers,  send  remittances,  or  make 
BIS Review 49/2007 
 1
purchases. This bears much potential for a country like ours…where the mobile phone sector serves 
practically all income groups and where the number of mobile phone users and usage are among the 
highest in the world.  
New technologies present a unique opportunity to reach a wide range of clients including the lower 
income segments of our population, who are traditionally marginalized and “unbanked.” For instance, 
the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines-Microenterprise Access to Business Services (RBAP-
MABS) has a joint project with Globe Telecom to provide banking services using the G-cash platform.  
At present, select banks are offering products such as Text A Payment and Text A Deposit. These 
products allow clients to pay their microfinance loan amortizations and make deposits without going to 
the bank branch or waiting for the field collectors.  
Indeed,  this  is  a  revolutionary  solution  for  low  value  payments  which  has  dramatically  lowered 
transaction  costs  for  both  the  bank  and  the  client,  increased  the  productivity  of  account  officers, 
decreased cash-on-hand risk, and increased access to financial services.  
Through all these innovations, the regulatory focus of the Bangko Sentral is to ensure the underlying 
soundness of banks with appropriate risk management measures. In this regard, the Bangko Sentral 
has  set  in  place  the  necessary  regulations  and  procedures  that  cover  electronic  banking  risk 
management, security procedures, internal controls, anti money laundering and consumer protection. 
We  have  even  created,  within  our  Supervision  and  Examination  Sector,  a  Core  Information 
Technology Supervisory Group to keep abreast of the latest developments in electronic banking.  
Together with the BSP’s liberalized branching regime, these technological innovations should enable 
banks to widen their reach to unserved and underserved clients in both rural areas and urban areas. 
Another  positive  development  is  the  increasing  participation  of  large  commercial  players  in  the 
microfinance industry. More and more commercial banks and social investors are seriously looking at 
providing  loans,  equity,  or  assistance  to  retail  microfinance  institutions.  These  new  linkages  and 
partnerships should lead to a wider range of products, broader distribution systems, development of 
local currency capability and ability to hedge foreign currency by MFIs, capital market development for 
microfinance, and finally put microfinance in the economic mainstream.  
At  the  Bangko  Sentral,  we  continue  to  explore  ways  to  strengthen  and  sustain  these  partnerships. 
Among  others,  we  conduct  networking  meetings  between  commercial  banks  and  retail  institutions. 
And  just  two  weeks  ago,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  the  classification  of  commercial  banks’ 
microfinance loans to non-bank microfinance institutions as alternative compliance to the mandatory 
credit  allocation  of  6%  to  small  enterprises.  This  is  a  significant  incentive  for  banks  to  provide 
wholesale loans that will increase the microfinance operations of retail institutions.  
Indeed, exciting developments are happening in the Philippine microfinance sector, indicative of the 
dynamism and creative energy that have characterized it in the last few years.  
Those of us who have seen the microfinance sector evolve and grow, are justifiably proud of where it 
is today. We have witnessed hope grow in the midst of poverty, seen lives change for the better, and 
communities grow in the process through the transformative power of microfinance.  
I am pleased to report to you that as of December 2006, total outstanding loans of 212 banks to more 
than 650,100 microfinance borrowers had exceeded P4 billion. Also as of December last year, these 
borrowers had accumulated modest savings averaging P2,000 (two thousand pesos) each or a total of 
about P1.4 billion!  
But, ladies and gentlemen, you and I know there is still so much more that needs to be done. Millions 
of Filipinos still live in poverty, without access to financial services that could empower them to better 
their lives. There is therefore an urgency to sustain our momentum, to bring microfinance to where it is 
needed the most, and thereby make a difference in uplifting the quality of life of our entrepreneurial 
and industrious poor.  
In this regard, we thank all those involved in the Microentrepreneur of the Year Awards for providing 
our future microentrepreneurs the hope, and the inspiration, that they, too can have better lives with 
their families and with other members of their community through microfinance.  
Mabuhay ang Microfinance! Marami pong salamat sa inyong lahat.  
2 
 BIS Review 49/2007
