Nils Bernstein: Recent economic and financial developments in Denmark  
Speech by Mr Nils Bernstein, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 26 April 2007.  
 Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. 
There is still high growth in the global economy. Growth has slackened off a little in the USA, but the 
upswing  in  Europe  and  many  other  parts  of  the  world  has  become  more  apparent.  The  significant 
global imbalances – especially the large current-account deficit in the USA, which is counterbalanced 
by substantial surpluses in, for example, China and the OPEC countries – have diminished a little, and 
the risk of abrupt adjustments is decreasing, but has not been eliminated.  
The  lower  US  growth  reflects,  among  other  things,  that  the  housing  market  is  adjusting  after  some 
years of strong price increases, but the adjustment seems to be moderate and gradual. There is no 
sign either that the problems faced by companies specialising in mortgage loans to less creditworthy 
households will spread to other areas of the financial markets.  
Concern that the European upswing might be suppressed by Germany's VAT increase has lifted, and 
the German economic dynamo is powering up.  
The overall prospects for Danish exports are favourable, and there will be no lack of demand in the 
immediate future. On the contrary, exports may be affected by a shortage of production capacity. The 
Danish economy is at its capacity limit, and many companies find it difficult to recruit the manpower 
they require.  
In more positive terms, employment in Denmark has never been higher, and the unemployment rate is 
the lowest since the start of the 1970s, and also among the lowest in the world. This also leaves little 
scope for economic growth in the immediate future. With the prospect of sustained growth in domestic 
demand, the pressure on capacity will continue unabated. 
It will to a high degree be up to us here in Denmark to ensure that we can benefit from the sustained 
international boom.  
The housing market has dampened in recent years after a period of very strong growth in cash prices, 
in fact so strong that it has also attracted international attention. 
Most  recently,  the  big  question  in  Denmark  has  been  whether  house  prices  are  about  to  slump.  A 
certain downward price adjustment in the areas with the largest price increases cannot be excluded. In 
view of the strong Danish economy it is unlikely, however, that we are on the brink of dramatic general 
price decreases. In itself it is an advantage that expectations of the future development in prices of 
owner-occupied  homes  have  dampened,  so  that  property  is  not  bought  chiefly  to  achieve  a  capital 
gain.  
The change of mood seems to have been most pronounced in the Greater Copenhagen area, and it is 
also in Copenhagen that house prices have recently fallen, especially for owner-occupied flats. This 
reflects that prices per square metre have reached a very high level, and that the supply of newly-built 
homes  has  augmented.  Construction  always  reacts  to  rising  house  prices  with  a  certain  time  lag. 
Economic growth in Greater Copenhagen is still strong, however, and prices will be underpinned by 
the influx of new residents from the rest of the country.  
Three  quarters  of  Denmark's  owner-occupied  homes  are  located  outside  Greater  Copenhagen.  In 
most areas, prices have risen more slowly, and price falls are less likely.  
The higher prices per square metre in recent years have strongly augmented housing wealth, which 
has  increased  by  kr.  670  billion  since  the  start  of  2005.  Borrowing  has  also  risen,  but  not  by  any 
means to the same extent. Home equity has grown by an estimated kr. 550 billion over two years. This 
ensures that there is a significant buffer against any future price drops.  
Rising house prices are first and foremost to the benefit of those of us that already own a home. The 
majority of the population are homeowners and this is probably one of the reasons that the high price 
increases have not provoked strong protests.  
BIS Review 43/2007 
 1
Stagnating and perhaps falling house prices will be to the benefit of first-time home buyers. For those 
who bought their homes when prices peaked any price drops will naturally be less welcome. However, 
only a small proportion of the owner-occupied homes changed hands at the very high prices. Around 5 
per cent of one-family houses in Denmark are sold each year, so that for most homeowners a small 
price drop will just mean that a small part of the capital gain that emerged so quickly will disappear. 
The increase in interest rates moreover diminishes the market value of the outstanding debt, unless 
the home is financed at variable interest rates.  
Danmarks Nationalbank assesses that in the short term the slowdown in the housing market will have 
only a limited effect on the economy in general. Once the construction backlog has been eliminated, 
new construction and conversion activity will probably dampen, but that is still far off, and furthermore, 
business  construction  is  increasing.  In  addition,  private  consumption  has  only  been  affected  by  the 
increasing housing wealth to a small degree. Since 2004 the propensity to consume has shown an 
increase equivalent to approximately kr. 15 billion, while housing wealth has risen by kr. 670 billion. It 
is true that the capital gains have been further mortgaged, but the proceeds have mainly been used 
for home improvements or pension contributions, or invested in other financial assets.  
For more than 200 years we have had a secure mortgage financing system with a large, standardised 
mortgage-credit bond market that has given borrowers access on equal terms to finance real property 
at long-term interest rates in the capital market. However, in recent times the mortgage-credit system 
has undergone many changes:  
Mortgage  credit  no  longer  comprises  associations  of  borrowers,  with  members  holding  joint  and 
several liability that join forces to gain access to a less developed capital market. Today, the players 
are profit-maximising limited-liability companies in an economy with well-developed capital markets.  
Mortgage-credit institutes and banks have become more closely connected in different ways. Credit 
institutions  from  other  EU  member  states  can  compete  freely  in  Denmark,  and  Danish  credit 
institutions have become active in financing real property abroad.  
Finally,  there  has  been  considerable  development  of  new  products  –  for  example  adjustable-rate 
loans, capped adjustable-rate loans and deferred-amortisation loans. In this way, mortgage credit has 
become a product like other commercial financial products in an open economy with a mature financial 
system.  
This  dynamic  has  not  changed  Danmarks  Nationalbank's  fundamental  perception  of  the  mortgage-
credit  system.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  always  found  it  to  be  a  secure  system,  beneficial  for 
borrowers, lenders, the capital market, and financial stability.  
Now a new type of covered bonds enters the market, called SDOs. At the last Annual Meeting I called 
for a thorough review of the future regulations for use of SDOs. I would like to acknowledge that this 
review has been undertaken, and there is now political agreement on a new act on SDOs.  
Overall,  I  believe  this  to  be  a  good  result.  The  bill  also  makes  it  possible  for  the  mortgage-credit 
institutes  to  provide  mortgage  credit  financed  by  issuing  bonds  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  today. 
Danmarks Nationalbank has considered this to be important.  
For some years the banks have competed with the mortgage-credit institutes to offer mortgage credit, 
among other things by introducing their mortgage loans. In addition, they also increasingly compete 
with foreign credit institutions – both in Denmark and abroad.  
Now the banks will have the opportunity to obtain financing by issuing SDOs against mortgage loans 
as collateral. This sharpens competition and also gives the banks a new and stable source of financing 
to counter the growing deposit shortfall, to the benefit of financial stability.  
I  don't  want  to  deny  that  at  Danmarks  Nationalbank  we  believe  that  the  current  mortgage-credit 
legislation, of which one cornerstone is a tight balance principle, has functioned well.  
The purpose of a balance principle is to limit the issuers risk to credit risk. Both the present and the 
proposed new balance principle fundamentally entail the rule that no interest-rate risks, option risks or 
exchange-rate risks may be taken.  
Today, risks are mainly covered by selling bonds that exactly match the mortgage loans, and this will 
naturally still be possible under the new balance principle, if wished for. However, the new balance 
principle  also  makes  it  possible  to  cover  the  risks  using  modern  financial  instruments  to  a  greater 
extent. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2007
The new legislation on SDOs also comprises a tightening of mortgage-credit legislation, required by 
EU-legislation, namely that throughout the duration of the loan no mortgage loan may have a value 
that exceeds 80 per cent of the value of the home that is mortgaged. Today, this only applies at the 
point in time when the loan is raised, as you will know.  
If  house  prices  fall,  the  credit  institutions  must  to  the  extent  necessary,  re-establish  the  collateral 
behind the issued SDOs, e.g. by raising loans and buying government securities to use as collateral. 
This  means  that  the  new  SDOs  will  always  be  backed  with  sound  collateral,  and  this  will  limit  the 
refinancing risk.  
Overall,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  assesses  that  the  regulation  on  SDOs  provides  a  basis  for  a 
mortgage financing system that is just as safe as today's mortgage-credit system. Now it remains to 
be seen how the market will receive the new bonds.  
In principle, the introduction of a new mortgage financing instrument that can also be used by banks 
must  be  expected  to  increase  competition.  This  is  by  no  means  detrimental,  but  it  does  require 
consumers to be active and capable of understanding the opportunities made available to them. The 
extensive work of devising methods to ensure transparency still remains to be undertaken. 
The cross-border integration of the financial markets is one of the more striking phenomena of the last 
30  years.  This  integration  makes  high  demands  of  the  underlying  infrastructure.  Cross-border 
securities trading still entails considerable costs.  
On this basis, the European Central Bank, ECB, has taken the initiative to improve the cross-border 
trading of securities within the EU. Target2-Securities is the name of a new common European system 
for settlement of securities denominated first and foremost in euro, but later also for settlement in other 
currencies.  
The objective of the project is to make it just as simple, inexpensive and efficient to settle securities 
trades across national borders within the EU as it is to settle domestic trades.  
At the beginning of 2008 the ECB is expected to take the final decision on whether to develop the 
system.  
The user requirements of the system will be determined in the near future. Danmarks Nationalbank 
and VP Securities Services have commenced the collection and coordination of the Danish input to 
the user requirements. 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  on  behalf  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank  acknowledging  the  excellent 
cooperation with both the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks and its members over the past year.  
BIS Review 43/2007 
 3
