T T Mboweni: Overview of the South African economy 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
87th ordinary general meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 20 September 2007. 
 Introduction 
The  primary  goal  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (the  Bank)  is  the  achievement  and 
maintenance of price stability. However, the role of the Bank in the economy goes beyond a 
narrow monetary policy focus. Low and stable inflation provides an important framework for 
economic growth, but regulation and supervision of parts of the financial sector, as well as 
the oversight of the payment system ensure that the wheels of the economy continue to turn 
efficiently. In the past year we have had to execute our mandate in an increasingly difficult 
and uncertain environment. The South African financial markets have not been spared the 
effects of the recent volatility in the financial markets and we have to be increasingly vigilant 
of the risks posed to the domestic economic landscape. At the same time we have to ensure 
good governance with respect to the internal workings of the Bank. It is against the backdrop 
of this volatile economic environment that I report to you today. 
Today  we  also  release  our  Annual  Economic  Report  which  covers  developments  in  the 
domestic and international economy over the past year. In particular, we highlight the main 
economic developments which have affected our operations and policy implementation. The 
focus of this address is on the main operational areas of the Bank including monetary policy 
and its implementation, gold and foreign-exchange reserves management, financial stability 
issues,  the  national  payment  system,  banking  regulation  and  supervision,  international  co-
operation and internal administration. 
Monetary policy 
This past year has been a challenging one for monetary policy. As I reported in August last 
year, from the middle of 2006 pressures on inflation emerged, and have since intensified. By 
December  2006,  year-on-year  CPIX  inflation  measured  5,0  per  cent  compared  to  3,7  per 
cent in April of that year. Inflation remained within the target range until April 2007 when it 
increased to 6,3 per cent from 5,5 per cent in the previous month. Since then it has remained 
outside the target range. Initially the main drivers of this adverse trend were food and petrol, 
but more recently there has been evidence of a more generalised upward trend in inflation, 
including that of services prices. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  responded  to  these  developments  by  raising  the 
repurchase  rate  by  50  basis  points  in  June  2006,  the  first  increase  since  2002.  This  was 
followed  by  successive  increases  of  50  basis  points  at  each  of  the  subsequent  three 
meetings of the MPC in 2006. By December the repurchase rate had increased to 9,0 per 
cent per annum. 
The pressures on inflation emanated from both international and domestic sources. At the 
global  level,  the  world  economy  continued  its  strong  performance  which  contributed  to 
sustained  upward  pressure  on  oil  and  food  prices  which,  in  turn,  had  a  direct  impact  on 
domestic  food  and  petrol  prices.  These  items  were  the  major  contributors  to  the  upward 
inflation trends during 2006. 
In  August  last  year  international  oil  prices  peaked  at  levels  just  below  US$80  per  barrel. 
Prices were influenced by strong global demand, supply disruptions in a number of countries 
and  geopolitical  uncertainties.  Food  price  pressures  have  also  had  a  global  dimension. 
Drought conditions in a number of countries as well as the increased diversion of agricultural 
products, particularly wheat, maize and sugar, to bio-fuels production have contributed to this 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 1
trend.  South  Africa  was  not  immune  to  these  developments  which,  in  conjunction  with  the 
impact of drought conditions in a number of regions, resulted in an acceleration of food price 
inflation,  in  particular  meat  prices  and  to  a  lesser  extent  maize  prices.  In  October  and 
November  2006  meat  prices  increased  at  year-on-year  rates  of  almost  20  per  cent,  while 
grain product prices increased by around 6 per cent. 
Although  world  inflation  remained  under  control,  the  pressures  emanating  from  these 
developments have dictated that monetary policy remains restrictive in many countries. 
Domestically, the MPC had to contend with the combined threats of high rates of growth of 
consumption  expenditure  and  credit  extension.  In  the  second  half  of  2006,  domestic 
household consumption demand growth also continued at a robust pace of around 7 per cent 
per annum, while the various consumer confidence indices indicated sustained optimism on 
the part of consumers despite the tightening stance of monetary policy. Towards the end of 
the  year,  motor  vehicle  sales,  particularly  passenger  vehicles,  showed  some  signs  of 
moderation.  Underpinning  this  consumer  exuberance  were  strong  rates  of  growth  of  credit 
extension, despite an increase in securitisation transactions. 
Following the 15-per-cent depreciation of the effective exchange rate from May to July 2006, 
the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  had  an  impact  on  the  inflation  outlook.  However,  it  then 
remained in a fairly tight trading range, despite the continued widening of the deficit on the 
current account of the balance of payments, which continued to be adequately financed by 
capital inflows. 
Not all the determinants of the inflation rate posed a threat to the outlook. Nominal unit labour 
costs  were  well  contained,  fiscal  policy  continued  to  be  supportive  of  monetary  policy  and 
although the economy was growing at a robust pace, it was not deemed to be growing at a 
rate  significantly  above  potential.  Inflation  expectations  were  also  anchored  within  the 
inflation target range. 
In the first two months of 2007 international oil prices declined significantly, with the price of 
North  Sea  Brent  crude  oil  reaching  a  low  of  US$51  per  barrel  in  January.  These 
developments contributed to a general downward revision of oil price and inflation forecasts. 
At the same time, there were tentative signs of some moderation in household consumption 
expenditure, particularly with respect to passenger vehicle sales. The MPC was also mindful 
of the fact that interest rate adjustments take time to impact fully on demand. Although the 
inflation risks were still perceived to be on the upside, the continued stability of the exchange 
rate,  sustained  fiscal  restraint  and  the  improved  inflation  expectations  resulted  in  the 
committee keeping interest rates on hold at the February and April meetings of the MPC. 
By  the  June  2007  meeting  of  the  MPC,  the  outlook  had  deteriorated  further.  Despite  the 
previous  adjustments  to  the  monetary  policy  stance,  available  data  at  the  time  suggested 
that real household consumption expenditure and credit extension remained strong, growing 
at  year-on-year  rates  of  around  7  per  cent  and  26  per  cent,  respectively.  International  oil 
prices resumed their upward trend, eventually peaking at around US$78 per barrel in July. 
The  overall  impact  of  the  adverse  oil-price  trend  on  domestic  inflation  was  moderated 
somewhat by the relative stability of the rand exchange rate. 
However,  following  the  breach  of  the  upper  end  of  the  inflation  target,  there  were  some 
worrying signs of a deterioration in inflation expectations. Furthermore, partly in response to 
the  higher  inflation  outcomes,  nominal  wage  settlements  began  to  trend  higher,  posing  a 
further risk to the inflation outlook. In response to these pressures and the less favourable 
outlook, the repurchase rate was increased at both the June and August 2007 meetings of 
the MPC. At the time of the August meeting, the turmoil in the world financial markets had 
begun.  At  that  stage  it  was  unclear  to  the  MPC  whether  these  developments  would  be 
confined  to  the  financial  markets,  or  if  they  would  impact  significantly  on  the  growth 
prospects domestically and abroad. The committee decided that it was appropriate to remain 
focused on the inflation target, and react to financial market developments insofar as they 
affected the inflation outlook. 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2007
The  breach  of  the  target  can  be  seen  as  a  setback  for  monetary  policy.  Nevertheless,  it 
should  be  noted  that  the  main  cause  of  inflation  exceeding  the  upper  end  of  the  inflation 
target  range  was  factors  beyond  the  direct  influence  of  monetary  policy.  We  are  mindful, 
however, of the impact of these developments on inflation expectations and the need to act 
against the emerging broader inflation pressures. The most recent inflation forecasts of the 
Bank suggest that inflation may return to within the inflation target range during the second 
half of next year, and the MPC will continue to act accordingly to ensure that this outcome is 
achieved. 
Money-market operations 
To ensure that the implementation of monetary policy was in line with the stance determined 
by  the  MPC,  the  Bank  managed  the  daily  liquidity  requirement  in  the  money  market  in  a 
range  roughly  between  R10  billion  and  R15  billion.  The  Bank  also  broadened  the  list  of 
securities that qualify as eligible collateral in its refinancing operations. With effect from 23 
May  2007,  two  categories  of  collateral  are  now  accepted.  Category  1  securities  comprise 
Government bonds, Land Bank bills, STRIPS, SARB debentures and Treasury bills. The new 
Category 2 securities comprise all non-bank, non-government securities that are included in 
the  All  Bond  Index  of  the  Bond  Exchange  of  South  Africa.  Borrowers  using  this  category 
have to provide more collateral. 
In co-operation with various market participants the Bank addressed shortcomings that had 
been identified in the South African Overnight Interbank Average (Saonia) rate. The Saonia 
rate  was  replaced  by  the  South  African  Benchmark  Overnight  Rate  on  deposits  (Sabor), 
which is a more representative and reliable pricing benchmark than its predecessor. 
Reserves accumulation and management 
The  Bank  has  continued  to  increase  its  level  of  official  reserves.  Gross  gold  and  foreign 
exchange reserves increased from US$23 billion at the end of March 2006 to US$29,8 billion 
at the end of August 2007. The international liquidity position, which was positively affected 
by the prepayment by the Bank of the US$1 billion syndicated loan that was raised in 2004, 
increased  from  US$19,5  billion  to  US$27,4  billion  over  the  same  period.  The  prepayment 
resulted in some cost savings for the Bank, and conveyed a positive signal to counterparties 
of the Bank and the market. With the recent buy-back of foreign currency-denominated debt 
by the National Treasury, the prepayment also contributed to the effort to reduce the external 
vulnerability of the country. 
A key focus area remained the refinement of the reserves management capabilities of the 
Bank. In this regard, the Bank worked closely with the World Bank under the auspices of the 
latter’s  Reserves  Asset  Management  Programme  for  central  banks.  Capacity  building  is 
central  to  these  efforts,  and  the  Bank  continued  to  invest  in  training  and  systems  for  staff 
involved in the areas of reserves and risk management. In addition, the investment policy of 
the Bank was reviewed and the governance structure was enhanced by the establishment of 
a Reserves Management Committee. 
The Bank and the National Treasury further strengthened their co-operation in the areas of 
reserves accumulation and liquidity management. The National Treasury assisted in draining 
a large portion of the liquidity created by the foreign-exchange purchases of the Bank. At the 
end of July 2007, the special deposit account of the National Treasury with the Bank, which 
was created for this purpose, totalled R54,5 billion including accrued interest. Agreement has 
been reached on the settlement of outstanding balances on the Gold and Foreign Exchange 
Contingency Reserve Account (GFECRA). The Bank and the National Treasury have agreed 
that, in future, only realised profit or loss positions that have an influence on money-market 
liquidity would be settled on a regular basis. This arrangement should reduce the amount of 
funds  flowing  between  the  Bank  and  the  National  Treasury  and  moderate  the  impact  on 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 3
money-market  liquidity.  Under  this  new  arrangement,  the  Bank  transferred  an  amount  of 
R319,3  million  (including  interest)  to  the  National  Treasury  for  settling  the  outstanding 
GFECRA balance as at 31 March 2006. 
Currency distribution 
Efforts  are  continuing  to  combat  the  counterfeiting  of  banknotes  and  to  ensure  that  only 
banknotes  and  coin  of  acceptable  quality  are  in  circulation.  Minimum  standards  for  the 
reissue of banknotes have been prescribed. 
In collaboration with the commercial banks the primary phase of the implementation of the 
Integrated Cash Management System has been completed. This system has the potential to 
improve  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  National  Cash  Management  System  in  the 
cash value chain, thereby reducing the cost of cash to the public. 
The  developmental  phase  of  the  interactive  Cash  Risk  Identification  and  Mitigation 
programme developed by the Bank and the South African Banking Risk Information Centre 
with  the  participation  of  the  commercial  banks,  the  cash-in-transit  industry  and  the  South 
African Police Service has been completed. This programme defines the minimum security 
standards for the cash management industry to reduce incidents of cash-in-transit heists and 
banking crimes, and is now being consulted on with unions and employee representatives. 
The minimum standards will also be promulgated into regulations by the Minister of Safety 
and Security. 
The national payment system 
The  value  of  total  settlement  in  the  South  African  Multiple  Option  Settlement  (SAMOS) 
system  amounted  to  an  all-time  high  of  R5,6  trillion  in  July  2007,  which  is  approximately 
R280  billion  per  day.  This  settlement  figure  also  includes  transactions  stemming  from  the 
equity and bond markets. In 2006 and 2007, approximately 90 per cent of settlement through 
the SAMOS system was effected on a real-time basis during the day. The remainder, which 
emanated from the retail environment, was settled in the evening. 
Directives  for  conduct  in  the  payment  system  for  system  operators  and  third-party  service 
providers will become effective during 2007. In May 2007 the Bank also commenced with the 
detailed oversight of non-bank participants in the national payment system. Specific focus is 
being placed on the operational soundness of payment clearing house operators. 
Following the promulgation of the National Credit Act, 2007, amendments were made to the 
National  Payment  System  Act,  1998.  These  amendments  outlawed  any  non-statutory 
preferential treatment of a payment instruction in any given payment system and paved the 
way  for  the  implementation  of  a  specific  payment  stream  to  process  payment  instructions 
randomly. 
Financial stability 
In  support  of  its  objective  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability,  the  Bank  also  seeks  to 
identify  inherent  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system  and  monitor  risks  that  may  result  in 
financial  system  disturbances.  On  the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  various  financial  soundness 
indicators the financial system was appraised as sound. 
The  Bank  also  assessed  the  financial  regulatory  system  in  South  Africa  to  be  inherently 
robust in terms of the twelve key financial soundness standards identified by the Financial 
Stability  Forum  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS).  Some  financial  regulatory 
challenges remain. These include the implications of the recently introduced National Credit 
Act, the possible introduction of an explicit deposit insurance scheme, the review of South 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2007
Africa’s membership of the Financial Action Task Force, initiatives to bring the hedge fund 
industry  within  the  scope  of  current  regulation,  and  the  implementation  of  a  new  capital 
framework (Basel II) for banks on 1 January 2008. 
In co-operation with other stakeholders in financial stability, the Bank furthered its efforts to 
prepare  and  maintain  suitable  contingency  plans  and  crisis  management  strategies  to 
respond  to  systemic  distress.  In  the  year  under  review,  a  programme  of  financial  sector 
continuity testing was initiated to help hone the responses of financial sector authorities to 
systemic threats. The Bank also participated in the Coordinated Compilation Exercise of the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  aimed  at  developing  capacities  of  countries  to  compile 
financial soundness indicators for the surveillance of financial systems. 
Banking regulation and supervision 
The Bank has the responsibility to ensure that the domestic banking regulatory environment 
stays abreast of international best practice. A key focus area remains the preparation for the 
implementation  of  Basel  II.  The  implementation  programme  aims  to  effect  the  requisite 
amendments to the legal framework and ensures the successful implementation of Basel II 
on 1 January 2008. 
The migration to Basel II has necessitated intensified interaction with the banks. Interaction 
has included on-site visits by staff of the Bank, requests for and the processing of specific 
information  to  assess  the  impact  of  Basel  II  on  the  capital  adequacy  of  banks,  as  well  as 
readiness assessment meetings with banks. 
In accordance with the latest industry requirements and market developments, and with the 
prescriptions of Basel II in mind, a finalised draft Banks Amendment Bill was approved by the 
Standing  Committee  for  the  Revision  of  the  Banks  Act  in  November  2006.  Parliamentary 
hearings on the draft Bill were held in mid-June 2007. The Bill is expected to be promulgated 
later this year, with implementation effective from 1 January 2008. The Regulations relating 
to banks (the Regulations) have been reviewed in totality to comply with the prescriptions of 
Basel  II  and  to  provide  banks  in  South  Africa  with  all  the  options  and  approaches  offered 
under Basel II. 
A  compliance  assessment  with  the  revised  25  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking 
Supervision  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  was  completed  in  October 
2006.  Based  on  this  assessment,  a  gap  analysis  was  completed  and  supervisors  are 
implementing  plans  to  improve  the  supervisory  process  with  immediate  effect  where 
possible.  Where  necessary,  amendments  will  be  made  to  the  Banks  Act,  1990,  and 
Regulations to ensure effective supervision. 
During the review period the level of compliance of the banking industry with the application 
of  anti-money  laundering  and  the  combating  of  terrorist-financing  legislation  remained  a 
focus area. About 40 suspect business or investment schemes, which gave the impression of 
being engaged in banking activity, are under investigation. 
International co-operation 
South Africa assumed the chair of the G-20 for 2007 and the Bank and the National Treasury 
have  been  jointly  co-ordinating  activities.  The  G-20  comprises  systemically  important 
developed and emerging-market economies. Two G-20 Deputies meetings, one in Pretoria 
and the other in Durban, and two African Policy Seminars, which were held on the fringes of 
the G-20 Deputies meetings, were hosted. 
Our term as host will culminate in the G-20 Summit of Finance Ministers and Central Bank 
Governors,  which  will  be  held  in  the  Western  Cape  on  17  and  18  November  2007.  Policy 
topics that will be considered include the reform of the Bretton Woods Institutions, commodity 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 5
cycles and financial stability, and fiscal elements of growth and development. These topics 
were also the focus of G-20 seminars hosted in Brazil, the United States and Turkey earlier 
this year. 
The  international  relations  of  the  Bank  remain  focused  on  strengthening  co-operation  with 
central banks and multilateral organisations. Special attention has been given to the African 
continent  and  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC)  region  in  particular, 
where  efforts  are  geared  towards  the  achievement  of  regional  integration.  The  Bank 
continues  to  take  a  strong  leadership  role  in  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors 
(CCBG) in SADC. 
In  its  role  as  leader  of  the  SADC  Payment  System  Project  and  under  the  auspices  of  the 
CCBG,  the  Bank  has  continued  to  facilitate  the  modernisation  and  harmonisation  of  the 
SADC regional payment, clearing and settlement systems. To date, the project has focused 
on  the  implementation  of  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  systems,  automated  clearing  and 
payment  system  oversight.  Significant  progress  has  been  achieved  in  this  regard  and  the 
current  focus  of  the  project  is  on  areas  such  as  remittances,  retail  payment  system  risk 
reduction,  the  securities  settlement  project  and  capacity  building  for  payment  system 
oversight. Further assistance will be provided to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 
Madagascar in terms of the planning of their payment system development. 
The Bank continues to be an active participant in the activities of the BIS. The participation of 
the Bank in and its contribution to the Foreign Exchange Settlement Risk Subgroup of the 
BIS Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems ensured that the Bank keeps abreast of 
international developments in this area and promotes best practice. 
Closer bilateral relations with other central banks have resulted in the signing of Memoranda 
of Understanding with the central banks of China and Peru in the past year. In addition, the 
Bank  has  received  numerous  visits  from  other  central  banks  which  have  allowed  for  more 
exchange of information. 
The  Bank  has  maintained  close  relations  with  multilateral  organisations.  Our  collaboration 
with  the  IMF  and  the World  Bank  has  resulted  in  a  number  of  joint seminars  and  courses 
being presented by the South African Reserve Bank College (College) in 2007. These are 
open to participants from central banks and finance ministries from the African continent. 
Internal administration 
The Annual Report of the Bank was distributed to shareholders before this meeting. The total 
balance sheet of the Bank shows an increase from R168 billion at the end of March 2006 to 
R220  billion  at  the  end  of  March  2007.  The  increase  was  mainly  the  result  of  the 
accumulation of official gold and foreign-exchange reserves and was financed in the main by 
an increase in government deposits, an increase in currency in circulation and the effect of 
valuation adjustments to the net reserves as a result of exchange rate movements. These 
adjustments are reflected in the increase in the GFECRA. 
The profit before taxation of the Bank increased from R1 038 million for the previous financial 
year to R2 907 million for the financial year ending 31 March 2007. Budgeted expenditure of 
the  Bank  for  the  current  financial  year  amounts  to  R1  879  million,  compared  to  actual 
expenditure  of  R1  658  million  in  the  financial  year  to  31  March  2007.  This  represents  an 
increase  of  13,3  per  cent  in  budgeted  expenditure  compared  to  actual  expenditure  for  the 
previous financial year. This increase is largely a result of the increased volume and cost of 
producing new currency. 
The  four  subsidiary  companies  of  the  Bank  achieved  their  objectives  during  the  financial 
year. After a review of reports by their Boards of Directors and internal and external auditors, 
the Bank is satisfied that these companies are managed in accordance with their objectives 
and  best  corporate  governance  practice.  The  results  of  the  subsidiaries  are  reported  on  a 
6 
 BIS Review 103/2007
inner-city  development 
consolidated basis with those of the Bank in the financial statements. The Bank continued to 
operate  an  over-the-counter  market  for  the  trading  of  its  shares.  During  the  financial  year 
ending  31  March  2007,  24  transactions  in  respect  of  94  700  shares  of  the  Bank  were 
concluded at an average price of R1,60 per share. On 31 March 2007, the Bank had 612 
registered shareholders and by 31 August this number had increased to 630. 
The  Bank  views  risk  management  as  an  essential  element  of  good  corporate  governance 
and  has  therefore  established  a  Risk  Management  Committee  (RMC)  to  oversee  the  risk 
management process in the Bank. The RMC is chaired by a Deputy Governor and the four 
executive general managers of the Bank also serve as members. 
Business  continuity  planning  for  the  Bank  has  been  completed  and  extensive  adequacy 
testing  is  currently  being  conducted.  A  consolidated  information  and  communication 
technology disaster recovery facility was established to enable the successful recovery and 
continuation of critical business processes in the event of a disaster or serious disruption at 
the Head Office building. 
The sourcing of an enterprise resource planning solution for the Bank was approved and a 
suitable  solution  selected.  This  system  will  replace  many  of  the  old  and  ageing  central 
services  software  systems  in  the  Bank  and  also  integrate  data  from  disparate  information 
systems into one unified system. 
The  Bank  continues  to  maintain  and  improve  existing  buildings  and  additions  not  only  to 
enhance the value of its properties, but also to preserve the cultural heritage of the country 
and  support  country-wide 
initiatives  where  possible.  Major 
renovations  and  refurbishment  are  being  undertaken  at  Head  Office  and  the  branches  in 
Pretoria  North,  Johannesburg  and  Cape  Town.  A  new  branch  is  being  planned  for 
Bloemfontein and plans are under way to renovate the branches in East London and Port 
Elizabeth, while preserving the historical character of these buildings. 
Corporate art collections play a critical role in nurturing artistic talent. In the more  than 53 
years that the Bank’s art collection has existed, it has supported a wide range of emerging 
and  established  artists.  A  book  depicting  a  selection  of  the  more  than  600  works  of  art, 
dispersed throughout Head Office, the seven branches and the College was published earlier 
this  month  and  it  is  believed  that  this  book  will  make  a  valuable  contribution  to  the 
appreciation of art. 
The  Bank  continues  to  pay  close  attention  to  its  human  resources.  The  staff  complement 
decreased to 1 934 at the end of March 2007, compared to 1 956 a year earlier. The overall 
staff turnover for the period was 6,8 per cent. The profile of new appointees was 84 per cent 
black, with 77 per cent of the management appointees black, and 45 per cent female. The 
profile of new appointees since 1 April 2007 until the end of July 2007 is 88 per cent black 
and 40 per cent female, with 80 per cent of the management appointees black, and 60 per 
cent female. 
The  modernisation  process  pertaining  to  the  revised Staff  Policies  was  concluded  and  the 
policies  implemented.  The  outstanding  policies  pertaining  to  outside  occupations  and 
directorships, as well as to ethics are being consulted with staff. 
An  emphasis  on  wellness  management  continues,  with  the  focus  on  physical  and  mental 
health.  Disability  management  and  HIV  and  Aids  prevention  continue  to  receive  attention. 
Other measures taken include the provision of medical and psychological wellness services. 
The Bank continues to place an emphasis on developing its staff. In addition to students who 
have recently completed their degrees, the Cadet Graduate Programme will be expanded to 
also cater for staff members of the Bank. This will double the number of cadets to twenty in 
2008.  In  an  effort  to  guarantee  future  accreditation  for  its  learnerships,  the  College  has 
completed a process to ensure that all its learning programmes adhere to the principles of 
outcomes-based education. 
BIS Review 103/2007 
 7
To  stimulate  research  in  the  Bank,  a  research  fellows  programme  has  been  introduced  in 
terms  of  which  senior  researchers  from  other  central  banks  and  academia  are  invited  to 
spend time at the Bank and engage in collaborative research. Three research fellows, two of 
whom  are  from  abroad,  have  already  spent  time  at  the  Bank  in  2007,  and  a  fourth  is 
expected later in the year. Applications have been invited for the 2008 programme. 
To  contribute  further  to  the  economic  research  effort  in  the  country,  a  conference  on 
macroeconomic policy challenges for South Africa was organised by the College in 2006. It 
included papers presented by leading academics from local and international universities, as 
well as other local economists. 
that 
further  challenges  and  uncertainties 
Conclusion 
From a monetary policy perspective this past year has been particularly challenging for the 
Bank.  The  international  environment  has  been  uncertain,  and  the  recent  turmoil  in 
international  markets  means 
lie  ahead. 
Nevertheless, the Bank will continue to focus on achieving its mandate and will strive to bring 
inflation to within the target range. Low and stable inflation remains the best contribution the 
Bank can make to economic growth and development in South Africa. 
The Bank will continue to make a contribution to financial stability in the country. Apart from 
oversight and regulation of the national payment system, future challenges are likely to come 
from the introduction of Basel II at the beginning of next year, the possible implications of the 
National Credit Act, and the impact of higher interest rates on a highly indebted population. 
We will not lose sight of the need to give attention to the internal management of the Bank. 
The Bank remains committed to the training and development of staff in the broader context 
of its Employment Equity Plan. 
Acknowledgements 
I want to thank the Presidency, the Government and Parliament for their continued support. 
Through  the  system  of  bilateral  committees,  the  Bank  has  maintained  a  good  working 
relationship with the National Treasury. I wish to thank the Minister and Deputy Minister of 
Finance,  and  the  Director-General  of  the  National  Treasury  and  his  staff  for  their  ongoing 
support and co-operation. 
I also wish to express my thanks to the members of the Board for their commitment to the 
Bank.  Their  efforts  are  important  in  ensuring  effective  corporate  governance  and  strategic 
direction  for  the  Bank.  Last  but  by  no  means  least,  I  wish  to  thank  the  deputy  governors, 
management  and  staff  of  the  Bank  for  their  support  and  contributions  to  the  successful 
running  of  the  Bank.  An  organisation  such  as  ours  is  only  as  good  as  the  quality  and 
commitment of its personnel. We are indeed fortunate to be able to attract an excellent group 
of employees. 
8 
 BIS Review 103/2007
