Franz-Christoph Zeitler: Global competition – what makes Europe competitive?  
Panel contribution by Professor Franz-Christoph Zeitler, Vice-President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the Conference dedicated to the 15th anniversary of the re-introduction of the Estonian kroon, at the 
Bank of Estonia, Tallinn, 23 May 2007.  
 Introduction 
1  
The previous speakers have already (and rightly) highlighted Europe’s ongoing need for structural 
reforms.  In  order  to  fully  use  the  benefits  of  globalisation,  it  seems  obvious  to  me  to  increase  the 
flexibility of our labour and product markets.  
However, I would like to focus on a slightly different issue today:  
• 
• 
I  shall  start  with  an  overview  of  the  entire  euro-area  and  then  move  on  to  consider  the  case  of 
Germany.  
To what extent has monetary union enhanced economic performance  
and thereby helped to improve the competitiveness of its member states? 
The international role of the Euro  
2  
Despite being considered as a bold experiment by some sceptics, European monetary union (EMU) 
has lived up to our expectations.  
In particular, the Euro has gained the same level of monetary stability and confidence as the most 
stable of its prerunner currencies: The average inflation from 1999 to 2006 in the euro-area was 2.05 
%, only slightly above our definition of price stability. This is below the long-run average inflation rate 
of the Deutsche Mark, which was 2.8 %, although this higher figure is partly owed to the more difficult 
international environment for example in the 1970s.  
Moreover  and  in  addition  to  price  stability,  the  Euro  plays  an  important  role  as  an  international 
currency and in the international trade. Today, it’s second only to the USD.  
Firstly, the share of the Euro in official foreign exchange reserves has increased from 18% in 1999 
to almost 26% in 2006.  
Even  if  one  has  to  take  into  account  the  exchange  rate  developments  and  the  build-up  of  foreign 
reserves of the Asian countries in that time span, the rising share of the Euro as an reserve currency 
mirrors a high degree of third party confidence in the currency union.  
Secondly, as for international debt securities, the stock of international debt securities in Euro rose 
from 19% in 1999 to 32% in 2006.  
This developments reflect the growing depth and liquidity of euro-area financial markets – a feature 
that  has  been  heavily  promoted  by  the  common  currency  acting  as  a  catalyst  for  the  EU’s  single 
market programme.  
As financial markets and economic development are closely linked, broadening demand of Euro spills 
over to international trade of goods, too. In most EMU countries, more than 50% of extra-euro-area 
exports of goods are invoiced in Euro. In Germany, the ratio is even higher than 60%.  
Trade effects of the Euro  
3  
The crucial question beyond this abstract figures is: “Does the Euro really helps to foster economic 
prosperity and growth?” Or does the opposite holds true as some politicians sometimes use the Euro 
and its exchange rate as a lightning rod? Let me mention two channels to back my hypothesis that the 
Euro  supports  economic  prosperity:  Firstly,  trade  within  the  EUM  and  secondly  beyond  the  EMU-
borders.  
BIS Review 56/2007 
 1
First channel: Adopting the Euro reinforces the positive impetus of the EU’s common market. The 
introduction of the common currency has eliminated currency risk within the euro area. Moreover, it 
has reduced trade costs and improved price transparency for its member states.  
Before  turning  to  an  empiric  prove,  one  caveat:  The  impact  of  the  single  currency  should  not  be 
reduced  to  one  single  date,  e.g.  1999.  In  fact,  one  has  to  take  into  account  the  whole  process  of 
convergence during the 1990s in the run-up to the monetary union.  
Empirical literature states that the Euro has probably boosted intra-eurozone trade by around 5 to 
15% so far.1 And indeed, German exports of goods within the euro area grew from 12% of GDP in 
1988 to 16.5% in 2006, with an interim downswing to 8.5 % in 1993 which was mainly caused by the 
German re-unification. So it is safe to say that the Euro has played its part in the increase of intra-
EMU-trade.  
Second  channel:  Trade  between  EMU-members  and  other  countries.  The  growing  international 
importance of the Euro spills over to extra-EMU-trade, too. The high and world-wide confidence in the 
monetary union supports the international trade of firms which are located in its member countries. To 
support the argument I would like to remind you of the 50 % figure of extra-euro-area exports invoiced 
in Euro.  
This  enumeration,  incomplete  as  it  may  be,  clearly  shows  that  the  adoption  of  the  Euro  has  had  a 
positive impact on the EMU’s macroeconomic performance.  
Competitive advantages of the German economy  
4  
Let  me  now  turn  to  my  last  point:  EMU  membership  comprises  handing  over  monetary  policy 
(including  nominal  exchange  rate  adjustment)  to  the  Eurosystem.  Does  this  impede  as  sometimes, 
mainly during election campaigns argued, a country’s ability to adjust to asymmetric shocks?  
The case of Germany helps to answer this question.  
In  the  past  years  Germany  has  made  it  from  the  bottom  of  the  euro  area  growth  table  to  a  good 
positioning in the EMU growth chart. Why is this?  
The  growth  gap  during  much  of  that  time  was  notably.  Average  growth  in  the  years  2001  to  2005 
added up to only 0.6 % p.a., which is clearly below Germanys potential growth rate of 1 ½ % p.a..  
This slow growth and the unsatisfactory placement in the European growth chart was partly the result 
of  other  economies  catching  up  economically  and  of  the  stimuli  generated  by  interest  rate 
convergence in some member states during the run-up to EMU. Domestic problems caused the main 
part of the subdued growth, however. Among other things the very quick catching-up of wages in the 
eastern  part  of  Germany  and  structural  weaknesses  in  the  labour  market  led  to  a  weak  domestic 
demand and economic performance.  
It was only gradually that the German economy emerged from this difficult situation.  
Firstly, the adjustment was supported by the fact that price dynamics in Germany have been more 
moderate than in most other EMU countries.  
On average the German HICP was 1 %-point lower than the average HICP of the other member states 
of the monetary union. This led to a cumulated price advantage of 8.5 % since 1999.  
Measured in terms of unit labour costs, German industry gained an advantage of 15 % since 1999.  
At this point one sidestep: It’s sometimes argued that higher inflation rates support growth because 
lower real interest rates foster investment activities. This is wrong for two reasons: Firstly, if calculating 
real  interest  rates,  one  has  to  consider  inflation  expectations  which  are  not  considerably  lower  in 
Germany  than  in  other  countries  of  the  monetary  union.  Secondly,  and  this  is  a  much  stronger 
argument, the case of Germany shows that modest price dynamics support competitiveness within a 
monetary union and therefore foster sustainable growth.  
                                                      
1   OECD, economic survey, euro area, 2007, p. 31. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2007
Secondly, beyond or parallel to the stability performance deep and sometimes painful restructuring 
effort  of  the  industry  was  necessary  during  the  process  of  catching  up.  This  include  modest  wage 
developments and strong cost saving and restructuring efforts in the last ten years.  
Thirdly,  the  legislator  launched  overdue  structural  reforms.  Among  other  things  the  system  of 
unemployment benefits as well as the pension scheme was reformed. Furthermore, from 2008 on a 
revised enterprise taxation will be valid.  
I don’t want to keep secret, that there is still some way to go, however. Just to mention one or two 
examples: Some 25 % of the new jobs in Germany are temporary, whereas only 4 % of the labour 
force stock is temp-work. This shows the need for further amendments of the labour market flexibility. 
Another example is the German deficit. From my point of view we are right now in a good position to 
go for a balanced budget and we are still a good way off.  
Concluding remarks  
5  
Let me conclude: A monetary union does not automatically lead to a high decree of competitiveness 
and good economic performance, but the remove of the “veil of exchange rate” puts the finger on the 
root of the matter, i.e. the structural weaknesses of a country.  
Taking all this together, Germany is a classic example of how market-related adjustments can work 
and be effective under the rules of a monetary union.  
BIS Review 56/2007 
 3
