Ewart S Williams: National Financial Literacy Programme in Trinidad and 
Tobago  
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the Launch 
of the National Financial Literacy Programme, Port-of-Spain, 31 January 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, let me first thank you for accepting our invitation to participate in the launch of 
the  National  Financial  Literacy  Programme.  We  at  the  Central  Bank  are  very  excited  about  this 
programme,  and  we  hope  that  we  could  pass  on  this  excitement  to  all  of  you  whom  we  have 
specifically invited to be our partners and stakeholders in this important national initiative. 
Minister  Enill  has  made  a  compelling  case  for  the  introduction  of  a  national  financial  literacy 
programme  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  Such  a  programme  is  certainly  needed  at  this  time  when  our 
economy is doing very well, with prospects for continued strong economic growth and improvements 
in nominal incomes. Just as we have recently opted, at a macroeconomic level, to forego some current 
consumption to provide savings for future generations, through the Stabilization and Heritage Fund, in 
similar fashion our current situation demands a quantum change in personal economic behaviour, to 
ensure that current income gains are to have a sustainable impact on personal welfare. 
As  Minister  Enill  indicated,  national  financial  literacy  programmes  have  assumed  increasing 
significance in most developed countries and in many emerging market economies. Our programme is 
a  pioneering  initiative  for  the  Caribbean  region  and  it  is  fitting  that  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  as  the 
economic power of the region, should lead the way in developing the financial capability of its citizens. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  outline,  in  some  detail,  the  design  of  the  National  Financial 
Literacy Programme that has evolved after intense collaboration with a small group of stakeholders 
that  make  up  what’s  now  called  the  Programme  Management  Committee.  This  group,  which  was 
assembled  shortly  after  the  Bank  was  invited  by  the  Finance  Minister  to  initiate  the  programme, 
comprises  representatives  of  the  Ministries  of  Education,  Legal  Affairs  (Consumer  Affairs  Division), 
and  Community  Development  and  Culture,  representatives  of  the  Bankers’  Association  and  the 
insurance industry, of the trade union movement, of the NGO community and of the Tobago House of 
Assembly. 
This committee is being supported by a Central Bank Secretariat, headed by Mrs. Jennifer Greaves, 
one  of  our  senior  managers,  with  Mr.  Clarry  Benn,  former  Executive  Director  of  the  Unit  Trust 
Corporation,  as  Program  Consultant.  Let  me  publicly  thank  the  members  of  the  Management 
Committee for their enthusiastic support and the solid work to get this programme off the ground. 
A convenient starting point for my presentation is to first clarify what we mean by “financial literacy”. In 
the conventional definition, “financial literacy” is seen as “the ability to make informed judgments and 
to take effective decisions regarding the use and management of money”. Persons that are financially 
literate should have the capability to make personal budgets, balance current spending and saving for 
the future; manage credit and debt; assess the needs for insurance and protection, and evaluate risks 
and return involved in different savings and investment options. 
As  such,  financial  literacy  is  a  fundamental  tool  for  all  of  us,  in  our  diverse  capacities  as  students, 
employees, consumers, savers, investors; in short, it is a tool for all responsible citizens. 
Why the Central Bank 
You may ask, why should the Central Bank be so concerned with financial literacy? Well, the answer 
is  that  in  addition  to  monetary  policy,  regulation  of  the  financial  system,  and  management  of  the 
country’s external reserves, the Central Bank’s mandate includes promoting public understanding of 
the financial system and ensuring that customers get a fair deal. This is the justification for the Bank’s 
creation of a Financial Services Ombudsman; it is also a most important reason for our involvement in 
the delivery of financial education. But there are other factors that justify the Bank’s involvement in the 
programme: 
• 
we are in an ideal position to spearhead this initiative because, for the Bank, the confusion 
between information and advertising does not arise. 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 1
 we have the credibility to provide unbiased and impartial information; and 
with our overview of the monetary system, we are in the best position to see the gaps and 
problems in the market. 
Financial literacy can also facilitate the efficient operation of the market economy in general and of 
monetary  policy,  in  particular.  For  example,  knowledgeable  consumers  promote  competition  among 
financial and non-financial firms which benefits the economy as a whole. Experience also shows that 
astute consumers are less vulnerable to fraud and abuse than the financially uneducated. 
What’s the programme strategy 
First, let me tell you what the programme is not. It is not a programme of Central Bank lectures or of a 
series  of  advertisements  in  the  media.  While  Central  Bank  staff  will  deliver  lectures  in  certain 
circumstances,  given  our  expanded  responsibilities,  we  don’t  have  the  capacity  to  conduct  such  a 
programme by ourselves. Also, while the programme will make use of the media, this will be only one 
aspect and not the most important at that. 
The model is for the Central Bank to manage and coordinate a programme whose essential elements 
are: 
• 
one, providing training to teachers, volunteers, peers and colleagues who would in turn pass 
on the knowledge in schools, in the workplace and in community-based organizations; and 
two, making use of existing financial service providers to deliver generic financial education 
to an expanded group of recipients. 
 The Central Bank will be responsible for the preparation and standardization of the education material, 
for training of volunteers and for the overall management of the programme, including the mobilization 
of financial and other resources. 
Priority groups 
The Bank has identified five priority groups to be targeted for financial education. These groups are: 
1. 
Primary and secondary school students – this is an obvious priority category based on 
the well-accepted notion that financial education should begin in schools where kids should 
be taught the essentials about managing money and good financial habits from an early age. 
The second priority group comprises young adults who are about to or have just entered 
the  workplace.  This  group  faces  particular  challenges,  as  they  are  targets  for  concerted 
advertising, for credit cards, loans, and insurance. In addition, they find themselves facing 
new financial obligations and most times, they are ill-equipped to make informed decisions. 
The plan is to locate these young people where they are – in tertiary institutions, in training 
programmes,  in  youth  organizations  or  wherever  they  could  be  found  in  groups.  Among 
young people, attitudes towards savings and debt have changed dramatically and too many 
seem to live in a world whose motto is “live for today and pay for it later”. 
A third group defined as priority are employees in the workplace, particularly those over 40 
who  do  not  have  ready  access  to  professional  advice.  For  this group,  the  programme  will 
focus  on  the  need  to  accumulate  adequate  savings  for  retirement,  which,  on  the  basis  of 
available information, is a major problem in Trinidad and Tobago. 
The  program  will  also  identify  community  groups  which  could  serve  as  avenues  for 
reaching large numbers of lower-income and under-privileged households and individuals at 
risk of financial exclusion. The plan would be to work closely with the NGO community as 
well as with the Ministry of Community Development and Gender Affairs to identify and focus 
on specific groups. 
We have decided to include as a priority category new and prospective homeowners in 
government  housing  programmes.  These  beneficiaries  of  government  housing  are 
low-to-middle income households, many of whom are facing, for the first time, the need to 
include mortgage payments in an already tight budget equation. The proposal would be to 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2007
collaborate with institutions such as the Housing Development Corporation, Home Mortgage 
Bank and Trinidad and Tobago Mortgage Finance to reach these citizens. 
Tobago has been identified as a special category. The Tobago House of Assembly (THA) was already 
in the process of implementing a similar programme entitled the Financial Outreach Programme. This 
Programme  will  now  be  integrated  with  the  National  Financial  Literacy  Programme  with  additional 
emphasis on small business development. 
This is obviously a tall order and, as a practical matter, the intention is to start off with a number of pilot 
projects, and to gradually expand over time. In the case of the schools, for instance, many countries 
have moved to make financial education part of the school curriculum. Pending such a development, 
the Bank is offering to work with the Ministry of Education to select schools for a pilot project and to 
provide  financial  education  training  for  teachers.  Similarly,  we  would  want  to  work  with  other 
stakeholders to plan the implementation of the programme over the short- and longer-term. I will return 
to this issue later. 
Scope of the education programme 
It is important to stress, ladies and gentlemen, that the financial literacy programme is not designed to 
make  people  financial  experts.  Rather,  the  aim  is  to  empower  individuals  with  sufficient  skills  and 
knowledge to make financial decisions and allow them to be more in control of their circumstances. In 
the  same  vein,  providers  of  financial  literacy  need  not  be  financial  experts.  Carefully  chosen 
volunteers, with the appropriate training, can foot the bill in most circumstances. 
Examples elsewhere have shown that financial literacy programmes tend to be more effective when 
the  information  is  presented  in a straight-forward  non-technical style,  and  by  trusted  intermediaries. 
For this reason, the programme will emphasize the use of volunteers and lean heavily on community-
based organizations for disseminating information that can assist lower-income families in exploiting 
financial opportunities. 
I should note that we will also seek to provide generic information through wider pathways such as the 
National Financial Literacy website, which will also be launched today, through the media and through 
brochures and pamphlets. 
Stakeholder support 
Ladies and gentlemen, given the model that I have outlined, it goes without saying that the success of 
the  financial  literacy  programme  will  depend  importantly  on  the  establishment  of  broad-based 
partnerships with a wide cross-section of the community – the Government, the financial community, 
the  corporate  sector,  the  NGO  community,  the  trade  unions,  the  credit  union  movement  and  other 
sectors. The obvious rationale for these partnerships is the fact that improving financial literacy is a 
win-win proposition that will benefit individual citizens as well as the economy and country as a whole. 
The main beneficiaries of any financial literacy programme would be the citizens who stand to gain 
better  control  of  their  financial  circumstances,  and  this  can  mean  more  financial  independence  and 
enhanced well-being. But there are economy-wide spill-offs. 
For instance: 
• 
employees who are not pre-occupied with pressing day-to-day financial problems are more 
likely to operate at higher levels of productivity which certainly benefit their employers; 
better  informed  consumers  of  financial  services  could  foster  competition  among  financial 
firms, contributing to improvements in service quality and cost; 
there is no doubt that improved financial literacy bestows significant benefits to the financial 
sector  as  it  facilitates  more  informed  choices  by  customers.  When  customers  understand 
what they are buying there is less room for complaints about being misled, and this is good 
for the credibility of the financial sector. 
  The files of the Financial Services Ombudsman are full of complaints from customers who clearly did 
not understand the insurance or banking product they had chosen. Financial education is all the more 
important  now  when,  technology  and  the  quest  for  efficiency  have  diminished  banker-customer 
interaction. 
BIS Review 12/2007 
 3
Research conducted in several OECD countries provide evidence, for example, that: 
• 
workers increase their participation in retirement savings schemes when employers provide 
tangible support to financial education programmes; 
mortgage counseling has been found to be very effective in reducing the risk of mortgage 
delinquency; 
young  adults  who  make  personal  budgets  and  plan  ahead  tend  to  manage  personal  debt 
better. 
  The  Central  Bank  is  hoping  to  partner  with  the  several  institutions  represented  here  today.  The 
partnership  could  involve  financial,  organizational  and  human  resource  (volunteer)  assistance.  We 
would like to suggest a few possible options: 
• 
Some non-financial corporations sponsor educational programmes in certain schools. Such 
firms could partner with the Bank to include financial literacy in the curriculum and could co-
finance with us the extension of the programme to a larger number of schools. 
Corporations  that  are  interested  in  youth  development  have  the  opportunity  of  sponsoring 
financial literacy programmes for groups that they would wish to assist. 
We invite tertiary institutions, such as COSTAAT, Cipriani College, UWI and UTT to partner 
with us in the delivery of financial education to their young and not-so-young students. We 
extend a similar invitation to the relevant authorities to include financial literacy as part of the 
various government-sponsored training programmes. 
We  would  welcome  a  partnership  with  those  lending  institutions  that  provide  mortgage 
financing  for  low-  and  middle-income  housing.  We  think  financial  education  will  help  the 
families manage their budgets and meet their mortgage commitments. 
   Obviously, a programme of the scope envisaged will require considerable funding. The Government 
and  the  Central  Bank  have  allocated  seed  capital  and  we  hope  to  supplement  these  resources 
through stakeholder contributions. 
But we are not only looking for financial support. We are hoping that the financial sector – the banks, 
the  insurance  companies  and  the  credit  unions  –  could  provide  volunteers  who  would  be  willing  to 
participate  in  the  programme  in  their  communities,  in  schools,  in  youth  groups,  and  in  any 
organizations who feel they can benefit from financial education. We think that it could be an excellent 
form of public service and of helping people to help themselves. 
I would like to extend an invitation to the NGOs to work with us to reach the many groups that can 
benefit from financial education so that they in turn can help themselves. And finally, we would like to 
search out opportunities to make financial education accessible, in partnership with the media, who, 
we hope, would also recognize this as an opportunity to contribute to public service. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is not difficult to judge that we in the Central Bank are very excited about this 
financial literacy project. But we are realistic. We recognize that financial literacy will need to overcome 
deep-seated poor financial habits, and in some cases, a stubborn resistance to change. Many people 
find  making  financial  decisions  daunting  and  confusing;  for  these  people,  even  thinking  about  their 
financial security is dispiriting and distressing, particularly if they are struggling to make ends meet. 
The challenge is to convince them that if they become more financially capable, they would be able to 
make their incomes go further and manage their commitments better. We also recognize that building 
financial capability is about long-term change and not about short-term adjustments. 
Clearly, for us to assess if progress is being made we need to know where we are. Accordingly, in the 
next few days we will begin a national survey to determine the current level of financial literacy and to 
better identify the most urgent needs. 
We hope that the launch of the National Financial Literacy Programme will be the start of a journey 
towards  improved  financial  capability  and  contribute  to  enhanced  financial  well-being  for  all  our 
citizens. The country needs this and we can achieve it if we all pitch in. The Central Bank hopes it 
could count on your support. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2007
