W A Wijewardena: Why worry about inflation?  
Speech by Mr W A Wijewardena, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, 25 May 2007. 
 Inflation, a continuous and steady rise in the general price level, is, by any standard, the public enemy 
number one. By the same token, hyper-inflation, an increase in the general price level to a very high 
level  within  a  very  short  period  of  time,  is  a  killer,  akin  to  a  mass  destruction  weapon.  Mr.  Gideon 
Gono,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Zimbabwe,  a  country  with  an  inflation  rate  of  more  than 
3700%,  equated  his  country’s  inflation  to  an  economic  HIV,  a  situation  where  people  would  die  en 
masse. This reference eloquently amplifies the gravity of the cost of inflation which a country has to 
bear. 
Why public enemy number one? 
From  the  point  of  view  of  economics,  there  are  usually  two  declared  public  enemies:  inflation  and 
unemployment.  Of  the  two,  inflation  ranks  higher.  This  is  because  inflation  hurts  everyone  alike: 
bankers, businessmen, workers, consumers and so forth. You cannot escape it unless you are smart 
enough to beat it by raising your income faster than inflation. In contrast, unemployment which is also 
a  serious  problem,  disadvantages  only  the  unemployed.  That  category  is  only  a  segment  of  the 
society. Hence, inflation is a bigger public enemy than the unemployment. When one compares it with 
other public enemies  like drug  abuse  or  terrorism,  one  would still  find  that  those  issues  would  also 
affect  only  a  segment  of  the  society  at  any  given  time.  Since  inflation  affects  everyone  and  people 
have limited prospects of escaping it, it is considered as the public enemy number one. 
Some amusing stories about inflation 
In the recent history, there have been many countries which have been hit by hyper inflation. Of them, 
the most prominent case has been the hyper-inflation in Germany after the First World War, where 
inflation  accelerated  to  1,000,000  %  per  annum.  Other  noteworthy  examples  are  Bolivia  (25000  % 
p.a.); Russia (2000 %); Israel (1500 %); Turkey (again 1500 %) and currently Zimbabwe (3700 % and 
still rising). 
When prices rise at these high rates, the first casualty would be the currency of the country. No one 
would like to accept the domestic currency, because its value would fall by the minute. Instead, people 
would start to accept other types of hard currencies like the US Dollar. If there is a shortage of those 
hard  currencies,  people  would  invent  their  own  currencies.  In  Germany,  with  that  hyper-inflation  in 
which prices rose by 2 % every minute, German Mark ceased to function as money. Instead, people 
started to use cigarettes, chocolate bars or empty bottles as the medium of exchange. 
Then, there is the story of those two brothers who inherited a sizeable wealth from their father. One 
being a reputed investor used his endowment to build a substantially large portfolio of investments. 
The other was a drunkard and used the entire amount for drinking. Thus, he ended up with a houseful 
of empty bottles. The story goes on saying that Germany was hit by hyper-inflation reducing the value 
of the entire investment of the son who adopted prudential policies to zero. But, the drunkard became 
a millionaire overnight, because his empty bottles now became money.  
A similar amusing story relating to Bolivian inflation in mid 1980s takes a different form. Since prices 
are  rising  at  such  a  high  rate,  it  became  necessary  to  negotiate  and  agree  on  a  price  before 
undertaking even a very simple transaction. The story says that before a person takes a haircut, he 
would agree a price with the barber. But, halfway through, the barber would stop cutting the hair and 
renegotiate the price. That was because by that time, hyper inflation has raised the prices to a still 
higher level. As a result, the original contract price no longer becomes valid. 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 1
Economic costs of inflation 
The  above  stories,  though  invented  to  amuse  people,  teach  us  some  very  valuable  lessons.  First, 
uncontrolled  inflations  erode  the  confidence  of  people  in  the  domestic  currency.  As  a  result, 
governments lose the control over money and fail to  use monetary policy to curb inflation. Second, 
people move away from long term contracts and would be concerned only about the passing moment. 
Salaries, earlier paid monthly would become payable first fortnightly, then weekly and daily and finally 
hourly. It would entail a tremendous cost on the employers to meet the demand for paying salaries 
every hour. Similarly, all other contracts would also be very short term contracts. People would not 
think of the future, but only on the passing moments. This type of short-term behavior on the part of 
people  would  cause  the  economy  concerned  to  collapse  on  itself  due  to  a  lack  of  long  term 
commitments. 
Inflation normally brings in several other irreparable damages to an economy. 
In the first place, inflation discourages exports, encourages imports and widens the gap between the 
imports and exports known as the trade gap causing problems for the balance of payments and the 
exchange  rate.  If  the  domestic  prices  are  higher,  there  is  no  reason  for  exporters  to  sell  a  product 
abroad. For instance, if inflation raises the price of a coconut to Rs 100 in the domestic market and its 
given  price  in  the  international  market is Rs  50, an exporter would  sell  the  product  in  the  domestic 
market to gain the price advantage. Similarly, imports are encouraged, because of the lower price in 
the international markets than the domestic market. This is equivalent to imposing a tax on exports 
and giving a subsidy to imports. 
Second, inflation favors borrowers and discourages savers, if interest rates are not adjusted to reflect 
the  going  inflation  rate.  This  is  because  when  such  adjustment  is  not  made,  though  the  amount  of 
money received by way of interest may be high, its actual real value is lesser and lesser than before. It 
is  tantamount  to  the  awkward  situation where savers  pay  interest in  real  terms  to  borrowers.  Thus, 
inflation contributes to enrich borrowers at the expense of savers. The high borrowings so encouraged 
would further fuel inflation. At the same time, the much needed savings flow would dry up retarding the 
long term development. 
Third,  arising  from  the  same  unadjusted  interest  rates,  inflation  discourages  financial  savings  and 
encourages  non-productive  types  of  investments  in  real  estate,  gold,  bullion  and  other  types  of 
precious metals. Bank deposits, stocks and shares are the main casualties, because their real value 
falls every year due to inflation. But, on the other hand, real estate and precious metals appreciate in 
value due to inflation. Hence, as an insulating measure against inflation, people would transfer their 
financial savings into such non-productive types of investments. But, for sustainable long term growth, 
the necessity is for savings in the form of financial savings and inflation would dry up that savings flow. 
Fourth,  inflation  distorts  the  resource  allocation  function  of  an  economy.  For  the  market  system  to 
allocate  resources  among  competing  uses,  a  price  expressed  in  terms  of  another  price  called  the 
relative  price,  should  change.  For  instance,  if  the  price  of  carrots  increases  relative  to  the  price  of 
cabbages,  carrots  would  become  more  profitable  than  cabbages.  Hence,  the  farmers  would 
concentrate  on  producing  more  of  carrots  and  less  of  cabbages.  But,  when  an  economy  is  hit  by 
inflation, all the prices would rise simultaneously, so both carrots and cabbages seem to be equally 
profitable. This would confuse the producers who would now be unable to make any choice between 
the two products. Hence, the much desired relative price change does not occur, when an economy 
has been hit by inflation. Instead, the absolute prices start to change and such changes do not provide 
the price signals for allocating resources.  
Fifth, continued inflation distorts the balance sheets of companies, especially the balance sheets of 
financial institutions. Companies may record profits in nominal terms, but a large part of such profits 
are eroded in real terms by inflation. When profits are adjusted for inflation, companies would find that 
their performance has not been so spectacular as has been depicted by the amount of rupees they 
have earned. In fact, their real position has pushed them backward to a lower level. 
Sixth,  inflation  very  forcefully  hits  the  vulnerable  groups  with  a  weaker  bargaining  power.  Such 
categories  include  housewives,  students,  pensioners  and  workers  whose  salaries  are  not  linked  to 
inflation. It would lead to continuous agitation by these groups creating social and political dissension. 
The country, instead of using its resources for investing in long term growth generating projects, would 
have to spend its energy and resources for solving such social issues. 
Thus, inflation is the unrivalled public enemy number one. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2007
Who should take the blame for inflation? 
It is ironical that practically everyone in the society should take blame for a continuously high inflation 
in an economy. This is because everyone, even in a very little measure, would have contributed to 
facilitate  inflation  to  raise  its  ugly  head.  It  happens  when  people  of  a  country  believe  that  they  can 
have a higher standard of living without working harder or producing more. 
Inflation in the long run is directly related to the amount of money which people would have for buying 
goods  and  services.  When  that  quantity  of  money  is  in  far  excess  of  the  quantity  of  goods  and 
services,  the  general  price  level  has  to  move  up  in  order  to  facilitate  the  required  volume  of 
transactions.  Hence,  the  magic  solution  for  keeping  inflation  in  check  has  been  the  production  of 
money exactly in line with the production of goods and services in the economy. Any violation of this 
golden rule, for whatever the justifiable reason, would pave the way for the long run inflation to peep 
into  the  system.  In  this  context,  the  Central  Bank  has  an  inalienable  responsibility  to  take  all  the 
measures necessary to curb long term inflation. 
The role of the Central Bank 
The Central Bank takes monetary policy measures to keep the total volume of money in line with the 
total  production  and  the  volume  of  transactions  in  the  economy.  Money  is  being  created  by  the 
banking system by using some sort of seed money called reserve money and produced by the Central 
Bank in its day to day operations. So all monetary policy measures adopted by the Central Bank take 
two different forms: at first, curtailing the production of its own reserve money and, then, checking the 
production of total money by banks.  
But, the monetary policy is expected to operate by forcing the entire economy to cut down its excess 
demand for goods and services. This objective would be attained by making money more scarce and 
raising  its  costs  to  a  higher  level.  Both  these  strategies  would  force  the  economy  to  make  a  very 
painful adjustment, by sacrificing the currently enjoying pleasures. This was eloquently described by a 
former  President  of  US  Federal  Reserve,  William  McChesney  Martin  Jr.,  as  withdrawing  the  punch 
bowl  when  the  dancing  gets  going  at  its  highest.  Naturally,  everyone  on  the  dance  floor  would  be 
disappointed  by  this  seemingly  cruel  act,  but  the  central  bank  does  it  for  a  good  cause,  just  like  a 
physician administering a bitter medicine to a dying patient to cure him. 
The role of the banks and the private sector 
So, the monetary policy measures taken by the Central Bank are all painful. It requires the economy to 
make  a  very  painful  adjustment,  but  that  adjustment  should  be  made  for  the  benefit  of  every  one. 
Those  who  are  subject  to  this  pain  should  have  a  good  understanding  of  the  virtues  of  this  painful 
adjustment and be prepared to take the bitter medicine for a permanent cure of the ailment. 
This casts a new responsibility on the banks, because monetary policy is implemented by the central 
bank through banks. In terms of this new responsibility, the banks should appreciate the intention of 
the central bank with a positive note. If the central bank raises interest rates and curtails credit levels, 
the banks should do much more than what the central bank has directed. It has to extend, both by 
deed and word, its full cooperation and commitment to attaining the monetary policy targets, because 
at the end, they are the main beneficiaries of having an inflation free world. 
A similar responsibility is cast on the private sector as well. The Central Bank, like a good physician, 
has to flush out all the causes of inflation from the system. When doing so, it has to adopt painful and 
unpopular measures. But such measures are taken for the interest and the long term well-being of the 
economy. If the economy is allowed to be hit by inflation continuously, it is the private sector which 
would suffer most. It would be reduced from a long term planner to an at the moment event manager. 
It would be pestered with numerous requests for wage increases by the employees. Its profits would 
fall  in  real  terms.  Hence,  it  is  the  private  sector  which  has  to  extend  its  utmost  cooperation  to  the 
central bank to implement the monetary policy measures most effectively. This understanding at all 
levels of the private sector is a must. 
BIS Review 55/2007 
 3
The Government’s contribution to inflation fighting 
The governments are usually faulted for making the biggest contribution to inflation. The blame here is 
usually directed to the running of a high budget deficit by the government. This criticism against the 
government  is  not  at  all  perfectly  accurate.  What  contributes  to  inflation  is  not  the  existence  of  a 
budget  deficit,  but  the  financing  of  the  deficit  through  inflationary  means,  viz,  borrowing  from  the 
banking  sector.  Like  the  government’s  deficit,  the  private  sector’s  deficits  are  equally  contributory 
towards  the  raising  of  money  supply  and  consequently  to  inflation.  Hence,  any  blame  should  be 
squarely leveled against both sectors. 
It is natural for any government to make use of the bank funding to fill budget deficits, because it is 
very convenient and cost effective. But, excessive use of bank funding leads to creation of additional 
money and through it, to  inflation. Hence, governments have to behave responsibly. When inflation 
sets in as a result of its irresponsible fiscal policy, it is the government which has to suffer the most. 
The government’s desire for bank financing has normally been equated to a child putting his fingers 
frequently into an open cookie jar. The duty of the central bank in such a situation has been to keep 
the lid of the jar tightly so that the child is unable to take out cookies at its own pleasure. This is not a 
popular measure, but central banks throughout the world have been found to keep the cookie jar in 
tight control for the benefit of the society. 
Given the above economic costs, inflation is undoubtedly the public enemy number one. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2007
