Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Die Zeit 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Die Zeit 
conducted by Mr Marc Brost and Mr Robert von Heusinger, 23 July 2007. 
 DIE  ZEIT:  Monsieur  le  President,  fifty  years  ago  the  German  Bundestag  created  the 
Bundesbank, one of Germany's best-known brands in the world. What is its legacy? 
Trichet: Monetary stability. Independence. Credibility. These principles are very favourable 
for sustained growth and job creation. Today it's globally recognized that this is the right way 
for monetary policy to deliver price stability and, by way of consequence, sustainable growth. 
DIE ZEIT: What do you admire most in the history of the Bundesbank?  
Trichet:  One  of  the  most  impressive  episodes has  been  the  open  conflict  with  Chancellor 
Konrad  Adenauer  who  wanted  the  Bundesbank  to  decrease  interest  rates.  But  the  Bank 
refused. It proved to be really independent. 
DIE ZEIT: That was 1956. Long ago.  
Trichet: Yes, but at the beginning of 2004 shortly after I became President of the ECB, three 
heads  of  member  states  asked  publicly  to  lower  rates:  The  Bundeskanzler  of  Germany, 
Gerhard  Schröder,  the  President  of  the  French  Republic,  Jacques  Chirac  and  the  Prime 
Minister  of  Italy,  Silvio  Berlusconi.  The  ECB  demonstrated  its  independence.  We  did  not 
comply.  
DIE ZEIT: Which personal episode with the Bundesbank do you cherish?  
Trichet: For me the whole history of the euro has an important personal touch with German 
friends  in  the  administration  and  in  the  Bundesbank.  In  the  time  of  the  preparation  of  the 
Treaty  I  worked  with  many  German  friends,  for  example  the  Bundesbank  Presidents  Karl-
Otto Pöhl, Helmut Schlesinger and Hans Tietmeyer. One of the most inspiring phases was 
the wording of the Treaty with Hans Tietmeyer, Horst Köhler and Jürgen Stark in particular. It 
was due to them that the Maastricht Treaty was well constructed and worked. Here you saw 
the will to unite Europe and the influence of this particular friendship between us.  
DIE  ZEIT:  You  mentioned  independence  as  the  legacy  of  the  Bundesbank.  Do  you 
have an absolute independence in mind? An independence that forbids even critique 
from the political side? 
Trichet:  It  is  simpler  than  that:  I  refer  to  Article  108  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  It  says  the 
executive branches in particular should not try to influence our decisions. It is a very clear 
wording.  So  it's  not  the  ECB  who  defines  its  independence,  it  is  the  Treaty,  which  was 
approved  by  the  people  of  the  member  states,  by  the  people  of  all  our  democracies. 
Everybody is welcome to criticise our policy - the media, the analysts, the academics. And 
we are, as an independent institution, as a last resort, accountable to the people of Europe. 
By the way it is not known that I go more often to the European Parliament than our friends 
from the American Federal Reserve go to the US Congress. 
DIE  ZEIT:  Last  week  the  French  secretary  of  state  for  European  Affairs  said  in  an 
interview that the Eurogroup - the 13 Finance ministers of the euro area - should be 
allowed to influence the ECB decisions. You reacted sharply. 
Trichet: I made the point that what was said was contrary to what the Treaty very explicitly 
says.  
BIS Review 85/2007 
 1
DIE ZEIT: The French intend to strengthen the political influence of the Eurogroup as a 
counter-weight to the ECB. That makes sense. Each other currency area in the world 
has one central bank and one Treasury. 
Trichet: It's a cliché that France is always heading towards a loose monetary policy. Since 
the  creation  of  the  Franc  after  the  revolution,  the  monetary  policy  had  the  very  strong 
tradition  of  a  currency  keeping  well  its  value  over  time.  Only  during  two  periods  of  a  little 
more  than  ten  years  over  two  centuries  -  after  the  Second  World  War  up  to  De  Gaulle 
became President and in the Seventies - the French monetary policy has been loose, but it is 
not the French culture. From 1994 up to the implementation of euro in 1999, we achieved a 
lower inflation rate than the Bundesbank. And we were supported by the French people. 
DIE  ZEIT:  But  today  the  French  government  wants  a  co-ordination  between  the 
Eurogroup and the ECB.  
Trichet: The Treaty organises the relationship between the central bank and the executive 
branches extremely well. Every fortnight, we invite Jean-Claude Juncker, the President of the 
Eurogroup, and the commissioner Joaquín Almunia to our council. Could there be a better 
way  to  understand  what's  going  on  in  the  central  bank  than  to  be  the  witness  of  the 
discussion of the Governing Council? I am also invited by the Eurogroup each month. We 
are able to meet three times a month which is a frequency which has no equivalent to my 
knowledge. 
DIE  ZEIT:  Juncker  argues  a  dialogue  of  three  persons  would  be  deeper  than  a 
discussion in the whole ECB-Council? 
Trichet: Again the Treaty organises a very frequent relationship. 
DIE ZEIT: As State Secretary of the French Tresor you pursued the idea of a stronger 
common  economic  policy  in  Europe.  Now  you  are  even  stricter  than  the  former 
Bundesbank in explaining why the ECB must be independent. 
Trichet: I apply the Treaty! Read article 108. 
DIE ZEIT: We have read Article 111 that shares the responsibility for the exchange rate 
between the ECB and the Finance Minister of the European Union 
Trichet: The Treaty organises the present responsibilities exactly as they were organised in 
Germany  since  the  creation  of  the  Bundesbank  or  in  France  since  the  setting  up  of  an 
independent Banque de France.  
DIE ZEIT: Wim Duisenberg once said, the Bundesbank is like Cream - the more you 
whip it the harder it gets. The same is true for the ECB. 
Trichet: It is a poetic metaphor. But in my view, we should not be influenced in any direction. 
Whatever happens, we have to achieve our primary mandate: price stability.  
DIE ZEIT: "Not all Germans believe in God, but all in the Bundesbank", Jacques Delors 
once said. The Mark was extremely popular. The euro isn't yet. What went wrong? 
Trichet: The euro is as stable, as credible, as a good store of value as the Mark was. And 
look at the figures: More than 12 million jobs have been created in the euro area since 1999 - 
many  more  than  in  the  eight  years  before.  And  around  2  million  more  than  the  US  have 
created in the same period. Certainly, that has also a lot to do with the structural reforms that 
we have to continue implementing actively. But stable prices are a necessary condition for 
sustainable growth and job creation. 
DIE ZEIT: Beyond all political differences there was always an economic consensus in 
Europe:  freedom  for  goods,  services,  labour  and  capital.  Now  the  French  President 
Nicolas  Sarkozy  attacks  the  European  principle  of  free  competition,  and  also 
European institutions, especially the ECB. What holds Europe together? 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2007
Trichet: We live in a world of very rapid changes, thanks to science and technology, thanks 
to globalization. There are major changes in the division of labour. And there is a temptation 
in  particular  nations  to  turn  the  EU  and  the  ECB  into  scapegoats.  This  is  not  fair.  The 
European  construction  has  helped  us  to  create  a  level  of  prosperity,  which  has  played  an 
important role in reuniting Europe. Our values are clear. We trust in democracy in freedom, in 
human rights. We trust in the fact that market economies are the best way to produce goods, 
services and prosperity. And our future will depend on the people of Europe. It is the free will 
of our democracies which will shape Europe in the long run. And at the ECB we are very 
proud to be already an executive institution; we are the “avant-garde” of Europe. 
DIE  ZEIT:  Do  you  understand  the  French  desire  for  a  stronger  role  of  national 
concerns in Europe?  
Trichet: I am not speaking of any particular nation. All European nations are members of the 
European team. And the success of Europe is the success of the team.  
DIE ZEIT: Perhaps the President of the ECB has to play a more political role in the next 
years than you want to...  
Trichet: Communication with the large public opinion, with all our fellow citizens is certainly 
one of the most important issues for all who care about the Unity of Europe. 
DIE  ZEIT:  Chancellor  Angela  Merkel  wants  European  rules  to  protect  Europe  from 
sovereign wealth funds. Do we need protection? 
Trichet: These funds, like all new phenomenons, have to be studied and carefully observed. 
On the other hand the principle of free circulation of capital at the level of the global economy 
has been beneficial for all economies concerned. 
DIE ZEIT: The euro is at an all time high vis-à-vis the Dollar and the Yen. Is the strategy 
of benign neglect the right one in times Asia is holding down its currencies?  
Trichet: On Asian emerging economies’ currencies we have a very clear message which the 
Central  Banks  of  the  G7  together with  the  executive  branches  have  confirmed  this  spring. 
We all say the Asian emerging economies as well as the global economy would be better off 
if these currencies would be more flexible. 
DIE  ZEIT:  Markets  are  worried  about  the  crisis  of  the  sub-prime  credit  market  in 
America. Are you worried as well?  
Trichet: In a number of segments in the global finance system we have observed in the past 
a  certain  under-appreciation  of  risks.  That  was  visible  in  the  low  level  of  volatility,  the  low 
level of spreads, the low level of risk premiums. During the last weeks we saw a correction. 
At the moment I would say it has been a healthy correction. But I remain cautious: it is no 
time for complacency. 
DIE ZEIT: At the moment there's a lively debate in- and outside the ECB whether the 
second pillar, the monetary analysis, matters anymore. The first revision of the ECB 
strategy came 2003, five years after its implementation in 1998. Will the next revision 
come 2008, five years after the last one? 
Trichet:  No.  The  two  pillar  strategy  has  been  very  effective.  We  are  very  attached  to  this 
methodology which permits the Governing Council to cross check the economic analysis and 
the  monetary  analysis  with  a  view  that  the  latter  gives  valuable  information  on  risks  from 
medium to long term. And we are permanently improving both analysis. 
DIE ZEIT: Markets are worried about the Sub-prime crisis in America. Are you worried 
as well? 
Trichet:  The  global  economy  remains  very  prosperous.  On  the  particular  sub-prime 
mortgages  issue  as  well  as  on  other  US  issues  I  entirely  share  the  view  of  the  Federal 
Reserve which has been fully vindicated. 
BIS Review 85/2007 
 3
DIE ZEIT: The definition of price stability is below, but close to 2 percent. In the last 
eight years the ECB failed seven times to deliver an inflation rate below 2 percent. The 
average stands at 2,05. With a symmetric target around 2 percent the ECB would be 
King. 
Trichet: Our definition is below but close to 2 percent in the medium term. It is exactly the 
same  as  in  Germany  and  in  other  countries  before  the  euro.  I  am  not  satisfied  with  the 
overall average but one has seen that we had to cope with increases in the price of oil and 
commodities, in particular that have been very significant. What is extremely important is that 
the inflation expectations are solidly anchored at a level in line with our definition. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2007
