Ewart S Williams: Issues in Caribbean economic development 
Address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  at  the  Sir 
Arthur  Lewis  Institute  of  Social  and  Economic  Studies  (SALISES)  Conference,  Port-of-Spain, 
27 March 2007. 
 is  one  of  unfulfilled  potential  and  concern  about 
Good  morning  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  title  of  my  presentation  as  shown  in  the  programme  is 
somewhat  misleading.  In  fact,  I  would  like  discuss  a  few  issues  viz:  the  economic  development 
challenges facing the region; the proposition that economic integration – specifically the CSME – is a 
necessary condition for meeting the region’s economic and social objectives and the role that savings 
and financial integration needs to play in the process. 
A convenient point of departure for my presentation is the theme of the recent and much-quoted World 
Bank study entitled: “A Time to Choose – Caribbean Development in the Twenty-First Century”. The 
study’s  theme  is  that  “as  the  twentieth  century  begins,  the  abiding  impression  (with  respect  to  the 
Caribbean) 
the  sustainability  of  past 
accomplishments”. The report notes correctly that over the past three decades, Caribbean economic 
development  has  lagged  behind  that  of  similarly  small  and  comparable  countries  like  Singapore, 
Ireland  and  Cyprus.  The  study  argues  pointedly  that  the  main  reason  for  this  is  that  while  these 
countries  based  their  economic  strategy  on  improving  competitiveness,  the  Caribbean  sought  to 
depend  disproportionately  on  the  exploitation  of  our  natural  resources  (in  the  case  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago)  and  ill-advised  reliance  on  preferential  arrangements  for  our  main  products  –  sugar  and 
bananas. 
It is an interesting thesis and even if a bit over simplified, has a lot of truth to it. In 1975, the Caribbean 
as a whole was more or less in line with Ireland, Singapore and Cyprus, in terms of GDP per capita. 
By the turn of the century, Ireland and Singapore were way ahead of the region, and with per capita 
incomes  almost  twice  the  region’s  highest  per  capita  country  –  the  Bahamas.  [And  it  is  not  only  in 
terms of per capita income, the disparity exists on a range of development indicators]. Indeed, Ireland 
is  ranked  number  4  in  The  Human  Development  Index:  Singapore  is  number  25,  and  the  highest 
Caribbean country Barbados is at number 31. 
What  happened  in  the  interim?  To  address  this  question,  let  us  first  examine  the  economic 
performance of the region in the last three decades. 
The story of the Caribbean is that of steadily declining growth in per capita GDP. In the 1970s, the 
annual average per capita growth rate in the region was 3.9 percent; this rate declined to 2.2 percent 
in  the  1980s  and  to  1.9  percent  in  the  1990s.  This  pattern  was  marginally  better  than  that  of  Latin 
America. However, it was lower than the average rate of growth of “all small island states” in the world 
and at the other extreme, emerging Asian countries grew at nearly three times the pace observed in 
the Caribbean. 
Almost all the countries in the Caribbean region suffered declines in per capita incomes in the 1980s. 
In  many  cases,  the  poor  growth  performance  continued  in  the  1990s.  A  notable  exception  is,  of 
course,  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  where  the  implementation  of  economic  policy  reforms  and  the 
resurgence of world oil prices led to a resumption in per capita growth.  
Since 2000, real GDP growth in the Caribbean has improved somewhat and per capita incomes have 
risen marginally. In Trinidad and Tobago, high oil prices and expanding capacity have led to a near-
doubling in per capita incomes in the period 2000-2006. In the rest of the region, the recent surge in 
economic  growth  has  been  driven  by  increasing  construction  of  infrastructural  and  tourism  facilities 
related to preparations for the 2007 Cricket World Cup. 
(Lest  I  be  misunderstood),  let  me  clarify  that  the  reality  of  declining  per  capita  growth  in  the  three 
decades  to  2000  does  not  negate  the  progress  that  has  been  achieved  by  the  region  during  the 
period.  This  progress  could  be  seen  in  the  evolution  of  the  universally  accepted  indicators  of 
development such as, income, health, education and life expectancy. 
In terms of income, for instance, all the countries of the region, with the exception of Haiti and Guyana, 
are classified as middle income countries or higher, with per capita incomes ranging from an average 
of US$6,000 for the OECS to US$18,900 for the Bahamas. The Caribbean ranks high on the Human 
BIS Review 34/2007 
 1
Development Index, relative to other developing and emerging market countries. The region’s average 
literacy rates are very high and life expectancy at birth is high at nearly 70 years. On the other hand, 
poverty rates in the region are also high, averaging nearly 30 percent and income inequality, while not 
severe as in South America, is significant. 
Given where we are, what are the main economic challenges facing the region. While it can be argued 
that these are many, I would like to select three. The first is the loss of preferential arrangements 
and the need to restructure our economies to meet the current global trading environment; the second 
is the critical importance of achieving higher productivity levels and the third relates to the need to 
strengthen fiscal positions and reduce the public debt burden. 
First, the loss of preferential arrangements 
Declining aid flows and the transition from traditional agriculture, as preferential access to European 
markets is eroded, continue to constitute a major economic challenge. These two developments are 
taking place at a time when exogenous shocks (be it high oil prices, 9/11, or natural disasters) have 
become more common place and at a time when Governments are facing strong political mandates to 
improve social and economic conditions. 
There is no denying the perverse geo-politics of the trade preferences issue – the fact that developed 
countries argue strongly for freedom of markets while they are reluctant to eliminate their own large 
agricultural subsidies or their harsh restrictions on freedom of labour. Be that as it may, it is difficult to 
deny  that  some  Caribbean  countries  have  not  exactly  taken  advantage  of  the  long  period  of 
preferential market access to increase productivity in the sugar and bananas sector. 
It is largely our fault that after all these years the estimated cost of producing and exporting sugar in 
Guyana and Belize – the lowest cost Caribbean producers, is 50 to 60 percent higher than that of the 
higher cost free market exporters. Similarly in bananas, the Caribbean countries are the highest cost 
producers in the world, rooted in low land productivity and high labour and transportation costs. 
Given the impending further erosion of preferential arrangements for sugar and bananas, in the next 
five years, few (if any) of the current regional exporters will be able to export profitably. This means 
that if exports are to be maintained, government subsidies to cover losses could rise to unsustainable 
levels. 
This brings us to the imperatives of economic restructuring: 
With the current open trade regime, the challenge for the Caribbean is to quickly develop new high 
productivity sectors that could drive the region’s developmental thrust. The reality in the Caribbean is 
that the regional agricultural sector will find it difficult to be globally competitive for the same reasons 
that  affected  sugar  and  bananas.  Similarly,  labour  intensive  manufacturing  can  no  longer  compete 
internationally  given  the  region’s  relatively  high  wage  structures  and  the  rise  of  China  as  a  major 
exporter of manufactures. 
However, the examples of Ireland, Singapore and Cyprus have shown that small economies can be 
competitive in many service sectors and in niche manufacturing. 
Whatever sectors we target for attention, we must engage in a concerted push to improve productivity. 
It  is  not  easy  to  measure  productivity  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  However,  notwithstanding  the 
measurement problems, various estimates for the Caribbean economies show gains in productivity in 
the  1980s,  followed  by  a  sharp  decline  (in  productivity)  in  the  1990s.  One  apparent  reason  for  the 
decline in the 1990’s is the lower productivity of both public and private investments (which, in 
the  smaller  economies,  have  been  concentrated  in  the  declining  agriculture  sector,  or  in  tourism,  a 
sector which is now in a mature phase and likely to produce smaller productivity gains). 
A second factor that could have led to declining productivity is migration. 
The  economics  of  Migration  is  a  complicated  phenomenon.  At  one  stage  of  our  history,  we  saw 
migration  as  a  safety  valve  against  possible  social  explosion  arising  from  high  unemployment. 
Migration  has  also  benefitted  our  economies  to  the  extent  that  remittances  have  become  a  major 
contributor  to  foreign  exchange  receipts  in  the  region.  In  contrast  to  these  positives,  however,  the 
evidence suggests that Caribbean migration has represented a brain drain which has weakened the 
skills  base  and  capacity  of  regional  economies.  The  excessive  emigration  of  skilled  labor  not  only 
creates immediate gaps in the labour force, which affects productivity, but also means that resources 
invested in education and training do not benefit the region as intended. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2007
The third challenge that, in my view, regional economies will need to address in the quest for 
self-sustaining growth and development is the need to deal with chronic fiscal imbalances. For 
many  countries  in  the  region,  these  imbalances,  which  have  largely  resulted  from  excessive 
government spending, have led to a build-up in public debt to unsustainable levels. According to IMF 
data, seven (7) Caribbean countries are among the ten (10) most indebted countries in the world. In 
general,  public  debt  to  GDP  ratios  of  50  to  60  percent  of  GDP  are  considered  high.  However,  six 
Caribbean countries (St Kitts and Nevis, Jamaica, Dominica, Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, Belize 
and Guyana) have debt ratios between 95 and 160 percent of GDP. 
Guyana  is  one  of  the  world’s  highly  indebted  countries,  identified  by  the  multilateral  institutions  for 
special treatment under the HIPC programme. In the last two years, two of the regional countries –
Dominica and Grenada have needed external debt restructuring. A third, Belize – is in the process of 
debt restructuring. 
High  public  debt  hurts  growth  as  resources  that  should  be  devoted  to  productive  expenditure  and 
social programmes are redirected to debt servicing. Moreover once high public debt sets in, it could be 
self-reinforcing on account of high debt servicing costs. The two options available to highly indebted 
countries are debt restructuring (as discussed above) or the generation of high primary surpluses as in 
the  case  of  Jamaica.  Even  though  Jamaica  has  generated  primary  surpluses  in  the  range  of  8-13 
percent of GDP for many years, public debt has continued to rise because of high interest costs and 
low growth. 
Regional integration (CSME) 
The region sees the implementation of the CSME as an essential element of any strategy to further 
the development of the regional economies. I finally agree with that position. The current integration 
model  is  what  CY  Thomas  describes  as  one  of  open  regionalism,  based  on  an  outward-looking 
market-oriented framework in which the private sector is expected to take the lead. As you know, the 
CSME covers, inter alia, the liberalization of trade in goods and services, the free movement of labour 
and capital, a regional strategic sectoral plan, the adoption of a harmonized investment code and the 
development of a regional capital market. The first phase of the model – the Caribbean Single Market, 
formally went into effect in the first half of 2006. The second stage – the implementation of the Single 
Economy now has a target date of 2009. 
The integration model is fundamentally sound in that it seeks to address the principal constraints that 
have  led  to  regional  economic  under-achievement  over  the  past  three  decades.  One  cannot  argue 
with the reasoning that, greater integration within the CARICOM region, on several fronts, could be a 
critical input in improving competitiveness. For example: 
• 
regional trade liberalization (which is essentially in place) should result in a reduction in the 
cost of inputs and contribute to the rationalization of production; 
labour mobility within the region has the potential to improve skill and wage arbitrage; 
co-ordinated  investment  promotion  could  make  the  region  more  attractive  for  foreign 
investment  and  reduce  the  fiscal  cost  attached  to  expensive  and  sometimes  wasteful  tax 
concessions; and • regional planning could facilitate the exploitation of production integration 
opportunities, through clusters of economic activities. 
The CSME model also presents opportunities for joint marketing in extra-regional markets, 
joint research and development, and joint purchasing arrangements. 
  While this is the framework, it is no secret that, implementation of many of the critical provisions of the 
CSME  has  lagged.  For  example,  the  impact  of  trade  liberalization  has  been  reduced  by  the  large 
number of exemptions from the common tariff reduction scheme. Free movement of labour so far has 
been limited to a small group of employment categories though further progress in this area is on the 
cards; agreement on the liberalization of trade in services has been slow in coming and there have 
been problems in implementing the rights of establishment which is pivotal to unlocking the potential of 
the regional private sector. 
But  the  CSME  faces  other  challenges.  The  implementation  of  the  programme  is  going  to  require 
considerable  financial  resources,  the  exact  quantum  of  which  has  not  yet  been  determined.  Funds 
need  to  be  found  for  financing  new  regional  institutions:  to  fund  compensatory  mechanisms  :  to 
BIS Review 34/2007 
 3
finance national and regional public infrastructure and to finance the activities of the regional private 
sector, which ultimately will be the engine of growth and development. 
While many of the regional institutions are being funded from contributions made by existing member 
states, there is some concern that many Governments, face an acute insufficiency of fiscal resources 
and  will  be  hard  pressed  to  take  on  new  commitments.  Moreover,  the  willingness  of  the  region’s 
traditional bilateral and multilateral partners to go beyond current funding levels is uncertain. To say 
the least, the desirability of depending on extra-regional bilateral donors to fund regional institutions is 
a delicate matter. 
The Caribbean Development Bank has played a pivotal role over the years in financing infrastructural 
development and social programmes in the region. A significant increase in the Bank’s resources will 
be required if the development thrust envisaged by the Single Economy programme is to be attained. 
It  is  widely  accepted  that  the  benefits  of  regional  integration  are  often  asymmetrically  distributed 
among  participating  countries.  This  inevitable  outcome  therefore  requires  that  compensatory  and/or 
corrective  mechanisms  form  a  necessary  and  prominent  feature  of  the  CSME.  A  Regional 
Development Fund is envisaged to be part of these compensating arrangements. 
The current proposal is for a Fund of US$250 million – US$120 million of which is to be contributed by 
member states with the remainder being sought from the region’s development partners. This will be 
another financing gap that needs to be filled. 
And finally, regional development in the context of the CSME will require new and expanded private 
sector financing mechanisms. 
Over  the  past  several  years  we  have  seen  increasing  integration  of  the  regional  financial  system. 
Much of this integration has come through cross-border ownership of financial institutions. However, 
by  and  large,  despite  ample  liquidity  the  financial  system  has  made  only  a  limited  contribution  to 
regional development through a reduction in the cost or an increase in the availability of financing for 
business investment. 
If  the  private  sector  is  to  play  the  pivotal  role  earmarked  for  it,  regional  private  financial  institutions 
need to adopt more innovative and more supportive financing strategies. One cannot over-emphasize 
the  need  for  appropriate  mechanisms  to  finance  small  and  medium  sized  firms  that  are  the  likely 
candidates  for  niche  manufacturing.  We  will  also  need  to  expand  the  availability  of  alternative 
financing options such as leasing and venture capital. 
Undoubtedly,  the  evolution  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  direction  envisaged  would  need  to  be 
accompanied  by  enhanced  regional  regulation  and  supervision  to  minimize  the  risk  of  cross-border 
contagion. 
The final piece of the financing puzzle should come from the further development and integration of 
the regional stock market. A first step, involving the cross-listing of twelve securities has already been 
taken. The next step is the establishment of an integrated regional stock exchange where all member 
states are linked electronically for the trading in bonds and equities. A fully integrated regional stock 
exchange would allow firms to have access to a wider market for raising risk capital. In turn, this would 
allow the productive sectors to become more productive internationally. 
In conclusion, the implementation of the Single Economy could put the Caribbean region once more 
on the verge of a new development thrust. If the region is to remain competitive in the global economy, 
it will need to reconfigure its production structures and raise its level of productivity. But the integration 
process will require significant financial resources, the source of which is not yet clear. Even if external 
financing is forthcoming, what is certain is that the region will need to increase its level of savings and 
improve  financial  intermediation  in  order  to  fund  its  long-term  developmental  objectives.  This  is  a 
matter of the greatest urgency since time is not on our side. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2007
