Anselmo L S Teng: Macao and the perspective of syndicated loans  
Speech by Mr Anselmo L S Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the Syndicated 
Loans Conference, Asia Pacific Loan Market Association, Macao, 7 June 2007. 
 Distinguished Guests, Dear Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to have the honour of speaking to the Association today. It is our privilege that this 
conference is held in Macao. First and foremost, on behalf of the Government of the Macao Special 
Administrative Region, I would like to express my warmest welcome to all of you to Macao, a city well 
known for its eastern and western patrimony. 
I would like to take this occasion to share with you the development of the Macao economy and our 
government’s strategy to promote sustainable development via proper economic diversification. I will 
then move on to talk about the local banking sector, loan market and some of my views. 
Macao is one of the leading tourism centres in the Asia-Pacific region in terms of visitor arrivals and 
receipts.  Our  economy,  following  the  establishment  of  the  Special  Administrative  Region  of  the 
People’s Republic of China in 1999, could be characterised as high growth, low unemployment, and 
strong fiscal and external balances.  
Capitalising  on  competitive  advantages  of  the  tourism  sector,  our  economy  has  sustained  a 
remarkable uptrend in the past seven years. With a population of just about half a million, Macao saw 
its record of visitor arrivals reaching 22 million last year. In the first quarter of this year, we achieved a 
real GDP growth of 25.6%, after having attained 16.6% in 2006. The unemployment rate is currently at 
a 10-year low of 3.2%, while inflation eased to 4.57%.  
In the past few years, our economic prosperity has been largely built on the thriving tourism sector, 
which  is  concentrated  on  a  few  products  and  markets.  The  SAR  Government  is  fully  aware  that 
“putting  all  eggs  in  one  basket”  is  risk-prone  and  counterproductive  to  macroeconomic  stability. 
Diversifying the structure of our economy is not only related to a valid concern for sustainability, but 
also our ability to generate new types of employment opportunity and ultimately, to maintain a high 
degree of social stability.  
For a small and open economy like Macao that possesses a competitive tourism sector, we believe 
that  diversification  should  be  strictly  based  on  the  economic  principle  of  comparative  advantage. 
Macao  should  not  arbitrarily  divert  its  scarce  resources  to  a  large  number  of  sectors  simply  for  the 
sake  of  diversification.  Instead,  our  policy  of  economic  diversification  is  strategically  focused  on  a 
small number of target sectors that underline Macao’s comparative advantages in regional division of 
labour.  
As the first step to proceed with diversification, we incline towards sectors that are complementary to 
the  development  of  the  leading  industry.  This  strategy  would  facilitate  a  more  efficient  allocation  of 
resources and possibly create new sources of economic expansion in the long run. In this vein, the 
SAR Government has placed great effort in promoting vertical diversification of the tourism industry, 
putting emphasis on non-gaming tourism with new elements such as culture, leisure, sport, shopping, 
convention and meeting.  
Besides,  we  have  been  utilising  Macao’s  strong  connections  with  Mainland  China  and  Portuguese 
speaking countries and also our business merits in terms of low costs, modern information technology, 
free commercial policies and capital flows, high flexibility and low tax system. The entry into force of 
the  Closer  Economic  Partnership  Arrangement  between  Mainland  China  and  Macao  (CEPA),  the 
establishment of the Cross-border Industrial Zone between Zhuhai and Macao and the Ministerial-level 
Forum  for  Economic  and  Trade  Co-operation  between  Mainland  China  and  Portuguese-speaking 
Countries  held  in  Macao  are  all  concrete  initiatives  taken  by  the  SAR  Government  to  diversify  our 
economy. 
Our objective for economic diversification is definite and consistent. We strive to develop non-gaming 
elements  in  tourism  services,  and  to  establish  Macao’s  position  as  a  business  platform  in  three 
aspects,  namely  the  Service  Platform  for  Economic  Co-operation  between  China  and  Portuguese 
Speaking  Countries,  the  Economic  Co-operation  Platform  for  western  Guangdong,  and  the  Global 
Chinese Entrepreneurs Networking and Co-operation Platform.  
BIS Review 63/2007 
 1
Looking ahead, as new tourism facilities would keep coming up to the market throughout the rest of 
this year, our tourism sector would continue to perform in 2007. It is noted that some of these new 
facilities are instrumental to our strategy of diversifying into new business segment of convention and 
meeting. In view of the strong GDP figure in the first quarter and other relevant statistics on hand, it is 
expected that the economy will grow at a reasonable pace in 2007. 
In fact, our positive assessment is shared by some international organisations and a reputable credit 
rating agency. Just a week ago, Moody's placed Macao’s credit ratings on its list of review for possible 
upgrade, pointing to our persistently strong fiscal and external positions. 
Benefited from the buoyant economy, the banking sector of Macao has achieved remarkable growth in 
recent  years.  Up  to  this  moment,  there  are  26  authorized  banking  institutions,  including  11  locally 
incorporated banks and 15 branches of banks incorporated outside Macao. Apart from local capital, 
the  rest  are  from  Mainland  China,  Hong  Kong,  Portugal,  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom, 
France, Singapore and Chinese Taiwan. The origin of capital reflects the highly open nature of this 
small city. 
By the definition of the Bank for International Settlements, over 80% of bank assets in Macao are of 
international  nature.  It  is  apparent  that  Macao’s  financial  sector  is  firmly  integrated  into  the  global 
financial  community.  This  APLMA  Conference,  held  here  in  Macao,  can  certainly  help  promote  our 
guests’  understanding  of  our  fast-growing  market  on  the  one  hand,  and  further  foster  exchange, 
networking and partnership between domestic and foreign financial communities on the other. 
As at the end of the 1st quarter of 2007, total assets of the banking sector grew by 22.3% year-on-year 
to  MOP  281.1  billion;  deposits  increased  by  18.2%  to  MOP  236.4  billion;  loans  reached  MOP  78.1 
billion, representing an increase of 18.1%. Nearly 30% of loans are related to properties, infrastructure 
and project financing. Non-performing loan ratio, the yardstick of asset quality, was at record low of 
1.1%. The overall profit for the 1st quarter jumped by 30.3% to MOP 1.0 billion, after a notable result 
of MOP 3.9 billion scored for the full year of 2006.  
The barometer of financial strength, measured by the consolidated capital adequacy ratio of the whole 
sector at the end of 2006, was kept at a high level of 14.7%, well above the minimum 8% required by 
the Basel Committee. 
These encouraging figures are in fact accompanied by a dramatic change in the domestic loan market 
landscape,  particularly  the  syndicated  loan  market.  In  the  past,  the  demand  for  financing  was  met 
mostly through lending made by local banks, and usually on a bilateral basis between the borrower 
and the lending institution. For certain projects such as property development or infrastructure which 
involved large sums, syndicates were formed. The related documentary, operational and legal support 
might not be that sophisticated owing to limited experience and resources. 
Lending  business  opportunities  for  financial  institutions  always  arise when  an economy  is on  a  fast 
track of growth. As we can see in these few years, the syndicated loan market has expanded in terms 
of number of arrangements and value of each arrangement.  
The rapid development of Macao’s syndicated loan market has brought professionalism, diversification 
and internationalization to the financial sector of this enclave. They certainly have had positive impact. 
The arrangement of syndicated loans involves higher demand for professionals, such as analysts for 
specific industries, back office administrative and operational staff, property valuation agents and legal 
counsels.  The  growth  in  syndicated  loan  markets  thus  stimulates  professionalism  in  a  number  of 
service sectors. 
In the past, syndicated loans concentrated on financing of local construction projects. But in the past 
few  years,  funding  purposes  of  syndicated  loans  show  diversification  –  from  casinos,  hotels, 
residential and commercial properties to construction projects of various nature. We expect that the 
development of syndicated loan market locally will accelerate the economic diversification process. 
The  recent  arrangements  of  several  syndicated  loans  for  gaming  projects  have  attracted  the 
participation  of  renowned  international  investment  and  commercial  banks  as  arrangers  and  book-
runners.  We  believe  that  the  continued  growth  in  Macao’s  economy,  and  hence  the  accompanying 
expansion of the local syndicated loan market will certainly serve as catalyst for further globalization of 
the Macao economy. 
As financial regulator, I encourage local financial institutions to participate in syndicated loans which 
will accelerate the expansion and internationalization of our financial sector. In the process, we should 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2007
always be on the alert to mitigate losses arising from reckless lendings which will certainly undermine 
the stability and healthy development of our financial sector. 
Before the Asian Financial Crisis, some might use the term “asset-based financing” to describe the 
lending culture of the region. Many credit exposure were in fact backed by assets before the crisis. But 
after the value of these assets had taken a nose-dive, the shock to the financial system was critical 
and it took a long time to recover. Collaterals do provide good protection for credit risk but their market 
values  are  prone  to  fluctuations  under  the  ever-changing  economic  and  monetary  conditions  and 
should only be regarded as the last resort for repayment.  
The condition of the overall economy, the soundness of the financial system and the self-perfection of 
the  regulatory  regime  in  the  region  have  greatly  improved  since  the  Asian  financial  crisis.  The 
resilience of the region to withstand the same sort of crisis has been much strengthened. But will it be 
able  to  withstand  another  shock  of  a  more  devastating  magnitude,  especially  now  that  the  global 
financial markets have been characterized by two features; inflated asset prices and excess liquidity. 
Infact, it was excess liquidity which causes the universal asset inflation. There are many explanations 
why there is so much money moving around the global village. Some of them are:  
1. 
To alleviate the economy from plummeting into a tailspin after the dotcom bubble of 2000 
and 911 incident of 2001, the FED eased money supply during the ensuing years; 
The thrifty Asians save much of their trade surplus and continue to keep their currencies tied 
to a weak dollar which results in the printing of more local currencies in the process to feed 
their export led growth; 
Although many central banks have raised short term interest rate, Japan however still clings 
to  a  near  zero  interest  rate  monetary  policy  in  an  attempt  to  uplift  the  economy.  The 
comparatively weaker Yen has given rise to carry trades; 
Oil exporters have reaped a windfall in the wake of a sharp rise in oil prices in the past 5 
years, the huge surplus has joined the river of excess liquidity; 
Demand for higher return by investors and deployment of derivatives have expanded lending 
capacity of financial institutions. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The  excess  liquidity  has  pushed  up  prices  of  all  categories  of  assets.  In  the  equity  market,  it  has 
triggered  an  increased  concern  of  shareholders  to  enhance  the  value  of  their  shareholdings. 
Leveraged buy-out firms are prowling to buy public companies or merge them and remove them from 
the stockmarket. A large chunk of their ammunition has been provided through debt financing, either 
by willing banks or hedge funds. On the other hand, directors of “prey companies” tend to raise funds 
through borrowing to buy back shares to avoid being gobbled up by the predators. In the past, only big 
companies  swallowed  small  companies.  Nowadays,  with  the  help  of  easy  money,  relatively  smaller 
companies  are  taking  on  companies  of  bigger  size.  The  demand  for  syndicated  loans  has  also 
increased due to the prolonged prosperity of the world economy. Financing is needed for additional 
infrastructure  and  exploration  for  commodities  and  energy.  This  is  especially  true  for  emerging 
markets, particularly Asia. 
We have explored the demand side. How about the supply side? The financial institutions appear to 
have  unlimited  capital  and  are  not  afraid  of  taking  credit  risk  arising  from  hitherto  not  so  desirable 
borrowers. What is the reason behind it?  
Again,  it  has  something  to  do  with  excess  liquidity.  As  I  have  just  mentioned,  there  has  been  a 
universal inflation of all kinds of assets. When the price of a certain asset is high, it purports that the 
return  on  the  asset  must  be  low.  In  an  attempt  to  maintain  a  reasonable  return  on  money,  money 
manager tends to acquire an appetite conducive to taking greater risks. This will enable banks and 
financial  institutions  to  repackage  their  loans  on  their  books  and  sell  them  to  willing  investors. 
Technically,  banks  can  easily  parcel  out  the  risk  to  hedge  funds,  pension  funds  and  insurers. 
Therefore, the capital which is hitherto tied up is now free for taking new loans. 
In the past decade, lenders have found a new way to mitigate credit risk. The new innovation has led 
to  the  development  of  a  series  of  instruments  called  credit  derivatives.  Some  of  them  are  very 
complicated. A relatively simple and popular one is called credit default swap. It is in fact a kind of 
insurance policy in a form of agreement whereby one party makes a series of payments to another in 
return for compensation in the event of a default.  
BIS Review 63/2007 
 3
Syndicated  Loans  will  continue  to  flourish  for  quite  some  time  in  the  future.  I  believe  this  is  the 
consensus. But should lenders rely more on the above factors to take in syndicated loans instead of 
applying due diligence in making a credit decision? As a regulator, I would like to draw your attention 
to the following observations: 
• 
When a bank has parcelled out the risk to its clients, the risk has gone out the front door but 
only to come in the back because of the bank’s trading and financial relationships with these 
same counterparties. 
Credit derivatives have prospered in an easy liquidity, low interest rate and benign economic 
environment.  Again,  there  is  counterparty  risk  involved  in  addition  to  market  risk.  Credit 
derivatives have not yet been tested in a credit crunch. 
 Nonetheless, I am still bullish about syndicated loans, particularly in thriving Asia. However, it is my 
candid  advice  to  our  credit  institutions  that  before  making  a  decision  to  participate  in  a  syndicated 
loan, the usual lending rationale should apply. The commitment of depositors’ funds should depend 
more on the merit of the project and the credibility of the borrower than anything else. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2007
