Jean-Claude Trichet: Governance and convergence – the state of play in the 
euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  conference 
entitled “Euro zone – converging or drifting apart?“, organised by the European Parliament (Committee 
of  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs),  Open  Debate  with  National  Parliaments,  Brussels, 
28 February 2007. 
 Mesdames  et  Messieurs,  Messieurs  les  Députés,  permettez  moi  tout  d’abord  de  remercier  Mr 
Pervenche Berès de m’avoir invité à débattre sur un sujet particulièrement important, qui est le degré 
de convergence des économies de la zone Euro. C’est en effet un grand plaisir pour moi de partager 
avec  vous  et  avec  mes  collègues  et  amis  Jean  Claude  Juncker  et  Joaquin  Almunia  aujourd’hui 
quelques réflexions sur ce sujet. 
Sehr  geehrte  Damen  und Herren,  sehr geehrte  Abgeordnete,  bevor  ich beginne,  möchte  ich zuerst 
Frau  Pervenche  Berès  danken  für  die  Einladung  und  das  Zustandekommen  dieser  sehr  wichtigen 
offenen  Debatte  zum  Stand  der  Konvergenz  innerhalb  des  Eurogebiets.  Es  ist  mir  eine  besondere 
Freude, mit Ihnen und meinen Kollegen Jean Claude Juncker und Joaquin Almunia einige Gedanken 
zu diesem Thema austauschen zu können. 
Economic and Monetary Union and the creation of the euro area – a single economy with a single 
currency at the level of a continent – was, and still is, a formidable endeavour. Contradicting all those 
sceptical – academics, media and other observers – who had anticipated a failure, EMU has been a 
great success. For eight years we have successfully worked together in the euro area with a single 
monetary  policy  and  a  single  currency.  To  those  who  claim  that  the  euro  has  played  against  job 
creation, I would like to mention here two striking numbers: over the 8 years since the creation of the 
euro, the euro area created more than 12 million jobs; over the 8 years preceding the creation of the 
euro, less than 3 million jobs were created; of course I do not want to give the full credit of these job 
creations to the advent of the euro, but it is difficult to deny that EMU contributed to this achievement. 
With  Slovenia  joining  the  euro  area,  the  latter  is  now  embracing  13  countries  and  a  population  of 
around 317 million, a little bit larger than the population of the US. This story of success, however, 
requires  a  continuous  effort  from  all  of  us,  from  the  ECB,  from  the  Commission,  from  the  national 
authorities,  from  the  Eurogroup  and  from  you,  members  of  European  Parliament  and  of  national 
parliaments, to continuously provide ‘good’ governance to the euro zone. 
Before  sharing  with  you  some  thoughts  for  the  good  governance  of  such  a  vast  area,  let  me  first 
provide you with our assessment and view on the current state of diversity in the euro area. 
Stylised facts of growth differentials 
Although I will focus on growth differentials and its related policy implications, let me briefly mention to 
you that in the case of inflation differentials, as you know, the current degree of dispersion across the 
euro area countries is historically low. Since 1999, inflation differentials across the euro area countries, 
measured  by  the  unweighted  measure  of  standard  deviation,  has  been  fluctuating  around  1 
percentage point, when at the beginning of the 1990s it was standing at around 6 percentage points. 
And  last  year,  inflation  dispersion  reached  a  level  of  0.7  percentage  points.  Moreover,  the  current 
degree of inflation dispersion among the euro area countries is practically the same as that seen in the 
US, in particular with the available data from 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas. 
In the case of output growth, the current degree of differences in output growth across the euro area 
countries  is  neither  large  by  historical  standards  nor  by  references  to  other  relevant  geographical 
areas. In fact, since 1999 – the start of the third stage of EMU – growth differentials have declined 
somewhat.  
First,  the  dispersion  of  real  GDP  growth  rates  across  the  euro  area  countries,  measured  by  the 
standard deviation in unweighted terms, has been fluctuating around a level of 2 percentage points, 
and has shown no apparent upward or downward trend over the past 35 years. However, since 1999, 
the  degree  of  dispersion  in  annual  average  terms,  also  measured  by  the  unweighted  standard 
deviation,  has  declined  among  the  euro  area  countries  and  in  the  last  year  is  estimated  to  have 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 1
declined further to slightly below 1.5 percentage points. Because sometimes the discussion focuses 
on the largest economies, let me mention that when looking at the four largest euro area economies, 
their growth differentials have been much lower, with a standard deviation fluctuating around a level of 
1 percentage point.  
Moreover, compared with other currency areas, the current degree of output growth dispersion within 
the  euro  area,  measured  by  the  standard  deviation  in  unweighted  terms,  does  not  appear  to  be 
significantly different than that observed across regions or states within the United States. Across the 
8 US regions, as defined by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis, the unweighted standard deviation 
has been fluctuating around 1.5 percentage points over the last years.  
The  second  stylised  fact  that  I  would  like  to  stress,  which  is  relevant  for  the  conduct  of  the  single 
monetary policy of the ECB, is that the degree of synchronisation of business cycles across the euro 
area  countries  seems  to  have  increased  since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  This  finding  holds  for 
various  measures  of  synchronisation  applied  to  overall  economic  activity,  for  annual  and  quarterly 
data,  as  well  as  for  various  country  groupings.  Also  last  year,  the  strengthening  of  activity  and  the 
rebound in the euro area’s real GDP growth was a very widely shared phenomenon across the various 
countries within the euro area. 
And the third relevant stylised fact, related to the previous one, is that since the beginning of the 1990s 
the contribution to dispersion from the cyclical component of real GDP seems to have been relatively 
limited while most of the dispersion can be explained by differences in the trend component. In other 
words, differences of real GDP growth across the euro area countries since the beginning of the 1990s 
are largely due to trend growth differences. 
These findings point to the relevance of structural factors behind output growth differentials across the 
euro  area  countries  over  the  last  years,  on  which  monetary  policy,  as  you  know,  has  no  direct 
influence. 
Policy considerations 
Let me therefore now say a few words about the policy implications of these growth differentials, in 
other words what good governance means to us, in view of the vast size of the euro area. 
But  first  of  all,  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  that,  in  general,  output  growth  differentials  among 
countries  or  regions  are  a  normal  feature  of  monetary  unions.  They  reflect  various  factors.  For 
instance,  differences  in  economic  growth  within  the  euro  area  partly  reflect  catching  up  of  lower 
income  economies.  Specifically,  this  has  been  visible  in  the  successful  case  of  Ireland,  a  country 
whose level of per capita GDP rose from well below the euro area average, at the beginning of the 
1990s, to significantly above the euro area average in recent years. A relatively strong increase in per 
capita GDP has also been seen in other economies, such as Greece and Spain over recent years. 
Also, demographic factors can play a role in explaining differences in growth rates across countries. 
Demographic  changes  affect  output  growth,  first,  via  the  population  growth  rate  and,  second,  via 
developments in the working age population, which is affected by changes in the age structure of the 
population. In particular, since the mid-1990s, output growth in Ireland, Spain and Luxembourg has 
been positively affected by demographic factors, partly reflecting immigration flows, while demographic 
factors have only made a marginal contribution to growth in Germany and Italy. 
Furthermore,  there  can  be  temporary  differences  in  output  growth  across  countries  reflecting,  for 
instance, an equilibrating adjustment process in a monetary union following a shock. There is no need 
to be concerned about those differences, as such differences are economically justified, are needed 
and  are  observed  within  other  currency  areas.  However,  in  some  cases  we  need  to  be  concerned. 
These cases are those when we see persistent differences in output growth which reflect inappropriate 
national  economic  policies,  structural  inefficiencies  and  rigidities  or  a  malfunctioning  adjustment 
mechanism in individual countries. These are the cases we should focus on as policy makers. 
Monetary policy 
We all know that the very existence of a single monetary policy and thereby a uniform policy interest 
rate across the euro area countries does not allow using monetary policy to influence output growth 
differentials  across  euro  area  countries.  This  makes  it  so  important  that  only  countries  which  have 
reached  sustainable  convergence  participate  in  the  euro  area.  The  decisive  contribution  the  ECB’s 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2007
single monetary policy makes to the smooth functioning of EMU is to maintain price stability – and be 
credible in the delivery of price stability in the future – in the euro area as a whole. Price stability is 
actually strongly requested by the European citizens according to various surveys and opinion polls 
and they attach utmost importance to the independence of the ECB in delivering such objective  
Design of national policies 
Addressing  “unsatisfactory”  output  growth  performances  in  individual  countries  must  be  tackled  by 
properly designed national policies in the fiscal and structural domains. Policies have to focus notably 
on increasing the adjustment capacity of economies to shocks and, in the slower growth countries, on 
fostering productivity and labour utilisation while maintaining stable macroeconomic conditions. 
Fiscal policy 
In this respect, fiscal policy, under the responsibility of national authorities, can best help in EMU by 
being sustainable and medium-term oriented, in line with the orientations provided by the Stability and 
Growth Pact. The Stability and Growth Pact is the key element of fiscal governance in the euro area. It 
provides a clear and transparent framework for putting into operation the reference values set by the 
Maastricht Treaty, 3% of GDP for fiscal deficits and 60% of GDP for public debt. Ensuring sound fiscal 
positions is necessary in order to compensate for the absence of a significant federal budget at the 
level of Europe that could absorb asymmetric shocks and in order to prevent the negative impact of 
unbalanced national fiscal policies. In a monetary union, such incentives could even be reinforced as 
part of the burden induced by fiscal imbalances in one country is indeed borne by all other members. 
The full and consistent implementation of the Pact sets the right incentives for countries to achieve 
sound  fiscal  positions.  And  countries  with  fiscal  imbalances  should  use  the  current  favourable 
economic environment to achieve such sound position rapidly.  
In particular, the Pact calls on Member States to bring budget balances to their so called medium-term 
budgetary  objectives  and  maintain  them  at  that  level.  These  objectives  are  designed  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of the debt burden while providing sufficient leeway for budgetary fluctuations over the 
business  cycle  without  jeopardising  fiscal  soundness.  This  free  operation  of  so-called  automatic 
stabilisers contributes to smooth economic fluctuations by letting the budget react to changes in the 
business  cycle.  In  this  way  fiscal  policies  contribute  to  economic  stability  and  support  strong  and 
sustainable economic growth.  
Fiscal  policy  can  and  should  also  help  mitigate  undesirable  trend  growth  differentials  through  “high 
quality”  expenditure  and  tax  policies.  In  particular,  high  and  inefficient  public  expenditure  can  put  a 
brake on economic activity by imposing a high tax burden on the economy and channelling resources 
into unproductive uses. Public spending and tax systems need to become more efficient and growth-
friendly to strengthen trend growth. Such reforms will also facilitate the adjustment of the economies in 
case of adverse shocks. 
By  contrast,  the  pursuit  of  “activist”  fiscal  policies to  fine-tune  the  economic cycle  entails significant 
risks: an ill-timed fiscal policy stance can be an important source of variability in the economy. It is thus 
desirable that governments, as a rule, abstain from discretionary fiscal policy aimed at fine-tuning the 
economic  cycle.  Especially  in  the  current  economic  environment,  it  is  important  that  governments 
prevent discretionary policy measures from contributing pro-cyclically to the business cycle. 
Structural reforms 
It is in the area of structural reforms where national policies can make the most significant contribution 
to facilitating the working of adjustment mechanisms in individual countries and to improving long-term 
growth and employment prospects as well as to addressing undesirable growth underperformance in 
some  countries.  In  this  regard,  the  Lisbon  process  has  raised  the  awareness  among  European 
countries  that  structural  reforms  are  decisive  for  remaining  competitive  in  an  increasingly  global 
economic environment. The Integrated Guidelines outlining reform and policy priorities as well as the 
setting-up  of  National  Reform  Programmes  are  suitable  instruments  to  lead  the  way  to  a  well-
functioning  internal  market  as  well  as  to  better  functioning  national  markets.  In  this  respect,  we 
appreciate  the  inclusion  of  a  special  euro  area  fiche  into  the  Integrated  Guidelines,  highlighting  the 
particular reform necessities of countries that participate in the euro area.  
BIS Review 20/2007 
 3
Let me briefly elaborate in more detail on these important issues. 
First, the focus must be on structural reforms enhancing economic flexibility. This should help to better 
absorb shocks and thereby improve the working of adjustment mechanisms in individual countries. In 
the context of EMU with a single monetary policy, the later the necessary national policy measures are 
taken to make the economies more flexible, the larger the potential costs can be in case of adverse 
shocks. 
How to enhance economic flexibility? There are many factors that may help to increase flexibility within 
the euro area. First, the Single Market needs to be completed in order to stimulate price flexibility by 
fostering  competition  and  open  product  markets,  e.g.  in  the  services  and  network  industries.  This 
requires that existing barriers to labour and capital mobility within the euro area are removed. In this 
respect, measures aimed at protecting domestic industries or employees against competition are only 
counterproductive as they delay the necessary adjustment. Now that Slovenia has entered it the euro 
area, it is decisive that its labour force is granted full access to the labour markets of all euro area 
countries.  As  I  have  already  stressed  in  several  occasions,  it  is  abnormal  that  there  are  labour 
restrictions  as  regards  Slovenian  workers  in  a  number  of  economies  that  are  members  of  the  euro 
area. 
Economic flexibility can also be promoted by removing the institutional barriers to flexible price and 
wage  setting  mechanisms,  in  particular  by  easing  product  market  regulations  and  employment 
protection legislation. 
Specifically, as regards wage setting, nominal and real wages should adjust to help absorb shocks. 
Wage setting  must reflect firms’ different  situations rather  than being  defined homogenously  across 
sectors or countries independently of the local conditions to the risk of a higher level of unemployment. 
It is consequently of particular importance for all countries to achieve a high degree of wage flexibility 
in order to improve the ability of their labour markets to adjust to such shocks.  
Secondly, national policies should aim at improving long-term growth prospects by, on the one hand, 
affecting positively labour utilisation and, on the other, improving labour productivity growth. 
Structural  policies  can  increase  labour  utilisation  by  addressing  labour  supply  incentives  that  are 
inherent  in  tax  and  benefit  systems.  High  average  and  marginal  tax  rates  and  high  unemployment 
benefits  impact  negatively  on  the  incentives  to  engage in  paid  employment  or  on  the  choice  of  the 
number of  hours  to  work.  Early retirement  policies  also  have  a  significant  negative  effect  on  labour 
supply and, hence, on the participation and employment rates. 
Growth  in  labour  productivity  should  be  supported  by  policies  that  aim  at  promoting  innovation  and 
technological change. For that purpose, policies should focus on allowing the efficient functioning of 
entrepreneurial  activities,  removing  for  instance  entry  restrictions  and  improving  labour  market 
adaptability. 
Speaking in front of elected representatives, I know that the successful implementation of structural 
reforms  requires  constant  explanations  and  well  targeted  communication  in  order  to  convince  the 
citizens about their beneficial effects on growth and job creations; I fully understand the difficulty of this 
task and can only encourage all responsible parties in these communication efforts.  
Conclusion 
I am fully aware that this is indeed a very demanding list of tasks. But this is in our view the only way 
ahead. There is indeed enormous work to be done by all of us. And I would like to stress “by all of us”. 
We have, the Eurosystem, the European Commission, the national governments, and the European 
and  national  Parliaments,  a  shared  responsibility  in  ensuring  a  smooth  functioning  of  EMU,  by 
improving  the  integration  and  flexibility  of  its  markets.  Some  differences  in  economic  performances 
across countries or regions have existed and will continue to exist in the future, as it is the case in the 
US and in other any areas.  
317  millions  d’Européens  ont  décidé  de  partager  aujourd’hui  un  destin  en  commun.  La  monnaie 
unique n’est pas seulement une formidable réussite et le symbole puissant de l’unité de l’Europe dans 
un monde en voie de transformation rapide. La monnaie unique nous réunit plus profondément, plus 
intimement  que  le  débat  public  européen  ne  le  suggère  parfois.  13  pays  aujourd’hui  et  25  pays 
demain  ou  après-demain  ont  décidé  d’unir  leur  destin.  Ces  25  démocraties  ont  démocratiquement 
approuvé  les  dispositions qui  les unissent.  Ces dispositions  ne sont  pas  inscrites  sur  un chiffon  de 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2007
papier. Elles sont inscrites dans un traité international qui engage tous ceux qui l’ont ratifié au terme 
d’un processus exemplaire. Mes collègues du Directoire, du Conseil des Gouverneurs et moi-même, 
nous  mesurons  pleinement  la  confiance  et  l’honneur  qui  nous  ont  été  faits  de  définir  et  mettre  en 
oeuvre  la  politique  monétaire  de  l’euro,  en  toute  indépendance,  pour  assurer  la  stabilité  des  prix 
conformément au Traité. C’est ce double sentiment de confiance et de responsabilité qui nous anime. 
BIS Review 20/2007 
 5
