Lars Nyberg: Developments in the property market 
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Fastighetsvärlden (Swedish 
newspaper), Stockholm, 30 May 2007. 
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  to  Fastighetsvärlden  and  talk 
about  the  Riksbank’s  view  on  the  property  market.  The  property  market  is  a  subject  that  arouses 
considerable  interest  and  is  discussed  frequently  in  many  different  forums,  both  in  Sweden  and 
abroad. I have on several occasions held speeches on the subject of the property market and I see 
good reasons for returning to this field to give the Riksbank’s views on current developments.  
In recent months the US mortgage market has come under focus, mainly because of developments in 
the subprime market. An increasing number of US households have experienced problems in paying 
their loan costs and some US mortgage institutions have gone bankrupt in recent months. This has 
given rise to some concern that we might see a similar development in Sweden. However, I believe 
there is very little likelihood of this. I will explain why a little later on.  
Today I intend to speak mainly about how we at the Riksbank view the recent developments in the 
property  market.  In  many  respects,  I  am  basing  my  answer  on  the  reasoning  put  forward  by  the 
Riksbank in the Financial Stability Report published last week. Both commercial property prices and 
housing prices have risen substantially for many years and although we have been able to see that 
the  rates  of  increase  have  slowed  down  slightly  in  recent  months,  they  are  still  high.  I  believe  that 
property prices may well continue rising at a fairly high rate over the coming period. But in the slightly 
longer term such a rapid increase is not sustainable. 
Why is the Riksbank interested in the property market?  
The fact that the Riksbank is interested in what is happening in the property market is based on the 
tasks we have been given by the Swedish Parliament. One is that we shall ensure that inflation is kept 
at a reasonable level, more precisely at two per cent a year. The other is that we shall safeguard the 
stability of the financial system. The way the property market develops can have significance for both 
of these tasks. Property often functions as collateral for the loans the banks grant to households and 
companies.  If  the  properties  are  not  reasonably  valued;  if  prices  have  been  pushed  up  through 
exaggerated optimism or speculation, there is a risk of a heavy price fall. During the crisis of the 1990s 
it was falling property prices, particularly office premises, that were the cause of major losses for the 
Swedish banks.  
Developments in the property market can also affect activity in the real economy. For instance, rising 
house prices reduce households’ loans in relation to the value of their assets. Recently, as prices have 
risen so much, it has become increasingly common for households to use the lower loan-to-value ratio 
to take out new loans on their housing. The new loan can then be used for further consumption, which 
stimulates activity in the economy. Correspondingly, falling property prices can contribute to subduing 
demand in the economy. If property prices were to fall heavily during an economic downturn, this could 
also lead to large loan losses for the banks and further aggravate the slowdown. 
The property market can be divided into two markets; a market for commercial property and a market 
for single-family dwellings and tenant-owned apartments. Today I intend to discuss both markets, but I 
shall begin with the commercial property market. After that I will talk about why housing prices have 
risen so much in recent years. Finally, I will talk about my views on future price developments.  
Commercial property 
The commercial property market has a direct bearing on financial stability. This is because property 
companies are the banks' largest individual borrowers. Around 20 per cent of the four major Swedish 
bank’s lending to the general public is to companies managing commercial properties, for instance, 
office premises or retail premises. The value of these properties is often pledged as collateral for the 
loans.  When  commercial  property  prices  fell  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  several  property 
companies experienced problems paying their loan costs, which caused major losses for the banks. 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 1
Property  is  also  an  attractive  investment  for  pension  companies,  insurance  companies  and  other 
investors. So both investors and lenders are affected by commercial property price trends. 
Prices for office premises are determined partly by the size of the rental income the companies are 
expecting  to  receive.  Developments  in  rents  are  in  turn  affected  by  how  strong  employment  in  the 
services  sector  is  expected  to  be,  although  this  relationship  is  not  entirely  stable.  As  with  prices  of 
other assets, prices of office premises are also determined by investors’ required rate of returns.  
After the bank crisis, developments in prices of office premises largely followed rents. However, this 
trend has been broken during the past two years. Prices have risen much more than is justified by 
developments in rents. During the first quarter of the year prices of office premises in Stockholm rose 
by 14 per cent on an annual rate, and prices in Göteborg rose by 20 per cent. Prices were steadier in 
Malmö, with a rise of 5 per cent on an annual rate during the first quarter. At the same time as prices 
have  risen  substantially  in  recent  years,  rents  and  demand  for  office  space  have  not  increased 
appreciably.  
While employment in the services sector has increased in recent years, this does not seem to have 
had an impact on the demand for office space. As both demand for premises and rent levels have 
remained relatively unchanged, it is therefore likely that the price upturns in recent years are due more 
to  a  decline  in  investors’  required  rate  of  return.  The  required  rate  of  return  depends  partly  on  the 
yields  on  long-term  government  bonds,  as  these  function  as  a  risk-free  alternative  to  investment  in 
property. The required rate of return also depends on how much investors demand in compensation 
for investing in higher risk assets, such as property, that is, what risk premium they demand. Interest 
on government bonds rose in total during the first quarter of the year. All other things being equal, t his 
should raise the required rate of return. However, over the past year the required rate of return has 
fallen.  This  could  either  be  due  to  investors  expecting  rents  to  rise  in  future,  or  that  they  have 
demanded a lower risk premium.  
A lower risk premium is in itself not surprising. The risk premiums on a number of different assets have 
fallen around the world in recent years. But as for a number of other markets, there may be reason to 
wonder whether the low risk premium on office premises is reasonable. 
However, one must remember that property companies have had very strong profit growth in recent 
years.  Unlike  the  crisis  years,  property  companies  currently  have  much  better  margins  to  manage 
some dampening of prices. I therefore do not believe at present that developments in the commercial 
property market comprise any threat to financial stability. But as it was the exaggerated commercial 
property  prices  that  contributed  to  the  banks’  major  losses  in  the  1990s,  I  consider  that  we  should 
monitor future developments in these prices a little extra closely. 
In recent years foreign investors have become more interested in the Swedish commercial property 
market. In 2006 foreign investors accounted for just over 40 per cent of all investments in the market. 
In terms of financial stability, this development has both advantages and disadvantages. More foreign 
participants  mean  that  the  risks  are  spread  to  different  types  of  investor,  which  is  positive.  It  also 
contributes  to  making  the  Swedish  property  market  more  liquid.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  also 
conceivable  that  potentially  negative  developments  in  the  international  market  could  more  easily 
spread to the Swedish market. If, for instance, an investor were to make losses on another country’s 
market, it is conceivable that the investor would sell Swedish property to cover the loss. Prices could 
thus change quickly even without any change in the underlying factors.  
That was the commercial property market. What about the housing market?  
Why have house prices risen so much?  
As you know, house prices have also risen substantially since the mid-1990s. A person who bought a 
house ten years ago would be able to sell it now for a price more than double what he paid for it then. 
Prices  of  tenant-owned  apartments  have  probably  risen  even  more1.  It  is  more  difficult  to  analyse 
prices of tenant-owned apartments. The statistics are more uncertain. But in principle, the reasoning 
with regard to the market for single-family dwellings also applies to the market for collectively owned 
                                                      
1   According to estate agents statistics (maklarstatistik.se) the price per square metre for a tenant-owned apartment has risen 
by 300 per cent in ten years. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2007
dwellings.  The  substantial  increase  in  house  prices  has  gone  hand  in  hand  with  the  increase  in 
household  indebtedness.  Of  all  the  loans  granted  to  households,  85  per  cent  have  property  as 
collateral. A sharp fall in property prices combined with households experiencing difficulty in paying 
their loans could therefore cause problems for the banks. A central issue here is whether house prices 
have been pushed up by exaggerated optimism or by speculation.  
Despite  the  rapid  upturn  in  prices,  I  do  not  believe  that  we  are  currently  seeing  any  general  over-
valuation of the property market. This is because there are a number of factors that can largely justify 
the rise in prices2.  
Firstly,  interest  rates  have  been  historically  low  in  recent  years.  Since  the  Riksbank  introduced  its 
inflation target, in the mid-1990s, the inflation rate has become lower and has stabilised. A more stable 
development in inflation also means that the real interest rates – interest rates excluding inflation – 
have fallen. At the end of 1996, after the crisis years, the real variable mortgage rate was around 7 per 
cent.  Today  it  is  around  2  per  cent.  Lower  real  interest  rates  mean  that  it  becomes  cheaper  for 
households to take out loans when buying housing. The low interest rates are therefore an important 
driving force behind the price increases. 
Secondly,  developments  in  the  real  economy  have  been  favourable  after  the  crisis.  Although 
unemployment has periodically been high measured by Swedish standards, households’ disposable 
incomes have increased substantially. Higher incomes have meant that households can afford to pay 
more for their housing.  
Thirdly, prices have also been affected by the fact that construction declined considerably directly after 
the crisis. When the demand for housing accelerated, it took some time before this could be met by a 
growing number of new houses on the market. Quite simply, it takes time to build houses. It was not 
until around 2000, when house prices had become higher and made new production of housing more 
attractive, that construction really accelerated.  
Moreover,  there  have  been  some  significant  changes  in  the  mortgage  market,  which  have  also 
contributed to house prices rising so sharply. I will return to these changes shortly.  
The development of these factors largely explains why house prices have risen as much as they have 
in recent years. It does not appear to be a question of general over-optimism among households and 
lenders.  I  therefore  do  not  see  any  serious  risks  to  financial  stability  from  developments  in  house 
prices at present.  
Household indebtedness has also risen substantially 
Household  indebtedness  has  kept  pace  with  property  prices  and  has  thus  risen  substantially.  This 
development  could  also  be  a  source  of  concern  for  those  wishing  to  safeguard  financial  stability.  If 
households have taken on more debts than they can manage to pay, it could lead to loan losses for 
the banks. Debts have also grown much more quickly than incomes in recent years. Today household 
indebtedness  is  even  higher  than  it  was  prior  to  the  crisis  breaking  out.  Households’  total  debts  in 
relation to their annual disposable incomes amounted at the end of 2006 to just over 140 per cent. 
Despite this high percentage, I do not feel any great concern. 
This is because even if debts are now at higher levels than they were prior to the crisis, today the 
costs of bearing these debts are not as great. The low real interest rates have meant that households' 
interest expenditure in relation to their incomes is at a historically low level. In addition, the households 
with  the  most  debts  are  also  those  with  the  highest  incomes  and  largest  assets.  The  Riksbank’s 
analyses  of  individual  households’  finances  show  that  these  in  general  have  good  margins  for 
managing  rising  interest  costs3.  Households’  loan-to-value  ratios  therefore  do  not  appear  likely  at 
present to cause the banks such large loan losses that they would be a threat to the stability of the 
banking system. But even if the household sector as a whole has good margins for paying its loans, 
there  is  of  course  always  a  risk  that  certain  individual  households  have  borrowed  too  much.  If  the 
household has made an overly optimistic calculation of its loan costs and taken larger loans than its 
                                                      
2   See also Financial Stability Report 2005:2 for a more detailed discussion of house prices. 
3   See also Financial Stability Report 2007:1 for the Riksbank’s analyses of households’ margins. 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 3
incomes can manage to bear, this could lead to payment difficulties. However, this is a question of 
each individual household to take into account.  
US households have had problems paying their loan costs 
As a whole, Swedish households currently have a good ability to pay. As many of you have probably 
heard,  there  has  been  rather  more  turbulence  with  regard  to  US  mortgage  customers  recently.  A 
growing percentage of US households have had problems paying their loan costs.  
Property prices in the United States have also risen substantially since the mid-1990s. As in Sweden 
the  higher  prices  have  led  to  increased  indebtedness  among  households.  In  the  United  States  the 
subprime mortgage market has also increased rapidly in recent years. This group includes in principle 
all  mortgage  customers  who  cannot  show  that  they  have  a  credit  history  sufficient  to  be  granted  a 
normal  mortgage.  These  can  be  households  with  records  of  non-payment  of  debts,  low  or 
undocumented incomes. Thanks to the subprime mortgage market these households have been given 
an opportunity to enter the housing market.  
When  US  property  prices  rose,  the  competition  among  mortgage  institutions  intensified  over  these 
volumes.  The  institutions  cut  their  lending  margins  and  in  some  cases  also  lowered  their  collateral 
requirements.  When  the  US  central  bank  raised  its  policy  rate  from  1  per  cent  to  5.25  per  cent 
between 2004 and 2006, households’ loan costs also rose. The construction of subprime loans meant 
that they were particularly vulnerable. This is because they often have a low interest rate during the 
first  two  years.  After  that  the  loans  are  renewed  at  market  rate  with  a  substantial  increment  to 
compensate the credit institutions for the high credit risk of the borrowers. A higher policy rate made 
the market rate higher and interest costs for many households with subprime loans rose substantially. 
When US property prices slowed down last autumn, the increase in borrowers’ wealth was subdued. 
They  could  no  longer  use  rising  house  prices  to  increase  their  borrowing  and  thereby  finance  the 
higher interest rates. This meant that more households in the subprime sector experienced difficulties 
in paying their loan costs.  
These  developments  have  led  to  a  number  of  US  loan  institutions  that  specialised  in  the  subprime 
going bankrupt. This has led to newspaper headlines and there has been much discussion of what the 
consequences might be. However, the effects should not be so great that they threaten the stability of 
the  US  financial system.  It  is  still only a  minor  part of  the  total US  mortgage market  that  has been 
affected. Subprime loans account for around 13 per cent of all mortgages in the United States. Around 
half of these loans are at variable interest rates and can thereby be initially affected by higher interest 
rates, and it is households with these loans who have experienced problems in paying them. Most US 
households still have a good ability to pay. At the same time, the financial institutions have, on the 
whole, strong balance sheets. This means that even a relatively large deterioration in credit quality in 
this sector would only lead to limited losses for the mortgage market as a whole. On the other hand, it 
is not impossible that developments may affect the US households’ consumption.  
Are there risks with subprime loans in Sweden?  
Can we expect to see a similar development in Sweden? No, I do not see any risk at present that we 
will  experience  this  type  of  development  in  the  Swedish  mortgage market.  In  Sweden,  loans  to  the 
subprime sector comprise an extremely small percentage of the total number of mortgages, no more 
than 0.5 per cent. The percentage is much lower in Sweden than in the United States. This is largely 
because  our  mortgage  market  and  the  US  mortgage  market  are  very  different.  In  Sweden,  lenders 
focus  primarily  on  the  borrower’s  ability  to  repay.  We  also  have  greater  access  to  information  on 
borrowers’ incomes and assets, which makes it easier to assess credit risks.  
The Swedish and US mortgage institutions also have different methods of financing their lending. In 
the United States it is common that the bonds issued by institutions are tied to different parts of the 
credit  portfolio,  which  have  different  risks.  These  types  of  instrument  have  been  an  attractive 
investment  for  many  investors  in  recent  years,  as  the  return  on  more  traditional  investment 
instruments,  such  as  government  bonds,  has  been  considered  too  low.  The  high  demand  for  the 
higher risk parts of the portfolio, which includes subprime, have meant that the banks’ financing costs 
for the higher risk loans have declined in recent years. This may have encouraged the rapid growth in 
the subprime market in the United States. The US method of securitisation is very rare in the Swedish 
mortgage market. In Sweden, mortgages are traditionally financed through the institutions and banks 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2007
issuing bonds with the total assets as collateral. If a Swedish bank were to have a larger percentage of 
loans with poorer credit ratings, it would mean that the total financing cost would rise.  
Although the market for subprime in Sweden is currently small, it is conceivable that it could grow with 
time. Essentially, this is a positive development as it enables more households to enter the housing 
market.  More  types  of  mortgage  do  not  necessarily  mean  that  credit  management  in  mortgage 
institutions will deteriorate.  
Changes in the Swedish mortgage market 
Although no large-scale market for lending to the subprime sector has developed in Sweden, there 
have been a number of other changes in the Swedish housing market – changes that have affected 
and may continue to affect developments in household indebtedness and property prices.  
This year new rules were introduced regarding how much capital the banks must hold in relation to the 
assets  linked  to  risks,  which  includes  lending.  These  rules  are  called  Basel  II.  The  new  capital 
adequacy rules will take into consideration the actual risk in lending to a better extent than the older 
version. As lending is considered to have a fairly low risk, it will enable the banks to hold less capital in 
relation to their lending. This entails a lower cost for the banks. Lower costs will enable the banks to 
cut their margins on lending rates and compete for loan volumes. The fact that the banks have been 
aware  that  this  rule  would  be  introduced  has  probably  contributed  to  the  institutions  cutting  their 
lending rates in advance.  
It is probably in turn the increased competition that has led to banks and mortgage institutions now 
allowing higher loan-to-value ratios. If one can borrow a larger amount with the same collateral, the 
need for a down payment declines. This makes it easier for households with good incomes but little 
wealth to enter the housing market. Typically, this often applies to younger households who do not 
already  own  their  accommodation.  At  the  same  time,  this  change  means  that  both  borrowers  and 
lenders become more sensitive to developments in house prices. All other things being equal, higher 
loan-to-value ratios should increase the risk of loan losses for the banks. However, while the banks 
are allowing a higher loan-to-value ratio, they appear to have compensated for this in recent years by 
tightening some of the requirements for granting loans.  
It has also become increasingly common that mortgage institutions offer interest-only loans. This also 
increases  the  borrowers’  and  lenders’  sensitivity  to  developments  in  house  prices.  The  fact  that 
households are choosing not to amortize their loans to the same extent may be related to the rising 
house  prices.  House-owners  have  been  able  to  see  their  loan-to-value  ratio  fall  even  without 
amortization payments. Amortization is also a form of saving, but it is not self-evident that it is the best 
thing for a household to have its entire savings in its own housing. If they choose not to amortize the 
loan,  they  may  perhaps  have  some  other  form  of  saving  that  can  be  used  if  their  incomes 
unexpectedly decline or costs increase.  
To  summarise,  I  do  not  see  any  serious  risks,  from  a  stability  perspective,  in  households’  growing 
indebtedness and in rising property prices – not at present. However, the current developments cannot 
continue indefinitely.  
Future price developments 
While we have been able to see some slowdown in the rate of increase in house prices over the past 
year, the rate is still high; the average price of a single-family dwelling rose by 8 per cent between the 
first quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year. I believe that we will have to assume that 
property  prices  and  indebtedness  will  continue  to  increase  relatively  substantially  over  the  coming 
period. This belief also appears to be shared by the households in SEB’s house price indicator and 
SBAB’s  estate  agents  barometer.  The  probability  of  this  happening  also  seems  to  have  increased 
recently. For instance, we have seen a rapid increase in the number of persons employed over the 
past year, which means that more people have the opportunity to be able to buy a house.  
In addition, it now appears that the property tax will be abolished completely with effect from January 
2008.  This  tax  will  instead  be  replaced  by  a  municipal  charge  of  a  maximum  of  SEK  4,500.  At  the 
same time, tax on capital gains on housing will probably be raised from 20 to 30 per cent.  
It is no easy task to quantify the potential effects this tax reform may have on house prices. Even if the 
abolished tax is financed through the housing sector, I believe that it will push up property prices to 
BIS Review 56/2007 
 5
some extent. All households who have previously paid more than SEK 4,500 a year in property tax will 
have lower monthly costs, according to this proposal. If households choose to use the sum they save 
on the abolished tax to take out larger loans, it is possible that this will lead to a slightly faster increase 
in prices than would otherwise have been the case. If the increased opportunities to borrow were to 
have a full impact on house prices, the reform could push up prices by around five per cent. The price 
increases would probably be highest in the parts of Sweden with the higher taxation values, where 
they  have  previously  paid  a  relatively  higher  tax  rate.  However,  there  are  a  number  of  factors  that 
imply  that  this  calculation  probably  overestimates  the  effect  on  prices.  Firstly,  the  Government  has 
been indicating for some time that it intended to lower property tax. It is therefore possible that house 
prices have already been affected to some extent by the decision. Secondly, the price increases could 
be counteracted by the higher capital gains tax. Thirdly, if households believe that the property tax will 
in some way be increased in the future, it is not certain that they will be prepared to increase their 
borrowing.  
As I said, it is not easy to measure the overall effects of the changed taxes. This is a subject which I 
believe we will have reason to discuss further in the future. 
In the slightly longer term, however, developments in indebtedness and also property prices will slow 
down. Quite simply, it is not sustainable in the long run for households to allow their debts to grow 
more rapidly than their incomes. Households would ultimately be unable to pay their loans. In the long 
run it is more probable that indebtedness and house prices will increase roughly at the same rate as 
nominal growth in the economy. This type of adjustment to more restrained growth rates will normally 
occur  smoothly,  as  households  begin  to  feel  that  their  finances  cannot  tolerate  a  higher  level  of 
indebtedness. If there is an overly sharp correction, it could lead to weak growth in the economy for a 
long period of time. In this case it would also have effects on inflation. 
Given these consequences, it is not reasonable to entirely ignore the risks with such rapid growth in 
house prices and loans. There may also be justification for taking these factors into account when we 
make our monetary policy decisions. To contribute to some extent to a smoother adjustment, we have 
therefore chosen on a couple of occasions to raise the interest rate slightly sooner than planned. This 
method of reasoning was also one reason why I entered a reservation against the decision to keep the 
repo rate unchanged at the most recent monetary policy meeting at the beginning of May. I advocated 
raising the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points. However, this is merely a question of fairly marginal 
adjustments in the timing of our interest rate decisions. Seen in a longer-term perspective, I believe 
that these considerations benefit stability both in the real economy and inflation. But I wish to point out 
that neither house prices nor household indebtedness have any independent significance for monetary 
policy. The important factors here are inflation prospects and developments in the real economy.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me summarize. In recent years we have seen prices soar with regard to both commercial property 
and housing. The rapid price increase has gone hand in hand with a substantial increase in household 
debts. At present I am not particularly concerned that these prices will lead to problems for financial 
stability.  But  this  is  a  development  that  is  not  sustainable  in  the  long  term.  House  prices  and 
household  indebtedness  cannot  increase  faster  than  household  incomes  in  the  long  run. Otherwise 
there is a risk of imbalances building up, which may be costly for the economy. We at the Riksbank will 
therefore be closely watching future developments.  
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2007
