Jean-Pierre Roth: SNB commemorative publication “The Swiss National Bank 
1907-2007” 
Remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank and 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  launch  of  the 
commemorative publication “The Swiss National Bank 1907–2007”, Zurich, 21 June 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  with  pleasure  and  some  pride  that  I  present  our  commemorative  publication  today  or  –  as  the 
German language puts it so well – our festschrift, or celebratory work. There is indeed good reason to 
celebrate.  One  hundred  years  of  doing  business,  crowned  for  the  most  part  with  success,  certainly 
warrants  celebration.  The  publication  of  a  festschrift  is  one  of  the  events  being  held  to  mark  this 
anniversary. 
It  is  the  fourth  such  work  to  be  published,  following  on  from  those  of  1932,  1957  and  1982.  It  is 
somewhat  different,  however,  insofar  as  it  commemorates  an  entire  century  of  the  National  Bank’s 
existence. 
We wanted this commemorative publication to be a learned work, which at the same time is accessible 
to a very broad readership. We wanted it to be both unpretentious and modern, yet in keeping with the 
tradition of the previous works. 
I make no secret of the fact that significant resources were deployed to prepare the book. Work first 
started over three years ago and some fifty or so bank employees were involved in the project. 
The work which I am presenting to you today is divided into three sections. The first tells the history of 
the SNB over the first seventy-five years of its existence. As the previous commemorative publications 
have already dealt in detail with this period, it was no longer necessary to recount all the events again. 
We thought that it would be more interesting to take a fresh and critical look at certain episodes from a 
historical perspective. This is why we called upon the services of three distinguished economists and 
historians, asking them to explore this period, and leaving them free to choose the salient points of 
their analysis. Michael Bordo of Rutgers University and Harold James of Princeton University took a 
detailed  look  into  the  first  half-century  of  the  SNB,  in  other  words,  from  its  Jean-Pierre  Roth  SNB 
founding in 1907 to the end of the Second World War. An exciting yet troubled time, which included 
the surge in inflation that came in the aftermath of the First World War, the laborious return to the gold 
standard, the 1936 devaluation, and the SNB’s activities during the Second World War. Peter Bernholz 
of the University of Basel is the author of the second chapter within this first part. He devoted himself 
to the period from 1945 to the early 1980s, including the return to convertibility, the Bretton Woods 
period, the transition to flexible exchange rates and initial experiences with an autonomous monetary 
policy. I am pleased to point out that the doors of the SNB’s archives were opened unreservedly to 
these authors. 
The second part of the publication is more traditional. It is devoted to the last twenty-five years and 
deals with various aspects of the SNB’s activities and its nature, ranging from monetary policy to the 
governance  of  the  bank  and  including  the  new  emphasis  placed  on  financial  stability,  changing 
international relations, the renewed statutory framework in which we operate, and the adoption of a 
modern  approach  to  managing  our  currency  reserves.  This  second  section,  divided  into  eight 
chapters,  was  penned  entirely  by  bank  staff.  We  did  not  want  a  purely  descriptive  text.  On  the 
contrary, we asked the authors to adopt an analytical, critical approach, concentrating on key issues. 
In order to recognise the authors and their contribution to the book – and this is a departure from the 
previous commemorative works – they have been personally named at the beginning of each article. 
Some forty in-house authors contributed to the work. 
For the third and last part of the book, which looks to the future, we took a step back. We called on the 
services  of  eight  Swiss  and  foreign  economists,  all  specialists  of  global  renown,  asking  them  to 
discuss those issues of greatest concern to today’s central banks. We asked Ernst Baltensperger of 
the University of Berne to provide a more academic assessment of the SNB’s monetary policy over the 
last  twenty-five  years.  We  called  upon  Marvin  Goodfriend  of  Carnegie  Mellon  University  to  give  his 
views on the optimum inflation rate, Frederic Mishkin of Columbia University to write about the policy 
of inflation targeting and to tell us to what extent it is truly a new phenomenon, and William White of 
BIS Review 71/2007 
 1
the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  in  Basel  to  address  the  difficult  question  of  whether  price 
stability  is  really  enough.  Manfred  Neumann  from  the  University  of  Bonn  was  asked  to  provide  an 
assessment of fixed and flexible exchange rate systems, Peter Kenen of Princeton University to give 
us his opinion on the need for foreign exchange reserves in flexible exchange rate systems, Martin 
Hellwig from the Max Planck Institute in Bonn to reveal his thinking on the co-existence of the Swiss 
franc  and  the  euro,  and  Alexander  Swoboda  of  the  Graduate  Institute  of  International  Studies  in 
Geneva  to  share  his  ideas  with  us  on  the  reform  of  the  international  monetary  system.  This  third 
section, which is aimed rather more than the first two sections at a specialised audience, is available in 
English only. The two other sections, meanwhile, are available in French, German, Italian and English. 
It only remains for me to that I hope you will find the book both engaging and interesting. To whet your 
appetite – and here my comments are aimed particularly at the representatives of the press – I should 
like to stress that we have been particularly transparent and candid in preparing this work, something 
which was probably inconceivable just twenty-five years ago. So start looking for the scoops which, no 
doubt, are hiding within the pages of the book – happy hunting! 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2007
