Ardian Fullani: Agreement between the Bank of Albania and the 
Competition Authority 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  signing  of  the 
Memorandum of Understanding, Tirana, 17 July 2007. 
 Dear participants, 
I am pleased to have concluded this co-operation agreement between the Bank of Albania 
and the Competition Authority.  
In  observance  of  the  legal  responsibilities  of  the  institutions  we  represent,  this  agreement 
concludes  the  formal  basis  for  cooperative  efforts,  in  terms  of  achieving  the  objective  of 
enhancing  the  competition  conditions,  in  which  the  banking  and  financial  activity  is  being 
conducted. Fair competition promotes the efficiency in the banking business and refines the 
composition and the functioning of the banking market, by providing significant services to 
clients and the public at large, being users of banking and financial services.  
It has been for some years now that the Albanian economy and the financial system are in 
an intensive process of integration into the regional economies and markets. This process 
requires the improvement of the legal and regulative framework for developing the business 
and the enhancement of the human and institutional capacities to cope with the challenges 
deriving from the economic openness and the enhancement of competition. Considering this 
phase  of  economic  development,  it  is  essential  that  the  regulatory  authorities  of  financial 
markets  and  their  institutions  establish  transparent  and  non-discriminative  conditions  for 
conducting business and moreover, develop necessary instruments to identify and eliminate 
cases  of  abuse  from  the  financial  institutions  in  their  relationships  with  the  other  market 
participants and the clients.  
According to this agreement, the Bank of Albania shall, in fulfilling its supervisory role and in 
co-operation with the Competition Authority, support the latter in identifying the behaviour of 
banks  and  non-bank  financial  institutions,  which  may  distort  competition  and  ultimately, 
maintain an unfair position in the market, set unreal prices for banking products and services 
and discriminate certain clients or part of the public. In such cases, the Bank of Albania will 
require the Competition Authority, to start an investigation procedure, according to the law 
provisions. On the other hand, the Bank of Albania will continue to ensure that the regulatory 
framework  and  the  supervisory  practices  remain  transparent  and  provide  to  all  entities 
meeting  the  law  requirements  equal  terms  for  conducting banking  and  financial activity.  In 
the  context  of  this  co-operation,  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  the  Competition  Authority  shall 
establish  the  format  of  formal  information  exchange,  by  observing  the  requirements  of  the 
law in terms of its quality and characteristics.  
Understandably, we have taken only one step along a very long process, which requires its 
consistency in practice, as well. It is crucial that the importance of this agreement be fully 
comprehended by the staff of both institutions. Its commitment is essential, in order for our 
co-operation to be part of our daily job and add to the efficiency of both institutions and not to 
remain solely on paper.  
The Bank of Albania considers the conclusion of this memorandum as a cornerstone which 
will  overwhelmingly  affect  the  enhancement  of  real  competition  conditions,  in  which  the 
banking and financial activity are currently being conducted. It is worth underlining that fair 
competition promotes the efficiency in the banking business and refines the composition and 
the  functioning  of  the  banking  market.  The  Bank  of  Albania  will  make  its  utmost  efforts  to 
make the co-operation deriving from this agreement as concrete as possible and with direct 
impact on achieving a real, fair and efficient market competition.  
BIS Review 82/2007 
 1
I  take  this  opportunity  to  express  the  Bank  of  Albania  commitment  to  carry  out  all  the 
responsibilities  deriving  from  the  law  and  from  this  agreement.  In  addition,  allow  me  to 
express my appreciation to the Competition Authority and to Ms. Lati for the support granted 
in the conclusion of this agreement. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2007
