Lucas Papademos: European Central Bank’s Annual Report 2006 
Introductory statement by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Strasbourg, 23 April 2007. 
 Madam Chair,  
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs,  
It is a great privilege and pleasure for me to present to you today the ECB’s Annual Report 2006. As 
you  know,  this  is  a  key  aspect  of  the  ECB’s  accountability  obligations  towards  the  European 
Parliament and we welcome this opportunity to explain our policy decisions and report on our activities 
to you. In my introductory remarks, I will first briefly review the economic and monetary developments 
in 2006 and early 2007 and explain the reasons behind the monetary policy decisions that we have 
taken. I would then like to address a number of policy issues examined in the Annual Report, including 
issues pertaining to the stability and integration of Europe’s financial system.  
Before doing so, however, I would like to recall that on 1 January 2007 the euro area welcomed its 
13th member, Slovenia. Accession to the euro area is rightly considered a tremendous success for 
that  country.  Thanks  to  the  diligent  preparations  of  all  parties  concerned,  the  currency  changeover 
from  the  Slovenian  tolar  to  the  euro  went  very  smoothly,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  everybody 
involved, especially the people of Slovenia.  
Economic and monetary issues 
Turning  to  economic  and  monetary  issues,  the  euro  area  economy  expanded  at  a  robust  pace  in 
2006:  real  GDP  grew  by  2.8%  (on  a  working-day  adjusted  basis),  compared  to  1.5%  in  2005.  The 
economic  upswing  was  broad-based,  with  domestic  demand  being  the  main  driver  of  economic 
growth. Sizeable gains in corporate profits and an extended period of favourable financing conditions 
supported  investment  growth.  In  addition,  euro  area  exports  continued  to  benefit  from  a  solid  and 
broad-based  global  economic  expansion.  Labour  market  conditions  in  the  euro  area  improved 
significantly last year. Employment rose by more than 2 million, and the unemployment rate decreased 
further to 7.5% in the fourth quarter of the year. The improvements in the labour market reflected both 
the rebound in aggregate demand and the impact of labour market reforms in a number of euro area 
countries. 
As  regards price developments,  average  annual HICP  inflation was  2.2%  in 2006,  unchanged  from 
2005,  and  above  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability,  i.e.  below  but  close  to  2%.  Annual  inflation 
rates  exhibited  considerable  volatility  over  the  year,  mainly  as  a  result  of  developments  in  energy 
prices. Overall, labour costs increased moderately and contributed to containing domestic inflationary 
pressures  in  the  euro  area,  although  the  situation  varied  greatly  from  country  to  country.  Despite 
significant inflationary shocks in 2006, and the fact that headline inflation was above 2% throughout 
most of the year, longer-term inflation expectations remained anchored to price stability.  
Nevertheless, risks to price stability remained clearly on the upside throughout 2006, on the basis of 
the ECB’s economic and monetary analyses. In addition to the possibility of further oil price increases, 
several other risks were identified. These included: the risk of stronger-than-anticipated pass-through 
of past rises in oil prices; additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those 
already  announced;  and,  more  fundamentally,  the  prospect  of  stronger-than-expected  wage 
developments and potential second-round effects in wage and price-setting behaviour. 
The monetary analysis confirmed, by cross-checking, the assessment of upside risks to price stability. 
Money and credit growth remained very robust during 2006, mainly reflecting the stimulative effects of 
the low level of interest rates and the strength of economic activity. The persistent underlying rate of 
monetary expansion since mid-2004 has resulted in the accumulation of a stock of liquidity which is 
ample by all plausible measures. A broad-based and comprehensive analysis of these developments 
pointed to upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. 
To  address  the  upside  risks  to  price  stability,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  adjusted  the  monetary 
policy stance in 2006 by raising the key ECB interest rates gradually by a total of 125 basis points, 
reaching the level of 3.50% by December 2006. On 8 March 2007 the Governing Council decided to 
BIS Review 39/2007 
 1
raise rates by another 25 basis points because it assessed that upside risks to price stability continued 
to prevail. 
The information which has become available since the last meeting of the Governing Council has lent 
further support to the reasoning behind the decision to raise rates in March. It has also confirmed that 
risks to the medium-term outlook for price stability remain on the upside. In addition to potential further 
oil price increases, these risks relate primarily to stronger than currently expected wage developments 
in an environment of robust growth in employment and activity. In order to sustain robust economic 
growth and foster job creation, wage agreements should take into account productivity developments 
as well as the price competitiveness positions and the prevailing high level of unemployment in many 
economies.  
Cross-checking the outcome of our economic analysis with that of our monetary analysis supports the 
assessment that upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium to longer term. Accordingly, the 
Governing Council will continue to monitor very closely all developments and ensure that risks to price 
stability  over the  medium  term  do not  materialise. Given  the  favourable  economic environment,  the 
Governing  Council  is  of  the  view  that  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  continues  to  be  on  the 
accommodative side, with the key ECB interest rates moderate, money and credit growth vigorous and 
liquidity abundant. Consequently, firm and timely action is warranted to ensure price stability over the 
medium term. 
It is precisely because the ECB has always acted in a firm and timely manner in the past years that 
our monetary policy, with its medium-term orientation, has succeeded in solidly anchoring longer-term 
inflation  expectations  at  levels  broadly  consistent  with  price  stability.  As  explained  on  various 
occasions before, it is through the continued anchoring of inflation expectations that monetary policy 
can make an ongoing contribution towards supporting sustainable economic growth and job creation 
in the euro area. 
Fiscal developments and structural reforms  
Fiscal  developments  in  euro  area  countries  in  2006  turned  out  to  be  significantly  better  than 
anticipated. However, this budgetary improvement was largely the result of buoyant tax revenues in an 
environment  of  stronger-than-expected  economic  growth,  offsetting  in  some  cases  higher-than-
planned public expenditure. Against the background of the current economic “good times”, it remains 
essential  to  step  up  the  pace  of  fiscal  consolidation  in  2007  and  beyond,  allowing  unexpected  tax 
revenue to be fully allocated to deficit and debt reduction. After all, common sense dictates that “the 
best  time  to  repair  the  roof  is  when  the  sun  is  shining”.  It  is  important  that  all  euro  area  countries 
achieve their medium-term objective of a sound fiscal position as soon as possible, and by 2010 at the 
latest. Furthermore, pro-cyclical fiscal policies should be avoided in all countries. It is vital to ensure 
fiscal sustainability in view of ageing populations in order to support long-term growth and facilitate the 
conduct of a stability-oriented monetary policy. 
With regard to structural reforms, euro area countries have become increasingly aware in recent years 
of  the  need  to  adjust  to  the  challenges  of  increased  global  competition,  ageing  populations  and 
accelerating technological change. Countries should make the best use of the current “good times” to 
make further progress on the path of economic reform, especially in view of the positive response of 
the supply side of the economy to the reforms implemented over the past few years. Employment has 
risen significantly, by more than 12 million people since the launch of the euro, and the unemployment 
rate  has  steadily  declined  to  the  lowest  level  since  1993,  although  it  is  still  unacceptably  high. 
Moreover, we have recently witnessed an increase in productivity growth. Although this seems to be 
mainly associated with cyclical factors, there is some evidence that, in certain sectors of the European 
economy, and in a number of euro area countries, efficiency gains of a structural or permanent nature 
are  being  achieved.  For  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  however,  it  is  too  early  to  reach  definite 
conclusions. In order to foster higher and sustained economic growth and job creation and enhance 
the capacity of euro area countries to adjust to shocks, further reforms are needed that can contribute 
to improving the efficiency, flexibility and adaptability of product, labour and financial markets.  
Financial stability outlook  
I would now like to address a number of issues concerning financial stability and integration in the euro 
area. As you know, the ECB monitors and analyses risks to financial stability in order to assess the 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2007
financial system’s shock-absorbing capacity. At the end of 2006, our assessment suggested that the 
main  scenario  for  euro  area  financial  stability  remained  broadly  favourable.  Various  considerations 
underpinned this judgement, including: first, global economic activity was expected to remain robust 
and  become  more  evenly  balanced;  second,  the  credit  quality  of  banks’  key  counterparties  – 
households  and  firms  –  generally  remained  high;  and  third,  euro  area  banks’  profitability  was 
anticipated to strengthen further, their solvency ratios comfortably exceeded regulatory requirements 
and  risk  management  methods  had  greatly  improved.  Against  the  background  of  the  positive 
macroeconomic outlook and benign financing conditions, and in the light of the latest information on 
the euro area banks’ performance, that assessment has been confirmed.  
At the same time, several pre-existing sources of risk and vulnerability remain and some of them might 
even have grown in importance. Among the vulnerabilities in financial markets, I would like to highlight 
the following three: first, the low levels of long-term yields and credit spreads in some markets make 
them vulnerable to a reappraisal of risks; second, unabated growth in the volume and complexity of 
new  financial  instruments,  combined  with  the  increasing  presence  of  lightly  regulated  and  highly 
leveraged  financial  institutions  in  the  same  markets could  have made  them  vulnerable  to disruptive 
adjustments with possibly unforeseen consequences as it is not always clear where the risk exposures 
ultimately  lie;  and  third,  rapid  re-leveraging  in  some  parts  of  the  euro  area  corporate  sector,  partly 
induced by a surge in leverage buy-out activity, makes a turn in the credit cycle increasingly probable.  
The global financial market turbulence of late-February and early-March of this year vividly highlighted 
the existence of some of these market vulnerabilities. It seems to have reflected an abrupt reappraisal 
and re-pricing of risks in response to a combination of triggering events, especially a rising concern 
about rapidly deteriorating credit quality in the US sub-prime mortgage market and, more generally, 
increased uncertainty about the macroeconomic outlook in the United States. This temporary increase 
in  financial  market  volatility  served  to  illustrate  how  an  abrupt  decline  in  risk  appetite,  when  asset 
prices may have departed from intrinsic values, can result in very sharp changes in asset valuations, 
even when changes in the economic fundamentals are relatively small. 
Looking ahead, in this context of what we have called “pricing for perfection” – in the sense that some 
asset  valuations  appear  to  be  based  on  highly  optimistic  expectations  about  future  economic 
outcomes  and  very  low  risk  premia  –  some  markets  could  continue  to  prove  vulnerable  to  adverse 
disturbances and changing market sentiment. Added to this, there is uncertainty about how markets 
for  innovative  and  complex  financial  instruments  (in  particular,  structured  credit  derivatives)  will 
perform  and  how  lightly  regulated  and  highly  leveraged  financial  institutions  will  behave  in  a  more 
challenging macrofinancial environment.  
That said, financial innovation and the growth of alternative investment vehicles, such as hedge funds, 
have had, in our assessment, an overall positive effect on financial markets in Europe, contributing 
significantly to enhanced market liquidity and greater pricing efficiency, portfolio diversification and a 
better  distribution  of  risks  within  the  financial  system.  However,  hedge  funds’  activities  are  also 
associated with potential operational and systemic risks. Moreover, the monitoring and management 
of these risks by their counterparties and investors have become more complex. An appropriate level 
of  transparency  is  therefore  important  for  effective  market  discipline  and  for  the  assessment  and 
management of risk by the counterparties of such institutions and by investors. 
A final point I would like to stress with regard to the activities of the Eurosystem in the field of financial 
stability concerns its ability to cope with a possible financial crisis affecting the euro area. To this end, 
the Eurosystem carried out a comprehensive financial crisis simulation exercise in May 2006 which 
confirmed its preparedness to deal with potentially systemic events that could affect the euro area’s 
financial system. This exercise also contributed to the enhancement of the existing arrangements for 
managing financial crises. 
European financial integration 
Before  closing,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  on European  financial  integration.  A  well-integrated 
financial system in Europe is beneficial for the European economy for a number of important reasons: 
it promotes economic growth by raising the economy’s growth potential and adaptability; it enhances 
the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses  across  the  euro  area;  and  it  is 
expected to positively affect financial and macroeconomic stability. Although intensified cross-border 
financial links may imply potentially an increased risk of financial contagion, the improved risk-sharing 
made possible by deeper and more integrated markets should contribute to a more balanced systemic 
BIS Review 39/2007 
 3
response of the economy to asymmetric shocks – which is, of course, of particular relevance for the 
smooth functioning of Economic and Monetary Union. This is not a theoretical argument. The evidence 
available for the United States shows that banking integration across the federal states has led to a 
better alignment of business cycles and a reduction in the volatility of economic activity, employment 
and personal income growth across the United States. 
Given the importance of financial integration for the reasons I have mentioned, the ECB actively seeks 
to promote this process through a variety of measures, for example the provision of central banking 
services that foster integration and the regular monitoring and reporting on the progress of financial 
integration with a view to enhancing knowledge and raising awareness of this process. In line with the 
latter objective, the ECB launched in March a new annual publication entitled “Financial integration in 
Europe”, which provides, among other things, an overview of the main Eurosystem activities pursued 
in 2006 that contributed to advancing European financial integration.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2007
