Christian Noyer: The challenges of financial liberalisation for emerging market 
economies 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, to RBI staff, Reserve Bank of India, 
Central Office, Mumbai, 14 May 2007. 
 I am very pleased and honoured to be here and I want to thank warmly my good friend, Dr Reddy, for 
having invited me to address the staff of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). 
The BIS recently announced that the RBI Vice-Governor, Mr Rakesh Mohan, will chair a new working 
group on "Capital flows and emerging economies". I would like to congratulate him for accepting to 
explore  this  complex  issue.  I  will  offer  some  views  on  a  related  topic:  "the  challenges  of  financial 
liberalisation for Emerging Market Economies (EMEs)". 
Financial liberalisation is defined here as the dismantling of internal and external controls on capital 
flows. It exhibits many positive aspects, for instance:  
• 
it contributes to improving global capital allocation efficiency, be it at the national or at the 
international level;  
it fosters competition on capital markets and consequently reduces the cost of capital as well 
as it brings about enhanced risk management;  
it also increases the role of market discipline for firm managers and policy makers since it 
raises the costs of poor governance.  
  While  there  is  a  consensus  about  these  positive  effects,  experience  has  shown  that  financial 
openness modifies the balance of risks at the macroeconomic level:  
• 
first,  it  may  reduce  some  risks,  for  instance,  by  decreasing  the  correlation  between 
investment and savings;  
second,  it  may  nevertheless  increase  other  risks:  for  instance,  greater  competition  in  the 
banking  system  may  prompt  strong  credit  growth  with  a  loosening  of  credit  standards,  as 
domestic banks try to maintain their profits and market shares;  
third, it may even create new risks, for instance through financial contagion, if risk appetite 
for emerging markets suddenly reverses, given the prominent role played by hedge funds in 
cross-border investments and the sudden shifts in their asset allocations. In this regard, the 
Banque  de  France  recently  published  a  special  issue  of  its  Financial  Stability  Review 
devoted to Hedge Funds, which may be of interest to the RBI (www.banque-france.fr). 
  In contrast with the French experience which took place in the 1980s, the Indian process of financial 
liberalisation takes place in a context of intense globalisation and accelerated innovation. It is gradual 
but successful and it is no surprise that India was one of the first countries to participate voluntarily in 
the IMF Financial Stability Assessment Program (FSAP). In my view, the progressive and transparent 
character  of  this  process  is  fundamental  to  guarantee  that  a  country  reaps  the  full  benefits  of  its 
integration into the world economy. 
The  lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  a  comparison  with  the  French  experience  may  seem  limited 
since, in the 1980s, France was facing capital outflows, whereas emerging economies are now often 
facing  speculative  capital  inflows.  However,  I  believe  that,  while  the  challenge  has  become  more 
demanding, successful financial liberalisation for EMEs still rests on the same two key conditions that 
applied to France: 
• 
• 
I will illustrate these two conditions in the reminder of my speech. 
Building a resilient domestic financial system while or before opening the capital account.  
Shaping appropriate institutions and policies. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 1
1.  
A successful liberalisation requires to strengthen the domestic financial system while, 
or sometimes before, opening the capital account 
I will briefly remind you why and how this can be done.  
First, why? This is because an efficient financial sector ensures both a better financing of and a better 
protection for the economy. 
On the one hand, it ensures a better financing of the economy by broadening the investor base and 
enhancing their ability to make use of diversified financial instruments. 
Not only does competition within the financial sector contribute to limiting the cost of capital but it also 
fosters  innovation  and  thus  allows  for  more  efficient  risk  management.  For  example,  securitisation 
provides financial institutions with instruments to manage the composition of their balance sheets and 
thus  contributes  to  buttressing  credit  distribution  while  supporting  the  development  of  financial 
markets.  Moreover  the  development  of  bond  markets  allows  for  a  better  financing  of  public  deficits 
while providing instruments that enable international investors to diversify their portfolios. It provides a 
reference for the market and may thus pave the way for the issuance of private bonds. 
On the other hand, an efficient and developed financial sector offers better protection for the economy 
against the risks of a capital account crisis. Most of the EMEs’ crises of the 1990s were triggered or 
accompanied by banking crises. To improve resilience to external shocks, it is essential that financial 
players be able to manage interest and exchange rate risks in a more flexible environment, both for 
themselves and their customers.  
Now, how to achieve this in a smooth way? 
There is a kind of paradox in the interaction between internal and external liberalisation: the former 
may be a pre-requisite for the latter but external openness may help stimulate and enhance domestic 
financial reforms. Actually, in the absence of the challenge created by foreign competition, domestic 
financial reforms may not be broad and fast enough.  
Moreover,  in  terms  of  best  practices  dissemination,  the  presence  of  foreigners  in  the  capital  of 
domestic  banks  may  ensure  a  faster  adoption  of  international  standards  and  codes,  especially 
concerning the monitoring, control and management of financial and operational risks. This is crucial 
for the resilience and the stability of the financial system. The report of the CGFS Working Group on 
"FDI in the financial sector of EMEs" highlighted that a lasting benefit of these FDI was their effects on 
the financial sector efficiency, thanks to the generally associated technology transfers and innovations 
in products and processes. In addition to their lower volatility, this is one more reason why attracting 
long-term  capital  flows,  such  as  FDIs,  seems  preferable  to  catching  short-term  flows,  although  the 
lessons from the Chilean experience versus some Asian misadventures suggest there is no unique 
model  for  all.  But  I  saw  that  the  size  of  FDIs  in  India  which  had  been  hitherto  rather  low  is  rising 
significantly (16 billions USD in 2006-07) which is good sign of its attractiveness. In France also we 
pay a lot of attention to inflows of FDIs (above 60 billions in 2006) as they matter as well in a more 
mature economy.  
So when setting the pace of internal versus external liberalisation, the authorities have to strike the 
right  balance  and  rhythm  between  the  two  sides.  In  this  respect,  let  me  evoke  briefly  the  way  we 
managed this process in France in the 1980s. Financial liberalisation started with the domestic side 
by: 
• 
• 
Modernising the money market;  
Deepening the bond markets, using the public sector as a benchmark (in order to price risks 
through a full yield curve for risk-free assets);  
Broadening the basis of the equity markets (including privatisations);  
Last but not least, creating new financial markets (futures, options…). 
• 
• 
Meanwhile, but sometimes with lags, the French capital account was liberalised. We switched from a 
situation, in 1983, where the exchange rate controls were at their tightest, following speculative attacks 
and three devaluations in 18 months, to a gradual removal of these controls beginning in 1984 and 
completed  in  1990.  Trade-related  operations  were  gradually  liberalised,  followed  by  most  financial 
transactions and, finally, residents were allowed to freely open foreign currency accounts and French 
banks to lend French francs to non–residents.  
2 
 BIS Review 64/2007
Of course, the Indian experience differs from the French one as there is no "one-size-fits-all" transition 
process. And I would be very interested in listening to your views on this. 
2.  
But before, let me remind you that, to be successful, it is not sufficient to improve the 
financial system: shaping appropriate institutions and economic policies is of the 
essence 
The  need  to  set  in  place  strong  institutions  should  never  be  underestimated.  A  G20  work  entitled 
"Institution building in the financial sector" (in which both India and France participated) stressed the 
importance of solid institutions along with deep and sophisticated financial markets as key elements to 
maximise  the  benefits  of  globalisation  and  reduce  the  risks  of  financial  crises.  An  appropriate 
institutional  framework  includes  among  others  a  well  functioning  legal  system,  a  reliable  payment 
system, a proper framework for regulation and supervision, an appropriate deposit insurance scheme, 
and  propitious  conditions  for  implementing  new  developments  in  information  and  communication 
technology. 
As a central banker, I will of course argue that the role of the central Bank is crucial. It should be the 
guardian of the health of the "financial ecosystem" through reinforced surveillance and a continuous 
improvement  of  the  regulatory  and  legal  framework.  Sound  supervision  must  be  promoted  by  an 
independent  body,  which  may  be  more  or  less  related  to  the  central  bank.  In  France  as  in  India, 
banking supervision is indeed implemented by the central bank staff. Sound supervision and a clear 
legal  framework  in  turn  are  likely  to  encourage  foreign  participation  and  maximise  the  associated 
benefits in terms of best practices.  
The need for appropriate supervision is indeed not reduced but modified or may even be increased in 
case of financial liberalisation. For instance, a working group in process at the BIS, in which both the 
RBI  and  the  BDF  are  currently  participating,  shows  that  the  development  of  local  bond  markets 
changes  the  types  of  risks  faced  domestically  from  currency  risks  to  interest  rate  risks  or  maturity 
mismatches. This requires to enhance and control adequate risk management in the banking sector 
and in those institutions in which the risk may have been transferred. Indeed financial innovations such 
as credit risk transfers may well spread risks but risk does not disappear.  
The central bank is also responsible for producing and disseminating various sets of monetary and 
financial statistics whose quality is of utmost importance for policy makers and investors. An efficient 
statistical apparatus provides the basis for financial transparency, thus contributing to disseminating 
best practices in terms of governance.  
Besides,  institutional  quality  also  strongly  influences  the  composition  of  inflows  into  emerging 
economies.  This  is  a  key  determinant  of  FDI  flows,  which  tend  to  increase  the  benefits  of  financial 
integration.  
The need for sound economic policies and strategies should not either be neglected.  
In  a  globalised  world  where countries  compete  to attract  foreign  capital,  sound  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies  influence  not  only  the  amount  but  the  composition  of  inflows.  Sound  domestic  policies 
strengthen the resilience of the economy to external shocks and thus maximise the growth benefits of 
capital account liberalisation.  
Recent crises remind us how macroeconomic imbalances may be exacerbated by financial fragilities 
and trigger capital account problems affecting economic growth. For instance, experience shows that 
excessive fiscal deficits are more dangerous with open capital markets. Actually, market discipline is 
not always at play or sufficient if there is excessive appetite for risk and not enough discrimination. 
Therefore, internal rules as well as Government commitments may be needed as illustrated by the so-
called European Stability and Growth Pact.  
In the same way, structural policies aiming at improving the efficiency of the labour and good markets 
shall accompany financial liberalisation. They are indeed needed to enhance the capacity of the real 
economy  to  attract  and  allocate  capital  as  well  as  to  reduce  vulnerabilities  and  absorb  potential 
shocks.  Here  again,  there  is  a  nexus  in  the  appropriate  rhythm  and  interaction  between  the 
liberalisation  of  financial  versus  real  markets.  Once  financial  liberalisation  has  started,  the  process 
benefits from continuous innovation and from its own impetus. The same does not apply to reforms in 
the labour and good markets where rigidities and obstacles are often deeply rooted. 
BIS Review 64/2007 
 3
Lastly, better integration into the global economy requires an appropriate exchange rate strategy. An 
emerging economy with high productivity gains and potential growth in the tradable sector is prone to 
receive large capital inflows and have a real appreciation of its currency in the long term. The latter 
may come either or both from nominal appreciation or higher relative inflation. 
Arguably,  exchange  rate  appreciation,  which  may  result  in  an  overvalued  currency,  is  a  risk  for 
emerging  economies  that  conduct  export-led  growth  strategies.  In  order  to  stem  appreciation  and 
maintain  their  competitiveness,  some  emerging  economies  –  like  China  –  have  accumulated  ever 
larger amounts of foreign reserves. However, undervalued currencies also represent a significant risk, 
not only for inflation but also because it allows foreigners to buy cheaply national assets. In addition, 
undervalued currencies contribute to ballooning global imbalances. "En passant", I am pleased to note 
that  both  India  and  the  Euro  area  post  significant  but  not  extravagant  levels  of  reserves  and  that 
neither is responsible for the persistence of global imbalances. 
Greater  use  of  exchange  rate  flexibility  in  emerging  countries  that  have  experienced  an  excessive 
accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  therefore  one  factor  in  the  resolution  of  global 
imbalances.  Moreover,  it  may  contribute  to  facilitating  domestic  monetary  policy  management 
(decreasing  inflationary  pressures)  and  makes  it  possible  to  better  contain  liquidity  growth  and  the 
risks associated with reserve accumulation and sterilisation. 
Of  course,  the  gradual  implementation  of  exchange  rate  flexibility  requires  that  controls  on  capital 
flows be lifted at a suitable pace. East Asia experienced this and I am eager to listen to your views on 
the interaction between financial reforms, institutions and structural or macro-economic policies. 
To  conclude,  let  me  say  that,  in  the  liberalisation  process  in  which  France  and  later  India  have 
engaged, both may learn from each other since they share similar features and are key players in a 
globalised world.  
To this end, cooperation should be strengthened.  
Cooperation  between  the  RBI  and  the  Banque  de  France  is  especially  relevant  since  our  two 
institutions look alike, for instance in terms of diversity in activities, structures (including branches) or 
staff recruitment for life through competitive examinations.  
At the financial industry level, more cross-fertilisation should also help. The French financial industry 
includes some of the largest European banks and insurance companies. Their business models are 
solid and based on a broad domestic market and best international practices. This enables them to 
generate strong profitability and develop abroad.  
But above all, the French financial industry has some specific features that may be valuable for Indian 
players. In particular, I would like to mention:  
• 
The historical links with the public sector, such as in India where public banks still dominate 
the banking sector and  
Banking  sector  expertise  both  in  a  rural  environment,  especially  relevant  for  India,  and  in 
large industrial groups, as indeed Indian industrial groups are active internationally. 
 In this respect, I am very pleased to participate with the RBI in the launching of the first French-Indian 
Financial Forum on May 16, in Mumbai. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2007
