Guy Quaden: Structural reforms in Europe – harmonisation or 
decentralisation? 
Exposé  by Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the  Central  Bank  of 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 12 January 2007. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  my  colleague  Governor  Mersch  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  address  this 
assembly, where I recognise a good many Luxembourg, Belgian and fellow European friends. They 
immediately bring to mind the close relations between our two countries, including close links on the 
monetary front for more than 80 years. I am pleased to see that these links have not been broken 
down within the wider European monetary union, which Luxembourg and Belgium have belonged to 
since 1999 and which expanded to 13 countries just a few days ago. 
The theme of our discussion is obviously something that is at the heart of my preoccupations, and for 
several reasons. 
Firstly, as an economist, understanding how the economy works and proposing ways of improving it, 
through structural reform, is almost a raison d'être. 
Then,  as  a  central  banker,  along  with  my  colleagues  in  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  I  put  out  a 
reminder  of  the  need  for  structural  reform  each  month,  in  the  explanation  of  our  monetary  policy 
decisions. What might sound like the monetary authorities singing the same old song to politicians at 
little cost does in fact reflect the importance of the two-way interaction between monetary policy and 
structural reform. 
On  the  one  hand,  by  ensuring  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and  making  sure  that  inflation 
expectations  are  well  anchored,  monetary  policy  helps  foster  a  macroeconomic  environment  that  is 
more stable and therefore conducive to more growth and employment. The current low level of long-
term  interest  rates  is  without  a  doubt  largely  attributable  to  the  credibility  earned  through  monetary 
policy. This achievement needs to be preserved; not least because it helps make structural reforms 
easier to implement. 
On the other side of the coin, by improving the economy’s capacity to adapt and raising the growth 
potential,  structural  reforms  facilitate  monetary  policy-making.  Therefore,  my  colleagues  and  I 
welcome the efforts that have already been made in areas where the benefits are only reaped in the 
long term, while political considerations tend to be rather short-term. 
And  lastly,  as  both  a  Belgian  and  European  citizen,  it  seems  quite  legitimate  to  aspire  to  a  society 
organised in such a way that everyone can put their talents to good use, be rewarded for their efforts, 
but  also  give  and  take  a  sufficient  dose  of  solidarity,  and  live  in  a  quality  environment.  Indeed,  the 
overall objective of structural reform must be to raise the standard of living in a sustainable way for 
each of us today, and for generations to come. 
I believe that the diagnosis for the European economy is already well known. Labour force mobilisation 
is  relatively  weak  in  Europe  -  and  this  has  certainly  proved  to  be  the  case  in  Belgium  -  while 
productivity gains have slowed down, despite remarkable scientific and technological progress. In the 
light of these observations, there has been a consensus for several years now - under the influence of 
work  carried  out  notably  by  the  IMF,  the  OECD  and  the  European  Commission  -  on  the  need  to 
stimulate labour market participation, reinforce the quality of the labour force, improve the functioning 
of markets in goods and services, including financial services, and step up the innovation effort. This 
strategy was endorsed by the governments of the European Union Member States at the March 2000 
European Council in Lisbon. 
I  think  we  have  to  acknowledge  that  progress  has  been  made,  albeit  at  varying  speeds  from  one 
country to another, but that there is also still a long way to go. European economies today are faced 
with many challenges. I am of course thinking of globalisation of the economy, demographic shifts and 
climate change. The current improvement in the economic climate must not be used as an excuse for 
postponing reforms; on the contrary, it should be seen as an opportunity to put them into practice with 
even greater resolve. 
My exposé will obviously not cover the whole issue of structural reform. Owing to time constraints, I 
will not go into nonetheless important topics like education and innovation. In line with what has been 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 1
suggested, I would like to illustrate the subject of reform with some concrete examples drawn from my 
country’s experience and pointing up encouraging progress, even though it is often still not enough. 
 First  and  foremost,  in  Belgium’s  case,  reforms  were  carried  out  in  areas  where  they  were  deemed 
most  urgent.  Significant  progress  has  been  made  towards  improving  the  country’s  public  finance 
situation, which had become unsustainable in the 1980s, and with wage-setting, taking account of the 
need  to  remain  sufficiently  competitive,  because  Belgium  has  such  an  open  economy.  Apart  from 
these characteristics that are peculiar to the Belgian economy, reforms have also been started in the 
field of pensions and employment of the older age bands of the population. 
1. 
On the public finance front, the results so far are quite satisfactory. Belgium brought down its 
budget deficit from 8 p.c. of GDP in 1992 to less than 3 p.c. in 1997, which was one of the 
conditions  for  joining  the  monetary  union.  With  the  exception  of  2005,  a  year  for  which 
Eurostat  considers  that  the  government’s  takeover  of  a  public  enterprise’s  debt  should  be 
accounted  for  as  non-recurring  expenditure,  public  sector  accounts  have  been  in  balance 
since the year 2000. 
Of course, a central banker must never let complacency creep in. So I make no secret of the 
fact that these results have been helped along a little by low interest rates, one-off revenues 
and, more recently, a favourable economic situation. On the other hand, I urge even greater 
ambition.  For,  in  order  to  meet  the  cost  to  the  budget  of  population  ageing  in  the  coming 
decades (healthcare, pensions, etc.), it is structural surpluses we should be showing as soon 
as possible. 
Even if it is advisable to further speed up the trend, the debt ratio, which reached a peak of 
133.5 p.c. of GDP in 1993, has nonetheless been on a continual downward path since then 
and dropped below the 90 p.c. mark in 2006. 
The return to a sustainable long-term budgetary policy has been made possible thanks to 
credible commitments, based on the opinions of independent institutions. 
EU  constraints  and  peer  pressure  have  certainly  served  as  an  incentive,  especially  in  the 
form of the multilateral surveillance system laid down by the Maastricht Treaty and then by 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  European  budgetary  standards  have  been  a  powerful 
disciplinary tool in preparing for Economic and Monetary Union membership. They remain 
effective in that respect. They have also played a big part in persuading the public to accept 
the need for the adjustment process. 
To prepare the ground for its work on the budget, the Belgian government draws widely on 
the expertise and advice of independent national bodies. On the one hand, it has entrusted 
the  National  Accounts  Institute  with  the  task  of  preparing  the  macroeconomic  forecasts 
which, in principle, serve as the basis for drawing up public budgets. On some occasions, 
the government has chosen to add a safety margin to these forecasts. Conversely, credibility 
factors  effectively  prevent 
into  consideration  a  more 
favourable 
macroeconomic scenario than that published by the National Accounts Institute. 
In addition, and again acting independently, the High Council of Finance, in whose work the 
National  Bank  is  involved,  draws  up  recommendations  for  the  course  of  the  public  sector 
borrowing requirement. These targets – certainly ambitious, but realistic all the same - have 
formed  the  basis  for  successive  governments’  budget  plans.  These  recommendations  go 
even further than strict respect for EU rules, since they take into account future requirements 
stemming  from  the  ageing  population.  Moreover,  the  High  Council  of  Finance,  which  also 
comprises experts appointed by the Communities and Regions, contributes to ensuring the 
necessary  coordination  between  the  various  levels  of  power  that  make  up  the  country’s 
system  of  government.  It  effectively  transposes  the  general  objectives  for  all  the  public 
authorities into specific recommendations for each entity. These are given a formal setting in 
cooperation agreements between the federal government and the communities and regions, 
a sort of internal stability pact. 
We could look at it as an example of good practice. Besides, the beneficial role of the NAI 
and the High Council of Finance in preparing the ground for consolidation of public finances 
is acknowledged in recent IMF and EC publications. 
taking 
from 
it 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2007
2. 
3. 
Unlike  the  budgetary  procedures,  the  automatic  wage-indexation  mechanism  used  in 
Belgium meets with almost unanimous disapproval by the international institutions, because 
of the nominal rigidities it risks causing. Along with Luxembourg, Belgium is certainly in good 
company here, but we are quite isolated among the European countries, even if several of 
them have partial indexation systems. Are Belgium and Luxembourg right to go it alone or 
not ? In my view, in the Belgian case the question calls for a carefully weighed-up response. 
The  wage-indexation  mechanism  has  been  around  for  a  long  time  in  Belgium.  The  first 
collective agreements on the subject were concluded as early as 1920, notably in the mining 
industry, and, after a wage freeze during the second world war, they were widely reinstated 
at the end of it. The wage-indexation mechanism has become an essential element of a wide 
social  consensus,  but  at  one  time,  it  also  risked  undermining  business  competitiveness. 
Index-linking was also temporarily suspended following the devaluation of the Belgian franc 
in 1982. 
The need to keep a competitive edge led to a thorough reform in 1994. The government laid 
down  a  new  requirement  for  the  so-called  health  index  to  be  used  as  a  reference  for 
indexation rather than the general consumer price index. A number of products like tobacco, 
alcoholic drinks, petrol and diesel are not taken into account in calculating the health index. 
In this way, any increase in taxes and excise duties on these products, especially tobacco 
and petrol, is no longer passed onto wages and prices and, on the other hand, second-round 
effects on wages from a sharp rise in oil prices are limited. This goes a long way towards 
explaining why, unlike what happened during the 1973 and 1979 oil crises, nominal wages 
have not been caught up in an inflationary spiral in recent years. 
No doubt driven on by the same desire for competitiveness, but also by the need to rein in 
public finances and inflation, I understand that the Luxembourg government also decided in 
spring 2006, after negotiating with the social partners in the tripartite coordination committee, 
to adjust the automatic indexation mechanism until 2009, by delaying the point in time when 
wages are indexed. And it decided to neutralise certain taxes, excise duties, fees and other 
contributions in the reference index for index-linking. 
While the indexation system, after being thoroughly reformed, remains an acquired right for 
both employees and for recipients of social benefits, the total development in private-sector 
wages has also been controlled since 1996 by the wage norm-another distinctive feature of 
the  Belgian  system.  This  indicative  norm  is  set  every  two  years  by  the  social  partners 
(employers and trade unions) in line with the expected evolution of hourly labour costs in the 
three main neighbouring countries (Germany, France and the Netherlands). It builds into the 
wage-formation  process  an  explicit  reference  to  the  external  situation  and  thus  the 
competitiveness of the economy. It is a strong coordinating tool for negotiations at sectoral 
level.  Among  these  sectors,  the  so-called  "all-in"  agreements,  introducing  a  corrective 
mechanism in the event of higher indexation than anticipated during the negotiations, have 
mushroomed. 
All in all, I would say that if we didn’t have wage indexation, we wouldn’t have to invent it. 
But, taking account of the built-in control features, now keeping it within limits, indexation in 
Belgium is not - or to be more precise, is no longer - the bugbear still decried by so many 
international institutions. 
On the other hand, I wholeheartedly share these same international institutions’ opinion on 
the need to raise the rate of employment in Belgium. At just 61 p.c. of the population aged 
between 15 and 64, Belgium’s employment rate is still noticeably lower than the average in 
Europe, not to mention other parts of the world. The boost it needs concerns, in particular, 
those  groups  that  are  under-represented  on  the  labour  market  –  young  people,  women, 
people of foreign origin and especially the relatively older groups of the potentially-working 
population. 
Raising  the  rate  of  employment  among  the  over-55s  is  essential  both  to  guarantee  the 
financial viability of the legal pension system and to reinforce the economy’s medium- and 
long-term growth potential. Quite paradoxically, the low rate of employment can be regarded 
as a pool of unused potential. However, tapping this potential is proving particularly difficult 
because the reforms we need to implement in this field frequently come up against strong 
resistance, from workers and employers alike. 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 3
Action along these lines has already been taken in Belgium. 
As  early  as  1996,  the  federal  government  got  down  to  tackling  a  major  reform  of  the 
pensions  regime  for  employees  and  the  self-employed,  by  gradually  raising  the  statutory 
retirement age for women, from 60 years at the beginning of 1997 to 65 on 1 January 2009. 
By then, it will be the same as the legal retirement age for men, which is helping to bring 
down  the  cost  of  population  ageing.  More  women  staying  on  in  the  labour  force  has  also 
helped push up the employment rate among 55 to 64 year-olds, a rate which rose from 26 
p.c. in 2000 to 32 p.c. in 2005, even though this is still very low. 
The  exemption  from  seeking  work  granted  to  older  unemployed  people  provided  an 
important  opening  for  early  retirement  from  the  labour  market.  The  age  limit  for  this 
exemption, which was set at 50 years until 2002, has been raised gradually to reach 58 in 
mid-2004. 
In 2005, the government launched another big reform whose main objective is to raise the 
employment rate among older people, above all by boosting the labour supply. It is known as 
the Solidarity Pact between the generations. 
The most significant measures concerned early retirement. This scheme has been used a lot 
from the end of the 1970s onwards, initially along with business restructuring efforts, but it 
quickly became widespread. At one time, the early retirement age was brought down to 55, 
and even to 50 in companies in difficulty or undergoing restructuring. 
These  conditions  have  become  unsustainable  now  that  people  are  living  longer  and  the 
population is ageing. The Pact brings the statutory early retirement age up to 60 years from 
2008 onwards, with a seniority condition which will be gradually raised to 35 years. Various 
measures have also been taken to limit the use of early retirement schemes in the event of 
mass  redundancies,  notably  by  giving  priority  to  active  employment  policies  through 
outplacement and training. An employment cell must now be systematically set up in such 
cases. 
Moreover, the Pact has also established a framework to encourage people reaching the end 
of their career to keep their job or return to work. Financial incentives have therefore been 
introduced,  including  a  new  bonus  system  granting  a  pension  supplement  for  people 
continuing to work after the age of 62. This should push up the actual retirement age itself. 
The Pact bears witness to an awareness and brings in an indispensable change of trend. 
According to the work done by the Study Group on Ageing set up within the High Council of 
Finance,  it  is  a  significant  stage  in  the  process,  but  still  not  enough  in  itself  to  bring  the 
employment rate in Belgium up to a satisfactory level. 
 Before summing up, I just have to say a few words about the question posed by the organisers of this 
debate  to  each  of  the  contributors,  namely,  which  is  the  best  method:  harmonisation  or 
decentralisation? Do these few selected examples of measures taken in Belgium enable us to draw 
some lessons about the best strategy for continuing and speeding up implementation of the structural 
reform so badly needed by European economies ? 
First of all, I would point out that this reform applies to existing situations which differ radically from one 
country to another, even from one region to another. These specific characteristics, which can range 
from  the  institutional  set-up  to  the  labour  relations  and  social  security  system,  the  structure  of  the 
economy or even the preferences of the various parties involved, must be taken into account when 
drawing up appropriate measures, likely to get sufficient backing from society at large. 
Faced with these arguments in favour of decentralisation, we should not overlook the importance of 
the  common  approach  developed  at  European  level,  in  the  context  of  the  Lisbon  strategy.  Its 
contribution has been primordial in making structural reform a subject of national debate. The use of 
benchmarking and promoting "best practice" also come into this awareness-raising effort at national 
level.  Furthermore,  the  European  dimension  helps  reap  the  benefits  of  positive  externalites  factors 
stemming from close coordination of reform measures between countries, and helps keep the risk of 
possible "beggar-my-neighbour” policies to a minimum. 
In the updated Lisbon strategy that they endorsed in 2005, the Member States and the EU authorities 
have put together a useful combination of a common and decentralised approach. The broad lines are 
4 
 BIS Review 5/2007
drawn  up  at  European  level  while  the  Member  States  are  now  given  more  responsibility  in 
implementing reform measures. 
Individual Member States mainly have their say by adopting National Reform Programmes, setting out 
government action in the fields of public finance, employment, the functioning of product and labour 
markets and promoting innovation. This joint process enables the European Union to take advantage 
of the positive interaction between structural policies. In the EU countries, notably in Belgium, drawing 
up  these  National  Reform  Programmes  and  implementing  the  reforms  effectively  requires  close 
cooperation  between  the  different  levels  of  government  (regional,  national,  European),  as  well  as 
between  public  authorities  and  other  stakeholders,  and  here  I’m  thinking  particularly  of  the  social 
partners, the academic world and society at large. 
Within this framework, the national central banks also have a key role to play. One the one hand, they 
must back up the political decision-makers and the social partners by providing their macroeconomic 
and financial expertise. On the other hand, they have to keep the public informed of the grounds for 
and the need for the structural reforms. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The structural economic reform train in Europe is certainly on track. It now just needs a strong push, 
so that every citizen can enjoy a higher level of employment and well-being tomorrow. 
BIS Review 5/2007 
 5
