Martín Redrado: The Central Bank of Argentina passed the test 
Article by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, published in Clarin 
newspaper on 5 August 2007. 
 This  time,  the  epicenter  was  not  Latin  America,  Southeast  Asia  or  Southern  Africa.  The 
financial  turbulence  of  the  past  few  days  comes  from  the  developed  world  –  more 
specifically,  the  United  States.  Real  estate  prices,  which  have  been  falling  for  more  than 
twelve months now, have begun to affect the quality of the assets in the mortgage market. In 
particular, banks and mutual funds trading mortgages in the subprime market have passed 
on increased risk to the system. This has led to a massive sale off in most of the higher-yield 
asset classes, including emerging market securities, to cover losses in the markets of origin. 
Against  this  turbulent  backdrop,  which  leads  to  a  new  risk  assessment  and  tighter  credit, 
Argentina has shown that it has the necessary exchange rate and monetary tools to provide 
its population with a horizon of solvency and predictability. 
In  this  context,  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina  is  like  a  chess  player  playing  simultaneous 
games, since monetary policy cannot have an erratic or spasmodic behavior. Instead, each 
“move”  must  be  in  line  with  the  global  strategy  applied  in  multiple  chessboards,  that  is, 
preserving  the  value  of  currency,  the  stability  and  depth  of  the  financial  system,  and  the 
equilibrium in the monetary market. From this perspective, special attention should be given 
to the downstream effect of each “move,” since often, “sacrificing a pawn” may seem costly 
in the short-term, but healthy and consistent with the main goals of the framework in place 
from a strategic point of view. 
Action  taken  –  encompassing  a  set  of  financial  and  banking  regulations  and  direct 
intervention in the monetary, foreign exchange and financial asset markets – should not be 
interpreted  in  isolation.  Instead,  it  responds  to  a  preventive  and  consistent  strategy 
developed in the past few years to ensure the necessary “artillery” to prevent frights 
in times of international financial turbulence. Prudential foreign reserve accumulation is 
an example that speaks for itself. As with every insurance policy, it represents an “abstract” 
benefit while it is not used, but a “concrete” one in financial stress situations: the $44 billion in 
the Central Bank’s coffers were enough to discourage speculation that might have increased 
uncertainty.  If  this  is  coupled  with  the  positive  inflow  of  dollars  coming  from  the  external 
surplus, the potential supply of foreign exchange is clearly higher than the demand.  
The current managed float scheme aims at preventing excessive volatility of the dollar in the 
long-term so as not to affect consumers and investors´ spending and saving decisions. At the 
same  time,  the  current  framework  avoids  providing  a  “foreign  exchange  insurance”  that 
would favor short-term inflows of “hot money”.  
Unlike what happened in the past, avoiding a hysterical reaction by the monetary authority in 
the first two days of turbulences was key to prove the adequacy of the current exchange rate 
regime: the “fear of floating” so much discussed in the economic literature is still alive 
in  the  Argentine  collective  memory,  even  among  sophisticated  analysts  and  the 
specialized  press.  Therefore,  an  early  migration  to  a  fully  floating  exchange  rate 
regime might be a reckless action and a point of no return. 
Afterward,  and  in  order  to  reduce  uncertainty,  action  taken  by  the  monetary  authority 
combined direct intervention in the foreign exchange market – in coordination with the state-
owned  banks  –  to  avoid  inflationary  pressures  and  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  the  money 
market so that the natural increase in interest rates would not become persistent and thus 
threaten credit dynamics. To that end, monetary policy instruments were used such as the 
absorption  of  Central  Bank  securities  (Lebacs  and  Nobacs)  which,  far  from  being 
conventional debt – they are backed by reserves – make up liquidity “cushions” that may be 
BIS Review 87/2007 
 1
used  in  a  situation  of  financial  stress.  Besides,  regulatory  measures  were  adopted  – 
bimonthly  calculation  of  banks’  reserve  requirements  –  to  “decompress”  monetary  stress 
situations. 
Another  eloquent  example  of  the  strategy  developed  in  the  past  few  years  to  face 
contingencies  is  the  recovery  of  banking  liquidity.  Just  as  reserves  play  the  role  of 
liquidity  insurance  for  the  monetary  authority,  banks’  cash  is  the  first  defense  line 
against unexpected events. For this reason, banking regulations fostered the recovery of 
liquidity, equivalent to almost 40 percent of total deposits, among the soundest in the region. 
Moreover, other financial solvency indicators are robust: partly driven by a regulation limiting 
bank financing to the public sector, the exposure of the financial system to the government 
was  dramatically  reduced  since  the  crisis  (18  percent  of  public  sector-related  assets,  a 
record low in years, which also makes resources available to finance the private sector), the 
nonperforming portfolio is record low, the system has already shown profits for a couple of 
fiscal years now, and the process of capitalization and extension of maturities for liabilities 
(negotiable instruments) has gathered momentum in the past few years, leading to a mature 
financial system for the future. 
All things considered, currently there are no symptoms of a weakened demand for domestic 
money. Deposits and credit do not seem to have been impacted by the international change 
of mood, and continue on their upward trend. Demand for dollar bills diligently rose and then 
fell to preexisting levels. 
All in all, the new international scenario creates new opportunities and challenges for 
the monetary strategy, but without risking the continuity of the ongoing program nor 
disrupting  the  rules  of  the  game.  On  the  contrary,  international  volatility  can  provide 
greater  room  for  maneuver  in  terms  of  use  of  available  instruments,  that  is,  the  foreign 
exchange and interest rates to achieve the intermediate targets (monetary program) and final 
targets  (intertemporal  inflation  rate)  of  the  Central  Bank's  monetary  policy,  the  greatest 
contribution of it to stability being the transparency and predictability of its guidelines. 
These days' greater uncertainty can also be a good exercise to understand that it is 
possible  to  live  with  international  volatility,  without  fearing  for  the  future  of  our 
savings or the stability of our jobs.  
2 
 BIS Review 87/2007
