Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy in 2006 and the outlook for 
2007  
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank and 
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the General Meeting 
of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 27 April 2007. 
 Mr President of the Bank Council 
Dear shareholders 
Dear guests 
One  hundred  years  ago  the  Swiss  National  Bank  opened  its  counters  and  conducted  its  first 
transactions. Year for year, the Chairman of the Governing Board has had the privilege of outlining the 
economic situation to you and setting out the SNB policy approach. It is a great pleasure for me to 
continue  this  tradition  today,  and  all  the  more  so  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  year  2006  was  a 
particularly favourable one for our economy: Growth accelerated to reach a level higher than the long-
term  trend,  while  employment  improved,  bringing  about  a  gradual  reduction  in  unemployment. 
Meanwhile, the rise in prices remained restrained and distinctly below the level of 2% that we equate 
with price stability. Moreover, for the current year, the outlook for growth, employment and monetary 
stability remain very favourable. 
Vigorous foreign trade 
The  healthy state  of  the Swiss  economy  has surprised many  observers  accustomed  to  the  meagre 
results of the 1990s and nervous in the wake of the events of the early 2000s. Yet the good results 
can be explained quite logically, since they arise from a combination of particularly favourable factors. 
First,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  remarkable  ability  of  the  private  sector  to  adapt  to  the  challenges 
presented by the globalisation of markets. Thanks to reorganisation efforts in the export sector, results 
in foreign trade have improved substantially. Over the past ten years, our exports have grown by more 
than 80%, or five times as fast as the gross domestic product. We now run a surplus in goods trading 
in addition to our traditional surplus in the area of trade in services. The success of strategies geared 
to quality and high-tech content are demonstrated by the vigorous growth recorded by exports in high 
added-value  areas  such  as  electronics,  watchmaking,  chemical  and  pharmaceutical  products. 
Alongside  this  we  should  mention  the  growth  in  the  exports  of  services,  particularly  in  the  areas  of 
finance and tourism. Overall, our net balance from trading in goods and services has increased from 
CHF 17 billion to CHF 37 billion in 10 years, in other words, from 4.6% to 8.3% of GDP. Clearly, far 
from  threatening  our  expansion  abroad,  globalisation  has  led  to  an  expansion  in  our  markets  from 
which our companies have been able to derive extensive benefits. 
The  prosperity  of  our  foreign  trade  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  good  shape  of  the  global 
economy,  whose  performance  has  been  very  good  over  the  past  few  years.  Recently,  signs  of 
weakness have been observed in the US, but a favourable international environment in 2007 can be 
expected in view of the unchanged vitality of the Asian economy and the recovery of growth in Europe. 
In addition to the favourable impetus from the global economy, our exports also benefited from special 
conditions on the foreign exchange market. The introduction of the euro resulted in a stabilisation of 
the  European  monetary  scene,  and  the  Swiss  franc  was  sheltered  from  the  speculative  disruptions 
that we have experienced in the past. Nowadays our currency is far less volatile that in the 1990s, and 
this is certainly beneficial for foreign trade. Moreover, although the dollar has lost ground over recent 
years, the euro has regained a level comparable to that of 1999. Since Swiss inflation was distinctly 
lower than that of our main trading partners, the real exchange rate index weighted by our exports to 
24  countries  has  declined  by  almost  10%  over  the  five  last  years.  The  competitive  position  of  our 
exporters has improved accordingly. 
Nevertheless, it would be precipitate to think that the Swiss franc was likely to continue weakening. In 
many respects, the current situation is paradoxical in view of the fact that currencies from countries 
where inflation is lowest – the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen – have lost ground to currencies from 
countries  with  a  less  favourable  price  outlook.  Obviously,  markets  are  responding  in  a  short-term 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 1
manner,  as  a  function  of  current  interest  differentials  or  of  expected  changes  in  these  differentials, 
without  fully  recognising  the  existing  economic  fundamentals  or  fearing  the  possibility  of  sudden 
adjustments in exchange rates. Inevitably, this speculative attitude is risky. History has shown us that 
reversals on foreign exchange markets often take people by surprise, that periods of strength in the 
Swiss franc may alternate with periods of weakness, and that the Swiss franc has a tendency to react 
excessively  in  times  of  uncertainty.  Therefore,  caution  is  called  for.  Our  exporters  need  to  retain 
control of their exchange risks even at times of low volatility. After all, nobody would think of doing 
without fire insurance just because their house had been spared for a number of years. 
Domestic demand on the right path 
Inevitably,  the  strong  momentum  of  foreign  trade  has  spilled  over  into  investment  and  domestic 
consumption, and especially into employment. 
Initially, an improvement in equipment investment and employment results from an increasing level of 
capacity  utilisation.  Thus,  in  manufacturing,  the  rate  of  capacity  utilisation  has  been  rising  steadily 
since  2002  and  has  now  reached  a  historical  high.  The  corporate  sector,  which  in  2005  was  still 
hesitant  about  the  soundness  of  the  recovery,  held  a  more  favourable  view  last  year.  As  a  result, 
companies  considerably  stepped  up  their  investment  plans  for  equipment.  At  the  same  time,  they 
created  jobs  –  in  particular  full-time  positions  –  at  a  faster  rate.  This  led  to  a  quicker  drop  in 
unemployment and the increased use of foreign labour. 
Consequently,  2006  was  very  clearly  a  year  of  consolidation  in  the  economic  cycle,  following  the 
uncertainties of the prior periods. The current outlook represents a continuation of this situation since 
the  order  books  are  well  filled  and  the  CEO  confidence  index  remains  positive.  Thus,  the  rate  of 
unemployment is likely to continue dropping over the course of the next few months. 
One  sector  that  is  dependent  less  on  the  foreign  economic  situation  and  more  on  the  financial 
environment is the construction sector. Residential construction has benefited strongly from the low 
interest rates over the past few years. In 2006, 41,000 new dwellings came onto the market or almost 
double  the  number  in  the  early  2000s.  Demographic  developments  as  well  as  increasing  incomes 
linked to favourable financing conditions assured a healthy level of demand. Nevertheless, there were 
initial  signs  of  saturation,  and  a  gradual  drop  in  the  mortgage  growth  rate  was  evident.  Everything 
points  to  a  further  decline  in  growth  momentum  for  residential  construction  this  year.  By  contrast, 
industrial and commercial construction is likely to continue improving. 
Growth in employment and income had a favourable impact on household expenditure. Growing at a 
rate of some 2%, consumption became a driver of the economy, a situation which contrasted to that of 
past years. The continued decline in unemployment over the months to come is likely to consolidate 
this picture. 
Overall, the Swiss economy recorded real growth of about 3% in 2006. This was the best result since 
2000. While enjoying the benefits of healthy demand in both foreign and domestic markets, it was also 
able to take advantage of the increased flexibility of local production attributable to the fact that the 
labour  market  had  been  opened  up  to  nationals  of  neighbouring  countries  –  without  threatening 
domestic employment. In the course of the past twelve months, almost 60,000 new jobs have been 
created – a figure unmatched since 2001 – while the number of jobless has dropped by 22,000. 
Restructuring efforts on the part of the corporates, advances in productivity and the increased flexibility 
in the employment market have created an environment that allows more vigorous growth. Thus, the 
difficult  path  of  reform  and  of  opening  up  has  yielded  its  first  successes.  It  is  advisable  that  we 
continue  following  this  path  in  order  to  ensure  a  sustained  and  durable  increase  in  our  productive 
potential. This will help us to place our social security institutions on a sound financial basis again and 
confront the challenges posed by the aging of our population. 
Continuing the normalisation of monetary policy 
Within  this  context  of  an  improved  economic  situation,  the  SNB  last  year  continued  the  policy  of 
gradually  normalising  the  interest  rates  that  it  has  been  pursuing  since  June  2004.  At  each  of  our 
quarterly assessments of the economic and monetary situation, we have concluded that preservation 
of medium-term price stability demanded that the three month Libor be adjusted once again, and it has 
thus been raised by 1.25 percentage points since January 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2007
With average inflation of 1.1%, 2006 was another year of price stability; indeed it was the thirteenth 
year  such  year  in  succession.  The  current  situation  remains  comfortable  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
inflation  outlook  is  moderate  and  last  year's  drop  in  oil  prices  is  having  a  favourable  impact  on  the 
indices.  Nevertheless,  we  remain  cautious  since  the  productive  resources  in  our  economy  are 
currently more or less fully employed and the Swiss franc has depreciated on the foreign exchange 
market – thereby tending to make our imports more expensive. We will continue increasing interest 
rates to the full extent that is necessary in order to preserve price stability in the medium term. 
Risks 
Based on the current momentum in the global economy, the outlook for 2007 looks good. Admittedly, 
there are signs of weakness in the US, but this phenomenon is likely to be temporary. In Europe, the 
recovery in 2006 was surprisingly strong. A slowdown is now expected, but not a marked downturn in 
the economy. Consequently, with respect to the economy, the assessment of risks appears relatively 
favourable for 2007. 
Clearly, the price of oil remains a source of concern. The continued growth in the global economy as 
well as the experience of recent years has shown us how fast the oil market can spiral out of control, 
given the shortage of surplus production and refining capacity. Consequently, we cannot fully exclude 
the possibility that the current period of calm is only transitory. 
We are currently observing an unusual situation of weak volatility on financial markets and low risk 
premiums on investments. These two variables can change direction very quickly. Consequently, we 
must remain on our guard since abrupt movements in financial variables – in stock prices as well as in 
exchange  rates  –  have  an  immediate  impact  on  our  economy  due  to  its  considerable  openness  to 
foreign transactions and its relative specialisation in the production of financial services. 
A comfortable position, in historical terms 
With  the  Swiss  economy  close  to  full  employment,  the  stability  of  prices  secured  over  a  period  of 
several years now and a liberal and open economy making it possible to make full use of monetary 
policy instruments, the Swiss National Bank currently operates in a comfortable environment. In this 
year – the year that marks the hundredth anniversary of the establishment of our bank – we should not 
lose sight of the fact that our predecessors often faced situations that were far more difficult than those 
we face today. 
So  it  was  that,  once  the  problems  posed  by  the  establishment  of  a  banknote  monopoly  had  been 
solved, the youthful SNB was quickly confronted, in 1914, with the problem of financing the military 
expenditure caused by the First World War and, after the end of hostilities, the difficulties related to 
normalisation. The social disruption of 1918 and the high level of inflation at the end of the war were 
bitterly felt and attributed to a failure of monetary management. This setback had a lasting effect on 
morale at the SNB and accounts to a considerable extent for the orthodoxy of the policies adopted in 
the decades that followed. 
This  accounts  for  the  determination  with  which  the  SNB  worked  to  restore  the  rules  of  the  gold 
standard once peace had returned. The pre-war gold parity was re-established in 1924. However, after 
a few good years, the economic situation again deteriorated, culminating eventually in the crisis of the 
1930s.  The  devaluation  of  sterling  in  1931,  followed  by  that  of  the  dollar  in  1933,  were  the  first 
episodes  in  the  eventual  collapse  of  the  gold  standard.  In  1936,  following  the  devaluation  of  the 
French franc, the Swiss federal authorities were forced, in their turn, to reduce the parity of the Swiss 
franc. 
A few years later, the challenge of administering a war economy again arose. The story of the Second 
World  War,  with  its  doubts,  agonies  and  errors  of  judgement  has  been  extensively  analysed  by 
historians over the past few years. Much reflection has also been carried out on the matter within the 
Swiss National Bank in order to better understand this difficult period in our own history. 
The  postwar  period  was  characterised  by  a  fierce  determination  to  start  afresh,  to  avoid  the 
reappearance of the misleading thinking that had led to pre-war protectionism, and to reconstruct the 
economies  that  lay  in  ruins.  A  phase  of  intensive  work  began,  with  the  aim  of  reorganising  the 
international monetary order. Still isolated, both economically and politically, Switzerland participated 
in the efforts without becoming a member of the Bretton Woods Institutions. The gradual liberalisation 
BIS Review 40/2007 
 3
of payments and trade rapidly led to a period of prosperity but also to a situation of disequilibrium in 
the  operation  of  the  international  monetary  system.  Inflation  and  speculative  movements  of  funds 
became  common  features  during  the  1960s  and  the  monetary  arena  was  disturbed  by  multiple 
devaluations, particularly in Europe. 
Suspension  of  gold  convertibility  for  the  dollar,  in  1971,  hailed  the  collapse  of  the  system  of  fixed 
exchange rates that had been put into place after the war. Faced with a massive flow of speculative 
funds,  the  SNB  was  forced  to  abandon  stabilisation  of  the  Swiss  franc  in  1973.  The  transition  to 
sustained  floating  for  the  Swiss  franc  was  definitely  the  most  important  change  of  direction  in  the 
monetary policy strategy pursued by our bank in its hundred years of existence. 
Since  then,  the  SNB  has  had  to  learn  to  operate  with  floating,  and  to  conduct  an  independent 
monetary policy. This has not always been easy, since the international environment has often been 
extremely instable with the result that the Swiss franc has, at times, been heavily overvalued. During 
the  1980s,  a  greater  degree  of  monetary  discipline  emerged  and  the  fight  against  inflation  became 
gradually more widespread. However, the world monetary order only achieved a certain level of calm 
towards  the  end  of  the  1990s,  when  the  European  monetary  integration  project  took  form  and 
monetary policies were geared towards the defence of price stability. 
 In sketching this rapid portrait of the hundred years of our history, we see how much circumstances 
have  differed  from  one  period  to  another.  It  is  therefore  fitting  that  we  pay  tribute  to  all  of  our 
predecessors  who  –  often  in  difficult  circumstances  –  gave  of  their  best  in  order  that  the  Swiss 
National Bank might fulfil its mandate. It was their prudent management of the country's business that 
sheltered us from the numerous monetary crises that battered so many other European states. It was 
they, too, whose determination made it possible for the SNB to conduct a monetary policy resolutely 
geared to stability. 
Our generation is deriving immense benefit from this heritage. Due to the courage and sacrifices of 
those who preceded us, we now reap the benefits of a prosperous economy and a healthy currency. 
Our  gratitude  also  extends  to  the  authorities  and  to  the  Swiss  people.  We  are  appreciative  of  the 
confidence placed in us by the Federal Council and by parliament. In guaranteeing our independence, 
the Federal Constitution gives us the means to act entirely in the interests of monetary stability. The 
political authorities can count on us using our freedom of action solely in the interests of fulfilling the 
mandates with which we are entrusted by the legislator. 
We  are  also aware  that,  despite  our  efforts  to  communicate  our  decisions,  the general  public  often 
finds them difficult to understand. That is why we truly value the confidence that the public places in 
us. It helps to sustain us when carrying out the mandate with which we are entrusted under art. 99 of 
the Federal Constitution, that of conducting a monetary policy that serves the interests of the country 
as a whole. 
Finally, I would also like to thank you, the shareholders of the Swiss National Bank. As representatives 
of  cantons,  cantonal  banks,  collective  bodies  or  Swiss  public  law  institutions,  or  as  individual 
shareholders, you have faithfully supported the Swiss National Bank since its foundation in 1907. You 
have remained at its side throughout all the ups and downs of its history and we are grateful for your 
support. 
Your presence is the guarantee of our independence, an essential factor in the success of our efforts 
to preserve the monetary stability of our country. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2007
