Tarisa Watanagase: Dealing with volatile capital flows 
Welcome address by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 42nd 
SEACEN Governors’ Conference, Bangkok, 28 July 2007. 
 Your Excellency Minister of Finance, 
Mr. Rodrigo de Rato, 
Mr. Hervé Hannoun, 
Fellow Governors, Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to begin by extending a very warm welcome to all of you to Bangkok. We are 
pleased to host the 42nd SEACEN Governors’ Conference and the 26th Meeting of SEACEN 
Board of Governors here in Bangkok. I would also like to express my sincere appreciation to 
His  Excellency  Chalongphob  Sussangkarn,  Finance  Minister  of  Thailand,  for  his  presence 
here to officially open the Conference. 
This year’s theme on “Living with Volatilities: Is SEACEN prepared for Rising Fluctuations in 
Exchange Rate and Capital Flows?” comes at an opportune moment, given a recent volatile 
and  uncertain  market  conditions.  This  volatility  has  posed  challenges  to  central  banks  in 
maintaining monetary and financial stability. 
Let me share with you some of my views on this very important issue. 
It  is  traditionally  believed  that  emerging  markets  are  subject  to  more  volatile  capital  flows 
than  developed  countries  due  to  underdevelopment  of  our  financial  markets  and  weak 
institutions.  Thus,  putting  in  place  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate  policy,  credible  monetary 
policy and sound domestic financial system could help emerging markets reduce the volatility 
of capital flows as well as its negative effect on the economic stability. 
The Asian financial crisis in 1997 taught us a number of painful lessons from volatile capital 
flows associated with such weak institutions. Since then, we have seen a large number of 
developing  countries  moving  towards  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  adopting  inflation-
targeting  framework,  and  improving  the  resilience  of  financial  system.  Yet,  the  challenges 
from volatile capital flows have become more intensified and we still see the implications of 
volatile capital flows on our economies. 
We are, therefore, very fortunate to have with us Mr. Rodrigo de Rato, Managing Director of 
the IMF, and Mr. Hervé Hannoun, Deputy General Manager of the BIS, to share their views 
and  insight  on  this  issue.  I  believe  that  we  can  greatly  benefit  from  the  IMF’s  new 
surveillance framework, which put greater emphasis on the volatile financial market, as well 
as from the BIS expertise on analysis of capital flows during the morning session. 
I  am  certain  that  their  perspectives  will  be  useful  in  setting  the  tone  for  our  further 
discussions  on  how  to  better  prepare  ourselves  for  the  more  intensified  volatility  of  capital 
flows, which, I believe, have been rooted to our current economic environment. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Following  our  discussions  on  the  theme,  we  will  have  Dr.  Perry  Warjiyo  and  Mr.  Richard 
Murray, our Executive Directors from the IMF to lead our discussions this afternoon on recent 
developments in global and regional economies with a view to identifying challenges ahead 
of us. I hope that we could learn a great deal from one another in this traditional session, 
particularly on how we should prepare ourselves for those potential risks in order to maintain 
internal as well as regional economic stability. 
In  addition,  I  believe  that  the  Meeting  of  SEACEN  Board  of  Governors,  tomorrow,  will 
continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  providing  guidelines  for  future  works  and  activities  of 
BIS Review 88/2007 
 1
SEACEN for the years to come. Our guidelines will be important for the SEACEN Centre to 
pursue its mission and become “a premier regional training centre for central banks in the 
Asia-Pacific region” according to its vision. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This year is a very auspicious year for SEACEN over its 40 year-history as it marks the 25th 
year  of  the  establishment  of  the  SEACEN  Centre.  We  are,  therefore,  very  honored  and 
privileged  to  host  the  Celebration  of  the  Silver  Anniversary  of  the  SEACEN  Centre,  here 
again in Bangkok, where the Agreement to establish the Centre was signed back in 25 years 
ago. 
Over  these  past  two  decades,  the  SEACEN  Centre  has  become  increasingly  important  in 
promoting  better  understanding  of 
financial,  monetary,  banking  and  economic 
development  matters.  Its  role  does  not  benefit  only  the  sixteen  member  central  banks  but 
also extends to several other countries throughout Asia and Pacific region. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity,  therefore,  to  congratulate  the  SEACEN  Centre  for  its 
work in helping bind together our community of central banks in the region. And, I would like 
to invite all of you to tomorrow’s dinner to commemorate its achievements in the past quarter 
of a century together. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
May I take this opportunity to wish all of you a successful and fruitful deliberation, and an 
enjoyable stay in Thailand. 
Thank you. 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2007
