Emsley D Tromp: The Caribbean marketplace – succeeding in a globalizing 
world 
Address by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  the  2007  TOG  Partners’  Conference, 
Willemstad, Curacao, 3 July 2007. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning, 
After a look on the conference agenda, I noticed that you already had two busy days behind 
you: one to get to know the island a little better (I am sure you enjoyed that) and yesterday 
your  first  conference  day,  while  everybody  else  on  the  island  was  celebrating  Curacao’s 
national holiday “dia di himno i bandera” (day of the national anthem and flag). I wish you a 
productive and interesting second half of the conference and hope that you will find some 
more time to enjoy the hospitality and beauty of our island. 
I  also  like  to  seize  the  opportunity  to  congratulate  Ralph  and  his  team  for  bringing  this 
prestigious conference to Curacao, making a welcome contribution to our tourism sector, and 
with  their  new  office  they  recently  moved  into.  A  new  office  –  aside  from  being  a  true 
architectural beauty – is a sign that doing business in Curacao has been good for KPMG and 
confirms confidence in the future of the island. 
I have been asked to address you on the topic “The Caribbean marketplace.” Without any 
further  elucidation,  I  took  the  liberty  to  interpret  this  topic  to  mean:  the  need  for  further 
Caribbean cooperation and integration to seize the challenges of a globalizing world. 
My address this morning is structured as follows. First, I’ll give you a brief overview of the 
implicit weaknesses of Caribbean economies. Next, I will discuss the impact of globalization 
on the region, followed by an overview of some critical elements of a regional globalization 
strategy. I’ll conclude my address with some closing remarks and the role KPMG can play in 
preparing the region for successful global competition. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  to  realize  that  Caribbean  countries  alone,  by  their  sheer 
size, cannot survive in a globalizing world. Most countries in the Caribbean are very small 
and have open economies and, therefore, very vulnerable to international developments and 
external  shocks.  The  erosion  of  preferential  market  access  to  the  European  Union,  the 
establishment of NAFTA, the terrorist attacks on the United States, the international efforts to 
combat  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing,  and  natural  disasters  all  had  a  great 
impact on our economies. 
The  high  vulnerability  of  our  economies  as  I  mentioned  is  primarily  the  result  of  our 
smallness, resulting in significant diseconomies of scale. Both the private and public sectors 
are affected by these diseconomies of scale.  
The  small  size  of  economic  units  and  the  small  size  of  our  national  markets  limit  the 
international competitiveness of the production of goods and services for both export and the 
domestic market. Small firms are at a disadvantage in the global market place, because they 
cannot realize economies of scale, are not attractive business partners, and cannot spend 
significant funds on marketing, research and development. 
Small economies have severe constraints on their material and labor inputs both in amount 
and variety, related to their limited land area and small populations, leading to high unit costs 
of production. For instance, the small size of the labor market limits the range of available 
skills, pushing up the price of scarce skills. On the supply side, employment alternatives are 
limited, which promotes a brain drain of high-skilled workers and causes high social costs for 
low-skilled workers when industries have to restructure. Moreover, the small market size and 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 1
limited range of resources result in a narrower range of domestic and export production and 
tends to cause high costs because there is often a lack of competition. 
The provision of public goods and infrastructure is usually characterized by indivisibility. This 
has two implications for small economies. First, the costs of public services per capita are 
higher than in larger economies. Second, the government may be forced to provide various 
goods and services – often at subsidized rates – that would typically be offered by the private 
sector in larger economies, increasing budgetary pressures. 
Besides  diseconomies  of  scale,  our  countries  are  characterized  by  high  vulnerability  to 
external shocks. Various factors contribute to this vulnerability, largely beyond our control. I 
like to mention here our geographical location and high level of openness. Our countries are 
located in a tropical area and, therefore, prone to natural disasters, particularly hurricanes. 
These natural phenomena are recurrent and affect a large proportion of our population and 
economies. In some cases, economic damages have exceeded annual GDP, taking a long 
time to recover. Our high level of openness, illustrated by levels of imports and exports of 
goods  and  services  near  and  even  over  100%  of  GDP,  also  entails  a  high  degree  of 
vulnerability  to  external  shocks.  This  is  aggravated  by  the  concentration  of  exports  in  a 
narrow  range  of  products  and  markets.  For  example,  the  erosion  of  preferential  access  of 
agricultural  products  to  the  European  market  is  having  a  significant  impact  on  some 
Caribbean economies. 
To  mitigate  the  effects  of  diseconomies  of  scale  and  the  high  degree  of  vulnerability  to 
external  shocks,  broader  and  deeper  cooperation  between  the  countries  in  the  Caribbean 
region is a viable and inevitable strategy. This is even more evident in light of the structural 
changes taking place in the world and the way they affect the countries in the region. 
These structural changes can be captured under the phenomenon of globalization, a multi-
dimensional process transforming all aspects of national and global activities and interactions 
in  a  rapid  and  profound  way.  Inherent  in  the  globalization  process  is  that  barriers  to 
international flows of goods, services, capital, money, and information are being increasingly 
eroded and/or eliminated. The fact that world trade grows about three times faster than world 
output serves as an illustration of this development. The small Caribbean countries which are 
vulnerable  to  external  events  and  that  have  limited  adjustment  capacity  are  particularly 
exposed to the effects of globalization. Let me elaborate some more on a number of aspects 
of globalization that impacts the region. 
The phasing-out of preferential trading arrangements 
1.  
The  Caribbean  region  has  been  enjoying  preferential  access  for  several  of  its  export 
products  to  the  markets  of  the  European  Union  and  the  United  States  for  a  long  time. 
However,  pressure  is  increasing  to  eliminate  preferential  arrangements  and  replace  them 
with  agreements  based  on  reciprocity,  exposing  the  Caribbean  countries  much  more  to 
international  competition.  The  dismantling  of  the  European  Union’s  banana  and  sugar 
regimes  is  an  example  of  this  development,  forcing  various  countries  to  structurally  adapt 
their economies.  
Rapidly increasing dominance of the global market 
2.  
Technological  developments 
information 
technology have eliminated the barriers of distance and time, resulting in the reconstitution of 
the world into a single economic and social space. To survive, every business must become 
globally  competitive,  even  if  it  produces  and  sells  only  within  a  local  or  regional  market 
because standards of quality and costs of production are set globally. 
telecommunications,  computerization,  and 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2007
Increasing importance of the services industry 
3.  
Services  constitute  one  of  the  fastest  growing  sectors  of  the  world  economy.  This  is  also 
evident in the Caribbean region, in which tourism and international financial services are the 
main pillars of most of the island economies. 
Economic concentration 
4.  
Globalization is creating larger units, both corporate entities and the coalescing of national 
economies  through  regional  integration  to  form  regional  trade  blocks.  The  number  of 
countries that participate in trade blocks and the share in world trade they encompass are 
ever  increasing,  representing  a  transition  from  an  atomistic  world  economy  of  national 
economies  to  a  global  market.  CARICOM  is  a  good  example  of  this  development  in  the 
Caribbean region. The most prominent feature of corporate concentration has been mergers 
and acquisitions. Particularly in the financial sector, we can notice this development also in 
the  Caribbean  region,  with  the  regional  expansion  of  RBTT,  FirstCaribbean  Bank,  and 
Guardian for example.  
Erosion of policy autonomy 
5.  
Globalization  is  shifting  power  away  from  sovereign  governments  toward  multilateral 
institutions  and  multinational  corporations.  Sovereignty  in  all  its  dimensions  has  been 
considerably  constrained  by  economic  interdependence.  As  a  result,  governments’  control 
over the design and implementation of national and international economic policy has been 
diminishing. 
From  the  discussion  of  these  aspects  of  globalization,  it  becomes  clear  that  formidable 
challenges confront the Caribbean region for successful adaptation to this new environment 
and  achieving  sustained  economic  development.  A  pro-active  adjustment  strategy,  as 
opposed to reactive adjustment, offers the greatest chance to success. Such strategy should 
focus  on  consolidating  and  improving  existing  economic  activities  while  reorienting  the 
economy  toward  new  types  of  economic  activities  for  the  national,  regional,  and  global 
markets. I like to discuss with you some critical elements of this strategy in more detail. 
A stable macroeconomic policy framework 
1.  
For  creating  a  stimulating  entrepreneurial  environment  conducive  to  investment,  it  is 
essential that macroeconomic policy instruments, such as structural policy, fiscal policy, and 
monetary  policy,  be  applied  in  a  consistent  and  sustained  manner,  complemented  by 
supporting policies – in the fields of for example education and infrastructure – and a stable 
institutional  framework.  This  environment  will  facilitate  private  sector-led,  market-driven 
growth.  
Strengthening existing economic activities 
2.  
Tourism  and  international  financial  services  are  the  most  important  economic  activities  in 
many  Caribbean  countries.  Tourism  is  a  highly  labor  intensive  sector  in  which  many 
companies  from  small  to  large,  spread  over  several  sectors  of  the  economy  are  involved. 
Tourism  activities  are  particularly  significant  in  the  retail  trade,  hotels  &  restaurants,  and 
construction sectors, generating a considerable part of employment and foreign exchange in 
our  economies.  Due  to  the  effects  of  globalization,  the  Caribbean  tourism  sector  is  facing 
increased competition from other regions, such as Asia and the Pacific. Therefore, to remain 
competitive  and  maintain  a  sound  growth  in  tourism,  new  products  and  markets  must  be 
developed.  This  diversification  could  include  health  tourism,  eco  tourism,  tourism  geared 
toward older travelers, cultural and heritage tourism, and conference tourism. 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 3
laundering,  and 
The  international  financial  services  industry  in  the  region  is  facing  many  threats.  Pressure 
from the industrialized world through international institutions, such as the OECD, the IMF, 
and  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  has  increased  to  address  issues  like  harmful  tax 
competition,  money 
impact  of 
globalization is particularly eminent in financial services, which is not restricted by borders. 
Therefore, competition is fierce from other regions and countries. To remain attractive and 
reputable  providers  of  international  financial  services,  our  strategy  should  focus  on  the 
strengthening  of  supervision  to  improve  compliance  with  the  current  best  practices  and 
requirements  imposed  on  international  business  and  finance.  If  our  legal  and  supervisory 
infrastructure is considered adequate by the countries we get our business from, we will be 
able to develop new products that can maintain this sector as an important contributor to our 
economies. 
financing.  Moreover, 
terrorism 
the 
Development of new economic activities 
3.  
In  identifying  new  economic  activities,  contributing  to  a  diversification  of  the  Caribbean 
economies,  we  have  to  realize  that  our  countries  are  not  at  the  lower  end  of  the  wage 
spectrum.  Therefore,  we  have  to  focus  on  increasing  productivity,  product  innovation,  and 
the  creation  of  niche  markets,  in  other  words:  more  knowledge-based  economic  activities. 
Given  the  importance  of  services-based  industries  in  Caribbean  economies  and  its 
encouraging prospects, the development of new activities in the provision of services is likely 
to  produce  the  greatest  rate  of  success.  Evidently,  our  workforce  will  have  to  be  properly 
skilled,  knowledge  oriented,  and  capable  of  adopting  new  technologies.  Some  interesting 
activities  that  could  be  explored  are  the  provision  of  retirement  facilities  to  persons  in 
developed countries, health care services to foreign patients, bio-technology, internet-based 
services, and entertainment. 
 Improving productivity 
4. 
Achieving and maintaining international competitiveness in a globalizing world necessitates 
continual improvements in productivity. This comprises not only labor productivity, but also 
managerial capacity, adaptation of new technologies, and improvement of infrastructure.  
Increasing labor  productivity  requires  improvement  in  the  quantity  and  quality  of  education 
through  vocational  training  as  well  as  on  the  job  training.  Social  partnerships  based  on 
tripartite  dialogue  between  the  private  sector,  trade  unions,  and  the  government  could 
promote the improvement of labor productivity. However, it is well known that much of our 
high-educated  human  capital  resides  outside  the  region.  It  is,  therefore,  also  important  to 
establish schemes to induce overseas nationals with professional skills to return home. 
Productivity  can  also  be  raised  by  improving  managerial  capacity  in  both  the  private  and 
public  sectors.  To  perform  well  in  a  constantly  changing  environment,  the  relationship 
between management and workers must be harmonious based on cooperation and dialogue. 
Managerial  capacity  can  be  improved  in  the  short  run  by  attracting  skilled  managers  and 
professionals  from  abroad  with  an  emphasis  on  Caribbean  nationals  who  have  a  better 
understanding of local culture and traditions. In the long run, improving education is the road 
to pursue. 
Finally, the adaptation of new technologies, such as the use of the internet to do business, 
and improving the physical infrastructure, such as utilities, airports, and telecommunication, 
will contribute to higher productivity. 
Overcoming xenophobia 
5. 
Many  Caribbean  countries  suffer  from  varying  degrees  of  xenophobia,  hampering  a 
successful participation in the global economy. We have to abandon this mentality, be less 
preoccupied  with  national  ownership  and  focus  on  what  foreign  investment  can  mean  for 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2007
economic activity, the development of new products and services with higher value added, 
and the creation of jobs. 
Strategic corporate alliances 
6.  
The  small  size  of  most  Caribbean  firms  put  them  at  a  severe  disadvantage  in  the  global 
economy. Collaborative corporate strategic alliances, mergers, and acquisitions can provide 
a  larger  capital  base,  expand  resources,  pool  expertise  and  introduce  new  technologies, 
largely eliminating this disadvantage. In addition, larger regional firms are more likely joint-
venture  partners  for  foreign  investors,  contributing  to  extra-regional  expansion.  The  further 
increase in size will equip them even better to compete successfully in the world market. 
Further regional integration 
7.  
In addition to corporate integration, regional integration should be expanded. CARICOM is 
the most suitable entity to take this task upon it by widening its membership to include the 
rest of the Caribbean and Central America which will create a much larger economic space 
and  thereby  increase  the  possibilities  of  realizing  the  necessary  economies  of  scale.  The 
ultimate  objective  should  be  the  completion  of  a  regional  single  market  and  economy. 
Combining forces through a regional cooperative approach is also the most effective way to 
proceed in international trade negotiations. It increases the leverage of small states, because 
by operating as a single unit we can increase our critical political mass, and it economizes on 
the  costs  to  our  countries  by  pooling  scarce  skilled  human  resources  and  sharing 
representational duties.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  tried  to  demonstrate  that  the  Caribbean  countries  and 
companies on their own will fall rapidly behind and marginalize themselves given the current 
trends  in  globalization.  Through  regional  alliances,  cooperation  and  integration,  we  can 
overcome our inherent weaknesses and will be able to compete successfully in the global 
market.  This  process  of  strategic  global  repositioning  is  far  from  finished  and  requires 
unrelenting  efforts  of  our  governments,  business  companies,  and  other  interest  groups  to 
implement the adjustments and structural transformation necessary for sustainable economic 
development in the decades ahead. To refer back to the topic of my address: the Caribbean 
marketplace,  in  my  opinion,  should  not  be  seen  as  the  last  stop  but  as  an  instrument  to 
succeed in the global marketplace. 
In  concluding  ladies  and  gentlemen,  KPMG  is  a  good  example  of  a global  company.  With 
offices  and  expertise  in  countries  all  over  the  world  and  a  solid  regional  presence,  KPMG 
pre-eminently  can  assist  governments  and  companies  in  the  Caribbean  in  the  difficult  and 
complex processes of change necessary to prepare the region for global competition. Many 
different  fields  of  expertise  will  be  involved,  such  as  international  business  and  finance, 
mergers and acquisitions, management training, interim management, and head hunting. All 
fields of expertise in which KPMG can pride itself as being among the world’s foremost.  
By  collaborating  with  other  stakeholders,  KPMG  can  play  a  pivotal  role  in  converting  the 
weaknesses I have identified in the Caribbean economies into strengths. This will go a long 
way in making the Caribbean not a final stop but an important stepping stone to do business 
in this globalizing world. This will not only lead to strengthen local economies, but it will also 
help improve social conditions to make the Caribbean an even better place to live and visit. 
Thank you for your attention and wish you a productive conference. 
BIS Review 78/2007 
 5
