Sergey Ignatiev: The macroeconomic situation and monetary policy in Russia 
Speech by Dr Sergey Ignatiev, Chairman of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation, at the 2007 
Money and Banking Conference "Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty", hosted by the Central Bank of 
Argentina, Buenos Aires, 4 June 2007. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, allow me to thank you for the opportunity to speak at this conference. 
Since the severe financial and economic crisis of August 1998, the Russian economy has recovered 
quite fast. 
During the past eight years – from 1999 to 2006 the annual average GDP growth was 6.7%. 
High economic growth rates have sustained during recent years. In 2005, GDP grew by 6.4%, in 2006 
by 6.7%, and in the first quarter of 2007, GDP gained 7.9% year-on-year. 
Investments  in  the  fixed  assets  have  increased  at  an  even  faster  pace,  mounting  up  to  11-14% 
annually over the past four years. 
Meanwhile, investments to GDP ratio remains fairly low, at approximately 18%. 
Real  income  of  the  population  is  also  rapidly  growing.  For  the  past  four  years,  it  has  risen  by  an 
average  of  12%  annually.  Rapid  growth  in  real  personal  incomes  (compared  to  GDP)  is  due  to 
dramatic improvements in terms of trade, caused by world oil price growth. 
From 2000 onwards, the federal budget enjoyed a surplus of revenue over expenditure. 
The last two years have seen a particularly large federal budget surplus. In 2005 and 2006, the budget 
surplus equalled to 7.5% and 7,4% of GDP, respectively. 
As you probably know, Russia took on the entire external debt of the former Soviet Union, despite the 
fact  that  Russia  accounted  then  for  only  half  of  the  Soviet  Union’s  population.  This  debt  totalled 
around 100 billion dollars. 
Russia  has  completed  advance  repayment  of  all  its  debt  to  Paris  Club  creditors,  and  to  the 
International Monetary Fund. 
Government external debt reduced from 158 billion dollars as of the end of 1998 to about 45 billion 
dollars beginning of 2007. At present it totals to approximately 4% of GDP. 
Russia’s international reserves are expanding rapidly. 
The reserves increased from around 12 billion dollars at the end of 1998, to the current total of about 
400 billion dollars. 
Clearly, Russia’s economic success in recent years is largely due to high world prices of the country’s 
exported commodities, particularly oil and gas. 
However, it is also the result of implemented economic reforms as well as the consequence of general 
social and political stability in Russia. 
Tax reforms carried out from 2002 to 2004 are worth noting. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The income tax rate for individuals was lowered, and fixed at a flat rate of 13%. 
Corporate profit tax rate was lowered from 35% to 24%. 
The  so-called  “turnover  taxes”,  levied  at  each  sale  of  an  item  and  equalled  to  4%  of  the 
item’s  price,  were  cancelled.  These  taxes  posed  obstacles  to  effective  production 
specialization. 
Sales tax, levied in retail at a rate of 5%, was cancelled. 
The base value added tax rate was brought down from 20% to 18%. 
4. 
5. 
At the same time, many tax privileges were removed. Improvements were made to tax administration. 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 1
Taxes on the production and export of oil and gas were raised. These tax rates are linked to the world 
oil prices. 
In general the tax system has been made simpler and fairer. 
The  process  of  preparing  and  executing  both  federal  and  local  budgets  has  been  substantially 
improved. 
At  the  beginning  of  2004,  the  Stabilization  Fund  of  the  Russian  Federation  was  set  up.  The 
Stabilization  Fund  receives  the  part  of  the  taxes,  paid  to  the  federal  budget  by  producers  and 
exporters  of  crude  oil.  This  part  is  the  result  of  the  high  world  oil  prices.  The  purpose  of  the 
Stabilization Fund is to provide a substantial level of backup for the federal budget expenditures in the 
event of a sharp decline in the oil price on the world market. It currently holds a total of around 110 
billion dollars. The Stabilization Fund resources are held in the Finance Ministry’s foreign exchange 
deposits with the Central Bank. These resources can be used to repay external debt. The funds can 
only be spent on current budget needs if there is a sharp decline in budget revenue due to a large 
drop in world oil prices. 
Besides,  the  Stabilization  Fund  plays  an  important  role  in  sterilizing  excess  liquidity  and  restraining 
money supply growth. 
In recent years, due to the strong balance of payments, foreign currency purchasing by the Central 
Bank has become the sole channel for increasing money supply. The Central Bank does not provide 
loans  to  the Government,  nor does  it expand  its  government  securities  portfolio.  The refinancing of 
commercial  banks  is  carried  out  by  the  Central  Bank  on  an  insignificant  scale.  In  order  to  sterilize 
excess money supply caused by growth in international reserves, the Central Bank uses a range of 
instruments; specifically, it attracts deposits from commercial banks and issues its own bonds. 
The  Stabilization  Fund’s  role  in  sterilizing  excess  liquidity  was  particularly  prominent  between  2004 
and  2005,  when  the  Stabilization  Fund  resources  increase  was  about  60%  of  the  total  increase  of 
Russia’s  international  reserves.  In  2006,  and  especially  in  2007,  international  reserves  have 
increasingly boosted by the inflow of private capital. 
Even  though  inflation  in  Russia  remains  high,  it  is  gradually  going  down.  In  2004,  consumer  price 
growth (December-to-December) was 11.7%; in 2005, the figure was 10.9%, and in 2006, 9.0%. In 
2007, inflation is expected to be reduced to 6.5-8.0%. From April 2006 till April 2007 the inflation rate 
was 7.6%. 
Russia applies a managed floating exchange rate regime. 
The Central Bank aims to attain two goals in implementing its monetary policy. 
The first principal goal is to gradually reduce inflation. 
The second task is to prevent a sharp real effective appreciation of the ruble, so as not to harm the 
conditions for economic growth. 
I would like to stress that we understand that the Central Bank can only exert a temporary influence on 
the real effective exchange rate of the national currency. For example, if there is a strong balance of 
payments and the Central Bank doesn’t allow nominal appreciation of the ruble, this will inevitably lead 
to growth in foreign exchange reserves, a rise in money supply, and eventually, after a certain period, 
to higher inflation. This means a real strengthening of the national currency. 
Besides, we acknowledge that the set goals are contradictory in principle. Given that the world prices 
for  exported  goods  are  very  high  and  there  is  a  strong  inflow  of  capital,  to  attain  the  two  goals 
simultaneously may be impossible. 
The Central Bank of Russia gradually enhances the focus on achieving its inflation goal and reduces 
its responsibility for preventing a sharp rise in the real effective ruble exchange rate. 
We  think  that  with  the  development  of  market  mechanisms,  increased  flexibility  of  the  economy, 
greater  production  factors  mobility,  and  the  development  of  the  financial  system,  the  degree  of 
negative impact on economic growth caused by ruble real appreciation should decrease. 
In the future we intend to stop taking on any obligations in restricting appreciation of the real effective 
ruble rate, and to move on to inflation targeting, and free floating regime. 
It is not easy to achieve considering our strong dependency on world commodity prices. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2007
In order to reduce inflation, the Central Bank allowed the increase of the nominal effective ruble rate: 
from December 2004 to December 2005, by 3,2%, and from December 2005 to December 2006 – by 
2,2%. 
The real effective ruble exchange rate grew 10.5% in 2005, and another 7.4% in 2006. 
Analysis of the economic situation does not yet allow us to definitely state that appreciation in the real 
effective ruble rate has negatively affected GDP growth to date. 
However,  it  should  be  noted  that  growth  in  industries  producing  tradable  goods  is  slower  than  in 
sectors producing non-tradables. In 2006, industrial output grew 3.9%, while retail trade went up to 
13.9%, and construction volume increased by 15.7%. 
An important and quite unexpected factor for us, which influenced the macroeconomic situation over 
the past 18 months, has been the large inflow of foreign private capital. 
Previously, up to and including 2004, we saw a net outflow of private capital. For example, the outflow 
totalled 25 billion dollars in 2000, and 15 billion dollars in 2001. 
The year 2005 saw the first net inflow of private capital in a volume of 1 billion dollars. 
In 2006 the net inflow of private capital grew sharply, reaching around 42 billion dollars. During the first 
four months of 2007, it exceeded 30 billion dollars. 
Private capital inflow has been boosted by anticipations of further nominal ruble appreciation. In 2006, 
the volume of foreign currency held in cash by the population and non-financial institutions shrank by 
12  billion  dollars.  The  process  of  dedollarization  of  the  economy  has  been  intensively  developing. 
According to the Central Bank estimates, the proportion of foreign currency at the end of 2006 (both in 
cash and in bank deposits) in overall money supply was around 15%, while at the end of 1999 this 
share exceeded 60%. 
The powerful inflow of private capital was partly due to the fact that as of July 1, 2006 all restrictions 
and burdens on foreign currency operations linked to movement of capital and effective until then were 
removed. The process of foreign exchange liberalization was fully completed. 
The  improved  investment  climate  and  the  stable  economic  situation  also  contributed  to  net  private 
capital inflow. 
The powerful private capital inflow boosted money supply. The M2 aggregate rose by 39% in 2005, 
and by 49% in 2006. 
In order to restrict money supply growth, the Central Bank raised interest rates on commercial banks’ 
deposits with the Central Bank several times in 2006 and 2007. Currently, the interest rate on one-
week  deposits  is  3%.  We  are  very  cautious  here,  and  are  closely  monitoring  interest  rates  on 
international markets.  A  large  rise  in  interest  rates  on  deposits attracted by  the  Central  Bank  could 
lead to an additional inflow of speculative capital and make deposit operations useless. 
Recently, in May 2007, the Central Bank raised the required reserve ratio from 3.5% up to 4.0-4.5%. 
Here, we are also trying to avoid radical changes. 
While adjusting the ruble exchange rate, the Central Bank considers the following as significant. 
The import of goods grows very fast under the influence of a high real ruble appreciation. In 2006, 
goods imports expanded by 31%. During the first quarter of 2007, they gained 39% compared to the 
first quarter of 2006. 
According to our estimates, if the nominal effective exchange rate of ruble remains unchanged, and oil 
prices stay at the level of the first five months of 2007, by 2010 imports of goods could exceed exports. 
In principle there is nothing wrong with it. But this will force us to consider very carefully the possibility 
of further nominal appreciation of the ruble. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 61/2007 
 3
